Super Headache: Keeping the Stars
Now that the Dallas Cowboys have won their second straight Super Bowl and the Buffalo Bills have played in (and lost) their fourth straight, they must try to keep their teams intact.
Or at least they must seek to keep the players they want despite the tricky paths of unrestricted free agency compounded by the introduction next season of a salary cap.
Of the 1,680 players on team rosters at the end of 1993, the National Football League Players Association expects there will be 499 unrestricted free agents this year.
All of them have played in the N.F.L. at least four years and their contracts have all expired.
On Feb. 18, those players can sign with any team, no holds barred.
On the same day, 155 restricted free agents -- those with three years in the league and whose contracts have expired -- can also sign, but their old teams can match those offers.


Review/Fashion; In Paris, Men's Wear Visits the Circus
What roles could the actors Fred Ward, who appeared in "The Player," and David Thewlis, the award-winning star of "Naked," be playing in their stacked shoes, shrunken jackets and elephantine trousers?
Loping around a circular arena in the Comme des Garcons show Friday night, they looked like part of an ensemble for a Fellini remake.
Rei Kawakubo, the designer, put her clothes on actors, musicians and the Zingaro circus troupe, many of whom have short legs and rounded bellies, which protruded from under tight tiny jackets.
It was just one scene in Paris's Fellini-esque season as this month's round of men's wear showings for fall concluded with strains of music by Nino Rota lending an eerie circus lilt.
Yohji Yamamoto and Ms.
Kawakubo evoked the Federico Fellini of "La Strada," showing men's wear in fun-house-mirror proportions in a circus-like setting.


Fisher Scientific International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Federal-Mogul reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TRANSACTIONS  Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Rick Forney, pitcher, to a one-year contract.


Hidden Rules Often Distort Ideas of Risk
THE list of worrisome risks seems to extend on and on like a litany of plagues -- earthquakes, fires, hurricanes, asbestos in the schools, ozone depletion, bacteria in drinking water, salmonella in poultry, toxins in fish -- to name but a few that have spawned anxieties of late.
Too often, psychologists say, people's worries about a given risk are out of proportion, with the fear either far greater than the actual danger or, occasionally, less.
Now studies are showing that these skews in perception follow hidden psychological rules that can explain why one risk is exaggerated in people's minds while another is played down.


Giuliani Seeks Concessions From Unions
Beyond cutting 14,000 to 18,000 jobs from the city work force, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is seeking $200 million in concessions by the municipal unions in benefits in the next fiscal year and roughly $200 million in savings from temporarily reducing the city's contributions to the municipal pension plans.
The new details emerged as the Mayor and his aides put the finishing touches on a four-year fiscal plan, to be released tomorrow, which will provide the first comprehensive blueprint of Mr.
Giuliani's plans to reduce the municipal work force and force city workers to face competition from the private sector in areas that have traditionally been the province of government in New York City.


SOCCER
World Cup Report
The unprecedented mutiny of 14 of Russia's top players threatens to ruin the country's chances in the World Cup next summer.


Folk-Art Auction Approaches Fine-Art Prices
The quirky ancestor portraits, weather vanes, embroideries and ship's mastheads that made up the widely exhibited folk art collection of Bertram K. and Nina Fletcher Little brought a total of $7.4 million on Saturday at Sotheby's in Manhattan.
The figure, twice what Sotheby's expected, set a record for a folk-art auction as collectors, curators, scholars and dealers turned out in force for the sale.
Described by many at the auction as a watershed for folk art, the prices paid may well set the levels for future auctions in this area.
At least four museums and historical societies made purchases from the collection, assembled over a half-century by the Boston-area couple, both of whom died last year in their 90's.


2 West Pointers Are Stabbed Outside a Bar in Newburgh
The star fullback of the Army football team and another West Point cadet were stabbed over the weekend in a brawl outside a Newburgh bar after they left the campus without passes in an Athletic Department van they were not supposed to be driving.
The incident has embarrassed a campus that is proud of the military discipline that meticulously restricts opportunities for drinking and time spent off campus.
But many cadets interviewed amid the snow-draped Gothic stone buildings said it did not reflect any tensions between the United States Military Academy here and the surrounding villages and nearby Newburgh.


Simulated Terror Videotape Shown at Trade Center Bombing Trial
A group of guerrilla fighters in the desert are the main characters in a short full-color videotape shown yesterday in the World Trade Center bombing trial.
The fighters can be seen subduing some guards in Grade B Hollywood-war-movie fashion.
They attach explosives to walls and cars, blowing them up.
And then, at the climax of the video, which the jury watched on television monitors, a van speeds toward the gate of an imposing sand-colored edifice.


Here's to the Taxpayer As Patron of Research
To the Editor:
The shortage of Federal funds for basic scientific research can largely be explained by how little the public and politicians are aware that this financing is productive, efficient and cost-effective.
The productivity is obvious to readers of scientific journals since each article acknowledges financial support, the vast majority from the Federal Government.
Yet most people learn about breakthroughs in the lay press, which rarely notes the support for the research.


Nicor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tellabs Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Before Nuclear Wastes Seep Into Water Supply; Spent-Fuel Option
To the Editor:
I am writing to correct "Surplus Plutonium Called Big Threat," your Jan. 25 account of the National Academy of Sciences study on management and disposition of excess weapons plutonium, for which I served as chairman.


National Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Studies in U.S. Back Needle Exchanges
To the Editor:
"Needle Exchanges Can Work" (editorial, Jan. 24) states that "a growing body of data now suggests needle exchanges offer more promise than risk." Yes, however, it is not mostly "a smattering of studies conducted abroad" that supports the efficacy of such programs.
The most comprehensive United States study of needle exchange programs, financed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, was released last Sept. 30.
Conducted over 18 months by researchers at the University of California at San Francisco and at Berkeley, it evaluates needle-exchange programs in North America, Europe and Australia.
Further, under the auspices of Representative Charles B. Rangel, chairman of the Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, the General Accounting Office released a report last March endorsing needle exchange programs as an AIDS-prevention strategy among drug injectors.
Both these studies cite the pioneering work of Prof.
Edward H. Kaplan of the Yale School of Organization and Management in modeling the dynamics of needle exchange.
Together with the laboratory research of Dr.
Robert Heimer at the Yale Medical School, who has tested needles for the presence of HIV, these Government-financed investigators have provided a scientific foundation for the New Haven needle exchange program, the success of which has inspired similar programs in many other American cities.
KARIN A. NOBILE  Asst.
Media Relations Director, Yale School of Organization &amp; Management New Haven, Jan. 26, 1994


Reviews/Dance; Shuttling Between Future And Past, With Attitude
The present, seen in terms of the past and the future, was the order of the day in the New York City Ballet's two performances on Sunday at the New York State Theater.
"Fanfare," Jerome Robbins's witty nod to Elizabethan pomp and later circumstances, returned to the repertory at the matinee, which also featured Ethan Stiefel in a major debut in "Harlequinade," George Balanchine's nostalgic remake of a 19th-century ballet by Marius Petipa.


Review/Opera: Lucia di Lammermoor; Divine? Dreadful? Diva Kicks Up Some Dust
The god who watches over opera fanatics has blessed them with a new and unusual gift.
She is Tiziana Fabbricini, whose talent to enrapture and enrage will provide endless bickering at impromptu intermission symposiums and those long evenings in front of the record player.
Opera's hot stove league burns year round, and Miss Fabbricini promises to keep a lot of people warm.
When the Italian soprano appeared in "La Traviata" at the Metropolitan Opera some months ago, I ventured a kind word toward one opera-minded critic who snarled a catalogue of vocal deficiencies and then left after Act I. At the Houston Grand Opera's "Lucia di Lammermoor" last night, I took what he thought might be a more prudent tack.
First a few words of caveat, then some compliments.
"She's the most important person in opera," answered another opera-minded critic stationed nearby, and in a tone that made one think toward one's physical safety.


LG&amp;E Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Emily Douglas, 94, Congresswoman and Author
Emily Taft Douglas, a former United States Representative from Illinois, died on Friday at a nursing home in White Plains.
She was 94 and had lived in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., since moving from Washington in 1986.
Mrs.
Douglas was the widow of former Senator Paul H. Douglas, who represented Illinois from 1949 to 1966.
But having served in the House from 1945 to 1947, she was the first American woman to precede a husband to Congress.
Both were Democrats.


Books of The Times; Reckoning the Many Costs of Living a Singular Life
Various Antidotes  By Joanna Scott 240 pages. Henry Holt. $20.
"Various Antidotes," the title of Joanna Scott's first collection of stories, refers, the reader quickly discovers, to her characters' strategies for coping with life.
The illness they are all combating is the chaos, randomness and uncertainty of existence; their antidotes are, variously, faith, science, madness, psychotherapy and obsession.


Stanley Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hayes-Dana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Before Nuclear Wastes Seep Into Water Supply
To the Editor:
"A Test Case for Nuclear Disposal," your Jan. 24 article on California's proposed Ward Valley radioactive waste dump, needs clarification on what materials from nuclear power plants could be buried in U.S.
Ecology's unlined trenches.


Indiana Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Study Bolsters Value Of Species Diversity
CONSERVATIONISTS widely believe that the more species an ecosystem contains, the more robust and stable it will be.
If that is true, they say, the steady reduction of biological diversity now taking place around the world could in time undermine the ecological foundation of human existence.
A counterargument holds that richness of species is unimportant to ecosystem stability as long as one or two species exist to carry out each of a number of vital functions like photosynthesis, pollination, plant-eating, predation and decomposition of waste.
If that is true, the case for preserving biological diversity, the touchstone of conservation in the 1990's, loses one of its major props.


Nova Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; After The Quake
For two groups of people, the center of life now is not a house or apartment or place of work.
It is an open field somewhere in Los Angeles.
The men and women made homeless in the 30 seconds of the earthquake two weeks ago wait in those scattered fields or in park meadows, worrying through their waking hours about whatever will happen to them and their children, now that their address is nothing but a number painted on a tent.


Kendall International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sonoco Products Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foster Goes Full Hurdle
Now that his 1993 farewell retirement tour is mercifully behind him, GREG FOSTER is ready to bid retirement a merciful farewell.
He has entered the 60-meter hurdles at the Chemical Bank Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden on Friday night, the very event that kicked off his retirement tour with his lone victory last year.
"I'm not one to quit at the bottom," he said yesterday in a telephone hookup from Los Angeles, recalling last year's disastrous season, which bottomed out in July when the three-time outdoor 110-meter hurdles champion knocked over the three hurdles at the Olympic Festival before dropping out of his "final" race.


B. A. Warner, 83, A Banker Who Led Community Efforts
Bradford Arnold Warner, a New York corporate official and former banker who was long active in community affairs, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Bridge
The most celebrated muddle in world championship play occurred in Monte Carlo in 1976.
The result of a match between Brazil and Italy was canceled because, after a blunder by a tournament director, the players were wrongly seated.
The match was not replayed, as it surely should have been, and the teams were awarded 12 victory points each out of a possible 20.
The Brazilians finished first, the Italians second, and the British, who would probably have been second in normal play, a disgruntled third.
One outcome was the introduction of a device that allows this misfortune to be corrected during the session.
But it is not always used, and the failure to do so caused trouble Saturday in the Flight A Grand National Teams in New York City.
In the last round teams headed by Brad Moss and Jared Lilienstein, both of Manhattan, seated themselves wrongly.
According to the regulations, both were given zero scores.
But for this, one of them would have certainly qualified for later knockout play.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Two in a Row at Home?
Not for the Mavericks  Hawks 90, Mavericks 85: Dominique Wilkins scored 14 of his 24 points during a 36-19 third-quarter charge as Atlanta overcame a sluggish start to hold off host Dallas, 90-85, last night.
The Mavericks, who snapped a league-record 19-game home losing streak Saturday night with a victory over the Sacramento Kings, had a late 11-2 rally to close to 88-85 with 47 seconds left, and Jamal Mashburn attempted to tie it with a 3-pointer.
But his shot from the left wing with 3 seconds to play failed to hit the rim.
Wilkins became the 11th player in National Basketball Association history to score 23,000 career points with a dunk during the third-quarter spurt.
The Hawks, playing for the fifth time in seven days, won for the fifth time in six games. (AP)


Devils Settle a Matter
The dispute between the Devils and the Ottawa Senators regarding goalie PETER SIDORKIEWICZ , who was traded to New Jersey by Ottawa last summer, has been resolved.
The Devils announced last night that Ottawa would pay two-thirds of Sidorkiewicz's salary for the season and that New Jersey would also get Ottawa's fifth-round choice in the June draft.


Acme Metals Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Patterns
The Glamour of Girth
The 90's seem destined to be defined as the era of the backlash.
The latest manifestation is an embrace of fat men by the fashion community.
Both Esquire Gentleman and L'Uomo Vogue are planning feature stories about attractive corpulence.
And at the shows of Comme des Garcons and So, there were more bulging stomachs than chiseled cheekbones.
While Esquire is taking a historical look, L'Uomo Vogue has induced its beefy subjects to pose for photographs.
Among those who have accepted are Fabien Baron and Gianfranco Ferre.
"I think that a fat man has two incredible appeals," said Aldo Pramoli, editor in chief of L'Uomo Vogue, after issuing the disclaimer "I'm not fat."


A 4-Year Contract For Chicago's Ventura
The Chicago White Sox yesterday created the most expensive pair of corner infielders in baseball history.
With first baseman FRANK THOMAS the sport's second-highest paid player at an average of $7.25 million a year, the White Sox signed third baseman ROBIN VENTURA to a four-year contract worth $20,725,000, or $5,181,250 a year.
Ventura, who earned $1,845,000 last year, had sought $4.05 million in salary arbitration.
The White Sox had countered with $3.3 million.
The new contract calls for salaries of $3.5 million, $5.1 million, $5,975,000 and $6 million.
It includes a club option for a fifth year at $6.1 million or a $150,000 buyout.


No Headline
"Let me be quite clear about this: This generation of republicans is going to see peace in Ireland." -- GERRY ADAMS, political head of the I.R.A.  [ A1:4. ]


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Jim Hammill; A Scientific Passion for Wolves
THE paw prints in the reddish sand of a forest road were only vaguely defined by the time Jim Hammill saw them, softened by an overnight rainfall: the tracks of a timber wolf.
Usually gladdened by any sign of a wolf, Mr.
Hammill was disheartened because these prints were made by only a single animal, and they were more than a mile from where he had set a line of five traps along a wolf path.
He was searching for members of the Nordic Pack, a wolf family that has been ranging around 130 square miles in north Dickinson County for several years.


Avery Dennison Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Review/Theater: Those the River Keeps; Rabe's Everyman Meets the Baby Question
David Rabe has written some explosive plays about that overgrown crybaby and brutal lout, the American male.
"Those the River Keeps" isn't one of them.
The newest drama from the author of "Streamers" and the Tony-winning "Sticks and Bones" comes perilously close to self-parody.
And that's at its best moments.
The rest of the time it just seems a shameless indulgence.
The speeches are overwritten.
The emotions are bloated.
The misery, of which there is an unending supply, is sodden and shapeless.


Lilly Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


METRO DIGEST
ALLIANCE OF BLACK GROUPS IN JEOPARDY
Recent bigoted remarks by a chief aide to Louis Farrakhan, minister of the Nation of Islam, and his failure to disavow them have interrupted the tenuous rapprochement between mainstream civil rights leaders and the Nation of Islam.
A10.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI NAMES HOUSING CHAIRMAN
Mayor Giuliani named Ruben Franco, the former president of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, as chairman of the New York City Housing Authority, concluding an appointment process that had been one of the most difficult for the Mayor.
The prospect of Mr.
Franco's appointment had created strong opposition among Hasidic leaders in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
B3.
AID TO HOMELESS PROGRAM IS CURTAILED
The State Social Services Department has temporarily halted its support for the expansion of an important city program to house the homeless, Commissioner Michael J. Dowling said.
B2.
RIGHT TO PRIVACY IS UPHELD IN H.I.V.
CASE
A Federal appeals court ruled that a person has a constitutional right to privacy about whether he is infected with H.I.V.
B3.
REGION  THE KINGDOMS OF HOME RULE
Dering Harbor, L.I., with just 32 houses, a puny water tower and a maintenance staff named Richie, is an incorporated village, the smallest in New York State, a locality with a budget of $115,000 a year and two major parties: the Independent Party, from which all candidates for village mayor and trustee are drawn, and the yearly summer cocktail party, to which all Dering Harbor is invited.
A1.
AGREEMENT REACHED ON BANKING BILL
Less than two hours before state banking laws were scheduled to expire, Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders reached agreement on a bill that would make permanent the rules that give banks great latitude to create new financial products and to set interest rates for credit cards and most types of loans.
B4.
ARGUMENTS ON EVIDENCE IN ABUSE CASE
The New Jersey Supreme Court heard arguments about the admissibility of evidence in the case of Margaret Kelly Michaels, who was convicted of sexually molesting 19 children during her seven-month employment at Wee Care Nursery in Maplewood.
She served 5 years of a 47-year sentence before her conviction was overturned early last year.
B5.
John G. Rowland, a 36-year-old Republican who almost defeated Lowell P. Weicker Jr. in the 1990 race for governor of Connecticut, announced his return for another run.
B4.
The star fullback on the Army football team and another West Point cadet were stabbed during a brawl outside a bar in Newburgh, N.Y., after they left the campus without passes in a van they were not supposed to be driving.
B4.
Upstaging Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and Assembly Republicans, Republicans in the New Jersey Senate announced their plan to reduce state taxes.
B5.
Chronicle B2  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B5


Minerals Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Counting Californians
To the Editor:
In "The Mood Turns Ugly," my Jan. 26 letter concerning "The Unfair Immigration Burden," your Jan. 11 editorial on illegal immigrants, I erred in saying two million people would be .6 percent of the population of California.
It would, of course, be 6 percent.
I still want to know how they are being counted and who's counting them.  (Msgr.) E. JAMES PETERSEN  Executive Director California Catholic Conference Sacramento, Calif., Jan. 26, 1994


Classical Music in Review
Juilliard Orchestra  Alice Tully Hall
Focus has been a sometime thing through the 10 seasons of Focus festivals of contemporary music at the Juilliard School, directed by Joel Sachs.
The series just ended, "Musical Worlds in Fusion," was literally all over the map and all over the century, charting the influences of far-flung cultures and disparate styles on Western classical music.


Newell Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyson Foods Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Before Nuclear Wastes Seep Into Water Supply; Not a Federal Report
To the Editor:
"A Test Case for Nuclear Disposal" (news article, Jan. 24) erroneously describes the report released by Senator Barbara Boxer as "a report from the United States Geological Survey." It was prepared by three employees of the Geological Survey and represents their personal views only.
It has not been subject to Geological Survey scientific peer review, which is standard procedure for the nearly 2,000 official reports we issue each year.


Court Backs Privacy Right Over H.I.V.
A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that a person has a constitutional right to privacy about whether he is infected with H.I.V.
The decision reinstated a suit against New York City by a man with H.I.V. who said the city had violated his rights by issuing a news release describing a city-brokered settlement of a job-discrimination claim that he had filed against Delta Airlines.
The release did not name the man, but he said its information made it possible for others to identify him.


Nazis Still Lead Reichstag Fire Suspects
To the Editor:
What an interesting but specious melange of semiconnected elements Stephen Koch used to cobble together a theory of Hitler-Stalin collaboration in 1933 in "The Dimitrov Conspiracy" (Op-Ed., Jan. 22).
Unfortunately, it fails, beginning with the contention that the night of the Reichstag fire was a "freezing night" on Feb. 27, 1933 (Rudolf Diels, Gestapo head, wrote in his memoirs that it was "ein regnerischer Vorfruhlingsabend," a drizzly pre-spring evening).


In Retrying Abuse Case, A New Issue
Just how to prevent fantasy from being presented as fact in sex-abuse cases is facing the New Jersey Supreme Court in the wake of one of the most sensational of the spate of cases involving day-care workers during the 1980's.
The court heard arguments today about the admissibility of evidence in the case of Margaret Kelly Michaels, who was convicted of sexually molesting 19 children, many of them 3- and 4-year-olds, during her seven-month employment at Wee Care Nursery in Maplewood.
She served 5 years of a 47-year sentence before her conviction was overturned early last year.


Bergen Prosecutor Takes Over Local Police Force
The Bergen County Prosecutor's office today took the rare step of seizing control of the 21-member police department in South Hackensack, charging that an investigation into illegal gambling revealed that some of the force's officers were dropping cases because of favoritism.
The accusations stemmed from information gathered during a four-month investigation that ended with raids on four illegal gambling rings on Sunday, a senior law-enforcement official said.
The official charged that some officers would let suspects go if they knew people on the force.


Sports of The Times; Break Up Cowboys? Money Might
FOR the Dallas Cowboys to emerge as the first three-peat Super Bowl champions, they must rebuild their line.
Their bottom line.
In all the fantasy about a Cowboy dynasty, the reality is that the offensive coordinator, Norv Turner, is about to be named the Washington Redskin coach, that five of Emmitt Smith's blockers (fullback Daryl Johnston and linemen Nate Newton, Kevin Gogan, Mark Stepnoski and John Gesek) will test the free-agent market along with linebacker Ken Norton and that Coach Jimmy Johnson is restless.


Japan Postpones Rocket Launching
The maiden launching of Japan's new H-2 rocket, which had been scheduled for Tuesday, has been postponed for at least one day because of high winds and the possibility of thunderstorms at the launching site on Tanegashima, an island in southern Japan.
The National Space Development Agency of Japan said it would decide as early as Tuesday on a new date for the launching.


Dow Corning Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Summerall Helps Mantle
Mickey Mantle and Pat Summerall are longtime friends, former star athletes in their 60's with different backgrounds and education.
But they had one common, destructive vice: alcohol.


Great Climate Cycles Seen in Last Ice Age
IN a burst of new discoveries, climatologists are beginning to reconstruct a recurring cycle of events that changed the face of the world several times during the last great ice age.
Each of the proposed new cycles seems to have included the buildup of a North American ice sheet whose central region was two miles thick; a series of warming fluctuations in the world's temperature, followed by the breakup of the ice sheet into armadas of icebergs that invaded the North Atlantic.
These cycles occurred at least five times during the last ice age, which lasted 100,000 years and ended some 10,000 years ago.


At 16, A Star; At 18, A Nobody
No winter Olympian ever flew so far so young as Toni Nieminen.
In Albertville, France, in 1992, the Finnish phenom formed a newfangled V with his ski tips and nervelessly rewrote the record books by winning two gold medals and a silver in ski jumping at age 16.


The Extent of Monogamy in Britain
A RECENT survey of sexual attitudes and behavior among the British has turned up results that have surprised some sociologists and pundits: the vast majority of people practice monogamy and only a small number admit to engaging in homosexual sex.
The findings seem to undercut the popular notions, fed recently by an unfolding series of sex scandals among government ministers, that adultery is widespread in British society and that more and more men and women are abandoning heterosexual roles.


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. BLOOD SUPPLY HITS LOWEST LEVEL SINCE WORLD WAR II
Once again, the nation's blood supply is perilously low.
But this winter the shortage has been the worst and longest since World War II.
The situation was so bad, blood bank officials said, that if more people had been injured in the earthquake in Los Angeles on Jan. 17, there might not have been enough blood to treat them, increasing the death toll.


Classical Music in Review
Fabio Bidini  Pianist Frick Collection
Fabio Bidini first drew wide notice for his performances as a finalist in the ninth Van Cliburn competition last year; his admirers reportedly protested when he failed to receive a medal beside his Italian compatriot Simone Pedroni.
On the basis of his New York debut recital on Sunday afternoon, one can understand both the enthusiasm of the Cliburn crowd and also the reticence of the judges.
This is a technically brilliant pianist with substantial poetic gifts, whose sense of interpretive balance has not yet matured.


Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Aflac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Growing Your Garden On a Computer Disk
NOT everyone is a born gardener, but some of us pretend.
So I visited the hardware store to select seeds for my suburban garden and, after consulting the almanac on a shelf for information, chose peepers, tulips and helicopters.
Taking the envelopes to the garden, I planted and watered the seeds and sped up the calendar so that each day took 10 seconds to pass.
For this was a computer game, or simulation, Forever Growing Garden, by Media Vision of Fremont, Calif.
The cat watched from inside the house through a window, and soon a bluebird flew over to taunt it.
A gopher also surfaced, but when I tried to catch him I caught a skunk instead.
Finally, two beautiful peepers started to pop through, but as of this moment (it is Aug. 2; whoops, now it's Aug. 3) there is no sign of the tulips or helicopters, the latter being fantasy plants.


CHRONICLE
Speaking of age, DENG XIAOPING, the senior leader in China, who has been reported to be seriously ill, had something to say this week about his longevity.
According to The Associated Press, the 89-year-old leader told The Press Digest newspaper in Beijing that he attributes his long life to cold showers and the game of bridge, which he plays avidly.


Chess
The top-class players are divided over the issue of which organization is the proper custodian of the world championship.
Some argue that the International Chess Federation, which has administered title play since 1948, is amateurish and unable to obtain sponsors that can afford the million-plus dollars the champions want to compete for.
Others contend that the rival Professional Chess Association, instituted last year by the titleholder, Gary Kasparov, is too interested in money and cannot be relied upon to objectively supervise the process of selecting challengers for his championship.
There is a third group, the pragmatists, who won't choose sides.
They are typified by the brilliant and easy-going 24-year-old Indian grandmaster Viswanathan Anand.
He played in and won the qualification tournament of the Professional Chess Association at the end of December and in late January won the first of the elimination matches run by the International Chess Federation.
If he continues his successes he will be qualified for two title matches, one with the federation's champion and the other with the association's champion, Kasparov.


Q&amp;A
Curve Balls
Q.  Does a curve ball curve?
A.
Yes, a curve ball does travel in a sideways arc, a very small segment of a very large circle.
In 1959, Dr.
Lyman J. Briggs, then 84, a retired head of the National Bureau of Standards, settled the question and explained the mechanism, using an overhead camera to show the curvature of the flight path.
He then used smoke streamers in a wind tunnel to study regions of higher velocity and lower pressure around curve balls.


Bills' Smith Ailing
The Buffalo Bills' defensive end BRUCE SMITH and their wide receiver ANDRE REED are among several players who will miss the National Football League Pro Bowl game in Honolulu on Sunday because of injuries sustained in the Super Bowl, the league announced yesterday.
Cornerback THOMAS EVERETT of the champion Dallas Cowboys also will not play in the all-star game.


G.O.P. Plans On Surpluses To Make Up For Tax Cuts
Upstaging Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman and Assembly Republicans, Republicans in the State Senate announced their plan for state tax cuts today.
And they went one step further than the Governor by committing nearly $300 million in surplus money to pay for the proposed cuts.
"We feel obliged, as responsible legislators, to identify sources of revenues for the bills we proposed that cut taxes," said Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco.


Southern Pacific Rail Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rollins to Finish Season
TREE ROLLINS , an Orlando assistant coach who was activated in January to fill out an injury-depleted roster, signed a contract yesterday that will keep him on the Magic's roster for the rest of the season.
Rollins, a 16-year veteran, signed a 10-day contract to fill in for the injured GREG KITE on Jan. 10.
The Magic, which is also missing forward LARRY KRYSTKOWIAK , signed the backup center to a second 10-day contract on Jan. 21.


Nipsco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


When U.S. Troops Fly a U.N. Flag
Misadventures in Somalia and Bosnia have understandably given United Nations peacekeeping a bad name in the United States.
Now the Clinton Administration, tempering its earlier enthusiasm for such operations, has devised tough new conditions for American participation.
The Administration would be willing to have U.S. troops join in U.N. peacekeeping if all the warring sides agree to a truce.
If not, Washington would consider committing troops only if its security interests were at stake, and then only if the troops were essential to assure the operation's effectiveness and their involvement had broad support from the American people and Congress.
American troops would be allowed to serve under foreign commanders if circumstances warranted.


Legent Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Observer; Bullish On Prisons
Get into plastics, the dreary old grown-up advised Dustin Hoffman in "The Graduate," and young men everywhere laughed.
I wasn't quite young enough to get the joke.
The dreary old fellow was simply tipping Dustin on a good capitalistic enterprise, wasn't he?
This was surely sounder advice than Horace Greeley's "Go west, young man, and grow up with the country," which people have listened to without laughter since Greeley issued it in 1850.


Insteel Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rostropovich in New York
Mstislav Rostropovich is to lead the National Symphony Orchestra in his last New York appearance as its music director on Sunday at 8 P.M. in Carnegie Hall.
The program includes Beethoven's "Leonore" Overture No. 3 and Third Piano Concerto, with Eugene Istomin as soloist, and the New York premiere of Schnittke's Sixth Symphony, which the orchestra commissioned.
Tickets are $12 to $50.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Surprise! Nobody Watched Old Movies
The evidence is in: no matter how forgettable a Super Bowl is, people will watch in very large numbers.
Super Bowl XXVIII was a decent game, but not as compelling as last month's wild-card playoff games.
Yet NBC's telecast of Sunday's game garnered a 45.4 Nielsen rating and a 66 share, the 10th best performance ever and the best in seven years.


Sundstrand Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harte-Hanks Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lawyer for Skater's Ex-Husband Says He Has Tied Her to Attack
Jeff Gillooly, the former husband of Tonya Harding, has told investigators that Miss Harding helped plan the assault on her figure-skating rival, Nancy Kerrigan, Mr.
Gillooly's lawyer said today.
Ronald H. Hoevet, the lawyer, said Mr.
Gillooly told Federal investigators last week that Miss Harding had given final approval for the Jan. 6 attack in Detroit, where Miss Kerrigan was struck above the right knee and kept from competing in the national championships.
The lawyer said Mr.
Gillooly's account was fully detailed, and included many points that could be corroborated by phone logs and bank records.


Primitive 'Venus' Rediscovered


CHRONICLE
When HILDEGARDE, the supper club singer, turned 87 last year, "I reversed my age to 78 and subtracted 20," she said.
"This year, I can't mess around with 88, so I'm just subtracting 30, which will keep my age at 58."
That may be one of the more poorly kept secrets, as Hildegarde celebrates her 88th birthday today with a performance at Eighty Eight's, a cabaret in Greenwich Village.


New Test Forecasts Progress Of AIDS
A BLOOD test has predicted progression from H.I.V. infection to AIDS earlier than standard measures in a pilot study, a team of researchers in New York City is reporting today.
The test measures the amount of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, replicating in certain cells in the blood.


Classical Music in Review
Cuarteto Latinoamericano  String Quartet Weill Hall
On Sunday, the Cuarteto Latinoamericano opened the Sonidos de las Americas: Mexico festival with six Mexican string quartets from early and late in the 20th century.
One could hardly expect more capable advocates for this repertory; Saul Bitran and Andre Bitran (violinists), Javier Montiel (violist) and Alvaro Bitran (cellist) are superb players, remarkably versatile in responding to the demands of different scores.


Avnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Salt as a Bane: A Town Suffers From a Flood
GLENN MORRIS lives beside a stash of the most precious mineral known to car and driveway in the Northeast.
But he can't appreciate it.
He hears how valuable road salt has become this wretched winter, and it seems funny -- in the peculiar sense.


Cash America International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sir Neville Stack, 74, An Air Chief Marshal
Sir Neville Stack, who commanded forces that airlifted British paratroops to Jordan in 1958 to support King Hussein and went on to become Air Chief Marshal, died on Wednesday in a London hospital.
He was 74 and lived in London.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Jenny. .


For Cleaner Air, a Cleaner Car
A small group of people from 12 Eastern states and the District of Columbia will meet in a Washington hotel this morning to make a critical decision for the environment, for consumers and for the automobile industry.
They are members of the Ozone Transport Commission, established by the 1990 Clean Air Act to find regional solutions to air pollution problems up and down the Eastern Seaboard.
On the table is a proposal bitterly opposed by the automobile industry.
If approved by the commission and by the Environmental Protection Agency, it would require all 12 states and D.C. to adopt California's tough "clean car" program.


Progressive Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knicks' Depth Has Been the Difference
Nobody expected Doc Rivers to shatter his knee, or Charles Smith to have knee surgery, or Hubert Davis to fracture his hand.
Almost everyone expected the Knicks to contend for a championship.
So the Knicks are not surprised that some people take their 31-10 record at midseason for granted.
Weren't they supposed to be good?
Didn't Michael Jordan retire and leave the Eastern Conference up for grabs?


Calhoun Is Still Out
Connecticut's coach, JIM CALHOUN , hospitalized with pneumonia, remained in stable condition yesterday and will miss tonight's game at Syracuse.
Calhoun is being evaluated daily at the University of Connecticut Health Center, said BEVERLY PARK , a spokeswoman for the center.


Radiation Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A Steady Diet of Records on a Steady Diet of Worms
Wang Junxia was placed in an unusual position yesterday.
She was sitting.
And she was not eating worms, which she frequently does.
This occurred in a hotel room in midtown.
In a tufted chair.
And people were taking pictures of this.
Normally, when you see Wang Junxia, the small 20-year-old from China, she is running.
She runs every day, with no break, up to 22 miles -- and that, sometimes, is only before breakfast.
One wondered if she ran this way to avoid breakfast, given what she sometimes finds on her plate.
The worms, like the elixir from caterpillar fungus and the soup made from the blood of soft-shell turtles, are all part of the nutrition required by her coach, Ma Junren.


IES Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Imperial Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Leontyne Price Recital
The soprano Leontyne Price is to give a recital on Feb. 27 at 2 P.M. at the Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts, in Walt Whitman Hall at Brooklyn College, Flatbush and Nostrand Avenues, Flatbush.
With David Garvey as accompanist, she is to sing works by Handel, Mozart, Verdi, Poulenc, Duparc, Hahn and Hoiby as well as a group of spirituals.
The event commemorates a recital Miss Price gave on Oct. 25, 1954, to open the Brooklyn Center.
Tickets are $25, $35 and $38.
Information: (718) 951-4500.


Midwest Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Computer Store At the End of the Phone
BECAUSE dozens of companies make computers that seem, and in most important ways are, identical, and because computers are now sold at drugstore chains and discount warehouses as well as at electronics stores, deciding what brand to choose and where to purchase it can stump many first-time buyers.
After deciding recently that their first computer would be an I.B.M. or compatible rather than a Macintosh, Jonathan Katz and Toby Mardis, who live in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., north of New York City, examined their options.


Reviews/Dance; Body Parts and Gentle Eccentricities
Erick Hawkins has carved a place for himself as the poet of American modern dance.
Like good poetry, his best dances have a way of speaking truths in a language that is familiar but not quite of the everyday world.
Those truths have often been about how moving bodies defined the empty space around them.
But over the last few years the choreographer, now 84, seems to be zeroing in on body shapes, parts and gentle eccentricities, as he does in "Each Time You Carry Me This Way," a 1993 work performed by the Erick Hawkins Dance Company on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater.
The theme of the dance, which is set to a vividly atmospheric score by Lucia Dlugoszewski, is how to carry and be carried.
Mr.
Hawkins suggests a remarkable variety of emotions and relationships with just the angle of the held body or the way it holds onto its moving carrier.
Dancers spill out of the stage wings, lapping leftward across the stage in staggered processionals and pools of moving bodies.


Loctite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Television; Even the Real Diamonds Have Some Artificiality
If you believe that diamonds are rare, romantic or forever, you have very likely been dazzled by the international diamond cartel.
That is one message of "The Diamond Empire," a sharply critical exploration of how De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. of South Africa has managed to maintain control of the gem trade for some 70 years.
Tonight's "Frontline" dig begins on West 47th Street in New York City, center of the American diamond trade; further excavating takes place in London, Africa and Siberia.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a sports article yesterday about a protest before the Super Bowl game in Atlanta referred incorrectly in some editions to the office held by Maxine Waters.
She is a United States Representative from California, not a state representative in Georgia.


Albany Deal Eases Rules On Banking
Just minutes before midnight, as state banking laws were about to expire, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed legislation that makes permanent a group of laws that give banks great latitude to create new financial products and to set interest rates for credit cards and most types of loans.
Banking officials said the agreement on the legislation, which ended more than a year of difficult negotiations, will help the state retain thousands of financial service jobs.
But consumer advocates criticized the legislation, saying that it does not do enough to guarantee low-cost banking services for the poor or establish consumer protections for bank users.


3 Are Finalists In Ameritech Review
The Ameritech Corporation, the Baby Bell telephone company serving the Midwest, said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on the creative portion of its consumer telephone services account to three finalists.
The account, with estimated billings of $35 million to $40 million, has been handled by Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago since 1989.
Dave Onak, an Ameritech spokesman in Hoffman Estates, Ill., identified the finalists as Tatham, which also handles Ameritech's print media buying; Bayer Bess Vanderwarder in Chicago, which handles the company's broadcast media buying, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago.
A decision is expected at the end of February or in early March, he said.


Unocal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Video Is Presented as Evidence at World Trade Center Trial


Will Coleman Walk the Aisle?
The Nets and Derrick Coleman need to get married, for the good of each other and the rest of basketball civilization, which can't take much more of this story.
No doubt it would be a stormy relationship, if not quite the magnitude of Jeff Gillooly-Tonya Harding.
The current stumbling block, in fact, is the Nets' insistence on having a realistic option of divorcing Coleman should he become impossible to live with.


Great Lakes Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Still Winless in Buffalo; Bills Fans Dig in Their Heels and Brace for Another Round of Waiting for Next Year
"Strive for Five in '95."
That is the city's new mantra.
Like mystics blocking out reality with a continual chant, fans here deadened the pain of losing a record fourth consecutive Super Bowl today by defiantly vowing to return next year.


Sure, It Hurts, but the Bills Aren't Ready to Give Up Yet
Buffalo Coach Marv Levy understood how Thurman Thomas felt after the Cowboys' 30-13 victory over the Bills.
Thomas's teammates tried to console the running back after his two fumbles led to 10 points by the Cowboys.
And Levy was still trying to deal with his own pain in losing his fourth consecutive Super Bowl and second straight to Dallas.
"We lost the game," Levy said.
"It's a bitter loss. I sort of don't want to be consoled by people who are well-wishers."


Karnishovas 3-Pointer Wins for Seton Hall
He was ice cold from the field tonight.
He turned the ball over with a minute left in regulation and the score tied.
The last time he saw his shot swish through the nets was a 3-pointer that opened the game.
But he was still the go-to man for Seton Hall.


Golden Poultry Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Consolidated Freightways reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hoffenberg Takes Backing From Newspaper
Steven Hoffenberg, the debt collection specialist who would be a newspaper publisher, is withdrawing his backing from Her New York, the turbulent, four-month-old publication.
But the newspaper's editor, Meme Black, who has been hired and dismissed by Mr.
Hoffenberg at least twice, said she expected to put out this week's issue and was heading a group of employees who were seeking financial support to keep the weekly publication going.


Simms May Require Shoulder Surgery
Moderate but persistent irritation in his throwing shoulder may force Phil Simms to have arthroscopic surgery in the next few weeks.
While Giants officials say it is not a career-threatening situation, some people in the organization are concerned over the effect surgery could have on the arm of the 38-year-old quarterback.
Simms underwent magnetic resonance imaging this afternoon.
Results of the test were not available last night.


Lejaren Hiller, 69, First Composer To Write Music With a Computer
Lejaren Hiller, an avant-garde composer who collaborated with John Cage and whose 1956 "Illiac Suite" was the first substantial piece of music composed on a computer, died on Wednesday at the Niagara Lutheran Nursing Home in Buffalo.
He was 69.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said his wife, Elizabeth.


Imperial Oil Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Dance Troupe Tries to Go Back by Moving On
Murray Louis has begun the new year by saying goodbye, and taking a long look back to the lessons of the past.
Mr.
Louis has decided to move from the Joyce Theater to the new Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, where Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance opens today for a two-week season.
Mr.
Louis decided to make the move when he rejected the 1994 slot offered for the company by the Joyce, which operates on an informal rotation basis.
There is some risk involved.
The Joyce, where the troupe has appeared over the last 11 years, has an established audience; the Kaye has only been open since April.
Mr.
Louis's troupe will be the first major dance company to have a season there.
And although the theater is subsidizing the engagement in part, it does not yet have a dance audience of its own.


METROPOLITAN COLLEGE REPORT
Manhattan
The high and the low -- Manhattan knows both.


Idaho Power reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Defections May Prove Cowboys' Defect
After the Dallas Cowboys left the field Sunday night, still the champions of the National Football League, they met in the locker room for one last time this season.
They held hands, said a prayer, and then Jimmy Johnson, amazingly, left the room without saying a word to his team.
He had television interviews to do.
Cowboys receiver Michael Irvin said that after Johnson departed, he looked at the players around him and wondered whether at the beginning of next season the same people would still be by his side.


Shifting Money to Help Poor Students
The Federal program aimed at improving basic academic skills of low-income children, known as Chapter 1, needs major revision.
Over the years, its funds have been spread too thin and fail to help many of the neediest students.
The Clinton Administration has put forth a sensible plan to concentrate more money on the most disadvantaged students.
As Congress begins marking up the bill this week, it should follow the Administration's lead -- and go even further.


Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
The era of the purple down coat is over at last.
So is the era of the Arafat scarf.
Earmuffs are very big.
So, on those women aspiring to make a fashion statement no matter what, are velvet hats that sit low on the head and evoke memories of Alfred Lord Tennyson.
Such are the observations of a lady New Yorker who, clad in two pairs of sweat pants, a sweater, boots suitable for log-rolling, a six-foot scarf, heavy coat and eyebrow-scraping headcozy strolled down Seventh ("Fashion") Avenue one day during this hideous invasion of Arctic cold.
So odd an assemblage occasioned no glances.
People in glass houses, after all . . .


Oxford Health Plans Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  MARINES KILL 8 SOMALIS, U.N.
SAYS  United States Marines opened fire in a crowded street in Mogadishu, killing 8 Somalis and wounding 12, United Nations officials said.
A1  GERRY ADAMS ON PEACE IN ULSTER  Arriving in New York, Gerry Adams, head of the political arm of the Irish Republican Army, said Ulster's 25 years of warfare would enter a climactic stage toward peace.
A1


Flora Stieglitz Straus, Philanthropist, 98
Flora Stieglitz Straus, a philanthropist long active in nonprofit organizations benefiting children, died on Jan. 24 at her home in Greenwich, Conn.
She was 98.
In the 1930's and 1940's, Mrs.
Strauswas a member and chairman of the New York State Commission for the Blind.


BMC West Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 28


Corrections
A brief report in the Company News column of Business Day on Saturday about the stock trading of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. misstated the movement in the company's stock on Friday.
It rose 6.25 cents, to $6.3125; it did not decline.


Classical Music in Review
Ervin Schulhoff Rediscovered  Downtown Chamber and Opera Players Merkin Hall
The 100th anniversary of the birth of Ervin Schulhoff would probably be generating more interest this year if the gifted Czech composer had survived the concentration camp to which the Nazis consigned him in 1941.
It is also possible, however, that he would have remained obscure; after mastering a brilliantly quirky, jazz- and folk-inflected style, he took an unfortunate Marxist turn in the 1930's and fell into a socialist-realist rut.
His was one of many careers wrecked by the 20th century's dead ends, musical or otherwise.


Aviall Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Home Rule's Exclusive, Costly Kingdoms
Sitting on a gently sloping hill of elm and locust trees that leads to a rocky beach, Dering Harbor offers virtually none of the amenities of a modern municipality.
No post office.
No playground.
Not a single quaint country shop.
Just 32 houses, a puny water tower and a maintenance staff named Richie.
Still, it is an incorporated village, the smallest in New York State, a locality with a budget of $115,000 a year and two major parties: the Independent Party, from which all candidates for village mayor and trustee are drawn, and the yearly summer cocktail party, to which all Dering Harbor is invited.


Abex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Emmitt Gets the Credit, but He Spreads It Around
Emmitt Smith firmly clenched the Super Bowl XXVIII most valuable player trophy yesterday morning at a news conference in his honor.
You knew that the sparkling, sterling silver trophy was in sure hands.
It was easy pickings for Smith -- the handoff came from Paul Tagliabue, the National Football League commissioner -- and he handled it as gracefully as he had 30 handoffs and four passes from Troy Aikman in the Dallas Cowboys' 30-13 championship victory over the Buffalo Bills.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL MORIARTY, a leading member of the ensemble cast of the NBC television series "Law and Order," quit the program last week, saying he thought the network was trying to keep him from speaking out about violence on television.
He also complained that his role, that of Ben Stone, a prosecutor, had been reduced.
He will, however, continue to work on the series until the end of this season.
Mr.
Moriarty could not be reached yesterday because he was in Millerton, N.Y., where he is building a house that as yet has no telephone.
Recently, he has been outspoken in his opposition to the plan by Attorney General Janet Reno to promote legislation limiting violence on television.
He had been invited to discuss his view on the "Today" show and "Now," both on NBC.


Cipsco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Civil Rights Chief Named Housing Agency Chairman
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday named Ruben Franco, the former president of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund, as chairman of the New York City Housing Authority, concluding an appointment process that had been one of the most difficult for the Mayor.
Mr.
Giuliani also appointed two members of the board of the housing agency, Myrtle G. Whitmore, who is active in civic organizations, and Kalman Finkel, a Brooklyn lawyer.
And he named Elizabeth Colon, a one-time candidate for Congress and a supporter of Mr.
Giuliani's campaign, as president of the Brooklyn Navy Yard.


Will Coleman Walk the Aisle?
The Nets and Derrick Coleman need to get married, for the good of each other and the rest of basketball civilization, which can't take much more of this story.
No doubt it would be a stormy relationship, if not quite the magnitude of Jeff Gillooly-Tonya Harding.
The current stumbling block, in fact, is the Nets' insistence on having a realistic option of divorcing Coleman should he become impossible to live with.


Pierre Boulle, Novelist, Is Dead; Author of 'River Kwai' Was 81
Pierre Boulle, the author of "The Bridge Over the River Kwai," "Planet of the Apes" and other novels and short stories, died on Sunday in Paris, The Associated Press reported.
He was 81 and lived in Paris.
Mr.
Boulle was born in Avignon.
After earning a degree in electrical engineering at the Ecole Superieure d'Electricite in Paris, he spent two years in France as an engineer before moving to Malaysia in 1938 to oversee a rubber plantation near Kuala Lumpur.


Properties Chief Dismissed
Open season on the heads of the licensing divisions of the major team sports continues.
Richard White, who last week was rumored to have been fired, is out as president of Major League Baseball Properties, a major league official said yesterday.
The official said White will be gone from the position as soon as lawyers complete negotiations on a settlement.
He declined to say why White was leaving, but another executive said the reason was more personal than business-related.
Both officials commented on condition of anonymity.


By Design; Skinny Skin Dresses
An amusing new style?
Or an unnecessary addition to the wardrobe?
We're talking about the sheer stretch dresses Karl Lagerfeld showed for spring, layered under or over other dresses or over camisoles and miniskirts.
The buyers at Henri Bendel had a positive reaction and whipped up versions of the dress to sell under the store's private label.
Customers got the message and the dresses have been selling nicely, said Teresa Tymoski, a vice president and general merchandise manager at Bendel's.


Goulds Pumps (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Greenfield Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ex-Congressman Again Joining Hartford Race for Governor
John G. Rowland, a 36-year-old Republican who almost defeated Lowell P. Weicker Jr. in the 1990 race for governor but then virtually disappeared from the public eye, announced today his return for another run.
But despite the hopes of senior Republican officials that the party would quickly rally around Mr.
Rowland, he faces what is shaping up as a major and perhaps bruising personal scrap with the Republican Secretary of the State, Pauline R. Kezer.


Albany Halts Support to Widen Housing Program for Homeless
The State Social Services Department has temporarily halted its support for expanding an important New York City program to house the homeless, Commissioner Michael J. Dowling said yesterday.
Mr.
Dowling said he and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo had decided to put a moratorium on widening transitional housing for the homeless pending a review of all programs to help the homeless.
"We have to look at whether it is desirable for us to continue to fund this type of housing," Mr.
Dowling said, "which has become much larger than we expected it to be. We cannot afford the dramatic expansion of this type of housing. It was never supposed to be the front end of the housing system. But that is what it has become."


New York Needs Stronger Ticket-Scalping Law
To the Editor:
Arnold Diaz deserves the credit he gets Jan. 23 for his popular "shame-on-you" exposes of consumer abuses on New York local television, particularly his Barneygate scoop.
In that case, he exposed outrageous ticket scalping for a stage show starring Barney the friendly dinosaur.


Accounts
*
American Hawaii Cruises, San Francisco, to Arian, Lowe, Travis &amp; Gusick, Chicago, to handle the creative portion of its estimated $6 million account, previously at J. Walter Thompson San Francisco.
Peter A. Mayer Advertising Inc., New Orleans, continues to handle media buying responsibilities.


Upjohn Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'Venus' Figurines From Ice Age Rediscovered in an Antique Shop
WHILE strolling on the rue Notre Dame in Montreal, a young sculptor happened to look in the window of an antique shop and see a display of tiny statues carved in ivory and stone.
It was the beginning of a rediscovery, revealed last week by archeologists, that could lead to a better understanding of a distinctive but enigmatic form of ice age art.
The statuettes in the window, of nude women with exaggerated breasts and buttocks, were prized specimens of the first so-called Venus figurines to be excavated in the 1880's in caves near Monaco.
Other discoveries across Eurasia followed, opening the eyes of scholars to a shared artistic expression that seemed to unite far-flung prehistoric people from the Pyrenees to Siberia.
Perhaps these were symbols in fertility rites, keys to prehistoric sexual roles, expressions of a common mythology, or simply ice age pornography.


COMPANY BRIEFS
SUN ALLIANCE GROUP P.L.C., London, an insurance company, said it would sell its leasehold interest in a British shopping mall to the property investment company Capital and Countries P.L.C. for $243 million in a move to end Capital and Countries' legal claim against it.


Weirton Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Support for Early Date of Arrival in America
NEW genetic research has produced more evidence that the first people to settle America probably arrived from Asia as early as 29,000 years ago.
The findings provide ammunition for escalating attacks on the traditional hypothesis holding that the migrations occurred about 12,000 years ago.
In a study of linguistically related Indians in Central America, the researchers developed an evolutionary time clock that they said should be more accurate than any in current use.
Applied to 18 other widely dispersed Indian groups, the clock showed that their common ancestors must have reached America 22,000 to 29,000 years ago.
After scattering, they began evolving their present degree of genetic diversity, the researchers said.


Logicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


LTV Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gartner, Gartner, Gartner for the Rangers
Some of their goals carried historic significance, and all five of them were of immediate importance last night as the Rangers forgot about their jet lag and returned to winning form with a 5-3 victory over the Penguins at Madison Square Garden.
When the power play clicked, so did Mike Gartner, who scored a hat trick while the team was in power-play formation.
Gartner's 607 career goals have left him just one hat trick shy of tying Bobby Hull for fifth place on the National Hockey League's career goal-scoring list.
Among active players, only Wayne Gretzky has proved more prolific than Gartner.


Emerson Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shortchanging the Teachers
Imagine a teacher with 14 years' experience returning to her elementary school after an extended leave, and being paid as a beginner.
Laurie Scher, a special-education teacher at Public School 59 in the Bronx, does not have to imagine it.
She lived it.
Since September, her expected biweekly paycheck of $1,200 has shrunk to $791.
Ms.
Scher is just one of hundreds of New York City teachers who have been shortchanged for months because of computer glitches -- and shameful procrastination -- at the Board of Education.
Board officials blame a new computer system installed last fall to automate functions that had been handled by 50 payroll clerks.
People like Ms.
Scher who returned at lower salaries were not the only victims.
Salary increases negotiated in the latest union contract failed to show up in the new system, and some teachers found they were making less rather than more money.


Defense Nominee Pushes Foreign Arms Deal
Sixteen months ago, the Pentagon canceled a $2 billion radar-jamming system after it failed crucial flight tests on Navy fighter jets it was designed to protect.
When the Defense Department shelved the program, it also prohibited the Government from acting as a middleman to sell the device overseas, as is the Government's customary practice with foreign arms deals.


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday about "Symphonic Dances," a new work by Peter Martins for the New York City Ballet, misstated the date of the premiere.
It is tomorrow evening, not this evening.


New York City Women Edge Closer to Men in Pay
Women in New York City came a lot closer to matching the earnings of men during the 1980's than elsewhere in the nation, according to a new study released yesterday.
The study, which covered New Yorkers over 25 years old, found that except for women who lacked a high school diploma, working women gained on men of comparable education during that decade.
And those income gains are likely to continue in the 1990's, experts said, although probably at a slower pace.


Somehow, Some Way, Islanders Win One
Finally, in this strange season where a bevy of upstart Panther, Duck and Lightning squadrons have stormed out of the sun belt and shown nothing but disrespect for the hockey establishment, there comes an expansion club that almost behaves like one.
For the hapless Islanders, the similarly hapless San Jose Sharks couldn't have turned up on their Nassau Coliseum doorstep to play doormat at a better time.
Desperate to reverse the five-game losing streak that tried the patience of players and coaches and marooned their No. 1 goalie, Ron Hextall, on the bench, the Islanders sorely needed the tonic that came tonight in the form of a 5-4 victory.


Chubb Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Helmerich &amp; Payne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pentagon Lawyer Called Top Choice as Reno's Deputy
As the White House announced the appointment of a little-known lawyer today to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, Administration officials said the White House and Attorney General Janet Reno had tentatively settled on the Pentagon's top lawyer to take over as the department's No. 2 official.
The Pentagon lawyer, Jamie S. Gorelick, emerged as the consensus choice to succeed Philip B. Heymann as Ms.
Reno's deputy.
Mr.
Heymann resigned unexpectedly last Thursday, citing a lack of chemistry between himself and his boss.


Personal Health; Exercising safely during pregnancy.
PREGNANCY is no longer a period of confinement.
About the only thing that is "confined" during pregnancy these days is the unborn child.
It is now commonplace to see pregnant women jogging, swimming, walking briskly and even skating and playing tennis, sometimes well into the last third of pregnancy.
Some women exercise after clearing their plans with their physicians, but many others never consult their doctors and instead take it for granted that activities they pursued before pregnancy are safe to continue.
Still others are inspired by their pregnancy to start regular exercise.


Kitchen Computer: Promising Steak, Serving Burgers
MY computer is talking to me.
"Now this recipe has been a secret for years," it says.


First Brands Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inter-Regional Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Justice Officials Expected to Drop Inquiry Into Brown's Tie to Hanoi
Justice Department officials said today that Federal prosecutors had decided to close their investigation of Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown without taking action on accusations that he had accepted a $700,000 bribe to help Vietnam end the United States trade embargo.
Justice Department aides said the decision would be reviewed soon by top Justice Department officials.
They said that if officials here agreed, the prosecutors would take the unusual step of making a public announcement because of the publicity surrounding the investigation.


Real Estate; The Business District in Wilmington, Del., Is Reviving, With Commitments From Four Companies
WEAKENED by corporate cutbacks and a flat economy, the business district here is bouncing back, thanks to some help from the city government.
The year-old city administration under Mayor James H. Sills Jr. won commitments from four companies last year to bring their operations to the downtown office center.


Making Takeout-Style Chinese Noodles at Home
EVERY once in awhile, noodle dishes -- the kind you ordinarily carry out from Chinese restaurants -- seem the perfect comfort food.
These are not cutting-edge Chinese dishes, but the old-fashioned kind available in chop suey parlors 40 years ago -- lots and lots of either very thin or very fat noodles with bits of chicken, onion and bok choy.
The ratio of noodles to other ingredients was about 500 to 1.


Judge Bars Price Advantage To Minority Bids in New York
A State Supreme Court judge has ruled that the city cannot offer a 10 percent "price preference" to bidders for municipal contracts that are owned by women or minorities.
The ruling, issued on Monday by Justice Walter B. Tolub of Manhattan, came less than a week after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani issued an executive order eliminating the price preference, saying it cost taxpayers too much money.


Yellow Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


CLINTON REPORTED TO BE READY TO END VIETNAM EMBARGO
President Clinton plans to lift the 19-year trade embargo on Vietnam within a few days, senior Administration officials said today.
While the President has not yet formally signified his assent, a senior Administration official said Mr.
Clinton had concluded that the time had come to begin normalizing relations with Vietnam by taking the highly sensitive step of resuming trade.
Mr.
Clinton's avoidance of military service during the Vietnam War adds to the political peril.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A new subcompact car from Kia Motors in South Korea is happy to play follow the leader.
THE newest nameplate in the American automotive market is more than willing to have Honda or other rivals declare themselves "a car ahead," as long as it can be perceived as following closely, and doggedly, behind.
In Las Vegas, Nev., and Portland, Ore., Kia Motors America, a unit of the Kia Motors Corporation of South Korea, will begin advertising tomorrow for the first cars sold under its name in the United States.
A print, broadcast and dealer-showroom campaign, produced by Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, uses humor and whimsy in seeking to create an image for the newcomer as both affordable and reliable, characteristics that might seem mutually exclusive in a four-door sedan starting at $8,495.


Review/Film; David Byrne Marks Another Phase Ended
In 1983, Jonathan Demme filmed Talking Heads in concert for "Stop Making Sense," presenting the performance seen from the outside: a stage show, nothing more.
Now, with the Heads dissolved, the band's songwriter and leader, David Byrne, has created what might be its sequel.
Its title is "Between the Teeth," but it could be called "Start Making Syncopation."
The movie, which opens today at Film Forum 1, shows a concert on Halloween 1992 at the Count Basie Theater in Red Bank, N.J.
Mr.
Byrne leads 10 Car Pile-Up, a band that zigzags from rock to funk to Latin rhythms in songs that are sometimes whimsical, sometimes dire.
The cameras focus on the prosaic details of music making like Mr.
Byrne's toes tapping in his cowboy boots and the red light of an amplifier glowing in the darkness between songs, yet they capture the sweaty, heady pleasures of rhythm becoming motion.


Chess to Get Sponsor: Intel
Bobby Fischer captured the nation's imagination a generation ago, taking the world chess championship from Boris Spassky on television.
Since then, champions have come and gone, but as a spectator sport, chess -- which, after all, involves two people sitting motionless for minutes on end, occasionally reaching out to do something incomprehensible -- has been a bust.
The Intel Corporation wants to change that.
Yesterday it announced that it would sponsor all events put on this year by the Professional Chess Association, which was founded by Gary Kasparov, the current champion, after he and other top players broke away from the International Chess Federation.


Clintons Campaigning to Scuttle Endorsement of Rival Health Plan
Senior Administration officials started an intense lobbying campaign today, including a White House meeting between business leaders and Hillary Rodham Clinton, to derail a potentially damaging show of support for a health care plan competing with their own.
While President Clinton met today with hospital officials and governors to promote his plan, his top aides sought to persuade members of the influential Business Roundtable not to back a less comprehensive one sponsored by Representative Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee.
The Cooper plan, unlike the President's, does not require employers to pay any of the costs of their employees' health insurance.


Sanitation Worker Is Slain on Subway
A New York City sanitation worker who had just finished an overnight shift was found shot to death on a subway train in the Bronx yesterday morning, the transit police said.
He was the first person to be killed on the subway system this year.
The body of Warren Lewis, 41 years old, of Co-Op City in the Bronx, was discovered in the last car of a No. 5 train when it pulled into the East 180th Street station at 8:55 A.M., said Albert O'Leary, a spokesman for the transit police.


Conner Drops Out
DENNIS CONNER will miss the fourth leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race, from Auckland, New Zealand, to Punta del Este, Uruguay.
BRAD BUTTERWORTH, Conner's co-skipper on the American entry Winston, announced the decision yesterday in Auckland, citing Conner's business commitments.


Gary Clare; Director, 32
Gary Clare, director of creative development for the performance-programs department at Thirteen/WNET, the public television station in New York, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 32.
The cause was AIDS-related, his family said.


Witco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton Increases His Request for Earthquake Relief to $9.5 Billion
President Clinton added $2.02 billion today to his request for Federal relief for victims of the Los Angeles earthquake, bringing his total request to $9.5 billion.
The request won approval from a crucial House committee later in the day.


Washington Post Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


GOLF: So Close, and Now So Far Away; In 1990, Mike Donald Nearly Won the U.S. Open; Today, He's Begging to Play on the Tour
In the small, sparsely furnished family room of the house where he grew up, Mike Donald slides a videotape into the VCR.
He is holding a remote control in his hand, fast-forwarding into the past, to a summer day more than three years ago when the course of his life was altered forever.
The figures on the screen snap into focus.
One is immediately recognizable as Hale Irwin, trim and fit, his graying hair stylishly cut.
The other looks vaguely familiar.
His open and friendly face, the one with the Kirk Douglas dimple in the chin, is topped by a Wilson visor.
He has the slight paunch of a man who enjoys a beer every now and then and the reddish countenance of a golf pro who has spent his life in the wind and sun.
It is Mike Donald, and he is on the 14th green at Medinah Country Club outside Chicago in a Monday playoff for the 1990 United States Open Championship.


Neiman Chief To Take Post At Federated
Terry J. Lundgren, chairman and chief executive of Neiman Marcus, confirmed yesterday that he would resign to head the merchandising office of Federated Department Stores.
His departure, effective April 7, leaves Neiman Marcus without a merchant at the helm and with a limited field of candidates to choose from.
The company said it was looking for a successor.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Beanpot Tournament
Around Boston, the highlights of the season are the next two Monday nights, when a ritual is played out at Boston Garden.
The opening pairings for the tournament are ideal: Boston College against an improved Northeastern team in the opener and Boston University and Harvard, two of the nation's best, in the sequel.
The victors will play for the prize on Feb. 14.
In the coaches' poll this week, Boston College is No. 2 after Michigan and Harvard is No. 4 after Michigan State.
Williams
The Ephmen boast a record of 11-3-1 and are in second place behind Connecticut in the ECAC East division with a 7-2 mark.
The Huskies snapped Williams's six-game winning streak last Saturday night by winning, 3-2, on a power-play goal in overtime.


Manufacturing Activity Reported Up in January
The National Association of Purchasing Management, whose monthly surveys reflect trends among the nation's manufacturers, reported yesterday that manufacturing activity continued to expand in January, for the fifth consecutive month, but not as rapidly as in the fall.
A separate index measuring the prices that purchasing managers pay for materials and supplies used in manufacturing jumped to 59.8, from 51.3, the highest level since November 1990.
The jump, mainly a result of rising steel prices, prompted Wall Street traders to drive up interest rates.
That is the usual Wall Street response when traders interpret a new piece of data as signaling inflation.


Reebok International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Princess Lucie Jadot Shirazi; Founder of Wildlife Fund, 86
Princess Lucie Jadot Shirazi, a founder of the World Wildlife Fund, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 86.
The cause was cancer, said Roberto Mitrotti, co-executor of her estate.


Cagle's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Food Notes
Food-Hall Developments
One old food department is changing, and a new one is coming.
This spring, the Marketplace in Macy's Cellar, one of the first large food markets in an American department store, will rearrange the furniture and add areas for selling pizzas, frozen yogurt, biscotti, cookies and pretzels, all by David Liederman of David's Cookies.


Israel Again Dashes Hopes Of Early Deal With P.L.O.
In the roller-coaster negotiations between Israel and the P.L.O. -- upbeat one moment, glum the next -- Israeli officials dampened expectations today for an imminent breakthrough that would get Palestinian self-rule going in the occupied territories.
Just two days ago in Davos, Switzerland, Israeli and Palestine Liberation Organization leaders suggested that they were on the verge of clearing away remaining obstacles and would quickly sign an accord on carrying out self-rule and a companion Israeli troop withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


National Intergroup reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ethiopian Art Highlights Black History Month


National Fuel Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wine Talk
IT has been said of Vega Sicilia, Spain's rarest wine, that even the King is on allocation.
One suspects that even in the new, democratized Spain, Vega Sicilia might come up with an extra bottle for King Juan Carlos.
But after that, this is one really scarce wine.


Forget Vietnam? No. Forgive? Perhaps.
Leo Thorsness spent six years inside a prisoner of war camp in North Vietnam.
Now he is building a home on Puget Sound in a state whose leading industries are poised to make billions of dollars trading with the former enemy.
If anyone seemed likely to be angry over lifting the two-decade-old embargo on trade with Vietnam, it would be Mr.
Thorsness, a former Air Force fighter pilot.
But he favors dropping the economic barriers.


Let's Look at Emergency Room Misuse
To the Editor:
Many physicians send their private patients to New York City's overburdened hospital emergency rooms before 9 A.M. and after 5 P.M. weekdays and over the weekends when their own offices are closed.
Patients who need to be seen, but who do not show any need for acute emergency care, are sent to the emergency rooms for workups, conducted by residents.


Despite Successes, Kirov Opera Finds Reasons for Gloom
Before the Kirov Opera made its much-admired visit to New York in the summer of 1992, the company seemed suffused with a kind of guarded optimism.
Yes, the Russian economy was in disarray.
But changes were in the works, and in the meantime the company's performances were at a high level of achievement and freedom promised much for the future.
Today, as the Kirov begins a weeklong Rimsky-Korsakov Festival here that has attracted many Western critics and visitors, that optimism seems frayed.
Both Valery Gergiyev, the artistic director of the opera and music director of the Maryinsky Theater, which also houses the Kirov Ballet, and Anatoly F. Malkov, the administrative director of the theater, sounded grim and pessimistic compared with their mood in 1992.
But they were hardly ready to give up the fight for artistic quality and financial independence, a fight that has solidified the Kirov Opera's reputation as Russia's best.


Banta Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 1


For Black Politicians, a Debate of Strategy and Leadership; After Dinkins's Defeat, Can a New Group of Leaders With New Concerns Achieve the Old Unity?
The politics of black New York has entered a period of transition, as politicians, community organizers, religious figures and other participants try to define their relationships with one another and with a new Mayor who won office without them.
Ever since the defeat of David N. Dinkins, New York's first black Mayor, the question of where black politics should head has been the center of a discussion in a variety of formal meetings, as well as informal sessions in clubhouses, church basements and kitchens.


Do White Leaders Denounce White Racism?; Picketing Farrakhan
To the Editor:
Monday night, Jan. 24, I saw firsthand the consequences of the fear that Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam leader, has instilled.
Those consequences resulted in a serious violation of our First Amendment right to raise a voice of peaceful protest.


Bomb Trial Focuses on Origin of Video
A defense lawyer in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday showed that a movie depicting a terror bomb attack on an American Embassy, which was played for the jury by the prosecution yesterday, included footage from a Hollywood release called "Death Before Dishonor," about American commandos fighting Muslim terrorists in a fictitious Middle Eastern country.
The footage, when shown on Monday, seemed a kind of visual highlight of the four-month trial.
When presented to the jury, the prosecutor asked his witness, an Arab-English translator, to translate the title, "International Islamic Resistance Presents a Course in Manufacturing Explosives."


Berlin Journal; A Neo-Nazi Whose Ardor Was Cooled by Killings
At meetings of German neo-Nazis over the last few years, the tall and powerful figure of Ingo Hasselbach has been one of the most imposing.
Articulate and intelligent, dressed in bomber jacket and heavy black boots, Mr.
Hasselbach became an admired figure on the far right with his angry speeches denouncing foreigners and other enemies.
But then last year Mr.
Hasselbach faded from view.
Rumors began to circulate that he had dropped out of neo-Nazi groups he helped organize.
His former comrades, angry at what they considered betrayal, began threatening his mother and sister.
On the side of the building where he lived in eastern Berlin, someone wrote in large letters, "Ingo Hasselbach, We'll Get You." A Change of Heart
Now Mr.
Hasselbach, 26, has confirmed his change of heart in an extraordinary book, "The Reckoning: A Neo-Nazi Drops Out." It is selling briskly, and has made Mr.
Hasselbach the most prominent figure in post-unification Germany to have recanted his far-right views.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  VIETNAM EMBARGO ACTION NEAR  President Clinton plans to lift the 19-year-old trade embargo against Vietnam and will do so within the next few days, officials said.
A1  ATTITUDES TOWARD VIETNAM THAW  Twenty-one years after the United States pulled out of Vietnam, attitudes are changing in the state of Washington, which is poised to make billions of dollars trading with the former enemy.
A8


Billions for School Are Lost In Fraud, Waste and Abuse
For several years, the Federal Government has been losing $3 billion to $4 billion annually to waste, fraud and loan defaults in its higher education student-aid programs.
That is more than 10 percent of the Education Department's annual budget of $29 billion -- enough to finance the nation's entire Head Start project.
Education officials, both inside and outside the Government, are well aware of the problem.
The Education Secretary, Richard W. Riley, recently called his department's management of its main scholarship program "worse than lax." Robert Atwell, president of the American Council on Education, representing 1,600 colleges and universities, terms the fraud and abuse "an intolerable embarrassment." Students Are Hurt
In the most dramatic cases in recent years, directors of for-profit trade schools and colleges have looted the budgets of these loosely regulated Federal student aid programs to buy themselves Mercedes-Benzes, travel the world, subsidize a drug habit, invest in religious causes or pay themselves million-dollar salaries.


New York State Warns Insurers
The New York State Insurance Department warned life insurance companies yesterday that if they failed to control their agents and stop improper advertising, the department could require that some companies submit advertising for approval before use.
The warning was part of a letter sent yesterday to 147 New York life insurance companies detailing the steps the department expected insurance companies to take in reviewing their procedures for controlling agents and advertisements.
Several Investigations
Salvatore R. Curiale, the state insurance superintendent, said earlier this month that several life insurance companies were under investigation as a result of "an outbreak of questionable business activities that companies have been unable or unwilling to properly police."


Review/Television; Thirty Years Later, Fallout in Nevada
"Turning Point: Coverup at Ground Zero" makes the case for the downwinders, the people who were in the path of fallout from the scores of nuclear blasts at the Federal Government's Nevada test site in the 1950's and early 60's.
They and their survivors, who are suing Washington for damages, have recently gained hope from the sympathetic spirit personified by Hazel R. O'Leary, the Secretary of Energy. (In a break from decades of official stonewalling, she recently pledged a full investigation of various radiation-related experiments conducted by the Government since World War II.)


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Property Trust of America, El Paso, is selling $200 million of notes in two parts.
The first part consists of $100 million of 7.5 percent notes due in 2014 at 98.902 to yield 7.613 percent through J. P. Morgan.
The notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
The second part consists of $100 million of 6.875 percent notes due in 2008 at 99.691 to yield 6.917 through J. P. Morgan.
The issue is rated Baa-2 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.


Review/Film; A Curse That Bridges Centuries
"Fiorile" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 13.
The film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, Broadway at 63d Street.
In "Fiorile," Paolo and Vittorio Taviani's sweeping and sensuous fable of how several generations of a Tuscan clan have lived out a family curse, the ghosts of the past are always threatening to jump out at its characters from the shadows of their troubled family history.


Insurance Official Draws Fire Over Health Plan Commercial
Under fire from three Senators for a television advertising campaign against the Clinton health plan, the head of the Health Insurance Association of America said today that the advertisements were "always subject to review or revision."
The insurance association leader, Bill Gradison, a former Republican Congressman from Ohio, said later that he was not yet prepared to drop the advertisements, which attack President Clinton's proposal that most Americans obtain health insurance through mandatory membership in purchasing cooperatives.
But Mr.
Gradison said he hoped he could make enough progress with the White House to end the advertisements.


INSIDE
Hearings on Clinton Deal
Democrats made a concession to Republican calls for hearings on the failure of a savings and loan tied to President Clinton.
Page A10.
U.S.
Is Pressed on Bosnia
Both Britain and the United Nations put pressure on the United States to take an active role to negotiate a peace settlement in Bosnia.
Page A6.
U.S.
Critiques China Rights
The United States issued an analysis of China's human rights record, saying Beijing has a long way to go to keep its trading status.
Page A9.
Giuliani Plan for Savings
Mayor Giuliani's fiscal plan is expected to call for big increases in worker productivity, especially from the Sanitation Department.
Page B1.
Overcrowding in Cyberspace
The web of computer networks and data services known as cyberspace is being overloaded as more people seek access to on-line systems.
Page D1.


Huskies Fall And Return To Reality In Big East
Now they can say it was bound to happen sooner or later.
Connecticut became the latest highly ranked team to stumble, as Syracuse's emotional 108-95 victory before a raucous crowd in the Carrier Dome created the sudden possibility of a race for first place in the Big East.
"It was obvious we would lose sometime," said Doron Sheffer, the usually reliable guard whose struggles tonight became one in a series of uncharacteristic Connecticut failures.


Executone Information Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Infinity Broadcasting Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ecuadorean Nominated as U.N.'s New Human Rights Chief
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali today nominated Ecuador's representative, Jose Ayala Lasso, to be the first United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, a post created by the General Assembly last year.
But his choice dismayed several American human rights monitoring organizations who said Mr.
Lasso lacked experience and served as Foreign Minister under the repressive military Government that ruled Ecuador in the late 1970's


Household International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Time Out From a Higher Calling


Finnish Pianist Wins Award Of Cash and Manager's Aid
Ralf Gothoni, a Finnish pianist, has been named the second winner of the Gilmore Award, one of the piano world's most generous, unusual and, by some standards, eccentric competitions.
As Gilmore Artist of the Irving S. Gilmore International Keyboard Festival, Mr.
Gothoni, who is 48, will receive $115,000 in cash and roughly $400,000 more in management services over the next four years.
The Gilmore is based in Kalamazoo, Mich.


Corrections
A television review yesterday about a PBS program, "Frontline: The Diamond Empire," referred incorrectly to De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., the world's leading diamond producer.
The company was not Jewish-controlled during World War II; its controlling family, the Oppenheimers, had long since embraced the Anglican religion.


Iran's Chief Escapes Shooting
President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani escaped injury today when a gunman opened fire from a crowd of worshipers gathered for a ceremony at Ayatollah Khomeini's mausoleum, the Iranian press reported.
According to state-run Iranian television, which broadcast a videotape of the incident, without showing the assailant, five shots were "fired into the air." No one was wounded, reports said.


As 'Homicide' Waits to Live or Die, Actor Plunges Into Shakespeare
While the NBC series "Homicide" hovers in limbo, Andre Braugher waits for news of its fate with the cool of a man who believes in predestination.
"I was simply out to do the best work I possibly could," Mr.
Braugher says of his stint playing the eloquent but icy Detective Frank Pembleton.
"What happens to the show is really out of my control, so I don't torture myself about questions of, 'Maybe we will, maybe we won't.' I don't cross my fingers and I don't pray over it."


Clean Harbors Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Eaton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Safeguard All Plutonium Now
The United States and Russia have agreed to dismantle many of their nuclear weapons.
But this wonderful idea has a potentially serious downside.
The nuclear material -- uranium and plutonium -- extracted during the dismantling process can, conceivably, be sold to or stolen by other countries that hope to build nuclear weapons of their own.
What to do?
The National Academy of Sciences has some useful ideas.
Highly enriched uranium extracted from warheads is relatively easy to render militarily harmless.
Once blended down, it can fuel power plants but cannot be used for warheads without re-enrichment.
In contrast, plutonium separated from spent fuel is usable in warheads.
It needs to be securely stored and disposed of.


Giuliani Plan Seeks to Raise Productivity
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is to unveil a fiscal plan today that calls for substantial increases in worker productivity and government efficiency, with a large portion of the money saved to come from the Sanitation Department.
Administration officials said the Sanitation Department would be called on to achieve about $45 million of the expected $300 million in productivity savings, which would probably require sanitation employees to cover longer routes and to work full eight-hour days.
Now, sanitation workers are often able to finish their routes in as little as six hours.


BIC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


No. 2 Official Is Resigning From the Fed
The vice chairman of the Federal Reserve announced his resignation today, giving President Clinton a rare chance to fill two seats on the seven-member board within several months.
The vice chairman, David W. Mullins Jr., said in a statement that he would leave on Feb. 14 to join a new money management firm led by John Meriwether, a former vice chairman of Salomon Brothers who was forced out for his role in a Treasury bond scandal in 1991.


Do White Leaders Denounce White Racism?; Attacked Blacks Too
To the Editor:
I would like to correct misimpressions in the press about the speech at Kean College of New Jersey last Nov. 29 by Khalid Muhammad, Louis Farrakhan's national spokesman.
Attention has focused on the speaker's rhetorical violence against whites and Jews without mention of his out rageous verbal assaults on blacks.
In answer to a question about South Africa, Mr.
Farrakhan's spokesman derided Nelson Mandela with a hypothetical scenario of rape and murder in Mr.
Mandela's household.


G.O.P. to Get Peek at Clinton Land Deal
The Republicans today renewed their calls for hearings into the links between President Clinton and a failed Arkansas savings and loan, and they won the Democrats' assent to take at least a brief look into the matter.
How deep, for how long and when were matters that the Democrats studiously left unclear.
For now, it appears that Republicans will at most be allowed to question officials at the Federal agency that in 1989 bailed out the bankrupt Arkansas institution, the Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan Association.


Do White Leaders Denounce White Racism?
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's major concern should be white anti-Semitism, a form of racism (column, Jan. 11).
Since the deliverance by Moses, Jews have not suffered as a group at the hands of Africans.
But Jews have suffered and continue to suffer at the hands of the white Caucasian race.


Review/Music; It's Dvorak's Turn in Brooklyn's Little Festivals
This season, the Brooklyn Philharmonic has built a series of festivals around its programs.
The latest, "From the New World," examined Dvorak's efforts to foster an American folk-based symphonic idiom during his years in New York, 1892-95.
An orchestra concert led by Dennis Russell Davies on Friday and Saturday evenings at the academy was the centerpiece; the ancillary events were six hours of lectures and recitals at the Majestic Theater on Sunday.
Joseph Horowitz, the orchestra's artistic adviser, has devoted much energy and ink to denouncing the museum culture that prevails in classical music.
Yet "From the New World" was entirely a museum experience.
On display were some large fossils: the "New World" Symphony, Mrs.
H.
H.
A.
Beach's "Gaelic" Symphony and Edward MacDowell's "Dirge".


No Headline
"The passion is gone." LEO THORSNESS, a former P.O.W.. who no longer opposes trade with Vietnam.  [ A8:1. ]


McClatchy Newspapers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


What Gillooly Says, and What Harding Says
At the heart of the investigation swirling around the Nancy Kerrigan assault are conflicting versions of events offered by Tonya Harding and Jeff Gillooly, the divorced couple who reconciled last fall only to separate once again shortly after the attack at the national figure skating championships in Detroit.
Harding, Kerrigan's chief skating rival, spoke to the F.B.I. for 10 hours on Jan. 18.
After investigators showed Gillooly her statement, Gillooly talked for 17 hours on Jan. 26 and Jan. 27.
Yesterday the authorities released records of those conversations.
Here are some of the princpal points of dispute: Dec. 27 or Dec. 28, 1993
Harding and Gillooly agree that she dropped him off at a meeting that authorities later said was attended by those who planned the assault, and that she picked him up.
But they disagree completely on what they talked about as Gillooly took the wheel of his pickup truck and drove off into the early evening.


Central La. Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Knicks Roll But Celtics Get Lost In Confusion
It was late in the fourth quarter last night when Acie Earl wandered onto the court, his eyes a bit dazed, his green Boston warmup jacket still covering the jersey he wore.
Kevin Gamble, his Celtic teammate, had to nudge Earl, tell him to undress, tell him that he was not prepared to enter the game.
It was too late, though, for the Celtics to wake up and get into this game at Madison Square Garden.
This was supposed to be a game between two hot teams -- the Knicks on a four-game winning streak, the Celtics on a season-high seven-game winning streak -- in a rivalry as old as there is in the National Basketball Association.


Even in Cyberspace, Overcrowding
For a world that is theoretically infinite and without boundaries, cyberspace appears to be straining at the seams.
In the computer-age equivalent of the Gold Rush, thousands of people are signing up each month for access to the worldwide web of computer networks and electronic information services -- known as cyberspace -- where strangers can chat, mail can be exchanged, groceries can be ordered and home banking can be done to name only a few possibilities.


Ohio Casualty Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP., Falls Church, Va., said its Land Systems division had won a $26 million contract from the Army to engineer, manufacture and develop the Army's Heavy Assault Bridge.
FIRST FIDELITY BANCORPORATION, Lawrenceville, N.J., the parent of Union Trust Co., Stamford, Conn., completed the previously announced acquisition of Greenwich Financial Corp., Greenwich, Conn., a bank holding company.
Holders of Greenwich Financial common stock will receive $16 in cash for each share, or an aggregate value of $41.9 million.


BMC West
The surge of activity in the building industry, as reflected in the 6.2 percent jump in December housing starts, is helping the stocks of construction and building materials companies.
The BMC West Corporation, a distributor of building supplies, has seen its shares rise 17.7 percent this week after posting record 1993 sales and earnings.


Pulte Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Veronica Driscoll, 67, Head of Nurses' Group
Dr.
Veronica M. Driscoll, a retired executive director of the New York State Nurses Association, died on Sunday at her home in Loudonville, N.Y.
She was 67.
The cause was cancer, the association said.


Weis Markets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Sports of The Times; Tonya Still Uncharged, Unconvicted
JEFF GILLOOLY sounds like a masochist's dream.
His former wife, one Tonya Harding, a figure skater from Oregon, has been issuing documented cries of help over the years that he is abusive to her, but she kept going back to him, a pattern she may regret right about now.
There is one last thing Jeff Gillooly has done to Tonya Harding.
He has served her up on a golden platter to the law and the United States Olympic Committee.
In striking a plea bargain, Gillooly said his former wife was actively involved in the plot to whack Nancy Kerrigan, before and after the actual assault on Jan. 6.


Stock Trading Resumed In Failed Spanish Bank
After suspending trading for more than a month, the Madrid Stock Exchange resumed trading in the shares of Banesto, the troubled Spanish bank, and to the surprise of many, the stock held up better than expected as a record number of shares were exchanged.
By the end of the sesssion, the stock of Banco Espanol de Credito, as the failed institution is formally known, had dropped 57 percent from its price of 1,995 pesetas on Dec. 28, when the Government seized control.
It closed today at 855 pesetas, or $6.05.


Wrigley (Wm.) Jr. Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ruth Mortimer, 62, Rare Books Curator And Smith Librarian
Ruth Mortimer Lancaster, curator of rare books and assistant librarian at Smith College in Northampton, Mass., died on Monday at her home in Williamsburg, Mass.
She was 62.
Her husband, John Lancaster, said she had died of metastatic breast cancer.


Fitness and the Fetus: A Turnabout in Advice
IN recent years, surging interest in physical fitness has led the medical profession to take a hard new look at the risks and benefits of both moderate and vigorous exercise for pregnant women and their unborn children.
Gone are the days when doctors and mothers-in-law routinely told pregnant women to take it easy and avoid strenuous activity.
Based on the findings of recent studies, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has reconsidered recommendations it made in 1985 to restrict the intensity of exercise in pregnancy to what some fitness experts have called "old lady limits." It issued a new advisory yesterday.


H. R. Leary, 82, A Commissioner Of Police, Dies
Howard R. Leary, the Police Commissioner of New York City from 1966 to 1970, a turbulent period marked by the exposure of corruption within the department and social strife in the city, died on Monday at the Buckingham Valley Nursing Center in Buckingham, Pa.
Mr.
Leary, who lived in Solebury Township, Pa., was 82.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his wife, Jennie.


Witnesses Recall Boasts on '63 Killing
The prosecution of the man accused of murdering Medgar Evers 30 years ago wound up dramatically today, with two more witnesses testifying that the defendant, Byron De La Beckwith, had bragged about the killing.
A surprise witness, Mark Reiley, took the stand in the fourth day of testimony in the third trial of Mr.
Beckwith on murder charges in the Evers case.
Mr.
Reiley was also the sixth person to testify that Mr.
Beckwith had boasted of or made reference to having killed Mr.
Evers in 1963.


Public &amp; Private; With Perfect Timing
Bill Clinton gives a good speech.
There is in him a bit of the preacher, some of the earnest high school orator, a little carnival barker and some door-to-door salesman.
You could tell how well his State of the Union address played by how fast his political opponents rushed to judge it empty rhetoric.
Before, the Gallup poll found that 67 percent of those they surveyed thought the President was on the right track.
Afterward the number rose to 85 percent.


Aldus Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Amgen Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Five Brooklyn Officers Suspected of Drug Shakedowns
Five Brooklyn police officers suspected of shaking down drug dealers for cash, guns and cocaine have been removed from active duty in anticipation that they will soon be arrested, police officials said yesterday.
The officers, who are attached to the 73d Precinct in Brownsville, first came under scrutiny last summer when a former officer testified to corruption investigators that the five often broke down the doors of known drug dealers, and then divided their stolen booty in an abandoned coffin factory.


Petro-Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In Mexico's Poor South, Coffee Now Blights Lives
Across the remote highlands of Mexico's deep south, where pine trees seem to snag the clouds and Indian rebels maintain a stronghold, unharvested coffee berries are turning wine dark and rotting.
The coffee is a casualty of the violent uprising that began in Chiapas State on Jan. 1.
Poor farmers have been too afraid to enter their fields to harvest the crop and some have even fled the wooden shacks they call home.


Turner Talks to Redskins
NORV TURNER, the Dallas offensive coordinator, met with the Washington Redskins' owner, JACK KENT COOKE, yesterday about becoming the team's new coach and came away from the talk saying only that "things are going good."


Barcelona Opera Burns; Efforts to Rebuild It Begin
Barcelona's famed Liceo opera theater was destroyed by fire yesterday, but before the 145-year-old neoclassical building had finished burning, Catalonia's Prime Minister, Jordi Pujol, vowed that within two years the opera house "would rise again from its ashes."
After years of bickering among regional, local and national officials and private owners for a planned restoration of the opera house that was to begin within a year, authorities were coordinating fund collecting efforts, including contributions from the European Union's disaster fund program.


Close-Knit Town Shocked at Takeover of Its Police
Quarterly property taxes are due at Town Hall now, but residents coming with checkbooks today found most of the doors locked.
Only the entrance to the police headquarters was open.
And it was full of strangers, screening all arrivals and admitting only those with official business.
"We're still executing warrants here," a detective from the Bergen County Prosecutor's office said sternly.
His message was clear -- outsiders are unwelcome now that the prosecutor's office is running the community's 17-member Police Department and rummaging through all sorts of police files, documents and records as part of an investigation into police operations and improper favors.


Olsten Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


A Settlement in Plant Case
HELEN DAVIS, fiancee of the late Mike Plant, has reached an out-of-court settlement with builders of Plant's racing yacht, Coyote.
Concordia Custom Yachts, of South Dartmouth, Mass., and Davis announced the agreement yesterday, but neither would disclose terms of the settlement.
Davis had sued Concordia for $6 million, maintaining that the boat yard had attached Coyote's 8,400-pound keel bulb with "defective materials and workmanship."


I.M.F. HEAD DEFENDS RUSSIA LOAN POLICY AGAINST CRITICISM
The head of the International Monetary Fund complained today that his institution was being made a "scapegoat" by the Russians, Western governments and various experts for Russia's faltering economic reform effort.
He said the responsibility lies with the Russians themselves.
In a rare public defense, the I.M.F.'s managing director, Michel Camdessus, summoned reporters to deliver a feisty rebuttal to charges that his organization has been unrealistic or too slow in negotiating with the Russian Government the terms for more Western aid.


Marriott International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TOUGH LINE TAKEN ON WATER CLEANUP
The Clinton Administration and Senate Democrats today spelled out ambitious proposals to revise the Clean Water Act, broadening it to include runoff from farms and other previously unregulated sources of pollution.
Their proposals would also further restrict discharges of toxic chemicals, toughen enforcement of pollution laws, expand Federal subsidies for local water-treatment programs and put into law the goal of preserving wetlands at their current total acreage.


It's Not Yellow Journalism, but Red, White or Rose
JOHN PAUL of Dundee, Ore., thinks wine is a laughing matter.
In Bung, the newsletter of Cameron, his winery, he mimicked a supermarket tabloid.
"Exclusive!" shouted a page 1 headline.
"Bill Clinton Drank Pinot Noir in College! 'I Never Swallowed,' He Now Claims."
By contrast, a whiff of academe greeted subscribers to the sophisticated Simi News, published by the Simi Winery in Healdsburg, Calif.
The main article: "Wild and Cultured Yeasts in Wine: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly."


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


World's No. 2 Hurdler Has a No. 1 Problem
Can a nice guy with bad reflexes become the world's best high hurdler?
As Jack Pierce settled sedately into the starting blocks for an evening practice session at Princeton University's Jadwin Gym, his coach, Norm Tate, patroled the 200-meter track with gestures of frustration.


Bridge
Bridge on Long Island suffered a grievous blow on Sunday when Frank Schuld died at the age of 66 after a heart attack.
For 19 years he had owned and managed the Vanderbilt Club, which moved from Manhasset to Lake Success last year.
His wife, Diana, will now control the operations of the club, which is one of the country's biggest.
All the great players in the New York metropolitan area have played at the Vanderbilt at some time in their careers.
Schuld's favorite deal in a long and successful playing career is in the diagram.
It was played at the Town and Country Club in Great Neck, L.I., a decade before he became its owner and changed its name.


Miscellany
*
J.
Brown Associates, New York, and Local Marketing Corp., Stamford, Conn., both units of Grey Advertising, merged to form a marketing integration agency, J. Brown/LMC Group.
Jack Brown, former president of J. Brown, and Jonathan Kramer, former executive vice president and chief operating officer of Local Marketing, will head the new shop as chairman and president, respectively. *
Bruce Blackburn, former president of Danne &amp; Blackburn Inc., New York, and John Young, former president of Lee &amp; Young, New York, opened a consulting company, Blackburn Young Inc., in Westport, Conn., specializing in corporate identity and communications planning.
A third partner is Charlene Haykel, formerly a senior vice president of Siegel &amp; Gale, New York.


EASTMAN KODAK CO. (N)
The Eastman Kodak Company reported yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings declined nearly 33 percent, to $201 million, or 61 cents a share, from a year earlier and its revenues fell 2.3 percent, to $4.5 billion.
Still, the fourth-quarter results exceeded the forecasts of many analysts by one or two cents.
Analysts had lowered their initial projections following cautionary comments several weeks ago by George M.C.
Fisher, Kodak's chairman, president and chief executive.


Sears Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accounts
*
Miller Brewing Co., Milwaukee, to Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago, to handle the introduction of Lite Ice, an ice beer version of Miller Lite beer.
Trade publications reported that Burnett, which already handles the Miller Lite account, was awarded the Lite Ice assignment after a review that also included Miller's two other main agencies, Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, and Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Today's Man, Moorestown, N.J., to J. Walter Thompson New York, to handle the retail chain's account, previously at Kaiser, Feinberg &amp; Associates, Philadelphia.
Billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON (N)
Johnson &amp; Johnson, the world's largest diversified health care company, said yesterday that sales were reduced in the fourth quarter and throughout 1993 by worldwide pressures to hold down prices and by the strength of the dollar overseas.
Profits rose 9.1 percent, to $335 million, in the fourth quarter, compared with the quarter a year earlier.
Sales in the quarter were flat.


Fitness and the Fetus: A Turnabout in Advice
IN recent years, surging interest in physical fitness has led the medical profession to take a hard new look at the risks and benefits of both moderate and vigorous exercise for pregnant women and their unborn children.
Gone are the days when doctors and mothers-in-law routinely told pregnant women to take it easy and avoid strenuous activity.
Based on the findings of recent studies, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has reconsidered recommendations it made in 1985 to restrict the intensity of exercise in pregnancy to what some fitness experts have called "old lady limits." It issued a new advisory yesterday.


Donors Respond to Reports of Lag in Neediest Cases
With less than four weeks remaining in The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund's 82d annual appeal for donations, hundreds of donors have responded to reports that the campaign is lagging dangerously behind last year's.
But despite the additional giving -- which has come from the corporate world, from repeat donors, from first-time donors and even from the unemployed -- the fund still needs more than $130,000 just to maintain the assistance it provided last year for services such as medical examinations for children and emergency rent help for immigrants and single mothers.


Stocks Retreat on Interest Rate Concerns
After four days of record-setting highs, stock prices turned down yesterday as weakness in the bond market raised investors' concerns about interest rates and their effect on corporate profits.
Hugh A. Johnson, the chief investment strategist for First Albany, said it was normal to expect some profit taking after a big move in the market.
But clearly, he added, "the big reason was the decline in bonds prices and the rise in interest rates."


Asbury Park Mayor Held On a Drug-Buying Charge
In recent months, Mayor Dennis Buckley has been a regular at the Tap Room.
And for nearly that long he has been watched.
On Monday, in the early afternoon, Mr.
Buckley's regular visit took a decidedly irregular turn when he was arrested and charged with buying cocaine at the bar across the street from his office at City Hall.
The Mayor's arrest, a blow for any city, was particularly bad news for this one.
Once a jewel of the Jersey Shore, it has struggled for decades to rejuvenate its beachfront, now filled with rundown rooming houses and few tourist attractions.


Book Notes
Shopping Trip
Larry McMurtry, the author of such popular and best-selling novels as "Lonesome Dove," "The Last Picture Show" and, most recently, "The Streets of Laredo," is a hot commodity by anyone's standards.
In a marketplace in which few fiction writers have celebrity name recognition, he has something approaching it.
Mr.
McMurtry has also had a successful history with Simon &amp; Schuster, where Michael Korda, editor to the stars, has published the Texas author's books for more than 20 years.
But recently, Mr.
McMurtry's agent, Andrew Wylie, told New York's richer houses that Mr.
McMurtry was willing to entertain bids from other publishers.
What's more, Mr.
Wylie said, he was proposing to sell the author's next four books -- two of them to be written with Diana Ossana, whom several publishers described as Mr.
McMurtry's companion -- for an astonishing $21.5 million.


Ewing, Starks on All-Stars
Patrick Ewing is going to his eighth All-Star Game.
John Starks is going to his first.
But Charles Oakley is going home for All-Star weekend.
Again.
Ewing and Starks were among the 14 reserve players selected to the Eastern and Western Conference teams yesterday, but Oakley -- who was considered a strong candidate by many people, including Knicks Coach Pat Riley -- found himself left off the list.


Shareholders Retain ICN Board
The board of ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. triumphed today in a proxy fight waged by Rafi M. Khan, a California stockbroker who had sought to unseat the company's longtime chairman, Milan Panic, and eight other ICN board members.
Shareholders voted overwhelmingly at ICN's annual meeting at its headquarters here to reject a proposal that would have replaced the current board with a six-member slate including Mr.
Khan.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Jan. 28
Jan. 21
Jan. 29
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
6.7
7.1
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
233.4
230.2
234.1
Distillate stocks
121.5
128.9
133.3
Crude imports, daily
5.9
5.4
6.7
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.9
1.3
Crude stocks
330.4
328.7
326.8
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
87.5
90.0
85.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Off the Menu
Chock Full o'Latte?
Perhaps Chock Full o'Nuts can tell these new-fangled latte and cappuccino cafes a thing or two about running a coffee bar.
The company, which began as a chain of nut shops, opened its first coffee shop in Manhattan in 1930 and built an empire of 110 of them.
It closed the last one in 1983.
Now, it is poised to re-enter the fray.
It expects to open an updated version of the coffee shops, serving latte and other coffee-based drinks, in May at 422 Madison Avenue (48th Street).


Tougher Car Emission Rules Requested by Eastern States
In a decision that could help shape the kind of cars sold at the turn of the century, 12 Eastern states from Virginia to Maine agreed today to have the Federal Government impose California's more stringent auto emission standards on them.
A vote here by representatives of the 12 governors and of the Mayor of the District of Columbia was the latest of several efforts by the group to be more vigorous in controlling smog than Federal standards require.


Filling Justice Posts
As the White House announced the appointment of a little-known lawyer, Deval L. Patrick, to lead the Justice Department's civil rights unit, officials said the Administration had tentatively decided to appoint the Pentagon's top lawyer, Jamie S. Gorelick, to the department's No. 2 job.
Article, page A13


Ex-Du Pont Official Gets A New Post
Joseph A. Mollica, who retired as chief executive of the Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical Company in December, was appointed yesterday as chairman and chief executive of Pharmacopeia Inc., a tiny start-up that is developing a novel method to save costly time in the discovery of new drugs.
Pharmacopeia, based in Princeton, N.J., was started last spring to develop a process invented by W. Clark Still, a Columbia University chemistry professor.
He developed a code that biotechnology, chemical and agricultural researchers could use to keep track of hundreds of thousands of chemical compounds undergoing tests.


Masur Stays on Course He Set for Philharmonic
Works by Stephen Albert, John Williams, Toru Takemitsu and Arvo Part are to have premieres, Roger Norrington will make a debut and Kurt Masur is to continue his dual Beethoven and Shostakovich cycle during the New York Philharmonic's 1994-5 season.
The season, which Mr.
Masur announced yesterday at Lincoln Center, extends the various programs started during the orchestra's 150th-anniversary celebrations in 1992.
Among these are thematic Celebration weeks, one looking at Brahms's choral music and another at Prokofiev's film scores, as well as weeks devoted to a contemporary composer (William Bolcom) and a young conductor making his debut (Daniele Gatti, the 32-year-old music director of the Accademia Santa Cecilia, in Rome).


A Black Police Group Rebuts Giuliani
A group of black police officers yesterday rejected Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's criticism of community policing, saying officers on beats should work on social problems they encounter.
At a news conference outside City Hall, the chairman of the Grand Council of Guardians, Eric Adams, said community policing had helped poor and largely minority areas.
"The same services that community policing brought to Washington Heights, Bedford-Stuyvesant and other black, Latino areas, have always existed in wealthier areas," Mr.
Adams said.
"These are the areas that need community policing more than other areas."


G&amp;K Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Japan Denies It Plans To Build Any A-Bomb
Responding to suggestions from abroad that Japan may be reconsidering its longstanding ban on nuclear weapons development, the Government said today that even if North Korea developed a nuclear bomb, "there is no nuclear option for Japan."
The declaration followed newspaper reports in London that Britain's Defense Ministry, in a secret report to the Cabinet, had warned that Japan now has all the elements necessary to build a nuclear bomb.
Concern has also been voiced in Washington that Japan's position may shift as nationalists respond to the perceived North Korean threat.


Anderson Makes Point And Sonics Are Sore
Proving again that when they are on their game they can play with anyone, the Nets scored a 104-103 victory tonight over the Seattle SuperSonics, the league's best team, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Kenny Anderson scored 26 points, matching Shawn Kemp for the game-high total, despite the soreness from the broken wrist on his shooting hand that he has been playing through all season.
Anderson also played with 12 stitches in his right forearm from a nasty spill he took this morning on his way to the shoot-around, also banging his elbow.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
It wasn't more than 18 seconds after the quake stopped.
The shaking had finally ended, the house was pitch black, we could hear the last of the crystal rolling off the shelves.
In 18 years of living in California, experience told us that this was a bad quake.
Unbelievably, the phone at the bedside rang.
My mother in New York was on the other end of the line.
'So, I hope you're happy," she said. "Now are you going to come home?" ALAN H. ROSENBERG
. . .
Dear Diary:
My family was out on an early January stroll when we came upon a blind man sitting in front of Saks Fifth Avenue.
I gave my daughter, Elana, a dollar to put in his cup.
As she put the money in, I leaned over and said, "Happy New Year." Surprisingly, the man gently took my hand, placed a quarter in my palm and pulled me close.
He quietly gave me a phone number and said, "Could you check on my lunch?"
I quickly handed my daughter over to my husband and waded through the thick crowds in search of a free and working phone.
I actually found one on the corner.
I inserted the coin, dialed the number I'd been I'd been given, and waited.
After several rings, a friendly voice said, "Burger Heaven."
"There is a blind man man sitting in front of Saks waiting for his lunch," I said.
"Can you help me?"
"Hold on," she said.
A moment later, she returned.
"Tell him it's on it's way." I went back and whispered in his ear, "Your lunch is coming." He thanked me and I went to find my family.
KAREN BINDER-BYRNES
. . .
Subject: Battle for the nightlife dollar, waged between country-western clubs and poetry-coffeehouses.
Sign: spotted by Paula Kleinschmidt over the bar at Hogs and Heifers in the far West Village.
DON'T EVEN THINK
OF POETRY HERE
. . .
Dear Diary:
Scene: A Manhattan department store dressing room during the Christmas holidays.
Toddler chorus: "Jingle bells, jingle bells, jingle all the way!"
Mother: Honey, can't you sing something else? You sound like a broken record.
Toddler: Mommy, what's a broken record?
Pause.
Mother: I guess that would be a CD that skips.
She sighs, speaks to another mother: Exactly when was it that life got so complicated?
ANNE NIXON
. . .
TRIBUTE TO JEOPARDY
At seven o' clock, over chicken
And mashed potatoes, you can
Impress your significant other
With the right answers to all
The questions that you missed
On your fifth-grade test
And be amazed that you must have
Known them all along. ELLEN FUCHS
. . .
PRIVILEGE
You get a memberhip card when you sign up with Tower Video.
It reads, "Tower Classic Club Membership." With this, I can rent films for $2 instead of $3.
A few days ago at the branch on Lafayette Street, I selected a film and presented it, along with my membership card, to the young checkout clerk.
Playfully, he aimed his scanner at my card and said, "Gotcha!" Then, after asking if I wanted a bag, which I declined, he placed my film on the counter beyond the detector though which customers must pass.
I went through this device, picked up my rental and started to walk out with it.
"Uno momento, senor," he said. "You have to sign the slip."
"Oh yes," I said. "I forgot."
"That's O.K.," he said. "It's one of your club privileges."
"Which one is that?" I asked, wondering if I was in line for additional entitlements.
He smiled at me.
"The privilege of forgetting," he said. GENE EPSTEIN
. . .
Dear Diary:
The scene: my house in Forest Hills, Queens, the morning after a recent snowfall.
Two boys, each about 12 years old, ring the doorbell.
They offer snow-shoveling services.
The taller of the two asks, "Would you like us to shovel for you?"
"How much?" I ask.
"Five bucks," announces the taller one.
"Deal," I say. "Let me know when you guys are done." I return to my paper.
About 15 minutes later, there's a knock at the door.
I survey an adequate shoveling of the stoop and sidewalk.
"Here's six bucks," I say.
"Thanks a lot."
The boys look baffled.
"Oh, no!" the shorter one says.
"Just five bucks, please, because we're going to split evenly."
I wonder if they shoveled the School Chancellor's sidewalk. JAMES WALSH
. . .
Dear Diary:
I was on a somewhat crowded crosstown M79 bus around 4 P.M., and I was standing in front of a well-dressed woman and her equally well-dressed young daughter.
As the bus slowed to approach a stop, mother and daughter rose.
"Now, dear," the mother said, "remember what I taught you to say?"
Pleased to be witnessing an example of manners, I smiled, waiting to hear the daughter's reply.
She opened her mouth, and in a sleep-shattering voice yelled, "Getting out!" GAIL JANOWITZ


In America; Joe Willie's World
So there was Joe Namath, walking across the artificial turf with the aid of his new plastic knees, his face baked and creased from decades in the Florida sun, getting ready to toss the coin for the opening of Sunday's Super Bowl.
And then someone mentioned that Joe Willie was 50 years old.
Fifty.
An age associated with grandfathers.
This didn't seem shocking, it just didn't compute.
The idea hung in the air as something not quite real, at least to some of us who remembered the way it was, and the way he was, 25 years ago when he had his extraordinary triumph.


Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NASA Saves Experimental Rocket Program
The space agency says it has intervened to save an experimental, vertical-landing space rocket that was about to be scrapped by the Pentagon.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration said on Monday that it had transferred $990,000 of its money to the Defense Department's Ballistic Missile Defense Organization to preserve the rocket and its ground equipment for further testing.


Eastman Chemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


J. R. and Bobby, Part II
So the Super Bowl was a bust.
The Jimmy and Jerry Show has real promise, and it is likely to run all year.
Jimmy Johnson, the head coach of the Dallas Cowboys, and Jerry Jones, the owner, are a couple of strivers from Arkansas who are exhibiting florid symptoms of post-season testosterone overload.
The public-relations legend of Jimmy and Jerry goes like this.
They were hustling lads who wound up playing football for one of Frank Broyles's best Razorbacks teams.
They were roommates.
As the years passed, they never forgot each other.
Jerry made a big pile of Sun Belt dollars.
Jimmy won a national college football championship at the University of Miami.
Jerry bought the Dallas Cowboys, fired the aging Tom Landry and brought Jimmy into town to Restore the Dynasty.
It only made it all the sweeter that Texans loyal to Landry yowled as if the newcomers wanted to turn the Alamo into condos.


Market Place; Baybanks Is Bouncing Back, And Takeover Talk Can Only Help.
IF you've never been to Boston, it is easy to overlook Baybanks.
With less than $10 billion in assets, Baybanks is only the country's 56th-largest bank.
In New England, it is fourth after Fleet Financial, the Bank of Boston and Shawmut National.
And Baybanks' stock certainly would not have attracted any attention.
The stock collapsed in 1989 and 1990, along with the New England economy.
It rebounded in 1991 and 1992, moving from about $10 a share in January 1991 to more than $40 two years later.
But for the rest of 1993 it reached a plateau, trading between $42 and $50.


La Quinta Inns Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Giuliani Asks Legislators For Aid for Budget Gap
During the mayoral race, Rudolph W. Giuliani ridiculed Mayor David N. Dinkins for always looking to Albany to solve fiscal problems he said were Mr.
Dinkins's fault.
Today, Mayor Giuliani went to the Capitol haunted by his own $2.3 billion budget gap and told legislators he needed their help to close it.
Though lawmakers from both parties praised his performance in legislative hearings today as strong and competent, Mr.
Giuliani, the first Republican Mayor of New York in two decades, left with no promises for more money, especially in the two crucial areas of education and Medicaid.
But he did leave with at least a hint that the political dynamic between the city and Albany is shifting and that Republicans are becoming a little more sympathetic to a mayor from the city.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 15 about the reappointment of the New York City Sanitation Commissioner, Emily Lloyd, misstated the surname of her husband, who is a deputy executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
He is William H. Goldstein, not Goldstock.


Washington Urged to Press For Bosnia Peace Settlement
The Clinton Administration came under renewed pressure from Britain and the United Nations today to take an active role in helping to negotiate peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In meetings at the White House, State Department and Pentagon and on Capitol Hill, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd of Britain called for greater American involvement in urging the three warring parties -- the Muslim-led Government, the Croats and the Serbs -- to resolve their differences at the peace table rather than on the battlefield.


Coastal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


From Homeless Addict To the Comeback Route
IT was just over a year ago that Angel Perez hit bottom.
The cardboard box he had been living in at the 79th Street rotunda in Riverside Park had disintegrated in a storm.
On the day after Christmas, he and a street buddy snatched a briefcase from a man and split the $300 they found inside, and Mr.
Perez used his share to buy 15 five-dollar vials of crack and some whisky.
He was wet and tired and, at 34, most of his teeth were missing.
He went to the midtown Port Authority bus terminal to sleep and get dry.
He was lying on the floor when a policeman came by and told him to leave.
Mr.
Perez was gathering his stuff and was about to shuffle off when he turned to the officer and said, "Can you help me?"


Staples Seeks a Shop For Broadcast Work
Staples Inc., the office supply store chain based in Framingham, Mass., is seeking an agency to handle the creative broadcast portion of its account, which for the last two years has been handled on a project basis by Clarke Goward Fitts Matteson in Boston, as well as by other agencies on a freelance basis.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek, in a report this week on the review, estimated them at $20 million.


Retrofitting Old Cars With Driver's-Side Air Bags
Auto manufacturers are luring buyers into showrooms by offering air bags.
But what about people who would like air bags but are not ready to replace their cars?
A large maker of air bag components has begun offering an "after market" driver's-side air bag -- actually, a replacement steering wheel that contains an air bag.
The company, Breed Technologies Inc. of Lakeland, Fla., says that the technology it is using in its used-car version represents an advance that may eventually be adopted for new-car air bags.


Plan to Preserve Pine Barrens Is in Danger, Supporters Say
A plan to preserve the Pine Barrens of eastern Long Island, adopted last summer after years of controversy, is in jeopardy because the state and Suffolk County have failed to provide promised financing, environmentalists and developers charged today.
"Long Island cannot afford to lose all we have accomplished to bumbling bureaucrats and politicians who don't deliver," said Alan Singer, president of the Pine Barrens Society, an environmental group.


People
*
John Shannon, chairman and chief executive of the Europe, Mideast and Africa regions of Grey Advertising, London, was promoted to the additional new position of president of Grey International. *
James H. Hayman was named to the new position of senior vice president and director of business development at Mezzina/Brown Inc., New York.
He was previously a senior vice president and group creative director for Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


New Armor All Unit Selects Bloom FCA
Armor All Home Care in Memphis, a new division of the Armor All Products Corporation, said yesterday that it had selected Bloom FCA in Dallas as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were estimated at less than $5 million.


RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tenneco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Oakley's Stats All Speak of a Star
When the crowd left his locker, when the uneasy smile was gone from his face, Charles Oakley walked across the room and casually opened the pregame booklet of statistics.
He turned to the page with the National Basketball Association leaders, and stared.
"Oh, just checking out the rebounding," he said, running a finger to his fourth-place league standing, with 506, more than every forward but Dennis Rodman, more than Hakeem Olajuwon and Shaquille O'Neal.
Forty-one games into an 82-game regular season, Oakley was halfway home to 1,000, the benchmark for rebounding excellence.


Clifton R. Read, 86, A Publicity Director
Clifton R. Read, a retired media and information director of the American Cancer Society, died on Sunday at Charlotte Hungerford Hospital in Torrington, Conn.
He was 86 and lived in Cornwall Bridge, Conn.
The cause of death was heart failure, the society said.


Man in the News: Deval Laurdine Patrick; Street Survivor via Harvard
He escaped from the tough cold streets of Chicago's South Side, finding safety and success in the serene environments of Milton Academy, Harvard and a prestigious Boston law firm.
Now, the survival skills and pragmatism that Deval Laurdine Patrick acquired in his 37 years will be tested in what has become one of the toughest jobs in Washington.
As President Clinton's nominee to be the Assistant Attorney General in charge of the civil rights division, Mr.
Patrick will oversee a department of 240 lawyers -- an administrative task beyond anything he has yet tried.


Mapco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cost of the Earthquake Grows


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Michigan Upsets Purdue, 63-62  Juwan Howard of Michigan put back an offensive rebound with 21.1 seconds left and Purdue missed three shots in the final seconds as the 13th-ranked Wolverines overcame an 11-point deficit to defeat the No. 8 Boilermakers by 63-62 last night a West Lafayette, Ind.
The Wolverines (14-4, 6-2 in the Big Ten) overcame a 36-point performance by Glenn Robinson to win a battle for first place in the Big Ten.
Michigan opened a half-game lead over Indiana.
Purdue (17-3, 5-3) missed 10 of 15 free throws in the second half. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Suspended Clyde Drexler of the Portland Trail Blazers without pay for one game and fined him $2,500 for bumping an official in a game Jan. 30.


Economic Quarrels Retake the Spotlight in Japan
Japan's Government pulled itself back from the brink last week by passing landmark political reform legislation after a bitter five-year struggle, but the success only cleared the way for a battle on a potentially even more complex and divisive issue -- reviving the economy.
Some top Cabinet members have already clashed over the matter, with the Prime Minister scolding his chief Cabinet secretary in public on Monday in a dispute over tax policy.


Pacificare Health Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Philadelphia to Spruce Up
After years of false starts, the owners of the Philadelphia's hockey and basketball teams have reached an agreement on a new arena stocked with luxury boxes in South Philadelphia.
The Flyers' owner, ED SNIDER, said he would build Spectrum 2 with the help of outside financing, and it was announced yesterday that the 76ers' owner, HAROLD KATZ, had signed a 29-year lease.


Banner Aerospace Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rivals Sweeten Paramount Bids at Last Minute
Only a minute before the final bidding deadline yesterday, QVC Network Inc. and Viacom Inc. sweetened their competing offers for Paramount Communications Inc., their long-sought prize.
But the new offers did not provide a clear-cut winner.
The bids, each of which consists of cash and stock, are sufficiently close and complex that they raised considerable confusion as investors tried to evaluate them.
As such, despite the Paramount board's deadline, the heated takeover battle is likely to continue for at least another two weeks.


Polaroid Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


State Dept. Castigates China on Rights Record
The Administration issued its long-awaited critique of China's human rights record today, painting a grim tableau of political prisoners, torture and forced confessions.
The report outlined a long road that it said Beijing must travel to have its preferred trading status renewed this year.
As expected, the State Department's annual review found that China's "overall human rights record in 1993 fell far short of internationally accepted norms as it continued to repress domestic critics and failed to control abuses by its own security forces."


CHRONICLE
Could there be a special Y chromosome -- as in Y.W.C.A -- in the family of Dr.
PREMA MATHAI-DAVIS?
She was the commissioner of the New York City Department for the Aging during the Dinkins Administration and yesterday, she started a new job, as the 10th national executive director of the Y.W.C.A.
Her family tree has roots that go deep in the organization in India and Pakistan.
Her maternal great-grandmother, Rachel Verghese, was an organizer of two Y's in the southern Indian region of Kerala.
Her mother's mother, Sarah Kovoor, and two great-aunts were also active there.


Ice Is Adding to Woes in Ohio


Experimental Treatment Needs to Be Defined
To the Editor:
Roger N. Parker is being disingenuous when he states in "A Tested Chemotherapy" (letter, Jan. 16) that it is incorrect to characterize high-dose chemotherapy and bone-marrow transplant therapy for advanced breast cancer as experimental.


Airborne Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Corrections
An article on Saturday about an appearance by Hillary Rodham Clinton before a meeting of doctors in Las Vegas, Nev., misidentified an obstetrician who told her that trial lawyers as well as doctors should be willing to sacrifice for health care reform.
He was Dr.
Allan Boruszak, not Dr.
William Bossak.


Lawyer's Estate Sues Over 'Philadelphia'
The family, estate and lawyers of a New York City lawyer who recently won an AIDS employment discrimination case have sued the creators of the hit movie "Philadelphia" for "no less than $10 million" in compensation, alleging that the film was based on the lawyer's life.
The lawsuit, which was filed on Monday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, names as defendants Tri-Star Pictures; the producer, Edward Saxon; the screenwriter, Ron Nyswaner, and the director, Jonathan Demme.
It also names a producer, Scott Rudin, who was not involved in the film.


Commerce Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Continental Medical Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Beware the Three-Strike Laws
Just when the public seems more anxious than ever about crime, an old punishment idea seems to be sweeping the country in new dress.
A California initiative drive calls it "Three Strikes and You're Out." Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York calls it "Three Strikes and You're In." President Clinton, huffing and puffing to overtake Congress, called it "Three Strikes and You Are Out" in his State of the Union address.
Habitual-offender laws, which put third offenders in prison for life, are familiar in many states.
But many of those earlier laws gave judges the option of imposing a life sentence.
The newer, "tougher" strikeout laws are mandatory and sweeping, covering nonviolent crimes as well as violent ones.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  LEGISLATORS ASKED TO AID CITY BUDGET
During the mayoral race, Mr.
Giuliani ridiculed Mayor Dinkins for always looking to Albany to fix fiscal problems.
Yesterday Mayor Giuliani went to the Capitol haunted by his own $2.3 billion budget gap and told legislators he needed their help to close it.
B2.


Knight-Ridder Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The two bidders for Paramount Communications, QVC Network and Viacom, sweetened their rival offers.
But the new bids did not provide a clear-cut winner in the takeover battle.  [ Page D1. ]


Books of The Times; Taking Paris by Storm, With Bananas Flying
Josephine
The Hungry Heart
By Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase
Illustrated. 532 pages. Random House. $27.50.
A little song called "Yes, We Have No Bananas" was the hit of 1923.
F.
Scott Fitzgerald thought it caught the goofy abandon of the age, so it seems right that Josephine Baker created the hit dance number of the age three years later wearing a belt of bananas accessorized only by beads and bracelets.


What It Costs the Military to Do the Job
To the Editor:
I certainly agree with the generally favorable tone that "A Pentagon Promotion for Mr. Perry" (editorial, Jan. 25) takes on President Clinton's nomination of Bill Perry to be Secretary of Defense.
Mr.
Perry is a realistic reformer with a solid record of achievement in the Defense Department, and I have high hopes that he will be a strong advocate of sound defense policy in the Administration.


Johnstown America Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.R.A. Political Leader Asks for 'Clarifications'
Speaking as the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, Gerry Adams complained yesterday that his faction could not come to a "definitive" position on the latest British-Irish peace proposal without further clarifications and proposals from the British Government.
"The sooner they provide this clarification, the sooner we can move forward," Mr.
Adams said at a discussion of the 25 years of violence over Northern Ireland, using his first American forum to attempt to place the burden of blame on the British.


CHRONICLE
Happy birthday, DNA: yesterday was the 50th anniversary of the publication of the paper that proved genes are comprised of material called deoxyribonucleic acid.
It was celebrated in low-key fashion yesterday afternoon at the site of the discovery, the sixth floor of the Rockefeller University Hospital, on York Avenue.


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Spectrum, to Calm Investors, Speaks of Plans by Sculley
Breaking nearly a week of silence after a flood of bad publicity, Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. said yesterday that its chairman, John Sculley -- rather than considering leaving the company or being distracted by the recent plunge in Spectrum's stock price -- was busily negotiating acquisitions or joint ventures with several companies.
The statement was delivered in an unusual manner: It was recited by the company's general counsel, Christopher P. Franco, over lunch with a reporter.
The statement said Spectrum was seeking alliances or acquisitions, in the United States and abroad, that would strengthen the wireless data-transmission technology on which the company is basing its future.


CELEBRATING WITH: John and Bonnie Raitt; Like Father, Unlike Daughter
"IS that Bonnie?"
The fan is young, in his mid-20's, and he looks at Bonnie Raitt, seven-time Grammy winner, as she walks down the street, with love in his eyes and lust in his heart.
But who is that with her, that tall, still-dapper white-haired man in the black leather jacket?
The fan seems puzzled.
It is her father, John Raitt, who was the original Billy Bigelow in "Carousel" on Broadway in 1945 and Sid Sorokin in "The Pajama Game" in 1954, and who last week came to New York to be inducted into the Theater Hall of Fame.
By his daughter.


President Overruled Officials In Granting a Visa to Adams
Both the American Embassy in London and the State Department recommended that Gerry Adams be denied a visa, but President Clinton decided to admit the Irish republican leader to the United States anyway, mainly for domestic political reasons, American officials said today.
In announcing the decision on Sunday, the White House said Mr.
Adams, who heads Sinn Fein, the political arm of the Irish Republican Army, had made encouraging remarks about renouncing violence at a meeting Friday with American diplomats in Belfast.
But British and American officials familiar with the results of the meeting hotly dispute that, asserting that Mr.
Adams merely repeated ambiguous formulations in answer to precise questions.


PEPSICO INC. (N)
Pepsico Inc. said yesterday that its earnings for the fourth quarter rose 67 percent, helped by strong growth in its domestic soft drink, snack food and fast-food businesses.
The sharp percentage rise in net income, to $442.5 million, was inflated by comparison with the comparable quarter a year earlier, when the company took a big charge for streamlining operations.
Excluding the charge in the previous year, net income increased 12 percent.


Eating Well
WHEN children are left home alone they often do things they shouldn't: they have their friends over for parties, they get into the Scotch and, in the old days, they probably smoked their parents' cigarettes.
Not me.
It wasn't that I was so virtuous; I just preferred food.
When my mother left me alone I got into the tapioca pudding.
By the time I was 10 I had learned how to make it myself, with canned pineapple tidbits and whipped cream.
Before milk was routinely homogenized, the cream always rose to the top and could be skimmed off for whipping, so there was usually some in the house.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.68
3.56
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
2.99
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.16
3.12
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.74
5.64
6.43
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.31
6.23
7.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.23
7.15
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.45
6.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Skating Panel Meets but Breaks With No Ruling
The five-member figure-skating panel that could help determine whether Tonya Harding represents the United States in the Olympic competition in Lillehammer, Norway, in three weeks held its first meeting in Colorado Springs yesterday, but adjourned without deciding whether Harding must face a disciplinary hearing.
That decision is expected no earlier than Friday, when the panel is scheduled to reconvene to hear a report from John Bennett.
He is the Portland lawyer assigned to gather information about the Jan. 6 attack on Harding's chief rival, Nancy Kerrigan, at the national championships in Detroit.


Ex-Husband of Harding Pleads Guilty in Attack
As Tonya Harding's former husband pleaded guilty today in the assault on Nancy Kerrigan, the authorities released statements by him saying that Miss Harding helped plan the attack.
But the statements, extensive as they were, seemed to provide little hard evidence of her involvement that could be independently corroborated.
The former husband, Jeff Gillooly, who lived with Miss Harding despite a stormy three-year marriage that ended last August, accepted a plea-bargain offer to a single count of racketeering, bringing two years in jail, a $100,000 fine and a promise that he would not be prosecuted anywhere else, either on state or Federal charges.
In exchange, he provided investigators with a full accounting of his version of events and promised to cooperate fully as the investigation continues.


Benjamin Ginsburg, 89, Dealer In Antique American Furniture
Benjamin Ginsburg, who was a leading dealer in antique American furniture until he retired a decade ago, died on Friday at his home in Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 89.
The cause was pneumonia, said his son Henry.


Ojeda Is Getting Back To Normal
There have been many defining and difficult moments for Bob Ojeda since that tragic evening on Little Lake Nellie last March, when the serenity of spring training was obliterated by a boating accident that killed two of his Cleveland Indian teammates.
Ojeda, a passenger in the boat, survived with serious injuries.
Sometimes he wondered if surviving was worth it.
Ojeda conceded that he had contemplated suicide, although he said the thoughts were fleeting.
There was the moment in July when Ojeda was running laps around a mental hospital in Baltimore, when he was a patient, and realized his life could not get graver.
Maybe, he told himself, it was time to leave the past alone.
Maybe it was time to journey onward.


Squatters Evicted After Firefighter Is Hurt


Black Belts and Blessings for East Harlem Nuns
Sister Marie Chantal could be the scariest dream imaginable for legions of smirking, snickering Catholic schoolboys: a nun adept in judo and tae kwon do.
They can relax.


Vietnam and U.S. Businesses Eager to Trade
Welcoming reports that the 19-year-old United States trade embargo against Vietnam is nearly over, Hanoi joined with American businesses today in predicting a surge of new investment in a nation that is growing rapidly economically but still suffering from the effects of the Vietnam War.
In Hanoi, the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry said it had not received any formal notification from Washington, but the Government's chief spokesman said in a statement that the lifting of the trade embargo would be "good news not only for the two peoples -- the Vietnamese and the Americans -- but also for the world community."


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


With Patriarch Slain, a Family Struggles
In the back of the Adames Food Center, below the shelves stocked with Hawaiian Punch and Diet Pepsi, one floor tile is whiter than the others.
That is where a single bullet burned a hole on the floor last month after piercing the back of Ramone Rodriguez.
Mr.
Rodriguez, 40 years old, who had owned the family bodega in Bedford-Stuyvesant for two years, was the victim of youths who the police say robbed stores in Brooklyn and, without provocation, killed three owners in less than a year.
Yesterday, Mr.
Rodriguez's relatives heard with a mixture of satisfaction, equanimity and hopelessness that the police had arrested five young men in the death of their patriarch.


Fuhr Doesn't Miss a Beat In Return to Sabres' Goal
As the Devils approached tonight's game against Buffalo, they prepared to face the goaltender with the best statistics in the National Hockey League this season, Dominik Hasek.
Instead, they were thwarted by Grant Fuhr, an old and experienced hand with five Stanley Cup rings.
Playing his first National Hockey League game in more than two months after surgery on his left knee, Fuhr performed with inspiration in leading the Sabres to a 3-2 victory over the Devils at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Chinese Economy Threatens to Pull Ours Down; Greasing the Skids
To the Editor:
It looks as if the Clinton Administration is greasing the skids for renewal of most favored nation trade status for China, regardless of China's massive human rights and trade rights abuses, including widespread use of slave labor to produce exports for the United States.


Sonics Pounce On Fidgety Celtics
SuperSonics 97, Celtics 84
Detlef Schrempf led seven Seattle players in double figures last night, scoring 21 points to lead the SuperSonics in a rout of the Celtics in Boston.
The Celtics, who turned the ball over 26 times in losing their second straight, were led by Dee Brown with 26 points and Rick Fox with 17.


Seafood a Small Part Of Food Illnesses
To the Editor:
The seafood industry strongly supports the regulatory program announced by David Kessler, Food and Drug Administration commissioner, and commended in "A Big Step for Seafood Safety" (editorial, Jan. 26).


Samuel Ornstein, 69; Led Children's Center
Samuel L. Ornstein, executive director of the National Children's Center in Washington, died on Jan. 19.
He was 69 and lived in Silver Spring, Md.
He had a heart attack at the center, his family said.


NovaCare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Finning Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.R.A. Advocate Says Visit Brought Peace Nearer
Acknowledging that President Clinton had increased the pressure to negotiate by granting him a visa, Gerry Adams, the political head of the Irish Republican Army, headed home yesterday vowing that "those who stuck their necks out on this issue for us will not be let down" in the search for peace in Northern Ireland.
"The gesture that was extended to us by the Clinton Administration sent the right signal to Ireland and has improved the climate," said Mr.
Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political arm.


Owens &amp; Minor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Scam Artists Turning Cold Into Profits
With icy Arctic air threatening to make this one of the coldest winters on record, state consumer protection officials warned today that a variety of scam artists were at work, including bogus oil-burner repairmen who prey on the elderly.
In the last few weeks, officials said, several young men posing as oil company repairmen have approached elderly homeowners on Long Island, entered their basements, taken apart their heating-oil burners and demanded cash in advance for unnecessary repairs.


An Icy Dip Is All in a Day's Work


Fieldcrest Cannon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


South Hackensack Police Chief Accused of Blocking Drug Case
The former police chief of South Hackensack was arrested today and accused of ordering one of his patrolmen not to file narcotics charges against two men arrested for possession of cocaine, officials said.
The former chief, Arthur Montenegro, 43, resigned on Monday when county authorities seized control of the tiny township's 21-member force.
He was arraigned today on charges of obstructing justice and official misconduct for interfering in the officer's March 1993 arrest.


School Stars Write Tickets To Universities of Choice
Early yesterday morning, thousands of high school football players across the nation put their pens where their mouths were as they turned oral commitments into written ones and signed letters of intent with colleges.
Among the early risers was quarterback Gus Ornstein of Fieldston Prep School in the Bronx, who commited orally to Notre Dame two Sundays ago.


Graves Is Superb But It's A Standoff
When it was over and everyone crowded through the narrow corridors for post-game comment, Islander Coach Al Arbour said it best with a slip of the tongue.
"We found a way to win -- to come back and tie it," he said after Ray Ferraro's goal with 1 minute 2 seconds remaining in regulation gave his team a 4-4 tie with the Rangers last night at Madison Square Garden.


Stocks Rise in Active Day; Dow Is Up 11.53
Stocks moved higher in brisk trading yesterday, following a firming of bond prices, some positive economic news and a rise in crude oil prices.
The Dow Jones industrial average, rebounding from Tuesday's decline, rose 11.53 points, to 3,975.54, while the Nasdaq composite gained 2.33 points, to 799.57.


Sears Becomes Sponsor
The designer RALPH LAUREN made clothes for BILL KOCH's America
team in the 1992 America's Cup yachting series.
And now Team DENNIS CONNER has jumped aboard the apparel gravy boat for the 1995 race series with the announcement in Chicago yesterday of major cup sponsorship from Sears sportswear and Sperry Topsider shoes.
The deal, worth about $3 million in backing, will allow the Sears Merchandise Group to put its name in bold letters on Conner's Stars &amp; Stripes sail.


OLYMPICS: 10 Days to Lillehammer; Kwan, Alternate, Will Train in Norway
As expected, the United States Figure Skating Association announced today that it would take the unusual step of sending Michelle Kwan, the 13-year-old Olympic alternate, to Norway to train in case Tonya Harding is removed from the team.
Frank Carroll, who coaches Kwan in Lake Arrowhead, Calif., said that figure-skating officials want the world junior champion to train in Oslo, which is about a two-hour drive from the Olympic figure-skating site here in Hamar.
Alternate sites in Copenhagen and London have also been considered.


Reports From the Bunkers, by Some Survivors; IN SEARCH OF TRANSPORT
EVER feel like Jack Nicholson in "The Shining," who suffered perhaps the worst cast of cabin fever imaginable?
He holed up in an off-season resort where he'd gone to write a book, lost his mind and went after his family with an ax.
But cabin fever needn't be so extreme, and you don't have to take it lying down.
Here is advice from inventive people who have found ways to keep from going crazy when temperatures drop and tempers rise.
I think the thing to do is to rent tropical movies, like "Beach Party." Or you could rent "Jaws," which is at the beach but makes you realize that maybe it wouldn't be so nice to be there.


Fundamentalists Impose Culture on Egypt
With their guns and explosives, Muslim militants have destroyed Egypt's tourist industry, scared away investors and halted Egypt's 20-year march toward democracy and economic liberalization.
But the more serious threat, many people here say, is the assault by Muslim theocrats on secularist traditions.


STATE DEPT. FINDS WIDESPREAD ABUSE OF WORLD'S WOMEN
For the first time, the State Department has focused on the treatment of women in its annual human rights report, and its findings are grim: forced sterilizations and abortions in China; Burmese and Thai girls coerced into prostitution; maids beaten in Saudi Arabia, and girls ritually mutilated in the Sudan and Somalia.
In painstaking detail, the report on 193 countries issued this week paints a dreary picture of day-to-day discrimination and abuse.
In Zaire, girls spend one-third as much time in school as boys and do most of the heavy farm work.
In the Republic of the Congo, adultery is illegal for women, but not for men.
Indonesian women are loath to go out alone at night because they are widely seen as fair game for sexual attack.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Prayer Plant Problem
Q.
I recently bought a healthy-looking prayer plant but now its leaves are brown.
What am I doing wrong? -- Lorraine Thomas, Baltimore.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR 12-year-old Kate Shipley, a junior high school student in Newton, Mass., a typical Sunday at this time of year includes playing a basketball game and an indoor soccer game and attending practice for yet another team she's on.
Although she enjoys sports tremendously, her schedule can be overwhelming.
"Since I play for three basketball and three soccer teams, I don't have much time to just play with my friends," she said.


Reports From the Bunkers, by Some Survivors; TO TASTE GROWING THINGS
EVER feel like Jack Nicholson in "The Shining," who suffered perhaps the worst cast of cabin fever imaginable?
He holed up in an off-season resort where he'd gone to write a book, lost his mind and went after his family with an ax.
But cabin fever needn't be so extreme, and you don't have to take it lying down.
Here is advice from inventive people who have found ways to keep from going crazy when temperatures drop and tempers rise.
I don't think it's the confinement that bothers me so much as the drear and drabness and draftiness and drang -- meaning the vast German sense that we really ought to get out of the house and expand imperialistically eastward, or at least go see a movie.


Powerful Business Group Backs Rival to President's Health Plan
The Business Roundtable, representing about 200 of the nation's largest companies, struck a blow against President Clinton's health care plan tonight by endorsing a rival proposal that would not guarantee universal insurance coverage.
Despite urgent last-minute lobbying by Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, the policy committee of the Roundtable voted to treat the rival bill as a "starting point" for legislation on health insurance.


After 5 Transfers, Officers Tell About Low Morale
While patrolling the high-crime streets of Brownsville yesterday morning, Officer Edward Bartnik got sidetracked to the halls of Public School 12 when a retarded child accidentally smashed his head against a blackboard and needed emergency care.
On any other day, the children might have applauded the rescuer, but Officer Bartnik faced raw insults.
As he described the incident, some of the elementary school children taunted him with phrases like, "There goes the cocaine precinct!"


Turner Quits Sky Box To Renovate the Cellar
Norv Turner met the press here yesterday afternoon in the same conference room where Richie Petitbon did the same thing only 11 months ago.
Turner took the same job, head coach of the Washington Redskins.
He became the Redskins' 19th coach. He hopes he lasts longer than the 18th coach did.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.25
3.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.02
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.20
3.19
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.70
5.74
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.28
6.31
7.21
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.19
7.23
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.43
6.28
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about Emily Taft Douglas, a former Democratic Representive from Illinois, misstated the middle name of her mother, who died before her.
She was Ada Bartlett Taft.


Union Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reports From the Bunkers, by Some Survivors; HOMEBOUND AND HAPPY
EVER feel like Jack Nicholson in "The Shining," who suffered perhaps the worst cast of cabin fever imaginable?
He holed up in an off-season resort where he'd gone to write a book, lost his mind and went after his family with an ax.
But cabin fever needn't be so extreme, and you don't have to take it lying down.
Here is advice from inventive people who have found ways to keep from going crazy when temperatures drop and tempers rise.
I've had mumps, measles, chicken pox, scarlet fever and who can remember what else.
But cabin fever?
Me?
I think not, buddy.
You're knocking on the wrong cabin door.
O.K., so sometimes I panic in packed subways, stalled elevators, endless movie lines -- any place with a preponderance of people.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Rosemary Clooney  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza Through Feb. 26
One of the newer songs in Rosemary Clooney's repertory is Paul Simon's great 1975 ballad, "Still Crazy After All These Years." It is on her latest album, "Still on the Road" (Concord Jazz).
And her performance of it on Tuesday was a high point of opening night of her one-month engagement at Rainbow and Stars.
She chose it, she said, "because if you're over 65 and still out on the road, you're still crazy."


Who's Afraid of the Fed?; Prospect That Short-Term Rates May Rise Is Being Accepted With Absence of Alarm
The prospect that the Federal Reserve may nudge up short-term interest rates soon has captured headlines, but the people who usually complain about such a move -- auto dealers and home builders whose customers commonly rely on borrowed money -- are uncommonly relaxed.
"If this is a tempered move to keep inflation at or below 3 percent, this is probably a positive event," said James R. Irvine, a home builder in Portland, Ore..
"I'm not saying I'm applauding this, but I don't have the concern."





Owner of Pardoned Dog Narrows Choice of Exiles
Taro, no longer the death-row dog, is now the most wanted.
In the five days since Taro, a 5-year-old Akita, was both saved from execution and exiled from New Jersey by the Governor's order, adoption offers have poured in (and poured in) from around the world.
And the competition is fierce.


Arvin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


France Pledges Subsidy To Aerospace Group
The French Economy Ministry said today that it would pump two billion francs -- $341 million -- into the money-losing, state-owned aerospace group Aerospatiale.
The decision to increase the capital of Aerospatiale S.A., which has been losing money for two years because of falling commercial-aircraft orders and declining military contracts, appeared likely to renew the debate between the United states and Western Europe on subsidies in the commercial aircraft business.


Sunbeam-Oster Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


North Korea Threatens to End A-Arms Talks
North Korea threatened today to break off its talks with the United States over nuclear inspections, asserting that the Clinton Administration had shown in recent days that the talks were only "a pretense for strangling" the Government of Kim Il Sung.
The statement was the latest in a series of increasingly belligerent warnings.
North Korea also said Washington's proposal to deploy Patriot anti-missile batteries in South Korea, combined with the recent visit to Seoul by R. James Woolsey, the Director of Central Intelligence, was evidence that the United States has moved to "the full-scale stage of the war preparations."


Mr. Hosokawa's Next Challenge
Japan's Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, has partly delivered on his pledge of political reform.
Though he had to compromise with the opposition Liberal Democrats, those reforms that could most benefit relations with the U.S. got through.
One reason Mr.
Hosokawa decided to compromise was Tokyo's need to proceed to other business -- stimulating Japan's stalled economy and addressing tough trade demands from Washington.
The U.S.
Trade Representative, Mickey Kantor, is now in Tokyo pressing for agreement before Mr.
Hosokawa's Feb. 11 summit meeting with President Clinton.
Both sides agree that Japan's huge trade surplus with the U.S. is politically untenable.
But they differ sharply over how to reduce it.


Unscrambling Hype In Cellular Phones
UNDER the glass counter top at an electronics shop in midtown Manhattan, a shopper surveyed two dozen hand-held cellular phones, sleek and bristling with buttons and controls, looking not so much like Maxwell Smart's shoe phone as like Captain Kirk's communicator.
"What is the difference between this $40 phone and this $90 phone?" asked the shopper, a man of about 60 who wanted to take the plunge into the brave new world of "personal communications."


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Report Finds Pills Cost More in U.S. Than Britain
Top-selling prescription drugs typically cost much more in the United States than in Britain, where drug company profits are limited as part of a national health insurance program, the General Accounting Office said in a report today.
Drug company executives challenged many of the findings, but members of Congress cited the report as evidence that the Government should impose some restraints on drug prices, as President Clinton has proposed.


Renault Makes a Profit Selling Volvo Stock
Underlining its estrangement from Volvo after the bitter collapse in December of a planned merger, Renault said today that it had sold a 4.82 percent stake in A.B.
Volvo,the Swedish auto maker's parent company.
The sale slashes Renault's stake in A.B.
Volvo to 3.45 percent.
It was made on the Swedish stock market and was apparently timed to take advantage of a 50 percent surge in the price of A.B.
Volvo's shares that has occurred since the merger collapsed on Dec. 2.


Pacific Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Traders Leaning To Viacom
Judging from the stock market's reaction yesterday, Viacom Inc.'s final bid for Paramount Communications Inc. appears to be the shareholders' favorite.
But for either Viacom or the rival bidder, QVC Network Inc., victory in the dragged-out takeover battle may bring a possibly tarnished prize.
Yesterday, Paramount projected a quarterly loss that stunned analysts, in large part because of unexpected difficulties at the USA Network, a cable channel that had been considered a solid performer.  [ Page D8. ]


CHRONICLE
MANFRED WORNER, the 59-year-old Secretary-General of NATO, has been named the winner of the Eric M. Warburg Prize given by the Atlantik Brucke, a private German organization that promotes German-American relations.
Mr.
Worner is recuperating from surgery performed last month to remove a benign intestinal blockage, so his wife, Elfriede, will accept the award in his place at a dinner in the Bavarian royal place in Munich, Germany, on Saturday.
Mr.
Worner has had four operations for intestinal cancer in the last two years, but he told NATO ambassadors late last year that his physicians said he had beaten the disease.


Review/Dance; Recalling a Founder In Works and Spirit, Troupe Starts Anew
The Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance Company opened a significant chapter in its existence on Tuesday night with a program that featured "Tides," a gem of a new work by Mr.
Louis, and revivals recalling his careerlong collaboration with Alwin Nikolais.
Nikolais died in May at the age of 82 and was honored in July at the Joyce Theater in a full-season retrospective of his choreography that was conceived by Mr.
Louis.
Now the company the two men co-directed takes on a different tenor.
It has, with this opening, become the resident dance troupe at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College (68th Street between Park and Lexington Avenues), where the current season is to run through Feb. 13.


Economic Scene; Special interests on the attack. In this case, they're beekeepers.
TO bee or not to bee: That was the question facing Congress last fall when it dropped subsidies for domestic honey producers, sacrificing the most easily lampooned symbol of profligacy in the Federal budget.
But do not underestimate the political tenacity of America's 2,000 commercial beekeepers.
They are now asking the White House to substitute hidden subsidies, collected directly from consumers, for the traditional kind dunned from taxpayers.
The question is whether President Clinton will risk the wrath of E. (Kika) de la Garza, chairman of the House Agriculture Committee and loyal friend of the honey makers, by saying no.
The more important question, perhaps, is whether Washington can stand up to special interests, or will simply pass the buck.


The Talk of Hollywood; Hollywood Trains Its Cameras on Hollywood
As a subject for movies, Hollywood should be a natural.
All that money, deceit and intrigue.
All those famous people.
Yet most film makers here (Robert Altman excepted) seem to feel the town is too rich, too excessive, too duplicitous and too weird to turn into a movie.
Besides, Hollywood-bashing by screenwriters, directors and executives who earn millions of dollars, and complain about selling out, seems not only silly but smug.


Officials Find Kerrigan Is Fit To Skate In Olympics
Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan skated today, a continent apart and under vastly different circumstances.
While Harding went through her daily practice before more than 1,000 cheering fans and dozens of news-media representatives, Kerrigan skated at a closed session to prove her physical ability to compete in the Winter Olympics this month.
Kerrigan, who was attacked and hit above her right knee Jan. 6, performed her technical, long- and free-skating programs at the Tony Kent Arena in South Dennis, Mass., displaying jumps, spins and choreography for a panel of figure-skating judges convened to assess her physical status.


Reports From the Bunkers, by Some Survivors; THE BEST EXCUSE
EVER feel like Jack Nicholson in "The Shining," who suffered perhaps the worst cast of cabin fever imaginable?
He holed up in an off-season resort where he'd gone to write a book, lost his mind and went after his family with an ax.
But cabin fever needn't be so extreme, and you don't have to take it lying down.
Here is advice from inventive people who have found ways to keep from going crazy when temperatures drop and tempers rise.
There's nothing like the two small dogs -- not to mention the two young children in our household who are up before dawn, with their sleds or ice skates at the ready and their jeans already pulled over their pajama bottoms -- to break the bubble of cabin fever.
For a grown-up, there's that delicious euphoria of thinking that here finally is one day when there is really nothing to do and nowhere to go.


Expatriate Ex-Crimson Puts U.S. On Notice
Team USA's great hockey adventure begins its final tuneup before the Lillehammer Olympic Winter Games in a rink not far from the great cathedral on an island in the Seine.
Peter Ciavaglia, a 24-year-old center, joined his teammates today from Sweden, where he has played for Leksand, one of the top clubs in that country's premier division.
He warned them about their American exuberance on the ice, how European officials don't tolerate the bumping and the occasional stick jabs that are part of the visitors' style.


Injuries Near Maradona
At least five reporters reported slight injuries yesterday after being hit by pellets from an air rifle fired from the home of the soccer star DIEGO MARADONA in Moreno, Argentina.
It was not clear if Maradona himself was the shooter, but reporters at the home said they they saw him carrying a gun.
One photographer said he took a photo of Maradona firing.


Redmen Thankful For Miami
If anybody cares to look back on what has increasingly become a dreadful basketball season for the St.
John's Redmen, one can point to Jan. 8 as the turning point.
That is the date St.
John's wasted a 17-point halftime lead to Villanova at Alumni Hall for its second straight defeat in what has now become a stretch of eight losses in its last nine games after tonight's 59-56 defeat in a rematch against a young Wildcat squad at a noisy duPont Pavilion.


In Managing Federal Money, Education Officials Fall Short
Last year when the Clinton Administration wanted to add yet another major student financial aid program to the beleaguered United States Department of Education -- direct student lending -- Congress was determined for once to provide the necessary manpower.
The Education Department was still bleeding from years of staff cuts.
During the Reagan and Bush Administrations, it was hit harder than any other Cabinet-level department, losing 33 percent of its work force.


Sports of The Times; Is the Case For Harding Open-Shut?
THIS is a true story: In January 1957 there was a terrible murder in Chicago.
Two teen-age sisters, Barbara and Patricia Grimes, were found in a culvert in a park, their nude bodies frozen.
A citywide search for the killer or killers was begun.
Headlines screamed as suspects were rounded up.
People were in panic.
Who committed this dastardly deed, and why?
Finally, a 21-year-old Skid Row illiterate bum and sometime dishwasher named Benny Bedwell, who wore long sideburns like Elvis Presley, was arrested.
"We got our man!" the sheriff gloated.
Bedwell denied the charge but after more questioning, he confessed: "Yes, I murdered the girls."


Willie Mae Ford Smith, 89, Singer Who Joined the Blues and Gospel
Willie Mae Ford Smith, a pioneering gospel singer, died on Wednesday at the Tower Village Nursing Home in St.
Louis.
She was 89.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Anthony Heilbut, a friend and her recording producer.


Fiscal Plan Could Curb Services, as Well as Deficit
Although Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has promised to avoid painful service cuts in his overhaul of New York City government, the financial plan he laid out yesterday includes some bitter medicine that the average New Yorker would feel immediately, from shrinking money for museums to fewer pickups of recyclable garbage to delays in the renovations of subway stations.
And if a financial plan reflects a Mayor's vision and priorities, then Mr.
Giuliani's plan envisions a hard-bitten but financially solvent city where welfare recipients are fingerprinted to avert fraud, where streets are allowed to be a little dirtier and where the city spends less to create new housing.


Charles Woodward, Theater Producer, 70
Charles Woodward, a producer or co-producer of a score of Broadway and Off Broadway shows in the 1960's and 70's, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 70 and lived in Charlotte Amalie in the United States Virgin Islands.
The cause was stomach cancer, said Shirley Herz, a friend.


Havana Journal; On the Street, Cubans Fondly Embrace Capitalism
Less than a year into major economic changes that have opened the way for foreign investment and freed many Cubans to work for themselves, life in this city is being transformed by a new ethic: the frantic search for dollars.
Although Cuba's Communist leadership has often sought to rein in the changes, repeatedly reminding the people that it has not chosen capitalism as a solution to the country's grave economic problems, almost everywhere one looks these days private enterprise is filling voids left by an exhausted Government.


Exide Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Fremont General reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paramount to Take a Loss On USA Network and Films
A trouble spot that showed up unexpectedly on Paramount Communications Inc.'s balance sheet yesterday was the USA Network, a cable channel that had previously been considered a solid performer.
Several analysts said the USA Network ran into problems because it had overpaid for programs produced by the studios of its two parent companies, Paramount and Universal.


Pacificare Health Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


After Meeting Aidid, U.S. Envoy in Somalia Speaks of Optimism
The United States special envoy to Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, met today with the Somali clan leader Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, and said afterward that despite widespread concern about the country's future stability, he was "more optimistic" about peace than a few months ago.
Mr.
Oakley met the general in Nairobi and said that General Aidid, who was subject to an American-led manhunt for five months, was "much more reasonable" than in the past and that in recent months he had been able "to decompress."


It May Be Cold Outside, But Inside, It's Crazy
YESTERDAY morning, Punxsutawney Phil, the Pennsylvania groundhog and film star, was yanked out of his winter quarters by an eager handler.
Phil saw his shadow shaking from the chill of one of the wickedest winters ever recorded, and dashed right back under his blanket of snow.
Six more weeks of woe.


Patience in Kiev
To the Editor:
Re your Jan. 27 Business Day article on the disappointments of the Seagram Company in trying to sell whisky from its branch in Kiev: Ukraine will need from investors the patience and forbearance they have shown in efforts to penetrate the Japanese market.
Disgruntled managers seeking scapegoats for unprofitable results are not objective observers; neither are impatient executives frustrated by lack of instant results.


Quake May Leave the Coliseum Shut Next Fall
The Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, home to two big time football teams, was so badly damaged in the earthquake last month that it will cost millions to repair and may not reopen for the fall season, officials said today.
The stadium was one of tens of thousands of structures "red tagged" by building inspectors, indicating that it was unsafe.
City and stadium officials met today to assess the damage and determine reconstruction needs and costs.


Olsten Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Colonel Says He Was Ousted Over Opposition to Satellite
In an unusually blunt public statement revealing internal conflict at the Pentagon, an Air Force colonel told a Congressional committee today that he had been dismissed from a prominent job for recommending that a $27 billion military satellite program be scuttled because of "fundamental, insurmountable problems."
The colonel, Sanford Mangold, told members of the House Government Operations Committee that the Milstar satellite system, intended to provide worldwide military communications during a nuclear war, had become "a cancer upon the United States Air Force budget."


Kemper Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Excerpts From Transcript of Giuliani Budget Speech
The following are excerpts from a transcript of the budget statement by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani as recorded by The New York Times:
To restore balance to city finances we need to act.
We need to confront our budget crisis head on.
Simply put, the crisis is this: as of July 1 New York City doesn't have enough money to meet its expenses.
Our expense budget is short by $2.3 billion, arguably the biggest deficit any administration has ever inherited.


Agnes de Mille Tribute
A memorial tribute to the choreographer Agnes de Mille is to be at noon on Tuesday at the St.
James Theater, 246 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
The program includes music and dance, reminiscences, excerpts from Miss de Mille's writings and film clips of her work.
Among those scheduled to participate are Isaac Stern, Morton Gould, Jerome Robbins and Zoe Caldwell.
The public is invited.
Miss de Mille died on Oct. 7 at the age of 88.


Don't Rename Museum That Wright Built
To the Editor:
I am a former apprentice of Frank Lloyd Wright and note with dismay the possibility of a change in the name of Wright's structure for the Solomon Guggenheim Museum to the Samuel K. and Ethel LeFrak Building (Arts pages, Jan. 24).


Sweeteners-Hyperactivity Link Is Discounted
In two new studies, researchers have found evidence that they say should put to rest the widespread belief that sugar or the artificial sweetener aspartame in the diet can make normal children frenetic and hyperactive children wild.
One study involved 48 normal preschool and school-age children who were given large amounts of sugar, aspartame or saccharine; neither the children nor their parents knew which sweetener they were eating.
The investigators, led by Dr.
Mark L. Wolraich of Vanderbilt University in Nashville, reported no effect on the children's behavior from any of the sweeteners.


Pennzoil Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Traders seem to prefer Viacom's latest bid for Paramount because it offers more protection against stock market uncertainties than a rival offer from QVC Network.  [ D1. ]  Paramount will record a loss of $18 million from its share in the USA Network.  [ D8. ]
Capital Cities/ABC formed a joint venture with Brillstein-Grey Entertainment, a management company that handles Dana Carvey, Carol Burnett, Garry Shandling and Mike Myers.  [ D1. ]


A Chief for Civil Rights
After stumbling badly for the past year in his efforts to find a new civil rights chief for the Justice Department, President Clinton has finally come up with an accomplished choice.
Deval Patrick, the nominee for Assistant Attorney General, is an able litigator of demonstrated commitment to the causes the Civil Rights Division is assigned to advance in the Justice Department.
His appointment could boost sagging morale in a unit that has been buffeted by criticism from outside and neglect within.
Last year the embattled nomination of Lani Guinier, which Mr.
Clinton withdrew on grounds that he disagreed with some of her voting rights theories, demoralized the division and the civil rights community, making it difficult for experienced candidates to take the job.


Review/Opera: Wozzeck; The Lyric Dresses Up Berg's 1925 Nightmare In a Modern Message
Alban Berg's "Wozzeck" is an often terrifying opera, a 90-minute obsession about a poor soldier, driven insane by warped authority figures.
So it should be no surprise that the exquisitely constructed score of this Expressionist nightmare from 1925 offers rich temptation for contemporary tastes, which yearn for simplistic dramas about victims of society's oppressive institutions.
There are moments in the otherwise pungent production of "Wozzeck" that made its debut at the Lyric Opera of Chicago last week, when the company succumbs to that temptation.
On Monday night, the performances were often excellent, while the messages were leaden.
The Drum Major who seduces Marie is dressed in contemporary army fatigues and parks a jeep against the Chicago skyline.
In a dance club, the wealthy get their thrills in a Felliniesque debauch as Wozzeck suffers.
Ah yes, we are meant to say, the army and the rich have contemporary victims as well.


Going on Guesswork
President Clinton admitted to the nation's governors this week that he had included insurance premium caps in his health care plan -- a provision many governors oppose -- partly because the Congressional Budget Office estimates that the caps would save the Treasury money.
The admission is disturbing.
The Budget Office's estimates of savings from health care reform, through no fault of its own, are guesswork.
Yet Mr.
Clinton says he is using such guesswork to shape a reform for a generation.
The Budget Office is required to estimate whether proposed budgets satisfy deficit-reduction targets set out in the 1993 budget law.
That is never an easy task.
When Congress legislates ordinary tax and spending changes -- such as last year's small gasoline tax -- the Budget Office can generate reliable estimates.
But when the issue is huge institutional reform, estimating procedures are not reliable.
Expenditures from today's health care system provide no useful guide to expenditures under a completely different system.


Raymond Allen, 72, Tenor in Light Operas
Raymond Allen, an artistic director of the Light Opera of Manhattan who appeared in many of its productions, died on Saturday at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Queens.
He was 72 and lived in Jamaica Estates, Queens.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his wife, Rhanda Spotton-Allen.


Southwest Airlines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inquiry Clears Commerce Chief On Vietnam Bribery Accusation
The Justice Department today cleared Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown of all charges that he had accepted a $700,000 bribe in exchange for helping lift the trade embargo against Vietnam.
The notice that law-enforcement officials had decided to end their investigation with no action against Mr.
Brown came today in a letter to the Secretary's lawyer, department officials said.
"He is pleased that the inquiry has fully and fairly exonerated him of any wrongdoing," department officials said in a statement.


American General Finance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nominee Seeks Strategist's Role In Pentagon Job
In three hours of generally friendly questioning today, William J. Perry, President Clinton's nominee for Secretary of Defense, sought to portray himself as not just a talented technocrat but as a global strategist and a forceful leader, saying the United States would seek to contain North Korea's nuclear program and support Russia's economic and political reforms.
Mr.
Perry, who would succeed Defense Secretary Les Aspin if confirmed, appeared before the Senate Armed Services Committee, which will vote on Thursday on whether to recommend him for confirmation.
A full Senate vote is expected soon after.


Sprint Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Disney Seals Times Square Theater Deal
The Walt Disney Company, the giant of family entertainment, will introduce Mickey, Goofy and lots of surprises to a street with a reputation as perhaps the nation's sleaziest.
Government leaders immediately hailed Disney's announcement yesterday that it will rehabilitate and reopen the landmark New Amsterdam Theater in September 1996 as a major push to reinvigorate the long-stalled effort to revitalize 42d Street in mid-Manhattan.
They promise other announcements soon.


Symantec
Shares of the Symantec Corporation, a computer software company, rose 13.9 percent yesterday, following the company's move last week to acquire SLR Systems, a leading developer of software tools for programmers.
Traders said SLR and other recent purchases would help establish Symantec as a leader in the utility software business.


American Barrick Res.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I Know You're Out There; I Can Hear You Breathing; Would-Be Standup Comics in Search of Live Audiences, as Clubs Weather Hard Times
Dentist by day, standup comic by night, Michael S. King has performed before audiences of two, and half that when one of them went to the bathroom.
But there are some things he won't do.
"I won't perform before none," he insists.
"I draw the line somewhere."
Mark Cohen, too, knows the ignominy and loneliness of the long-distance comic.
He has performed before none.
He's been at clubs where there were no customers, so the waitresses, serving nothing to nobody, were pressed into service as the audience. 'The Next Robin Williams'
Happily for the two comics, those days are mostly past them now as they join a select company of featured performers who regularly harvest laughs at the handful of live comedy clubs around town, Mr.
Cohen as a wacky improviser who has been touted as "the next Robin Williams" and Mr.
King as a nerdy loser who goes to a discount psychiatrist to talk about other people's problems.


Reports From the Bunkers, by Some Survivors; A-B-C-D-EEEEE!
EVER feel like Jack Nicholson in "The Shining," who suffered perhaps the worst cast of cabin fever imaginable?
He holed up in an off-season resort where he'd gone to write a book, lost his mind and went after his family with an ax.
But cabin fever needn't be so extreme, and you don't have to take it lying down.
Here is advice from inventive people who have found ways to keep from going crazy when temperatures drop and tempers rise.
As a pregnant woman, I have spent more than one sleepless night over the last few weeks sipping Ovaltine, listening to the wind whip bare branches outside the window, wondering how I might be able to assassinate Alfie.


G2 Resigns Local Mitsubishi Accounts
G2, the Grey Advertising spinoff shop that handles the Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America account, said yesterday that it had resigned its five remaining local Mitsubishi dealer association accounts in Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles and San Francisco.
Billings were not disclosed.
"This move will allow us to focus all our resources and efforts" on Mitsubishi's national account, David Stickles, president of G2, said in a statement.
G2, which is based in Huntington Beach, Calif., will continue to handle the accounts until the associations select replacement shops.


New Marketing Unit From Leo Burnett
The Leo Burnett Company in Chicago said yesterday that it had formed an interactive marketing group, which will serve Burnett clients including Oldsmobile.


John Rewald, 81, Expert on Art Of Post-Impressionist Period, Dies
John Rewald, a teacher, a curator and an author of landmark studies in the history of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art, died yesterday in Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 81, and had homes in Manhattan and Menerbes, France.
The cause was congestive heart failure after a long illness, said his physician, Kevin Cahill.


Corrections
A chart in Science Times on Jan. 25 about meteoroids that explode in the upper atmosphere gave an incorrect measure of the estimated energy of such explosions.
It showed energy equivalents in millions of tons of TNT, not thousands.


Western Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yankee Energy System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hundreds of Fingerprints Introduced in Blast Trial
The Government put its fingerprint expert on the stand yesterday in the World Trade Center trial, and the sheer numbers produced in her testimony were prodigious.
The expert, Carol Ann Edelen, reported that 2,233 latent fingerprints were developed from the exhibits uncovered in the case and earlier introduced into evidence.
Of them, 343 fingerprints were found to belong to one or another of the defendants.
Ms.
Edelen, who said that she had 31 1/2 years experience as a fingerprint analyst for the F.B.I., was brought to the stand to give the results of almost all of the fingerprint tests done during the long investigation of the trade center bombing.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed John Dopson, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.


Essay; Hair Shirt City
Why is it, whenever public figures moan about the rigors of public scrutiny, some journalists feel called upon to dive into their hair shirts, ostentatiously flagellate themselves and engage in paroxysms of mea culpa?
The preceding paragraph is hyperbole, a Latin word signifying "to throw a ball beyond the limits." Hyperbole is a time-honored tradition both in politics and journalism; it is a colorful and blessed part of the warped woofing in public life.


Indiana Loses Coach but Still Wins Game
Indiana 87, Ohio State 83
Indiana Coach Bob Knight was ejected and a starting forward was injured, but the No. 14-ranked Hoosiers still beat Ohio State, 87-83, in overtime last night in Bloomington, Ind.
Knight was ejected after receiving two technical fouls 69 seconds apart in the second half.
Both technicals came for arguing with officials.


Carolina Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reader's Digest Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


13 Cities Are Accused of Diverting Airport Money
The chairman of a Congressional committee that oversees Federal funds for transportation said today that 13 localities had illegally diverted $252 million in airport revenue since 1982 for local needs.
Representative Bob Carr, a Michigan Democrat who heads the Appropriations subcommittee on transportation, said a six-month Congressional study of 33 leading airports found that income had been diverted from 13 of them for various local programs.
The law requires that airport revenue from all sources, including Federal grants and rent from concessionaires, go only toward airport improvements like more runways and safety equipment.


Pentair Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Islamic Leaders Visit Sarajevo to Support Bosnia Government
Two Islamic Prime Ministers -- Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan and Tansu Ciller of Turkey -- visited Sarajevo today to show their support for the Bosnian Government.
Donning baby-blue United Nations flak jackets, the two Prime Ministers arrived at the airport at midday amid extraordinary security and were escorted through town by a caravan of armored personnel carriers.


CHRONICLE
More than 700 women, and two dozen or so men, streamed into the Sheraton Manhattan Hotel on Seventh Avenue yesterday to contribute to the coffers of Gov.
ANN W. RICHARDS, who is running for a second term in Texas, and KATHLEEN BROWN, the State Treasurer of California, who is seeking to unseat Gov.
Pete Wilson in that state.
It may be early in the 1994 election year to be asking for contributions, but ELLEN MALCOLM, the president of Emily's List, which organized the event, said, "Ann needs $14 million to run for re-election and Kathleen needs $25 million, and when you need to raise that much money, there's no such thing as an off-season." Emily's List, which was founded in 1985, raises funds for Democratic women candidates.


The Pop Life
Women Off the Pedestal
When Tori Amos was writing the songs for her second album, "Under the Pink" (Atlantic), her biggest inspiration was Alice Walker's novel "Possessing the Secret of Joy." She was particularly disturbed, she said the other day, by the author's description of the way women in certain cultures have enforced the ritual genital mutilation of young girls.
It gave her a theme -- women betraying women -- that runs through many of the songs on the record.


In Overhaul Effort Clinton Seeks 'One Stop' Assistance Centers for the Jobless
Calling for a major restructuring of the nation's unemployment and welfare systems, President Clinton said today that he would ask Congress to consolidate scores of benefit programs and create "one-stop-shopping" centers where unemployed workers could pick up assistance checks and receive job training and placement help.
Courting an audience of about 300 job-training specialists and graduates of some of the nation's most innovative jobs programs, the President smiled and joked, hoarsely, with several people who shared stories about moving from the unemployment lines back into the work force.
He then dismissed the existing system, saying it was weighted down with "yesterday's programs" and needed an overhaul.


Books of The Times; Errors in Judgment And Ripples Thereof
The Palace Thief  By Ethan Canin  205 pages. Random House. $21.


Bum Rap
As a 35-year-old father of a 16-year-old son (yes, I was a teen-age father), and as a professor and ordained Baptist minister who grew up in Detroit's treacherous inner city, I am disturbed by some elements of gangster rap.
But I'm even more anguished by the way many black leaders have scapegoated its artists.
While gangster rap takes the heat for a range of social maladies from urban violence to sexual misconduct, the roots of our racial misery remain buried beneath moralizing discourse that is confused and sometimes dishonest.


Burlington Industries Equity Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Cool Weather Threatens to Delay a Shuttle
The space shuttle Discovery, about to begin a new era in Russian-American space cooperation, was being readied today for launching with unusually cool weather as a cause of concern.
Discovery is scheduled to begin its 18th journey into space at 7:10 A.M. on Thursday.
The launching will be delayed if the temperature, which is predicted to be in the low 40's, and the winds combine to violate launching rules.
Those involve a combination of factors, including winds, air temperature and humidity.


For Engineers Involved in Fatal Accidents, Counseling Offers Aid
Harry Obser, an engineer with the Long Island Rail Road, was pulling into Bay Shore last September when he saw someone on a bicycle slip around the crossing gate.
He blew the warning whistle and hit the brakes, but his efforts were in vain.
An instant later the cyclist was dead, and Mr.
Obser, 50, who had been an engineer for 27 years and had been involved in two other fatal accidents, decided to take an early retirement.


Senators Propose I.R.A.'s for Homemakers
Five women Senators, backed by a wide assortment of women's groups, announced today the introduction of a bill that would allow homemakers to set up their own individual retirement accounts.
Current law allows $4,000 in I.R.A. contributions for two-earner households but limits married couples to $2,250 a year if only one spouse has earned income.
The proposed legislation would extend the $4,000 ceiling to all couples.


GIULIANI OUTLINES A BUDGET TO CUT GOVERNMENT SIZE
Saying New York City faced "a fiscal emergency," Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani outlined a budget plan yesterday that would reduce the city's spending for the first time since the fiscal crisis of the 1970's, eliminating at least 15,000 municipal jobs, consolidating departments and slashing agency budgets by more than $1 billion.
The Mayor's cuts would fall heavily on the city's Department of Sanitation, on social services and on the school system, which alone would face a reduction of 2,500 jobs, or more than half, from its administrative staff.


No Headline
"Older people, they have some reservations about shooting in general. The young folks don't seem to have developed those inhibitions yet; they don't consider the consequences of pulling the trigger." -- JOSEPH E. LOVELOCK of the New York City police.  [ B6:4. ]


U.S. and Japan Studying a Private Panel for Trade Issues
In a possible sign of movement in deadlocked trade talks, the United States and Japan are looking favorably at the idea of a private commission to assess progress in increasing sales of foreign autos and auto parts in Japan, officials from both Governments said today.
The commission, which might be made of auto industry representatives as well as academics, would give the private sector, rather than the two Governments, more of a role in addressing the huge trade deficit in auto products that the United States has with Japan.


As Boulmerka Runs, She Is Making History
The Algerian woman who dared to bare her limbs in public was downright demure yesterday, but then this wasn't a track meet, but a news conference.
And Hassiba Boulmerka was dressed for it in jock chic, from her long-sleeved pullover and neat jeans to her lavender suede loafers and pink socks.
Making her first visit to New York, Boulmerka was on display for several reasons.
As the 1991 world champion and 1992 Olympic gold medalist in the 1,500 meters, she has been declared the favorite to win the women's mile in the Chemical Bank Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden tomorrow night.


Market Place; Westinghouse needs cash. But should it shed broadcasting?
SHOULD Michael H. Jordan, the chairman of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, sell one of the company's crown jewels: its broadcasting division?
Some people say they think he should as a way to pay down the debt the company incurred in its disastrous foray into financial services in the 1980's.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday about a lawsuit filed by the trustee overseeing the bankruptcy of the Towers Financial Corporation against Steven Hoffenberg, its former chairman and chief executive, misstated the role of Terrence Corrigan, a lawyer.
Mr.
Corrigan represents the trustee, Alan Cohen, not the creditors' committee.


Spain Opens Criminal Inquiry on Banesto
The Spanish central bank said today that it had opened legal proceedings against the former management of the troubled Banco Espanol de Credito, which it ousted five weeks ago, saying the bank was on the verge of collapse.
The inquiry, which can last a maximum of 18 months, is directed against Mario Conde, the former chairman of Banesto, as the bank is commonly known here, and former board members.
These include Roberto Mendoza, a vice chairman at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, which created a fund that holds an 8 percent stake in Banesto.
Mr.
Mendoza was a director of Banesto.


Tambrands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Speed Is Worth The Risk For Some
The death last Saturday of the veteran downhill skier Ulrike Maier of Austria has raised questions about the equipment skiers use today.
Are modern skis the equivalent of the oversized tennis racquet, the breakthrough in tennis that changed forever the way a ball is served?
And more important, are the new skis too dangerous?
The idea of curtailing innovations in Alpine equipment was broached Tuesday in Switzerland by Marc Hodler, president of the International Ski Federation.
He suggested that high speeds might be tempered by regulating equipment.


A Renewal For a Place Of Renewal
MORE than 10,000 patients have passed through the wrought-iron-and-glass doors of the Smithers Alcoholism Treatment and Training Center at 56 East 93d Street in Manhattan.
They have ranged from the famous, like Joan Kennedy, Truman Capote and Dwight Gooden, to people who were assisted by Medicaid.
In the 40,000-square-foot house, with mahogany doors and marble fireplaces, patients stay for 17 to 30 days, battling alcohol and drug abuse -- often with success.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Offensive Defenseman  Defenseman Lyle Odelein, usually a low scorer, had five assists as Montreal trounced visiting Hartford, 9-2, last night.
Odelein, who returned after a three-game layoff with a bruised shoulder, equaled a club record for assists in one game by a defenseman set by Doug Harvey, now in the Hall of Fame, on Feb. 19, 1955.
The record was matched when Odelein sent Gilbert Dionne in alone to blast Montreal's last goal of the blowout behind Jeff Reese at 16 minutes 19 seconds of the third period. (AP) Red Wings 3, Lightning 1: Scotty Bowman registered his 1,000th coaching victory as goalie Chris Osgood, a rookie, stopped 33 shots in Detroit's victory over Tampa Bay at St.
Petersburg, Fla.
Bowman's record includes 137 playoff victories.
He has coached six Stanley Cup champions (five with Montreal and one with Pittsburgh) and is the winningest coach in National Hockey League history (863-396-231 in the regular season and 137-82 in the playoffs) in 21 seasons.
He also has the best winning percentage (.656) of anyone who has coached at least 600 regular-season games.
Osgood permitted only John Tucker's goal with 2:11 left to improve his record to 13-4-4.
Sheldon Kennedy scored at 7:29 and Keith Primeau at 13:23 of the first period for a 2-0 Detroit lead. (AP)


5 Young Robbers Took the Cash, Then Killed Anyway, Police Say
A 19-year-old Brooklyn youth led a teen-age stick-up team on a string of robberies at small stores in Brooklyn, killing three shop owners apparently without provocation after they had already handed over their money, the police said yesterday.
In one case, the five suspects, who were arrested in the last two weeks, forced a grocer in Bedford-Stuyvesant to kneel before shooting him in the back, the police said.
In another, they slammed a butcher in Bushwick against a wall as he was closing up shop, then shot him.
In yet another, they opened fire on another grocery owner when he balked at handing over $400.


Madeline C. Hunter, Teaching Innovator And an Author, 78
Dr.
Madeline C. Hunter, an educator and psychologist who translated a psychological learning theory into practical teaching techniques, died last Thursday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 78 and lived in the Bel Air section of Los Angeles.
Dr.
Hunter had a series of strokes, said the Graduate School of Education at the University of California at Los Angeles, where she was an adjunct professor.


INSIDE
Nominee Faces Senators
Appearing before a Senate committee, William J. Perry, the nominee for Defense Secretary, portrayed himself as a global strategist and forceful leader.
Page A16.
Hearing on Troubled Satellite
An Air Force colonel told a Congressional committee he was dismissed for recommending that a military satellite be scuttled because of "insurmountable problems." Page A16.
No Move on Hanoi Embargo
Despite growing signs to the contrary, President Clinton insisted he has not made up his mind on whether to lift the United States economic embargo against Vietnam.
Page A8. 19 Neglected Children Found
A drug raid led Chicago police to a cockroach-infested apartment, where children slept on the floor and competed with dogs for food.
Page A14.
Guggenheim Cuts Back
Just weeks after receiving two major donations, the Guggenheim Museum announced cuts in its staff and operating hours.
Page C11.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR 12-year-old Kate Shipley, a junior high school student in Newton, Mass., a typical Sunday at this time of year includes playing a basketball game and an indoor soccer game and attending practice for yet another team she's on.
Although she enjoys sports tremendously, her schedule can be overwhelming.
"Since I play for three basketball and three soccer teams, I don't have much time to just play with my friends," she said.


Coleman Deal Doesn't Pass the Inspection
A proposed long-term contract extension for Derrick Coleman has stalled, with the Nets' ownership unwilling to pull the trigger on a potential $90 million deal.
Instead of approving the deal, the Nets' owners have told the team's senior vice president, Willis Reed, to explore the possibilities of trading the fourth-year, All-Star power forward.


Alexander Lubinsky, Record Executive, 70
Count Alexander Numa Labinsky, a bass and the president of Nimbus Records, died on Friday at his home in Monmouth, Wales.
He was 70.
He died in his sleep, said Peter Elliott, a vice president of Nimbus.


Japanese Stocks Lower
Stocks traded lower here today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 75.21 points, or 0.37 percent, to 20,174.82.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei lost 166.31 points.


Congressional Black Caucus Backs Away From Farrakhan
Bowing to pressure from his membership, the chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus said today that his group was distancing itself from Louis Farrakhan and his black nationalist group, the Nation of Islam.
The chairman, Representative Kweisi Mfume, said that the 40-member caucus would back away from any working relationship with the black Muslim organization and Mr.
Farrakhan until black members of Congress were satisfied that the Nation of Islam was moderating its views on whites, both Jews and gentiles.


Houston Grand Jury Declines To Indict in Mistaken Killing
A grand jury today declined to indict a homeowner who shot and killed a Scottish businessman whom he mistook for a burglar.


Grossman's Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Williams Issues Denial
MITCH WILLIAMS, the former Philadelphia Phillies relief pitcher, said he took a lie detector test to support his denial of a woman's allegation that he raped her, his lawyer said yesterday.
The Cincinnati police said they are investigating the allegation by a Kentucky woman who said Williams raped her in September at a Cincinnati hotel.
Williams has not been charged and no warrants have been issued, Sgt.
RICHARD NEWSOM said.
"I am aware of the allegations against me and totally deny them," Williams said in a statement released by his lawyer, MARTIN PINALES.


London Grows Impatient With Adams's Demands
The chief British official for Northern Ireland sought today to discredit the assertion by Gerry Adams, the political leader of the Irish Republican Army, that Mr.
Adams cannot endorse the Irish-British framework for peace talks until its provisions are clarified by the British Government.
Mr.
Adams, on a two-day visit to New York, said he could not yet accept the plan, which would give him a place at formal peace talks in return for a convincing cessation of violence by the I.R.A.
He says he needs clarifications and other steps before he tries to persuade the I.R.A to lay down its arms.
The campaign of violence has killed 3,114 people on both sides since 1969.


Senators Seek to Open Up Cable and Phone Markets
In a further sign that Congress is ready to overhaul communications laws, a bipartisan group of senators will make public its own proposals Thursday to let telephone companies, cable television and long-distance companies compete head-to-head.
The bill is broadly similar to a legislative package already working its way through the House of Representatives, and its introduction means that both houses of Congress are proceeding along parallel paths.


Eagle-Picher Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


AT HOME WITH: Ann-Margret; The Lady in Pink Remembers Elvis
IN person, you don't call her Ms.
Margret or Ann, but the name her mother calls her: Ann-Margret.
And even now, at 52, she wants to be the good girl.
"Isn't it interesting how we set these impossible standards for ourselves?" she asks over tea in her Benedict Canyon living room, her voice a whispered purr.
"I always tried to be the perfect little girl. Always tried to have the perfect little manners. Never wanted to displease my parents. But you're setting yourself up." She laughs a deep, full-bodied chuckle of the heh-heh-heh variety.


Defense Follows Familiar Course In Evers Slaying
Thirty years made little difference today.
The defense in the third trial of Byron De La Beckwith, accused of murdering the civil rights leader Medgar Evers in 1963, began its presentation much the same way its counterparts did at the first trial 30 years ago: calling witnesses who placed the defendant 95 miles away at the time of the shooting.


Montana Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Starks Founders, but Blackman Rights Knicks
John Starks spent the fourth quarter on the bench tonight.
Rolando Blackman spent the fourth quarter on the court.
It was an unusual move by Pat Riley, but it paid off.
With Blackman and Derek Harper playing the final quarter together in the backcourt, New York won its sixth consecutive game, squeaking out an 85-80 victory over the Washington Bullets at the USAir Arena.


U.S. Must Take Nonproliferation Lead
To the Editor:
"The U.S. has traditionally tried to stop the spread of nuclear weapons by talking nations out of wanting the weapons in the first place or by denying them the technology to make arms," you state in "Slower, but Surer, Arms Curbs" (editorial, Jan. 22).


International Flavors &amp; Fragrances reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reports From the Bunkers, by Some Survivors; SLUSH IS FOR WADDLING
EVER feel like Jack Nicholson in "The Shining," who suffered perhaps the worst cast of cabin fever imaginable?
He holed up in an off-season resort where he'd gone to write a book, lost his mind and went after his family with an ax.
But cabin fever needn't be so extreme, and you don't have to take it lying down.
Here is advice from inventive people who have found ways to keep from going crazy when temperatures drop and tempers rise.
Unless the windchill factor is something like 20 below, my antidote to the cold is to put on my long underwear; a turtleneck sweater or two; old hiking pants; a down jacket (also comfortably old); lined, waterproof boots; a fur hat (one of those "bomber" models with earflaps that can be fashioned under your chin like an instant beard); warm gloves, and a scarf.
Then I waddle out the door.


Time to Fingerprint Juvenile Offenders
To the Editor:
Since 1985, I have been the chief sponsor of legislation in the New York State Assembly to mandate the fingerprinting of juvenile offenders for all felonies.
I welcome Bob Herbert's support in "15 and Armed"(column, Jan. 23).


White House Memo; Clinton Is Still Tiptoeing Round the Vietnam Mines
If anyone had forgotten just how skittish Bill Clinton can be when it comes to Vietnam, there could be no better evidence than his public insistence today that he has not made up his mind on whether to lift the American embargo on Hanoi.
It has been more than a month since his top deputies signed off on a recommendation to restore trade relations with that former enemy, a step they would never have taken without a keen sense of the boss's wishes.
Aides had been saying for weeks that he was moving irrevocably in that direction, and they said Tuesday and again today that there would be no turning back.


National Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Sierra Tahoe Bancorp, Truckee, Calif., is selling $10 million of convertible subordinated debentures due in 2004 at 100 to yield 8.5 percent through Dakin Securities.
The issue is noncallable for three years.


Corrections
A sports article on Tuesday about the Chinese distance runner Wang Junxia misstated the location of Liaoning Province, where she trains.
It is in Northeastern China.


Tom Morrow; Designer and Painter, 65
Tom Morrow, a designer and painter, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan. He was 65.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Tribune Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  GRIM REPORT ON WOMEN'S RIGHTS  For the first time, the State Department has focused on the treatment of women in its annual human rights report and its findings were grim.
The report on 193 countries paints a dreary picture of day-to-day discrimination and abuse.
A1


Bridge
Two invitational championships in Europe in the last two weeks, the Cap Volmac in the Netherlands and the Macallan in England, are claimants for the title of the strongest event ever played.
Eight pairs played in both, and tabulating the combined results for them, with the lowest totals first, is interesting:
1st, Geir Helgemo and Tor Helness, Norway, (1st in the Cap Volmac and 5th in the Macallan), tied Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, United States (2d and 4th).


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., said it would buy the fluorochemicals business of Akzo Chemicals, a unit of Akzo N.V. of Arnhem, the Netherlands.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.
BROWN &amp; ROOT INC., Houston, a subsidiary of the Halliburton Co., said its Energy Services unit, a provider of oil and gas services, had begun work on a $53 million contract to provide design and procurement services for a $1.5 billion Irish Sea development by the Hamilton Oil Corp., a unit of the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. of Australia.


The Talk of Hollywood; Hollywood Trains Its Cameras on Hollywood
As a subject for movies, Hollywood should be a natural.
All that money, deceit and intrigue.
All those famous people.
Yet most film makers here (Robert Altman excepted) seem to feel the town is too rich, too excessive, too duplicitous and too weird to turn into a movie.
Besides, Hollywood-bashing by screenwriters, directors and executives who earn millions of dollars, and complain about selling out, seems not only silly but smug.


Mandela and de Klerk Open Fire in Battle for Votes
Four years after official South Africa renounced its racist past, and four months after they shared a Nobel Peace Prize, Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk served notice today that the moral high ground is no longer big enough for both of them.
In the first blazing battle of what is now a full-scale campaign for the first national election open to all races, the reformist President and the patriarch of the liberation movement warred over who really freed South Africa.


Family Values as a Las Vegas Smash
Spencer and James Betz of San Diego have been coming to this gaudy gambling mecca for years, but their most recent trip was different from all the rest.
This time they brought their newborn daughter, Jamie; they brought their nanny, Yada Lopez, and they left their bankroll at home.
Because, while the Betzes did find time to play the slots, they were heading to the MGM Grand Hotel and its "Wizard of Oz" theme park, one of three newly opened mega-hotels that are bringing a family touch to the gambling Strip.


Journal; 'Some Place Thrilling'
How are healthy heterosexuals supposed to behave in front of a gay man who is dying of AIDS?
This question of etiquette confronted the New Yorkers who attended an unusual book party at an Upper East Side town house a week ago tonight.
The celebrated book was "Diary of a Lost Boy," a funny new novel about a dying young gay man and his best straight friends, a couple who might have been played by Cary Grant and Katharine Hepburn in a 30's screwball comedy.
The author is Harry Kondoleon, 38, who arrived at his party by ambulette from St.
Vincent's Hospital, ignoring a doctor's warning that the mere trip uptown could be fatal.


Beneficial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bill Would Condemn Yankees to Keep Them
In socialist dictatorships, governments nationalize coal mines and oil fields.
New York lawmakers want to use that approach to protect one of the state's most vital industries: the Yankees.
A bill introduced today in the Democratic-led Assembly would create a sports facility authority and give it power to condemn sports franchises that threaten to leave the state, just as the Transportation Department uses its power of eminent domain to condemn property for road construction.
The authority could sell bonds to raise money to buy a team, and then could sell team shares to the public.


In a Tough Industry, Style Fails to Save McCaffrey
McCaffrey &amp; McCall, an agency known for elegantly understated advertising campaigns for prestigious brands like Mercedes-Benz and Tiffany, died yesterday at 32, a victim of big client losses and changing industry dynamics.
McCaffrey joins a lengthy list of stylish, small-to-midsized shops disappearing in the last year, including Scali, McCabe, Sloves, acquired by Lowe &amp; Partners; Geer, DuBois, liquidated after it was unable to pay its creditors; Great Scott Advertising, closed because of setbacks suffered by its real estate clients, and Campbell &amp; Wagman, closed after losing its biggest client, First Interstate Bancorp.


Review/Theater; This Art Imitates The Life Of Mother
By far the most interesting aspect of "Smiling Through," Ivan Menchell's musical about a middle-aged English entertainer during World War II, is its status as a monument to filial devotion.
The story of how this show came to be is compelling.
The musical itself, unfortunately, is not.
It is as if the emotions that had inspired it had been bizarrely ironed and sanitized into the standard forms of feel-good theatrical convention.
Mr.
Menchell created "Smiling Through" specifically for his mother, Vicki Stuart, an English-born nightclub and television singer who stopped performing after the death of Lou Menchell, her husband and on-stage partner, in 1979.
Now, thanks to her son, Ms.
Stuart, in the character of a woman who has resumed her career after a hiatus inspired by the death of her husband, is again belting out songs and addressing audiences about the values of pluck, determination and holding tightly to cherished dreams.


Playboy Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Japan Socialists Threaten to Quit Coalition in Dispute Over Taxes
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa pushed his governing coalition toward collapse today by announcing that he would only reduce income taxes to revive Japan's stalled economy if the cuts were offset by an even larger increase in sales taxes in three years.
While the decision touched on arcane issues related to tax policy, it quickly created a political crisis that could affect Washington as well as Japan.


CHRONICLE
GERMAINE GREER, the feminist writer, has invited the homeless in England to move into her house with her near Cambridge.
Writing in a recent issue of "The Big Issue," a weekly newspaper whose proceeds aid the homeless, Ms.
Greer recalled her own difficulties finding a decent place to live before her 1970 book, "The Female Eunuch," made her famous.


Review/Film; Down and Out (and Eccentric) in Lisbon
A gaunt middle-aged hypochondriac with a taste for voyeurism is not the sort of person one expects to be the central character in a movie, even a European art film.
But in Joao Cesar Monteiro's deadpan comedy "Recollections of the Yellow House," the director himself plays just such a character.
Joao de Deus, the Portuguese film maker's cinematic alter ego, is a bumbling, sad-eyed everyman and sometime hack writer of meager resources who exudes disorder.
Joao is one of several eccentric tenants who inhabit a seedy Lisbon rooming house run by the fanatically proper and puritanical Dona Violeta (Manuelade Freiras).
In a mordantly funny early scene, Joao complains to his landlady about bedbugs, which may or may not be imaginary.
He even chases down one bug and traps it in a container; but it is invisible to the viewer, and when he displays it for Violeta it is also indiscernible.
A bedbug rash is not Joao's only ailment.
He also has sores in his mouth and an inflamed groin that requires the wearing of an athletic supporter packed with ice cubes.


A First Deep Cut
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's budget plan for New York City is a stiff dose of what he promised.
While the plan is not the actual budget, which comes in April, it foretells tough, mold-breaking measures to balance city spending and revenues over the long haul.
Mr.
Giuliani used a few bookkeeping gimmicks and overly optimistic revenue assumptions, but he has relied on them less than his predecessors did.
Over all, the plan represents a thrust in new directions that will enrage the old order and cheer Mr.
Giuliani's supporters.


Golfers of the World Unite!
The PGA Tour is expanding into the People's Republic of China.
Deane Beman, commissioner of the tour, announced today at Pebble Beach Golf Links that the tour has added a International Tournament Players Club facilities in the communist nation, entering into an agreement with Hong Kong-based Mission Hills Holding to operate the three clubs.
Two other tournaments were added in Thailand.
The club, Mission Hills-Shenzen in Guangdong Province near Hong Kong, will be the site of the 1995 World Cup.
The tournament, which matches two-man teams from 25 nations, will be the first golf tournament played on communist soil.


CAE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Praxair Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Radical Islam Group Warns Foreigners to Leave Egypt
The Islamic Group, a radical organization responsible for many killings and linked to the bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City, advised all foreigners today to leave Egypt for their own safety.
"We implore tourists and investors to leave the country, because the next operations will be extremely ferocious and strong," read a statement the group sent by fax to news agencies.


Kansas City Southern Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Despite Big Gifts, Museum Cuts Back
Just two weeks after announcing it had raised half of a $100 million capital campaign fund, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum dismissed nearly 10 percent of its staff yesterday, reduced the hours at both its landmark Frank Lloyd Wright building and its SoHo branch, and temporarily closed its library.
The museum is also considering postponement of a major fall exhibition because no sponsor has been found.
The museum's director, Thomas Krens, who has expanded the Guggenheim's museum facilities as well as its profile in New York and abroad, said the cutbacks did not reflect overreaching or miscalculation, and that these streamlining measures would not inevitably diminish the Guggenheim's presence.


Gordon Wins Hearing, But Rojas Loses His
The results of the initial salary arbitration hearings are in, and each side has emerged with a victory.
The Montreal Expos learned yesterday they won their case with pitcher MEL ROJAS, and pitcher TOM GORDON found out he won his case with the Kansas City Royals.
Both arguments were heard Tuesday in Los Angeles.
JOHN OLERUD and the Toronto Blue Jays, on the other hand, will not go to a hearing.
They are expected to announce today a multiyear contract worth about $5.5 million a year.
JOE McINTOSH, agent for the American League batting champion, and HOWARD STARKMAN, a club spokesman, confirmed yesterday that the two sides were close to an agreement.


Drug Raid Uncovers 19 Children in Squalid Chicago Apartment
When Police Officer Patricia Warner walked through the front door of a tired two-flat building here on Tuesday night, she thought she was stepping into a crack house.
What she discovered was worse.


News Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ABC in Unusual Venture With Talent Firm
In the first union of a television network and a stable of star talent, Capital Cities/ABC announced a joint venture yesterday with one of Hollywood's leading management companies, Brillstein-Grey Entertainment, which handles comedy performers like Dana Carvey, Carol Burnett, Garry Shandling and Mike Myers.
The deal calls for the new company to develop and produce programs for a wide range of media including network television, pay-per-view television, videocassettes, cable and radio.
Ownership of the programs will be shared by ABC and Brillstein-Grey.


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


WHERE TO FIND IT
TO most cyclists, the three-speed bicycle is at best a pleasant memory.
But to a core of devotees, the three-speed is easy and uncomplicated, with none of the odd brake systems or confusing gears that can be found on more sophisticated bicycles.
Three-speeds are particularly popular in New York City, with its relatively flat terrain.
Some riders, including messengers, choose three-speeds for durability and comfort (rear metal fenders, standard on three-speeds, help to keep puddles from splashing on riders).
And many consider three-speeds a less obvious target for thieves than flashier bikes.


Chinese Economy Threatens to Pull Ours Down
To the Editor:
The concern for improvement of human rights in China has allowed the erroneous argument to flourish that keeping the status quo with China is important for the United States economy.
I would like to discuss China's real economic structure and its meaning for the American economy.


PC Officer Leaving I.B.M.
Edward F. Rogers, the chief financial officer of the IBM Personal Computer Company, is retiring at age 56.
Mr.
Rogers has worked for the International Business Machines Corporation for 31 years, mostly in a series of financial management jobs.


Cominco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gene Boucher Is Dead; Met Baritone Was 60
Gene Boucher, a baritone who sang with the Metropolitan Opera, and a former national executive secretary of the American Guild of Musical Artists, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60.
The cause has not yet been determined, said Dick Moore, a spokesman for the guild.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bradley Is Suspended
Philadelphia 76ers center SHAWN BRADLEY missed last night's home game against Cleveland after he was suspended by the league for bumping an official Saturday night.
Bradley was suspended for one game without pay and fined $3,000. (Reuters)


Cuomo Aide On Pollution Plans to Quit
Thomas C. Jorling, New York's commissioner of environmental conservation for the last seven years, told Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today that he planned to leave the administration to take a management job with International Paper.
Mr.
Jorling plans to leave state government in late February or early March, said Madeline J. Gallo, an assistant commissioner in the department.
Ms.
Gallo said she did not know precisely what Mr.
Jorling's title or responsibilities would be at the giant forest products company, which is based in Purchase.


A Long Budget Process
The release by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of his preliminary spending plan is the opening of a five-month process by which the New York City government determines its budget for the next fiscal year, which begins on July 1.
The plan, which is required by the City Charter, gives projections of spending and revenue for the next four years, but its details focus primarily on the next fiscal year.
Members of the Giuliani administration, including budget officials and agency heads, will meet with City Council committees over the next month to discuss details of their initial proposal.
Mr.
Giuliani and some of his aides will also meet, no doubt, with state legislative leaders over the next two months, seeking more aid to the city in the state's spending plan, which by law is to be completed by April 1.


Silicon Officers Are Promoted
Silicon Graphics Inc. said yesterday that Edward R. McCracken, its president and chief executive, had been named chairman and chief executive and that Thomas A. Jermoluk, its executive vice president and chief operating officer, had been named president and chief operating officer.
The promotions follow the resignation last week of James H. Clark, the company's founder and chairman, effective on Feb. 28.
Dr.
Clark intends to start a software company for interactive television.


METRO DIGEST
GIULIANI OUTLINES BUDGET TO CUT SIZE OF GOVERNMENT 'A FISCAL EMERGENCY' Saying New York City faces "a fiscal emergency," Mayor Giuliani outlined a budget plan that would reduce the size of the city's government for the first time since the fiscal crisis of the 1970's, eliminating at least 15,000 municipal jobs, consolidating departments and cutting spending by more than $1 billion.
A1.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a vote by some Eastern states for tougher auto emission standards misstated New Jersey's position in some copies.
The state voted to defer a decision on the issue; it did not vote for the tougher standards.


Events: Creativity For Selling's Sake
Packaging Evolution  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6862.
"Packaging the New: Design and the American Consumer, 1925 - 1975," an exhibition of packaging, drawings, furniture, products and advertising, is to open on Tuesday and continue through Aug. 14.
The show traces the history of American consumerism and the increasing importance of product and package design in American manufacturing.
The work of such industrial designers as Norman Bel Geddes, Donald Deskey and Henry Dreyfuss is featured.


A Renewal For a Place Of Renewal
MORE than 10,000 patients have passed through the wrought-iron-and-glass doors of the Smithers Alcoholism Treatment and Training Center at 56 East 93d Street in Manhattan.
They have ranged from the famous, like Joan Kennedy, Truman Capote and Dwight Gooden, to people who were assisted by Medicaid.
In the 40,000-square-foot house, with mahogany doors and marble fireplaces, patients stay for 17 to 30 days, battling alcohol and drug abuse -- often with success.


Betty Heitman Is Dead; G.O.P. Leader Was 64
Betty Heitman, a Republican Party official who prodded two Presidents to appoint more women to high Government posts, died on Monday at her home in Baton Rouge, La.
She was 64.
Her son, Paul, attributed her death to natural causes.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Taj Mahal  The Bottom Line Greenwich Village
Performing on Monday night as part of the Bottom Line's 20th-anniversary lineup, Taj Mahal played songs he could have picked 20 years ago.
They were solo blues, time-tested songs about fishing, lost love, big-legged women, blue-lighted parties, freight trains and the blues itself.


Coyer Named A Jets Coach
Larry Coyer, a defensive coordinator at East Carolina, was named defensive line coach for the Jets yesterday, completing Coach Pete Carroll's defensive alignment.
He replaces Greg Robinson, who moved up to defensive coordinator.
Coyer, 50, coached for 20 years at nine colleges, including three at U.C.L.A., where he worked with Robinson.
He also coached for three years in the United States Football League, first with the Michigan Panthers and then with the Memphis Showboats.


An Encore for Sandstrom?
The Rangers, looking for the kind of gritty player who could smooth their way through the playoffs, have discussed a trade with the Los Angeles Kings that would bring forward Tomas Sandstrom back to New York.
Although Neil Smith, the president and general manager of the Rangers, said no deal was imminent, he confirmed yesterday that Sandstrom's name had come up in recent talks with Nick Beverley, the general manager of the Kings, a team that made it to the Stanley Cup finals last season but is now struggling through a mediocre season.
They talked again last week when the Rangers played in Los Angeles.


Taking On the Unions; With Few Debts to Labor, Giuliani Offers Budget Plan With Cutbacks in Work Force
Rudolph W. Giuliani, New York City's first Republican Mayor in a generation, swept into office last November with less support from municipal unions than any other mayor in recent memory.
Most of the city's labor movement backed David N. Dinkins.
The teachers remained neutral.
Only the firefighters, correction officers and police rallied to Mr.
Giuliani's side.
Now Mr.
Giuliani has shown what it means to owe few debts to labor.
For his fiscal plan makes quite clear that the new Mayor intends to force down the size of the city work force by 15,000 employees from what he calls a "historic high" and also to wrest productivity savings, new work rules and benefits concessions from the workers who remain.


Reports From the Bunkers, by Some Survivors; HOMEMADE (NO CRUMBS)
EVER feel like Jack Nicholson in "The Shining," who suffered perhaps the worst cast of cabin fever imaginable?
He holed up in an off-season resort where he'd gone to write a book, lost his mind and went after his family with an ax.
But cabin fever needn't be so extreme, and you don't have to take it lying down.
Here is advice from inventive people who have found ways to keep from going crazy when temperatures drop and tempers rise.
Why is it that when it's minus 2 degrees, the stores are all showing straw boaters instead of earmuffs?
More maddening yet, why, when Central Park is covered with a gorgeous blanket of white, is there not a sled to be found for sale in all of Manhattan?


For Public Employees, Anger at Mayor's Plan
At the end of his shift, Daniel Porch, a sanitation worker for the last 10 years, paused in a dressing room in a garage underneath the Williamsburg Bridge and bitterly complained about a Mayor who, he contended, has made him and his fellow workers scapegoats for the city's financial problems.
"It seems almost like he has something against the city worker, especially the sanitation worker," said Mr.
Porch, a slender, 41-year-old with traces of his native North Carolina in his voice.
"It doesn't make sense to me. He's saying we don't work hard enough. But that's just so he can get what he wants without anybody getting upset about it."


House Approves $9 Billion for Los Angeles Earthquake and Other Emergencies
Congress has a rule that it will not spend money beyond what is budgeted, and thus add to the Federal deficit, except in an emergency.
Today the House of Representatives decided that the Los Angeles earthquake met that test and voted $7.7 billion in aid to its victims.
The House also decided that the Pentagon had an emergency, and gave it $1.2 billion in unbudgeted money for operations in Bosnia, Haiti, Somalia and Iraq.
And it decided that last summer's Midwestern floods were still an emergency, and voted to spend $300 million on levees and other projects.


Gary E. Crawford; Lawyer, 45
Gary E. Crawford, a partner in the Manhattan law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami.
Mr.
Crawford, who lived in Manhattan, was 45.
The cause was lymphoma, said Felix Counts, a friend of the family.


For Some Retailers, a Rough January
Cold weather in the Northeast and the earthquake in California took their toll on retail sales last month, with some companies reporting sharp declines from figures a year earlier.
But several analysts viewed the setback as temporary and said the industry's outlook remained strong for coming months.
Two big retailers that saw significant declines in January sales at stores open at least a year were the Limited Inc. and Charming Shoppes Inc., with sales down 9 percent at each company.
January sales at the Mercantile Stores Company fell 7.6 percent from the comparable period last year.


Dr. Marija Gimbutas Dies at 73; Archaeologist With Feminist View
Dr.
Marija Gimbutas, an author and archeologist, died Wednesday at U.C.L.A.
Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 73 and had lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was cancer, said a colleague, Dr. Cristina Biaggi.


U.S. Plans Expanded Trade Zone
The Clinton Administration is drafting a plan that would create a Western Hemisphere free trade zone in 10 to 15 years and, as a first step, add Chile to the North American Free Trade Agreement by late next year, Administration officials said today.
The plan not only responds to clamoring by Latin American countries to join the North American free trade club that now includes Mexico, but also recognizes that removing trade barriers can be a boon for Washington because the Latin American region is an enthusiastic, fast-growing market for United States exports.


Hopes Fade For the Dow's Hitting 4,000
The 4,000 level on the Dow Jones industrial average, which seemed so attainable at the beginning of the week, slipped further away yesterday as the closely watch market barometer slid 7.88 points to finish at 3,967.66.
Stock prices fell under pressure generated by a weak bond market and by profit taking ahead of today's release of the January employment report.
Sharp declines in stock markets in Europe also helped set a negative trading tone.
Since Monday's record closing high of 3,978.36, the Dow has seesawed up and down and lost almost 11 points.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy, with 318.4 million shares traded, in line with the range of recent trading, as losing issues outpaced gainers by 1,190 to 918.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a new, aggressive campaign, Prudential Securities tries to put a troubled past behind it.
AN aggressive campaign for Prudential Securities Inc. from its new agency makes an audacious promise: "Prudential Securities today. It starts with straight talk."
No doubt the hundreds of thousands of investors who bought limited partnerships from Prudential during the 1980's wish that promise were retroactive.
Prudential, the nation's fourth-largest brokerage firm, has agreed to repay those investors for the huge losses they suffered because brokers misrepresented the safety and returns of the risky investments.


Just Staying Out of Jail Doesn't Qualify You for the Olympics; No Character Builder
To the Editor:
I believe Tonya Harding should skate in the Olympics.
Though she embodies values and qualities of character and style that I and others detest, she has not yet been charged with any crime -- no grand jury, no prosecution, no conviction.
While I am convinced she had a role in the assault on Nancy Kerrigan, I would not compromise a pillar of our democracy -- presumed innocent until convicted by a jury of one's peers.


Just Staying Out of Jail Doesn't Qualify You for the Olympics
To the Editor:
Both "Let Her Skate" (editorial, Jan. 30) and "Harding, the Games and Us" (Sports of The Times, Jan. 28) seem to have lost all perspective on the role of sports and sportsmanship in this country.


British Worry That U.S. Is Slighting Them Now
There is a deep wellspring of anxiety in Government circles here these days.
It comes from the fear that the United States no longer cares about Britain.
This week's bout of jitters comes from the White House decision to grant a temporary visa to Gerry Adams, the Irish republican leader.
But that is only the latest and most dramatic instance in what is seen as almost a yearlong series of slurs and slights from Washington.


Reagan Birthday Is a Gift to His Party
Ronald Wilson Reagan, now almost 83 but still as ruddy-cheeked as if he had just finished clearing brush, showed up in town tonight to talk up America and poke fun at liberals for 2,500 well-dressed Republicans.
The excuse for the party was Mr.
Reagan's birthday, which is Sunday, but that was the thinnest of veneers for the real purpose, to raise money for the Republican National Committee's political operations.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Tuesday with an article about the growth of Americans' total personal income in December mislabeled the most recent month.
It was December 1993, not January 1994.


Nominee for State Department Job Faces Mideast Questions
American Jewish organizations and Republican senators have raised questions about the writings of Strobe Talbott, the Deputy Secretary of State-designate, on Israel, which some say reflect at best ignorance, at worst hostility.
Two Jewish groups have gone on the offensive, sending excerpts around town from two columns that Mr.
Talbott wrote for Time magazine and calling on President Clinton to withdraw his nomination.
Mr.
Talbott, who has been a close friend of Mr.
Clinton since they were roommates at Oxford University, is now the State Department's ambassador-at-large for the former Soviet Union.


U.N. Security Council Warns Croatia on Troops in Bosnia
The United Nations Security Council warned President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia today that his country may face an economic embargo unless he withdraws the estimated 3,000 to 5,000 Croatian Army soldiers he has sent into Bosnia and Herzegovina to help Bosnian Croats resist Muslim attacks.
In a statement, the Council strongly condemned Croatia for this "serious hostile act" against another member state.
It called for the withdrawal of all Croatian troops from Bosnia and Herzegovina and asked Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to report in two weeks on whether the forces have departed and removed their weaponry and other equipment.


Wright Probably Out
The Utah Jazz center LUTHER WRIGHT, who was hospitalized following a disorderly conduct arrest on Jan. 23, is receiving psychiatric treatment for a "chemical imbalance" and may not play again this season, a team official said yesterday.


Critic's Choice/Dance; Sitting Up for a Cause
Attending this year's benefit marathon for Performance Space 122 is likely to provide a remarkably comprehensive sample of today's lively, unruly artistic goings-on south of 14th Street, with a dance party thrown in for good measure.
Called "Sit Up!" this time around, the annual benefit features the experimental in performance art, dance, music and video.
It will present 80 or so individuals and groups, participating in two shows each tonight and tomorrow.
The lineup for tonight's first show, for example, includes rising stars like the performance artist Peggy Pettit; and old favorites like Alien Comic, who builds an act out of found objects; David and Ain Gordon, and Valda Setterfield.
There will be dance from Sally Silvers and Dennis O'Connor, and even a writer, Sarah Schulman.
Other shows this weekend include artists like John Kelly, John Zorn, Ghettoriginal and the Rock Steady Crew, Y'All and Dancenoise.


Devils Can't Break a Back-Home Habit
Coach Jacques Lemaire tried a different routine, but the Devils still lost at home upon their return from a West Coast road trip, reinforcing a pattern that has bedeviled them for years.
Lemaire is an avid student of the history of teams in certain circumstances.
Although he is in his first year as coach of the Devils, he knows all about the team's strange propensity to lose its first game at home after a West Coast trip.
They have lost six of their last seven home games upon returning from a trip out west.


An Ancient 'Lost City' Is Uncovered in Mexico
In a lush river delta on Mexico's Gulf Coast, archeologists have found temple mounds, ball courts and other traces of a sprawling pre-Columbian seaport city that flourished more than 1,500 years ago and may have been a vital center of ancient culture and coastal commerce.
A preliminary survey of the site, about 60 miles northwest of the modern city of Veracruz, has revealed the ruins of more than 100 earth-and-stone pyramids and other structures, some reaching heights of 130 feet, that had long remained largely hidden under dense vegetation.
The core city and its suburbs extended over 40 square miles and were occupied by thousands of people, possibly more than 20,000 -- large for that time and region.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about struggling standup comedians misidentified the performer shown at the Comedy Cellar in Greenwich Village.
He was Mark Cohen, not Michael S. King.


Black History Month Events
February is Black History Month.
Here is a sampling of commemorative events taking place around the city this weekend.
Schedules of events sponsored by the New York Public Library can be found at all branches of the library.
Today  "AFRICAN ZION: SACRED ART OF ETHIOPIA," Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, 515 Malcolm X Boulevard, at 135th Street, Harlem.
Icons, manuscripts, gold and metal items from the fourth to 18th centuries.
Through March 29.
Hours: Monday through Wednesday, noon to 8 P.M.; Thursday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 491-2200.


It's Still Strut Your Stuff for the Good Old Boys
Figure skating is about looking good.
Judges tend to give a higher score for a perfectly performed double axel than for a slightly imperfect but bold triple axel.
This is about as good a metaphor as you will find about the traditional status of women in sports.
This is beyond winning or losing; this is about pleasing men.
Nancy Kerrigan and Tonya Harding both please men, in different and traditional ways.
That's why their story is so compelling, why it follows so smoothly -- as "Knots Landing" followed "Dynasty" followed "Dallas" -- the Saga of Joey and Amy, the Separation of the Bobbitts.
It's a basic plot: the good girl, the victim who needs to be protected, the girl that boys marry, versus the bad girl, the fatal attractor, the girl that boys just skate around with.
And we thought it was 1994 already!


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Mark Williamson, pitcher; Rene Gonzales, infielder; and Henry Cotto, outfielder, on minor-league contracts.


Review/Art; A Robert Morris Tour of Contemporary History
Rarely does an exhibition's title pinpoint the central weakness of an artist's work, but "Robert Morris: The Mind/Body Problem," opening today at the Guggenheim Museum, just about hits the nail on the head.
The phrase has deep and complex import for several essayists in the show's catalogue, who go on at great and often obscure length about the meaning of Mr.
Morris's Minimalist and Post-Minimalist sculptures, drawings, performances and installation pieces.
But for those who like their English straight up and readable, the show's subtitle may signal what this large and admittedly ambitious exhibition ultimately confirms: that Mr.
Morris's art is overly didactic and cerebral and weirdly unconnected.
It seems to be made by someone with a mistrust of emotion, a disregard for pleasure and a strong pedagogical bent; an artist more involved with problem solving than art making who often reduces the viewer to the role of guinea pig.


Restaurants
"Hi, thank's for coming out on such a terrible night," Gabriel Aiello was saying as he stood by the door of his restaurant last week.
It was one of those icy evenings, and Mr.
Aiello kept saying, "We're glad you're here!" as people staggered in out of the cold.
Long before they had reached their tables he had managed to make every customer feel welcome, drawn them into his restaurant, given them a sense that he cared about their comfort.
It did not end at the door.
All over the restaurant people would look up from their menus to find Mr.
Aiello at their elbow.
"Can I help you?" he kept asking.
"Need some suggestions?" He was everywhere, bringing wine to this table, chatting with that one.


Bumpy Flight for Traveler's False-Arrest Suit
Dennis R. Curley survived an American tourist's nightmare.
On a winter getaway to Mexico, he was seized by the police, who accused him of taking marijuana into the country.
They strip-searched him, threatened him, demanded to know where the drugs were and pointed a rifle at his groin, then at his head, he said.
"I thought, 'That's it -- heaven, here I come,' " he said.


Reviews/Film; On the Trail Of a Lost Fish
As "Ace Ventura: Pet Detective," the comic actor Jim Carrey gives one the most hyperactive performances ever brought to the screen.
With his hair swept into a precarious leaning tower, his eyes wide as saucers, moving in spasms, he suggests Desi Arnaz as Don Knotts on speed.
Only a child could love Mr.
Carrey's character, but that may be the point.
The movie has the metabolism, logic and attention span of a peevish 6-year-old.
It's not the story that matters, but the silly asides, like the way Ace starts doing impersonations of "Star Trek" characters at odd moments or singing the theme from "Mission Impossible."


Sounds Around Town
Low-Key Blues
"In Bed With the Blues: The Adventures of Fishy Waters," Guy Davis, Henry Street Settlement, New Federal Theater, 466 Grand Street, Lower East Side, (212) 576-9028 or (212) 598-0400.
The fictional Fishy Waters is an itinerant blues guitarist and singer from the Mississippi Delta.
The time is 1959.
And Guy Davis, the singer and actor who invented him, plays acoustic guitar and harmonica and sings with a husky, low-keyed intensity.
His stories, some taken from the anthology "American Negro Folktales," are interwoven with songs by Mississippi John Hurt, Blind Willie McTell and Robert Johnson, as well as his own originals.
Soothing yarns eventually give way to harrowing tales of racism and murder.
Shows are tonight at 7:30, tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Indian Songs
"Vocal Music of North India," Nanda Banerjee and Kinnar Seen, Washington Square Church, 135 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 545-7536.
Although most of the virtuosos of Indian music are men, there are significant exceptions.
Nanda Banerjee, who was born in Bangladesh and brought up in Calcutta, is renowned for her inspiring performances of North Indian classical vocal music.
Her wide-ranging program will include ragas, light classical songs known as thumri and religious poems called bjajans.
She will be joined on the tabla by Kinnar Seen, one of India's leading accompanists.
The performance is tonight at 8.
Tickets are $12.
S.
H.
Scatting in Chelsea
Leny Andrade, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
This Brazilian jazz singer has been compared with Ella Fitzgerald for her improvisational skills, and to Sarah Vaughan for her deep, rich vocal tone.
But ultimately she is very much her own person.
She commands a percussive scat style firmly grounded in samba, and she projects exuberant earthiness that is much more direct than most of her American counterparts.
Shows are at 9 tonight and tomorrow night.
Tickets are $20; $25 ringside.
There is a two-drink minimum.
S.
H.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Signed, Sealed, Delivered
Wednesday was college football's national letter-of-intent day, the day high school players had to commit themselves to the college of their choice.
According to several high school football experts, Tennessee, Florida State, Southern California, Michigan and Miami had the best recruiting classes, with Boston College the sleeper of the pack.


Art in Review
Joan Snyder and Jessica Stockholder
Jay Gorney Modern Art  100 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Feb. 12
The pairing of the veteran Joan Snyder and the younger Jessica Stockholder, artists from different art-world spheres, is inspired.
Each does something for the other: Ms.
Snyder's paintings, exuberant and brightly colored abstractions evocative of landscape and bearing titles like "Exaltation," are made to look looser and more spontaneous.
And Ms.
Stockholder's sculptures, cobbled together from sheets of plywood, yarn, wire mesh, carpeting and plastic scraps, look unexpectedly distinguished.


Clinton Warns Youths Of the Perils of Pregnancy
After sidestepping critical comments by Mother Teresa about abortion as they shared a stage today at a prayer breakfast, President Clinton traveled to a junior high school in an impoverished neighborhood to lecture more than 300 students against the perils of single parenthood.
At the interdenominational breakfast, Mother Teresa, the missionary from Calcutta, India, used her address to appeal for charity for the poor and homeless and denounce the practice of abortion as "the greatest destroyer of peace today."


Knicks Are Hot In Dead Of Winter
Pat Riley will not need his motivational speeches this weekend.
The Knicks' opponents will provide the incentive.
Friday night, New York will play the Atlanta Hawks in a battle for the best record in the Eastern Conference.
Then on Sunday afternoon in New York, the Knicks resume their rivalry with the Orlando Magic in a nationally televised matchup between two All-Star centers: Patrick Ewing and Shaquille O'Neal.


Chad Wins World Court Decision In Territorial Dispute With Libya
Ruling in a long-festering border dispute that has caused repeated outbreaks of violence, the International Court of Justice today rejected Libya's claims to a large swath of neighboring Chad's territory.
The 17-member court, the judicial arm of the United Nations, ruled by 16 votes to 1 that the border was set by a 1955 treaty between Libya and France, the former colonial power in Chad, and that the claims of the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, to territory beyond that frontier were groundless.


Overhauling School Grants: Much Debate but Little Gain
Last fall, during Senate hearings on the abuses of student financial aid programs by colleges and trade schools, the senators were quizzing Education Department officials about ways to reduce the billions of dollars in annual losses, when the subject turned to political interference.
"Every Congressman I have talked to wants us to manage this program more tightly," said Dr.
David Longanecker, the Assistant Secretary of Education responsible for higher education aid.
"On the other hand, when it comes down to an institution that happens to be in their general jurisdiction, it is a different story. That is obviously a more legitimate institution than the others we should be shutting down."


Nielsen TV Ratings Face A Challenge by 3 Networks
After years of complaining about inaccuracies in the Nielsen ratings, the three biggest television networks announced yesterday that they were underwriting a multimillion-dollar research effort to find an alternative system.
Network officials said they hoped their efforts would encourage other companies to challenge Nielsen Media Research, the only source of national television ratings.
If that happened, it would be the first time in almost a decade that Nielsen faced a serious competitor.


Doris C. Frankel, 84, Emmy-Winning Writer
Doris C. Frankel, a playwright whose work found its way to Broadway, radio and television and who won an Emmy Award for her work on the soap opera "All My Children," died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 84.
The cause was a stroke, said her son Benjamin R. Barber.


CLINTON DROPS 19-YEAR BAN ON U.S. TRADE WITH VIETNAM; CITES HANOI'S HELP ON M.I.A.'S
President Clinton today ordered an end to the trade embargo on Vietnam, casting away a central remnant of one of America's most divisive wars and opening a potentially lucrative market to American goods.
After nearly two decades of a bitter peace, Mr.
Clinton said it was now time to acknowledge the cooperation Vietnam has shown in the search for evidence of the 2,238 Americans still officially listed as missing from that conflict, which ended in 1975.
He said opening the door to trade would benefit that still-unfinished search.


Business Groups and Labor Unions Attack Clinton on Health Plan
President Clinton came under fire from opposite ends of the political spectrum today as the United States Chamber of Commerce joined the Business Roundtable in opposing his health plan, while liberal lawmakers and labor unions complained that the President was too willing to make concessions.
Robert E. Patricelli, head of the chamber's health committee, told Congress that the business group could not support Mr.
Clinton's health care bill because "it proposes such a burden of high employer premium contributions, rich benefits and counterproductive regulation."


The Truth According to Ollie
Oliver North has just started in politics, and already his words have got more twists than a snake's back.
Accused by one caller to the Larry King show of having lied to Congress, he replied: "I didn't lie. When I raised my right hand and took the oath, it -- all the American people were watching -- I told the truth."


Chad Wins World Court Decision In Territorial Dispute With Libya
Ruling in a long-festering border dispute that has caused repeated outbreaks of violence, the International Court of Justice today rejected Libya's claims to a large swath of neighboring Chad's territory.
The 17-member court, the judicial arm of the United Nations, ruled by 16 votes to 1 that the border was set by a 1955 treaty between Libya and France, the former colonial power in Chad, and that the claims of the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, to territory beyond that frontier were groundless.


Diner's Journal
Friday
A letter arrives from the concierge of a famous New York hotel, touting the wonders of a restaurant called Castellano.
"It is not listed in any of the guidebooks," it says.
Intrigued, I go over for lunch and discover a very pretty room filled mostly with men.
At the next table a lively discussion of the Bible is taking place over plates of ravioli filled with mushrooms.
I eavesdrop shamelessly as I devour tiny grilled squid on a bed of sauteed spinach.
That is so good that I have dessert: stewed winter fruits on banana ice cream.
The menu is unusual and the food is good, albeit a bit expensive. (That dessert cost $11.)


Grossman's Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


ITT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Showcase Event Can Still Draw A Crowd
A generation ago, before there was a Super Bowl or a Meadowlands or Islanders or Nets, there was a major sport in New York City known as indoor track.
Outdoors, track and field was for dilettantes in Los Angeles or Europe.
Indoors was for Madison Square Garden, for sellout or near-sellout crowds for five consecutive weekends, when neither blizzards nor bitter cold could restrain the addicts of this three-ring circus.


Flightsafety
Shares of Flightsafety International Inc. rose 17.3 percent in the last two days after the company reported fourth-quarter earnings that surpassed Wall Street's expectations.
The pilot-training company, which also trains operators of ships, electrical utilities and steam generating plants, posted a 9 percent rise in earnings.


Restaurant Reviews
Restaurant reviews, news and advertising; normally in Weekend, appear today on pages, A20-21.


Albany Again Debates Keno Gambling Plan
Although lawmakers turned him down last year, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has come back with another proposal to put keno, a rapid-fire lotto game with drawings every five minutes, into bars, restaurants and convenience stores.
Mr.
Cuomo, who compares keno with church bingo, has penciled in its worth to the state budget at $74 million.
But an unlikely group of opponents, with a variety of agendas, could kill the proposal again this year.


An Ancient 'Lost City' Is Uncovered in Mexico
In a lush river delta on Mexico's Gulf Coast, archeologists have found temple mounds, ball courts and other traces of a sprawling pre-Columbian seaport city that flourished more than 1,500 years ago and may have been a vital center of ancient culture and coastal commerce.
A preliminary survey of the site, about 60 miles northwest of the modern city of Veracruz, has revealed the ruins of more than 100 earth-and-stone pyramids and other structures, some reaching heights of 130 feet, that had long remained largely hidden under dense vegetation.
The core city and its suburbs extended over 40 square miles and were occupied by thousands of people, possibly more than 20,000 -- large for that time and region.


Reviews/ Film; Buddies, Bullets And Bugs
Who would have thought that Christopher Lambert, the stony-faced hero of "Greystoke: The Legend of Tarzan," had a sense of humor?
His career has included some unintentional comedy, but the planned goofiness of his performance in "Gunmen" is the best surprise in this otherwise witless action movie.
Mr.
Lambert's character, a smuggler named Dani, reluctantly becomes part of a buddy team with a drug-enforcement agent named Cole, played by Mario Van Peebles.
Mr.
Van Peebles is less surprising here because everyone assumes that the star and director of "New Jack City" and "Posse" is smarter and more stylish than this mess.


Books of The Times; Playwright Is Still His Own Best Spiritual Guide
Tennessee Williams
Everyone Else Is an Audience
By Ronald Hayman
Illustrated. 268 pages. Yale University Press. $27.50
With his plays, Tennessee Williams redefined the poetic possibilities of the American theater while immortalizing a gallery of marginal souls: the lost, the incomplete, the crippled -- people frightened of life and longing for intimacy but trapped by their own frailties and lies.
These characters -- Blanche in "A Streetcar Named Desire," Alexandra Del Lago in "Sweet Bird of Youth," Maggie in "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" -- were self-portraits, of course; the plays were elaborate spiritual maps of the playwright's own dreams and fears and yearnings.


Michael Signs a Contract, Now Hopes to Sign a Reliever
George Steinbrenner stated emphatically in October that Gene Michael was his general manager and would continue to be his general manager for at least two more years.
So what if he did not have a written contract beyond midnight on Halloween?
Steinbrenner said Michael would be childish if he groused about working without a contract.
Now, Michael can act like a giddy child after the Yankees finally announced yesterday that his contract has been renewed for five years, two of which are guaranteed.
The Yankees have the option of renewing Michael each year after the first two years.


METRO DIGEST
FARRAKHAN DECRIES TONE, NOT CONTENT
Maintaining his hard line on race relations, Louis Farrakhan, Minister of the Nation of Islam, defended anti-white and anti-Jewish sentiments voiced by one of his chief lieutenants in a recent speech.
But Mr.
Farrakhan said he had rebuked the aide for the manner in which those sentiments were expressed.
A1.


Burkett Signs
The San Francisco Giants reached agreement with right-handed pitcher John Burkett on a one-year contract.
Terms were not released, but Burkett had originally asked the team for a reported $3.9 million.
The issue was scheduled to go to arbitration on Friday in Los Angeles.
Burkett, 28, was 22-7 and had a 3.65 ERA with the Giants last season. (AP)


Review/Film; Mapping the Hearts of Hollywood
There were two ways of looking at the ending of "Broadcast News," the witty, rueful, amazingly perceptive 1987 romantic comedy by James L. Brooks that has made Mr.
Brooks's next film so well worth waiting for.
In "Broadcast News," you may recall, a high-strung television producer named Jane found herself falling in love with an unreasonably successful newscaster named Tom, who represented everything Jane found troubling about her profession.
Tom was bad news -- quite literally.
But he was also terrifically charming, which made Jane's tortured response all too easy to understand.
So should Jane take Tom up on his 11th-hour proposition?
Should she stop hiding behind her scruples and try to live happily ever after?
There must have been viewers who wished that "Broadcast News" had managed a sunnier ending, but they missed the point.
The intelligence and generosity with which Mr.
Brooks described Jane's moral dilemma were precisely what made the film so fine.
A deep, lingering seriousness colored even its lightest moments.


Athens Journal; Under Acropolis, Art Meets Politics, Explosively
If Melina Mercouri is made at all uncomfortable at the threat of being taken to court, it does not show.
Indeed, as the onetime movie star again takes up the cudgels for art and antiquity as Greece's Minister of Culture, she seems almost to relish the fray.
Since she and other Greek Socialists returned to power in October, Ms.
Mercouri has served notice of an array of plans to refurbish her nation's heritage, from Athens to the Aegean.
She has also become embroiled in something of a brawl.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about a record executive misspelled his surname in some copies.
He was Alexander Labinsky.


The Pressure Stays On in Gaza


Men, Too, Are Victims of Domestic Violence; Equal Responsibilities
To the Editor:
The response to the acquittal of Lorena Bobbitt has been reported as divided by gender: Women cheer, men voice dismay.
Activists from women's organizations hail the verdict as a victory; men's groups deplore it as an invitation to violence.


Russia and Georgia Sign Military Cooperation Treaty
Russia and Georgia signed a cooperation treaty today that will increase Moscow's military influence there and tighten its ties with the embattled Georgian Government of Eduard A. Shevardnadze.
The treaty, one of two dozen documents signed today by Mr.
Shevardnadze and President Boris N. Yeltsin in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, will allow Russia to keep three military bases on Georgian soil past 1995, while committing the Russian military to train and supply the Georgian Army.


Japanese Premier Is Forced To Drop Plan for Tax Cuts
Facing the harshest personal attacks of his tenure, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa suffered a humiliating blow this morning when he was forced to abandon a plan for a $55 billion cut in income taxes and an even larger increase in sales taxes after three years.
Ichiro Ozawa, the strategist behind Mr.
Hosokawa's increasingly frail coalition Government, brought the governing coalition back from the brink of a split when he said at a news conference that efforts to find a compromise tax plan had failed and that the coalition parties had decided to start over.


Ice Damages a Park in New Jersey


Perjury Conviction In Abduction Case
A man who prosecutors say helped a Hasidic rabbi kidnap a boy in 1992 was convicted on Wednesday of lying about the case to a Federal grand jury in Brooklyn.
Shai Fhima, then 13 years old, disappeared in April 1992.
Prosecutors contend that Rabbi Shlomo Helbrans, who runs a Borough Park, Brooklyn, yeshiva that the boy attended, abducted him because the boy's parents, Michael Reuven and Hana Fhima, disagreed with the rabbi about his education.
The rabbi, his wife, Malka, and an associate, Mordechai Weisz, are scheduled to go on trial next month in state court on kidnapping and conspiracy charges.


Kantor Fails to Move Japan
The United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa agreed today to step up efforts to reach a trade deal, but little progress was apparently made toward resolving stalemated issues.
Masayoshi Takemura, Japan's top Government spokesman, said Mr.
Kantor and Mr.
Hosokawa had agreed that efforts would be redoubled to forge accords by Feb. 11, when the Prime Minister is to meet with President Clinton.


Let's Not Leap From Welfare Pan Into the Fire
To the Editor:
Representative Lynn Woolsey correctly asserts in "Reinvent Welfare, Humanely" (Op-Ed, Jan. 22) that placing limits on public assistance is an inappropriate response to the growing frustration with America's welfare state.
Besides unnecessarily increasing the harshness of poverty, punitive measures will place an additional burden on taxpayers.


Copley Shares Fall on Lawsuit News
Worried investors drove down the shares of Copley Pharmaceutical by $1.875, to $25.875, yesterday on news of lawsuits claiming damages on behalf of patients who used albuterol, the generic drug maker's troubled asthma drug.
Copley's shares have lost 12 percent since Monday in Nasdaq trading that has been unusually heavy for the small company.


Defense Avoids Calling Suspect In 1963 Slaying
Jurors and spectators in the retrial of Byron De La Beckwith, charged with murdering Medgar Evers 31 years ago, were denied a dramatic climax to the six-day trial when the 73-year-old defendant decided not to testify on his own behalf.
Mr.
Beckwith's court-appointed lawyers thus ended the presentation of their case without having their client tell the jury of eight blacks and four whites that he did not kill Mr.
Evers as the civil rights leader got out of his car in the driveway of his Jackson home.


At the Bar; More than a century after its founding, a new honorific at the A.B.A.: Madam President.
Two women now sit on the United States Supreme Court, and soon two others will occupy the top two slots at the Justice Department.
And next week another, perhaps even more formidable barrier will fall: For the first time, the American Bar Association will elect a woman as president.
On Tuesday, the bar association's nominating committee will choose its president for the 1995-96 term.
And having beaten back a number of rivals, men and women alike, and survived some embarrassments in her own backyard, the winner by acclamation will be Roberta Cooper Ramo, a 51-year-old general practitioner from Albuquerque, N.M.
She will succeed George Bushnell of Detroit, who, in the A.B.A.'s peculiar, delayed-reaction brand of politics, won't take office himself for another six months.


Sense of Relief, and One Of Betrayal, Are Evoked
For some, the announcement of economic coexistence with Vietnam was greeted with a sense that, finally, peace was at hand.
For others, it seemed a final betrayal by the Government.
Bitterly denouncing the President's decision were some former prisoners of war and those who believe American troops listed as missing in action may still be alive.
They said any accommodation with Vietnam would be wrong until a final accounting.


Auto Sales Jumped 13.8% Last Month
United States automotive sales surged 13.8 percent in January, despite the effects of the Los Angeles earthquake and severe winter weather, suggesting that the demand for new cars and light trucks is outpacing bullish forecasts.
Car buyers seem to be moving up their purchases of new cars faster than auto makers and economists had expected.
The reasons for this are the high average age of cars and trucks on the road, as well as increases in employment, personal income and consumer confidence.


Maytag Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coleman And Nets Reopen Talks
After Nets ownership rejected a potential $90 million contract extension for Derrick Coleman, talks reopened today with both sides seeking a shorter deal that would pay Coleman more money up front and allow the team an option to get out of the deal before its completion.
The Nets owners, David Gerstein and Alan Aufzien, have made it clear that they will not give Coleman a guaranteed deal for eight years, similar to the one Charlotte gave Larry Johnson last October.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Apple Computer Inc., Cupertino, Calif., is selling $300 million of 6.5 percent notes due in 2004 at 99.925 to yield 6.51 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


3 Officers, Accused of Assault, Are Suspended
A sergeant and two police officers were suspended without pay yesterday after an early morning incident in a Queens convenience store in which a man said the three, all off duty, assaulted him and stole $100, the police said.
The office of the Queens District Attorney is also investigating whether criminal charges should be brought in the incident, which took place in a 7-Eleven store in Flushing shortly before 3:30 A.M.
Wednesday.


A Little Law School Does Battle With the A.B.A.
Last year a young law school in Massachusetts failed to win accreditation from the American Bar Association.
If that occurrence seemed entirely unremarkable at the time, the same cannot be said now.
In fact, it may prove to have been the flashpoint of an uprising that, in the extreme, could ultimately cripple the association's 70-year-old authority to accredit American law schools.


Defense Avoids Calling Suspect In 1963 Slaying
Jurors and spectators in the retrial of Byron De La Beckwith, charged with murdering Medgar Evers 31 years ago, were denied a dramatic climax to the six-day trial when the 73-year-old defendant decided not to testify on his own behalf.
Mr.
Beckwith's court-appointed lawyers thus ended the presentation of their case without having their client tell the jury of eight blacks and four whites that he did not kill Mr.
Evers as the civil rights leader got out of his car in the driveway of his Jackson home.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Leconte Stuns Becker  Henri Leconte of France stopped Boris Becker's comeback, beating the three-time Wimbledon champion, 4-6, 6-2, 6-1, yesterday and advancing to the quarterfinals of the Marseilles Open in France.
The third-seeded Becker, returning to the circuit after a two-month layoff, struggled to win the first set, then won only three more games.
Becker has dropped to No. 13 in the world.
Leconte is ranked 86th after another comeback following a back injury.
Becker had not played since an early exit at the Grand Slam Cup at Munich in December. (AP) Upsets in Tokyo: Marketa Kochta of Germany, scoring her biggest upset ever, beat third-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, 7-6 (8-6), 7-5, in the second round of the Pan Pacific Open in Tokyo.
Fourth-seeded Jana Novotna of the Czech Republic was another upset victim, losing by 4-6, 6-4, 6-1 to Kristie Boogert of the Netherlands. (AP) Canadian Advances: Patricia Hy of Canada, the No. 2-seeded player, breezed by Misumi Miyauchi of Japan, 6-1, 6-1, to advance to the quarterfinals of the Amway Classic in Auckland, New Zealand.
The unseeded threesome of Anna Smashnova of Israel, Veronika Martinek of Germany and Jolene Watanabe of the United States also made the final eight. (AP) Bruguera Struggles but Wins: Top-seeded Sergi Bruguera of Spain struggled once again before prevailing, 7-6 (7-2), 3-6, 6-1, over Australia's Todd Woodbridge in the Dubai Open. (AP) N.B.A.
Wennington Stars  B. J. Armstrong scored 20 points, Scottie Pippen added 19 and reserve center Bill Wennington scored eight in the final 6 minutes 52 seconds to lead the Chicago Bulls to a 94-85 victory over the Utah Jazz last night in Salt Lake City.
Wennington drove the lane for a layup with 6:52 to play to put Chicago ahead for good, 75-74.
Armstrong, who scored 13 points in the fourth quarter, then hit a 3-pointer and a layup as the Bulls led 80-76 with 5:29 to play.
Karl Malone, whose 24 points topped Utah, made a 15-footer, but Wennington answered with a baseline jumper with time running off the 24-second clock to put Chicago ahead 82-78.
Wennington was 4 for 4 from the free-throw line on the next two Chicago possessions, and Steve Kerr hit a 19-footer from the right baseline to put the Bulls up 88-83 with 1:20 to play. (AP) Spurs 98, Cavaliers 97: Dale Ellis capped a 31-point performance by converting a 3-point play with 4.2 seconds left last night as the San Antonio Spurs beat the Cleveland Cavaliers, 98-97, in Richfield, Ohio.
It was the Spurs fifth straight victory.
Cleveland's Gerald Wilkins missed a wide-open 20-footer from the left baseline as the buzzer sounded, allowing the Spurs to get their second victory in their last 11 trips to Richfield. (AP) Trail Blazers 126, Suns 105: Harvey Grant scored a season-high 29 points and six other Portland players scored in double figures as the Trail Blazers routed the visiting Phoenix Suns.
The Blazers built a 23-point lead with four minutes left in the second period and were never seriously threatened thereafter.
Grant connected on 13 of 19 shots, and Clifford Robinson and Clyde Drexler added 17 points apiece.
Buck Williams had a game-high 16 rebounds and 11 points for his 20th double-double of the season.
Cedric Ceballos did most of the scoring for Phoenix -- which was without injured players Charles Barkley, Danny Ainge and Kevin Johnson -- with 26 points.
Ceballos has averaged 31.4 points in the last five games. (AP) Rockets 99, Lakers 88: Hakeem Olajuwon scored 10 of his 28 points in the third quarter and the Houston Rockets held off a late Los Angeles rally at home.
Olajuwon also had 15 rebounds for the Rockets.
Otis Thorpe added 20 points and 13 rebounds.
Elden Campbell scored a career-high 29 points and had 13 rebounds to lead the Lakers.
Vlade Divac had 16 points and 15 rebounds, and George Lynch added 14 points and 12 rebounds. (AP) N.H.L.
Sharks Top Flyers  Sergei Makarov scored with 1 minute 47 seconds left in overtime last night to lift the San Jose Sharks to a 3-2 victory over the host Philadelphia Flyers.
Igor Larionov broke down the ice on the game-winning play, found space along the right boards and spotted Makarov streaking down the left side.
He sent the puck across the slot and Makarov scored his 14th goal of the season.
Philadelphia is without a victory in its last five games (0-4-1) and dropped below .500 for the first time this season (24-25-3).
The slumping Flyers' last victory came on Jan. 19.
San Jose has lost only once in their last seven road games (4-1-2). (AP)
Nordiques 4, Blues 3: Iain Fraser's breakaway goal snapped a third-period tie, leading visiting Quebec over St.
Louis.
Brett Hull continued a recent hot streak for the Blues, scoring his 37th goal.
He has six goals in his last three games.
(AP)


FHP International Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Elodie Osborn, 82, First Director Of the Modern's Traveling Shows
Elodie Courter Osborn, the first director of circulating exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art, died on Jan. 20 at Sharon Hospital in Sharon, Conn.
She was 82 and lived in Salisbury, Conn.
She died of natural causes, her family said.


Report Suggests Clinton Counsel Hampered Suicide Investigation
The United States Park Police report on its inquiry into the death of a top White House lawyer strongly suggests that Bernard W. Nussbaum, counsel to the President, impeded its investigators and offered a dubious account of the discovery of the victim's brooding note, say Federal law-enforcement officials who have seen the report.
The report says that Mr.
Nussbaum interfered with interviews of witnesses by directing that other White House lawyers sit in, the officials said, and that he denied the park police access to documents in the office of the deputy White House counsel, Vincent W. Foster Jr., as the park police looked into his death.


Man in the News: Sergei Konstantinovich Krikalev; Symbol of New Cooperation
He is a young man with an old man's experiences.
At the age of 35, Sergei K. Krikalev has been an engineer, a daredevil airplane pilot and an officially designated hero.
He has traveled around the world more than 7,000 times.
With so much accomplished, Mr.
Krikalev set another milestone today as he became the first Russian astronaut to fly aboard an American space shuttle.
Blasting into space aboard the shuttle Discovery with five American astronauts, he symbolized the beginning of a new era of international cooperation in space exploration.


Not to Worry
So now it turns out there was no need to feel guilty after all.
For years, those who drenched their heads in hair dye had to worry not only about vanity; there was also the concern that they were risking their lives.
After all, some studies showed hair dyes caused cancer, didn't they?
Perhaps cancer was the Almighty's punishment for human conceit.


Sports of The Times; Vicki-Maria Overshadow Tonya-Nancy
CAN we stop talking about Tonya and Nancy for a moment?
I know it's hard to get off the subject, but there is a whole world full of female athletes out there without any knee-whacking taking place.
So I'm not talking about Tonya and Nancy today.
I'm talking about Vicki and Maria.
Vicki Van Meter is 11 years old and Maria Sansone is 12 years old and they live about 30 miles apart in northwestern Pennsylvania.
Both of them play sports -- not at any level that will interest Mike or the Mad Dog or first-time callers -- but at the wholesome level of sports we want our daughters and our sisters and our cousins and our nieces and our granddaughters to be playing, because we believe competitive sports will bring them fun and health and confidence and fulfillment.


Dr. Marija Gimbutas Dies at 73; Archaeologist With Feminist View
Dr.
Marija Gimbutas, an author and archeologist, died Wednesday at U.C.L.A.
Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 73 and had lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was cancer, said a colleague, Dr. Cristina Biaggi.


No Headline
"Whatever the Vietnam War may have done in dividing our country in the past, today our nation is one in honoring those who served and pressing for answers about all those who did not return. This decision today, I believe, renews that commitment and our constant, constant effort never to forget those until our job is done." PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ A6:4. ]


INSIDE
Russia Wins Georgian Pact
In a move that set off protests and a deadly terrorist bombing, Russia and Georgia signed a pact that will extend Russia's military influence over its southern neighbor and bolster Georgia's embattled leader.
Page A3.
Vast City Found in Mexico
In a discovery that could reshape theories about Mesoamerican culture, experts have found ruins of 100 pyramids and other traces of a seaport that may have flourished on the Gulf Coast 1,500 years ago.
Page A10.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE GOVERNMENT INSPECTOR," National Actors Theater, Lyceum, 149 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
Nikolai Gogol's comedy, set in Russia, about a petty civil servant who is mistaken for a high official from Moscow.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $47.50.
Information: (212) 239-6280.


Art in Review
William T. Wiley
Max Protetch Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 12
For all their myriad detail, the paintings of the San Francisco artist William T. Wiley are hard to see.
From a distance, his dense networks of words, figures, symbols and decorative flourishes look like a blur.
Up close, they seem so exhaustingly loquacious that one is inclined not to get involved.


Bidding War Is Possible After Offer for Maclean
Maclean Hunter Ltd., one of Canada's largest communications companies, was noncommittal today about a merger proposal it received on Wednesday from Rogers Communications Inc., another large Canadian media company.
Such a combination would create a Canadian media giant with properties ranging from Maclean's magazine to Canada's largest cable television company and would involve more than $3 billion in cash and stock.
Stock market and media industry analysts were quick to speculate today that the offer from Rogers might lead to merger proposals from other Canadian companies, starting a bidding war similar to the struggle in the United States for control of Paramount Communications Inc.


Bond Buyers Bet $1 Billion on China
The Chinese Government and Merrill Lynch &amp; Company patted themselves on the back yesterday after successfully completing a $1 billion offering of 10-year bonds.
But a number of money managers who sat out the offering questioned whether investors might be at substantial risk because they became caught up in the excitement of the Communist giant's inching toward a market economy.
"Many people are eager to be involved with the Chinese," said James Calmas, a vice president of Massachusetts Financial Services in Boston, which did not buy the bonds.
"And there's clearly plenty of economic growth to be had, but I don't know if you're being paid to take the political risk. What if China falls apart? What if we have another Tiananmen Square?"


TV Weekend; A Leisurely Tour of Anne Tyler's Small Miracles
"The Hallmark Hall of Fame" is probably be the last place you would expect to find Anne Tyler, the novelist who specializes in extraordinarily ordinary people.
The distinguished long-running television series is usually partial to stories with gently upbeat, warmhearted endings.
Ms.
Tyler's "Breathing Lessons" takes a clear-eyed look at the world and finds it considerably less than comforting, though there are compensations for those willing to compromise a bit.
Produced and directed by the consistently intelligent and adventurous John Erman ("Roots," "An Early Frost") and with a script by Robert W. Lenski ("Decoration Day"), "Breathing Lessons" comes to television this Sunday at 9 P.M. on CBS.
Maggie and Ira Moran, living in Baltimore and married for 29 years, set out by dented car for Deer Lick, Pa., to attend a funeral for the husband of Maggie's best friend, Serena.


New Work for Cello
The Greenwich Village Orchestra is to present the premiere of "Entre Nous," a work for cello and orchestra by Irwin Bazelon, on Sunday at 3 P.M. at the Washington Irving High School, Irving Place at 16th Street, Gramercy Park.
Dorothy Lawson is the soloist; Robert Grehan conducts.
The program also includes works by Berlioz and Rachmaninoff.
Tickets are $8.
Information: (212) 969-0197.


Backup Healy Keeps Rangers Going Forward
Gritty is not pretty, but the Rangers did not come here to entertain anyone.
Their mission was to squeeze 2 points out of claustrophobic Boston Garden and the stingy Bruins who dwell here.
Playing their second game in two nights and their sixth in the last 10, the visitors combined determination and great goaltending for 3-0 victory, which makes them 4-1-1 since the All-Star Game break and 7-1-1 in their last nine as they continue their ride atop the 26-team National Hockey League.


Remember, Moorer, Lecterns Can't Duck
If you follow his sport you know who he is.
But if you're a fair-weather fan whose attention drifts between main events, chances are you've never heard of Michael Moorer.
Never mind.
Moorer fights Evander Holyfield in Las Vegas, Nev., on April 22 in a heavyweight title bout that should do a lot for his name recognition.


Cowboys Hire Zampese
Saying he was "our guy from the word go," the Dallas Cowboys owner JERRY JONES yesterday hired offensive coordinator ERNIE ZAMPESE of the Los Angeles Rams.
Zampese, 57, agreed to a three-year contract.
He replaces NORV TURNER, who was named coach of the Washington Redskins on Wednesday.
Turner was an assistant under Zampese in Los Angeles before taking over the Cowboys offense in 1991. (AP)


Dining Fashionably Late: Where to Do It Well
IF New York is the city that never sleeps, then why is it so difficult to find a steak after 10:30 P.M.?
As someone who has lived in Madrid and Barcelona, where you don't even start calling for reservations until 11 P.M., I have always found New York City to be relatively somnolent when it comes to dining in restaurants at midnight.
To be sure, there are febrile nightclubs where you can dance your combat boots off; and bars aplenty pour well into the morning.
But try to find a comfortable spot where you can have a pleasant meal while sitting down (and not in vinyl booths), perhaps with a glass of wine, and you have a challenge.
My recent nocturnal ramblings around the city found that a great demand exists for late dining: most places that stay open late do a brisk business.
"It's amazing the scene in here at 1 A.M.," said Robert C. Young, the chef at One if by Land, Two if by Sea, a romantic and formal restaurant on Barrow Street in Greenwich Village.


U.C.L.A. Regains Its Touch While Routing an Old Rival
U.C.L.A. 101, Southern Cal 72
Ed O'Bannon tied a season high with 24 points and No. 4 U.C.L.A. routed Southern Cal, 101-72, last night in Los Angeles, the most lopsided game between the crosstown rivals since 1968.





Measure Twice, Cut Once
There should be no argument with Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's determination to make deep and lasting cuts in the New York City budget.
They are needed, urgently.
But how to shape those cuts is another matter.
Given that there will be pain, and that city services will be reduced, the Mayor and the City Council must balance severity with fairness.
Above all, they must look out for those New Yorkers least able to fend for themselves.


CompuCom Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Penn Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.C.L.A. Regains Its Touch While Routing an Old Rival
U.C.L.A. 101, Southern Cal 72
Ed O'Bannon tied a season high with 24 points and No. 4 U.C.L.A. routed Southern Cal, 101-72, last night in Los Angeles, the most lopsided game between the crosstown rivals since 1968.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.31
3.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.05
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.20
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.76
5.70
6.37
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.30
6.28
7.18
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.21
7.19
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.43
6.25
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


One Twin Is a Goal Scorer While the Other Twin Is Cut
Peter Ferraro swiped at the puck and scored tonight, clinching a 5-3 Team USA exhibition victory over Norway.
Not far away, as he had done a thousand times since the time they were practically toddlers on Long Island, his twin brother, Chris, cheered.
But Chris was not on the ice or the bench tonight as Peter scored with 22 seconds remaining.


Textron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


GROCERS CHALLENGE USE OF NEW DRUG FOR MILK OUTPUT
A day before the introduction of a genetically engineered growth hormone designed to boost milk production in dairy cows, some of the country's largest food companies and distributors took measures yesterday to restrict the use of the animal drug.
Among the companies moving to keep their dairy suppliers from using the gene-altered drug, the first important product of agriculture biotechnology to be used to produce food, were the Kroger Company, the nation's largest supermarket chain, the Southland Corporation, owners and franchisers of 7-Eleven convenience stores, and Pathmark Stores Inc.


Bill Gains to End Interstate Banking Curbs
Congress appears increasingly likely to remove the biggest remaining barriers to interstate banking.
A House panel endorsed a bill today to remove the barriers, and the leading Senate critic of the bill abandoned his opposition.
To some extent, the legislation recognizes the reality that most states already allow out-of-state banks to acquire local institutions.
But the bill is expected to bring real changes in the Southeastern United States by eliminating present rules that bar most acquisitions by banks from outside the region.


A Passion Spent, Finally
It was Lyndon B. Johnson's war, though the initial commitments were made by John F. Kennedy.
The peace, such as it was, was the handiwork of Richard M. Nixon, but that was tainted by the stench of defeat.
Now, irony of ironies, fate has chosen Bill Clinton to lead the nation in consigning the whole sad, ugly ordeal to the dim recesses of memory -- the same Bill Clinton who, like Dan Quayle and many other privileged members of his generation, managed to avoid service in the rice paddies of the Mekong Delta or the jungles of the Central Highlands, on the carriers in the Gulf of Tonkin or the choppers of the First Cavalry Division.


Like Pied Piper, the Puck Lures the Young
Where do the little boys get their big dreams?
At center ice here at the Darien Ice Rink, under the championship banners, beneath the electronic scoreboard, at 5 o'clock on Saturday mornings.
They enter the rink with puffy eyes and hair matted by sleep, lugging equipment bags as big as they are.
Some come directly from Friday night sleepovers; some, an hour or two later, will be back in bed.
In the locker rooms, they slump on benches while moms and dads lace their skates.


Abroad at Home; The Economic Motive
"Like everything else," Foreign Minister Shimon Peres said, "the economy is a matter of psychology." And the psychology of peace, he said -- the belief that the conflict between Israel and its neighbors is at last coming to an end -- has set off an Israeli economic boom.
"Israel is going through one of its best periods economically," Mr.
Peres told a press breakfast in Boston.
"It has 7 percent growth, I think the best figure in the West. The impact  [ of peacemaking with the P.L.O. ]  has been very positive."


Yeshivas Wield Political Power
Last fall, when witnesses at Senate hearings testified about Hasidic leaders in Brooklyn siphoning off millions of Federal student aid dollars from their schools to enrich their religious causes here and in Israel, it made news nationally.
But for old-timers at the Education Department, this was not a surprise.
Department investigators had tried often in the last 20 years to bar many of these schools from Federal aid, but at crucial junctures, dating back to Senator Jacob Javits in the mid-1970's, they were stymied by New York's Congressional delegation.


For Children
Celebrations of the Chinese New Year are taking place all over New York City, in all sorts of configurations, starting this weekend.
The new year, the year of the dog, officially begins on Thursday and will be celebrated for several weeks.
Here are three New Year events.
Lantern-Making Workshop
Chinatown History Museum  70 Mulberry Street, at Bayard Street, second floor (no elevator)  (212) 619-4785  Recommended ages: 8 and up  Sunday
Certainly you've seen delicate looking Chinese lanterns swaying in the slightest breeze.
At this paper-lantern workshop, children can make and decorate their own in different colors, under the direction of a Stephanie Mar, a Chinese-American artist.


Donna Karan Moves Account In-House
The Donna Karan Company and the Arnell Group said yesterday that after nine years, they had agreed to part ways on all advertising and marketing for the apparel and fashion company's brands including Donna Karan and DKNY.
As a result, Karan has moved its account, with billings estimated at $11 million to $12 million, to its in-house creative services department headed by Trey Laird, creative services director, who formerly worked at Arnell.
"The two companies have changed dramatically in the last 12 months," said Peter Arnell, the chairman and chief executive at Arnell.
"We just decided that it was time to move on." But senior executives at Karan have expressed dissatisfaction with Arnell's current campaign for the less-expensive DKNY apparel line.


Review/Film; Lawyers, Guns And Murder
"Aileen Wuornos: The Selling of a Serial Killer" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 9.
The film opens today in Manhattan.
In January 1991, Aileen Wuornos, a prostitute in her late 20's, admitted to the murders of seven men, each picked up on a Florida highway, which was her usual venue.
Some months later, after pleading no contest to the murders, Ms.
Wuornos was sentenced to six life sentences, though she had been tried for only one of the murders.


Art in Review
Paul Ramirez-Jonas
Postmasters Gallery  80 Greene Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 12
In his smart new works, Paul Ramirez-Jonas points to an earlier and more innocent technological time.
Mr.
Ramirez-Jonas has recreated kites made around the turn of the century, by Alexander Graham Bell and others, in early aeronautical investigations.


Reviews/ Film; The Secret Extra-Marital Life of a New York City Policeman
In the most recent phase of an unusual career, the director Peter Medak turned to film noir with surprising success.
Best remembered for "The Ruling Class," his wildly eccentric 1972 comedy starring Peter O'Toole, Mr.
Medak had languished for a while in Hollywood ("Zorro the Gay Blade," "The Men's Club") before resurfacing with two dark, quintessentially English crime stories.
Both "The Krays" (1990) and "Let Him Have It" (1991) told bitter, deadly, sardonic tales set off by Mr.
Medak's newly hardboiled direction.
And both displayed a real noir nihilism, perhaps because the film maker was obliged to reinvent his form.
Bound by true stories and confined to English row houses and seedy nightclubs, both these films became as visually distinctive as they were temperamentally tough.
They were made without condescension.
That is not the case with "Romeo Is Bleeding," Mr.
Medak's latest foray into noir terrain.


Lost Phone Logs Roil Texas Politics
Gov.
Ann W. Richards, a Democrat facing a potentially bruising re-election campaign this fall, is embroiled in a controversy over her aides' destruction of records of years of phone calls from her state office.
While no one has established whether any laws may have been broken, the timing of the dispute could not be more delicate.


Review/Art; Political Works as Empty (or Stirring?) Statements
Political art's weaknesses can also be its strengths.
No art dates faster, yet none can so well capture the temperature of its time.
No art can more easily fall into prescriptive rhetoric, yet none is so capable of delivering the same conscience-stirring impact.
Gallery shows of work by two American artists of an earlier day, Hugo Gellert (1892-1985) and Philip Evergood (1901-1973), both known primarily for their political work, illustrate the possibilities and limitations of the genre.
Gellert, whose graphic work from the 1930's can be seen in a handsomely mounted show at Mary Ryan Gallery, is the less familiar figure.
After coming to New York from his native Hungary, he supported himself as a commercial illustrator -- designing some of the earliest movie posters and contributing drawings to The New Yorker -- while contributing art to a number of radical socialist journals.


Grand Jury Decides Not to Indict Williams
A Hamilton County, Ohio, grand jury yesterday declined to indict MITCH WILLIAMS, the former Philadelphia Phillies pitcher, after hearing allegations that he raped a woman in Cincinnati in September.


New York to City O Groton: Pay Up; Persistent Computer Labels Town a $60.11 Parking Scofflaw
Deep inside the New York City Parking Violations Bureau there is a bulldog of a computer.
For almost three years it has held this southeastern Connecticut city of 9,673 in its electronic jaws, and it will not let go.
Late last month, the New York City Sheriff, Philip A. Crimaldi, sent a letter with the salutation "Dear City O Groton," warning that this was the "Final Notice of Impending Levy." A check for $60.11 had better be sent, or wages would be garnished, bank accounts would be seized or cars and other property would be sold at auction.


Book by Yeltsin On New Russia
A book by Boris N. Yeltsin providing a personal, day-to-day account of his past two years as Russia's President is to be published simultaneously in at least a dozen countries in May, the book's American publisher announced yesterday.
The book, tentatively titled "The President's Journal," begins with Mr.
Yeltsin's role opposing the attempted coup in August 1991 against Mikhail S. Gorbachev and moves on through the dissolution of the Soviet Union and Mr.
Yeltsin's own rise to power.


Harding Faces New Threat On Ethics
As the investigation swirling around Tonya Harding continues, the focus will switch to Colorado Springs on Friday, where a panel of sports officials will meet to determine whether she has violated the United States Figure Skating Association's code of ethics.
Although the United States Olympic Committee has jurisdiction over Harding's eligibility to compete in the Winter Games later this month in Norway, the skating panel's action could influence the U.S.O.C.'s thinking.


A King in Winter Revisits Old Battle
He strode the fairways as in a scene of old, grinning, waving and carrying his putter like a jeweled scepter.
Out of the forests and into the limelight, some dreamlike flashback of what he once was, Arnold Palmer returned to the leader board today.
In the first round of the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am, playing on Spyglass Hill, the most difficult of the three tournament courses, Palmer, 64 years old, was five shots short of shooting his age.


A Resignation Sends Albany Into a Debate
The resignation of Environmental Commissioner Thomas C. Jorling to work for International Paper has surprised many officials and lobbyists here and has prompted some environmentalists and one lawmaker to question whether he showed favoritism toward the paper industry in recent years.
Mr.
Jorling, who has largely won praise from environmental groups during his tenure as head of the Environmental Conservation Deprtment, defended himself today and said his decisions involving paper companies that have been questioned by environmentalists were made before any job discussions with International Paper.
But news of his new job renewed a debate -- familiar in Albany, Washington and other capitals -- about the potential for trouble when regulatory officials leave government to work for an industry they once regulated.


Sounds Around Town
Chambers's Drums
Joe Chambers, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, (212) 749-2228.
Joe Chambers is one of the best drummers jazz has, a living reminder of how well some musicians, during the 1960's, incorporated experimentalism in their playing.
And as a composer, he writes music that never seems quite settled, just the sort to force his musicians to think before they play.
He's leading a quartet that features the ever-improving Antonio Hart on saxophone.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9, 10:30 and 12.
There is a $10 cover and a $10 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Zairian Sounds
Tabu Ley Rochereau, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
This great Zairian singer is a real treat to hear.
He'll croon some, but more than anything he'll engage the whirling guitars of his band.
He leads one of the dance world's best groups, a 13-member orchestra that's meant to keep people going and happy all night long.
The two shows tomorrow night are at 11 and 1 A.M.; there is a $16 cover.
P.
W.
Radio Stories
Duplex Planet Radio Hour, Church of St.
Anne and the Holy Trinity, corner of Clinton and Montague Streets, Brooklyn Heights, (718) 858-2424.
David Greenberger, the host of the show, collected reams of interviews with the residents of a nursing home where he worked.
The content ranges from the surreal to the measured, and Mr.
Greenberger reads them blandly, letting the words and ideas pop and crackle with humor.
The music is provided by the pianist Terry Adams, of the group NRBQ, and he'll be joined by a quartet.
The show is on Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets are $15 for reserved seats, $13 for general admission.
P.
W.


Farrakhan's Rebuke Of Aide for Invective Is Hailed by College
The chairman of Kean College's board of trustees yesterday hailed Louis Farrakhan's decision to suspend a top aide for an inflammatory speech he made at the state school more than two months ago.
"I applaud the many citizens, legislators and officials, appointed and elected, who have come forward to denounce the comments by Mr. Muhammad," said the chairman, Larry Lockhart.
"Now is the time for the educational community to address the issues raised surrounding hate speech and racism in our society."


Art in Review
Peter Hutchinson and Paul Garrin
Holly Solomon Gallery  174 Mercer Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 26
In playful collages, Peter Hutchinson mixes color photographs of luscious gardens with vistas of snowcapped mountains, using paint to cover the edges between the photographs.
The fantastic landscapes that result have an impossible perfection, with the sensual foliage of Bermuda placed against the pristine beauty of the Alps, and cactuses tangled with snowy peaks.


First Big Space Rocket Is Launched by Japanese
In a declaration of independence from the United States space program, Japan today launched its first large rocket built solely with its own technology.
The H-2 rocket, with "Nippon" painted on its side, blasted off at 7:20 A.M. from Tanegashima, an island in southern Japan.
The powerful but complex first-stage engine, which was dogged during its development by explosions, fires and faulty welds, appeared to perform flawlessly, although complete data for evaluation are not yet available.


Getting Rich Quick
His pursuit of .400 fell short last season, but JOHN OLERUD of the Blue Jays attained a plateau of another distinction yesterday.
Olerud will begin the 1994 season with the second most lucrative contract for a player with as little time in the major leagues as he has.
The Blue Jays and their first baseman agreed to a three-year, $17 million contract that will become a four-year, $22.5 million contract if Olerud has 500 plate appearances in any of the three seasons.
The contract, which averages $5,666,667 a year, includes a $1.5 million signing bonus and salaries of $3.25 million, $5.25 million and $6 million.
Olerud would be paid $6.5 million for the option year.


Review/Film; Depardieu's Bahamian Vacation
Actually, Mr.
Depardieu acquits himself with remarkably good cheer.
Since "Green Card," he has reached the point of being able to banter amusingly in English, which puts him way ahead of almost everybody else involved with this film.
Steve Miner, the director whose "Forever Young" looks like a work of great sophistication by comparison, stages "My Father, the Hero" in a startlingly perfunctory manner.
Katherine Heigl, playing the teen-age daughter who is mistaken for Mr.
Depardieu's girlfriend, parades about in skimpy bathing suits, displaying almost everything but a sense of humor.


Market Place; One contrarian favors investing in 'things' rather than 'paper.'
IT takes a brave person to republish his past market predictions.
James Grant recently did just that, in a book with footnotes on how things turned out.
Currently, with stock prices soaring and bond prices stable, he is showing more fortitude still in arguing against securities and for commodities -- preferring "things," as he puts it, to "paper."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration is drafting a plan to create a Western Hemisphere free trade zone, with Chile intended as the first member.
The plan, which may take 10 to 15 years to fully accomplish, responds to Latin American interest in joining the North American trade zone and recognizes that removing trade barriers can spur United States exports.  [ D1. ]


More Movies for Fans Of 'Philadelphia'
To the Editor:
Frank Rich suggests in "The Other Quake" (column, Jan. 23) that we should applaud the actor Tom Hanks and the audience that is rushing to see Jonathan Demme's "Philadelphia" as "heroes." Yet Mr.
Rich seems to concede that the movie is at best mediocre, if well-intentioned.


Borg-Warner Security Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Men, Too, Are Victims of Domestic Violence; Mrs. Bobbitt's Brutality
To the Editor:
"Violence and the Bobbitts" (editorial, Jan. 22) suggests the Lorena Bobbitt jury "be forgiven for finding a reason to excuse Mrs. Bobbitt's brutality: brutality she herself endured for too long." But brutality, no matter how long endured, cannot excuse a retaliatory assault, and a jury that reaches a verdict on that basis is guilty of miscarriage of justice.


Paramount Board to Meet
QVC Network Inc. could face another hurdle today in its battle for Paramount Communications Inc. if, as anticipated, Paramount's board votes to maintain its merger agreement with Viacom Inc., QVC's rival.
Moreover, Paramount's board is expected to explore procedures to insure that the dragged-out takeover war ends on Feb. 14, when the tender offers expire, if neither side receives 50.1 percent of Paramount's shares.


Ukrainian Parliament Edges Closer to Atomic Disarmament
The Ukrainian Parliament moved closer today toward approving a deal that would rid Ukraine of its nuclear weapons, but insisted on more details before final ratification.
Parliament adopted a carefully worded and somewhat confusing resolution that effectively renounced the 13 conditions it placed on ratification of first Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, known as Start-1, last November.


Thomas D. O'Connell, Drought's Nemesis, 62
Thomas D. O'Connell, an engineer who managed New York City's water supply through the droughts of 1981, 1985 and 1989, died on Sunday at the Bay Shore Hospital in Holmdel, N.J.
Mr.
O'Connell, who lived in Matawan, N.J., was 62.
The cause was an aneurysm, said his son, Dr. Brian T. O'Connell.


Intel Settles Chip Dispute With Cyrix
In an important victory for a small chip maker, the Cyrix Corporation may receive up to $10 million in payments from Intel as part of a settlement the companies reached on Wednesday in a computer-chip patent dispute.
The settlement follows a ruling two weeks ago by a United States District Court in Sherman, Tex., that the Intel Corporation cannot collect a licensing fee from computer makers using Cyrix's chip, as Intel had insisted.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICA'S FAVORITE CHICKEN CO., Atlanta, and United Franchise Owners, Los Angeles, agreed to convert or develop 156 restaurants in Southern California.


Inside Art
Americana the Beautiful
Sotheby's braced itself for a wild weekend.
In preparation for the sale of American folk art from the Bertram K. and Nina Fletcher Little collection on Saturday in New York, the auction house arranged its main salesroom with nearly as many chairs and telephones as are on hand for the important evening Impressionist, modern and contemporary art sales.
It was a first for a decorative arts auction, but the planning paid off.
Every seat was taken and the standing-room crowd spilled out of the room.
"We knew it was going to be big," said Nancy Druckman, who heads Sotheby's American folk art department.
"But we didn't know it was going to be that big."
Sotheby's held seven different sessions over a four-day period and the furniture, paintings, folk art, decorative objects and prints brought in a hefty $14.3 million, well above the $8 million to $11.9 million pre-sale estimate.
The weekend before, Christie's held a series of Americana auctions in New York, too.
Though its sales were smaller and the offerings not quite as impressive, they totaled $5.4 million, just above Christie's low estimate of $5.3 million.
At both auction houses it was the private collections that sold the best.
"For the first time in years we saw new buyers who previously hadn't bid in Americana sales," said Leslie Keno, director of American furniture at Sotheby's.


U.S. Imposes New Alcohol Test Rules
The Clinton Administration today issued regulations requiring random tests for alcohol use by more than seven million transportation workers responsible for public safety.
The testing program, the largest in the United States, will affect 6.6 million truck and bus drivers; 340,000 airline flight crew members and mechanics, air traffic controllers and aircraft dispatchers; 280,000 railroad and mass transit crew members and maintenance workers, and 120,000 pipeline workers.
Maritime workers are already tested by the Coast Guard.


CHRONICLE
When ROBERT TAUB sits down at the piano to play "Reflections for Piano and Synthesized Tape," at the Walter Reade Theater in Lincoln Center on Monday, it's not likely that anyone will accuse him of being a spy.
A pianist as a spy?
The last time Mr.
Taub tried to perform the piece, about 10 years ago, he aroused precisely those suspicions, he said the other day.
He recalled the musical cloak-and-dagger tale:


The Spoken Word
EVIL: THE COSMIC SHADOW, St.
Peter's Church, 619 Lexington Avenue, at 54th Street.
A daylong symposium on the perceptions of evil in various cultures and the arts, with dance and drama performances, screenings and lectures.
Among those taking part are Tamar Rogoff and Mariko Sanjo, dancers and choreographers; Robert Thurman, a professor of Indo-Tibetan studies at Columbia University; J. Ronald Havern, a poet, playwright and teacher, and Abdullah Djoniba Mouflet, a choreographer and teacher.
Tomorrow, 8:30 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Admission: $80; $60 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 663-0142.
AIDA LECTURE, Metropolitan Opera Guild, Kaplan Penthouse, Rose Building, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza.
A lecture on Verdi's opera by Cori Ellison, the senior music editor of Stagebill.
Tomorrow at 11:45 A.M.
Admission: $8.
Information: (212) 769-7021.


Art in Review
Tony Cragg
Marian Goodman Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Feb. 19
This is the English sculptor Tony Cragg's best New York show in some time.
In the past, he has seemed like an ambitious artist with an apparently limitless supply of ideas, but not enough good ones.
In fact, the chief interest in his exhibitions often lies in the sheer variety of materials and forms: a half-dozen of his large sculptures seen together look like the products of as many different hands.
Unfortunately, the biomorphic mode he has often favored in recent years has yielded few rewards.
It seems at once leaden and precious, especially when infused with heavy-handed ecological subtexts.


CHRONICLE
KEVIN ROCHE, the architect, has been elected president of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, succeeding the painter JACK LEVINE.
Mr.
Roche will serve until 1997 as head of the august 250-member organization, which is based in New York.
He was elected to the academy in 1970, and has served on its board of directors for the last three years.


The Garden State's Iron Horse of Politics Rolls Again
The Mayor of Jersey City is here because he faces a tough fight over revamping his schools.
The Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly is here because he is running for the United States Senate.
The junior Senator from New Jersey will show up later, because it is his seat the Speaker wants.
The head of marketing for Ireland Coffee Company of Pleasantville is here because, well, because everyone else is.
Once a year at this time, New Jersey's political and business elite crowd onto a chartered Amtrak train and spend five hours in a blizzard of business cards and campaign literature, clogging the aisles, laughing too loud and spilling beer and diet drinks on one another.
A Chamber Salute
Officially billed as the annual New Jersey Chamber of Commerce salute to the Garden State's Congressional delegation, the trip has evolved during its 55 years into the longest-rolling influence-peddling, electioneering and networking caravan in the state's history.


Director of U.S. Land Management Resigns
Jim Baca, a leading ally of environmentalists as the Federal official responsible for managing 270 million acres of public land, resigned today after the Clinton Administration sought to reduce his role in the political fights over grazing and mining.
Mr.
Baca's departure as director of the Bureau of Land Management had been feared by conservation groups since last week, when he was offered the post of deputy assistant Secretary of Interior, a transfer that the Administration called a promotion but that Mr.
Baca did not welcome.


Home Video
Consensus: No Consensus
While talk drones on about the information highway, the public goes on renting videocassettes.
Of 739 respondents in a recent Video Software Magazine survey, one in four had rented a movie the week before and nearly half of those renters had taken home more than one.


Art in Review
Peter Noever
Storefront for Art and Architecture  97 Kenmare Street  Little Italy  Through Feb. 26
Peter Noever is best known as an avant-garde impresario.
As director of the Museum of Applied Art in Vienna, he has fought his city's cultural complacency with lively shows and publications devoted to the work of young architects from abroad.
Now, this energetic importer of ideas has exported a fine small show of his own designs, which combine architecture, sculpture and landscape.


Farrakhan Repudiates Speech For Tone, Not Anti-Semitism
Louis Farrakhan, head of the Nation of Islam, demoted a senior aide today for anti-white and anti-Semitic statements made in a recent speech, calling them "repugnant" and "mean-spirited," but defended the "truths" he said the aide had expressed.
In a rare news conference, Mr.
Farrakhan left those "truths" unspecified beyond saying that the aide, Khalid Abdul Muhammad, was correct when he said that 75 percent of slaves in the antebellum South were owned by Jews.


Shuttle Lifts Off On First Mission With a Russian
The space shuttle Discovery streaked into an icy dawn sky today, carrying the first Russian astronaut ever to be launched in an American spacecraft.
Space officials hope the mission starts a new era of Russian-American cooperation in space
Discovery blasted off on its eight-day mission at its scheduled 7:10 A.M. launching time, although there had been concern that unusually cold weather might cause a delay.
It was the 18th flight for Discovery, the 60th in the program and the first this year.


On My Mind; Bigots And Journalists
Time magazine has printed a news story disclosing that fighting black anti-Semitism by asking black leaders to stand against it is a way of "enforcing racial correctness" and, "it might be argued, is just another kind of bigotry."
Yes, that is what Time actually says.
Page 37, issue predated Feb. 7.
In its news section is a story about how an anti-Semitic speech made by a "semi-obscure" spokesman of the Nation of Islam before just a "few dozen" college students is made into a big deal.
It becomes pressure against "black leaders across the country," and that "rankles" with "some" blacks.
It comes at a bad time for black-Jewish relations, says Time, particularly in New York, always "fretting" about race.


Dehere Nears the Gate For His Belated Debut
Make way for Dehere.
He is one week late and he hasn't raced in three months.
But he is still the reigning king of the 3-year-old colts, and he will join the traffic on the road to the Kentucky Derby when he makes a delayed debut Saturday in an allowance race at Gulfstream Park.
Dehere, the juvenile champion of last year and the early favorite for the Derby this year, was scratched from the Hutcheson Stakes last Saturday with a touch of the colic.
So, he was back in the barn while his undefeated archrival, Holy Bull, was winning the race for his fifth straight victory.
They will tangle in the Fountain of Youth Stakes on Feb. 19, along with Patton and Go for Gin and other Derby candidates.
But Dehere needs the seasoning of a race before then, and he will get it in Saturday's first race against three horses of lesser magnitude.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10


Giuliani Backs Off Some School Cuts In Day-Old Budget
Just one day after releasing his preliminary budget, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday backed off the budget's call for a reduction in school crossing guards, lunchroom aides and assistant principals.
He said he really wanted Board of Education job reductions only in the system's administrative ranks.
The Mayor said the budget documents that listed specific cuts in the school support staffs were mistaken and a result of a misunderstanding between budget officials of City Hall and the school system.
Mr.
Giuliani said cuts in anything besides administrative staff "was never my intention."


Luxury-Line Automobile Theft: Steal From the Valet, Not From Drivers
David Newman knew something was wrong when he left a restaurant here Tuesday night and saw no sign of the attendant who had parked his car.
But he only realized how wrong when he and his dinner companions noticed a car at the curb with its engine running and a thumping sound coming from the trunk.


Pitney Bowes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Showcase Event Can Still Draw A Crowd
A generation ago, before there was a Super Bowl or a Meadowlands or Islanders or Nets, there was a major sport in New York City known as indoor track.
Outdoors, track and field was for dilettantes in Los Angeles or Europe.
Indoors was for Madison Square Garden, for sellout or near-sellout crowds for five consecutive weekends, when neither blizzards nor bitter cold could restrain the addicts of this three-ring circus.


Another No. 1 Knocked Off Its Pedestal
Maybe there just isn't a No. 1 team in college basketball.
Maybe the top of the polls should be kept vacant until early April, late on the season's last Monday night a couple of hours down the interstate in Charlotte, when some grateful collection of survivors finally steps up to a victory stand.
Put it this way: After top-ranked Duke, the fifth No. 1 team in as many weeks, was beaten by North Carolina, 89-78, tonight amid the frenzy of the Dean Dome, do we have any volunteers?
The Tar Heels, second in the Associated Press poll and tied for second with U.C.L.A. in the CNN/USA Today poll, might not have any choice.
Throughout an overwhelming second half, they wore down a Blue Devil group that had made 64 percent of its shots in the first half.


Coleman And Nets Reopen Talks
After Nets ownership rejected a potential $90 million contract extension for Derrick Coleman, talks reopened today with both sides seeking a shorter deal that would pay Coleman more money up front and allow the team an option to get out of the deal before its completion.
The Nets owners, David Gerstein and Alan Aufzien, have made it clear that they will not give Coleman a guaranteed deal for eight years, similar to the one Charlotte gave Larry Johnson last October.


CHRONICLE
Dispatches from the world of arts and letters:
GWENDOLYN BROOKS, the 77-year-old Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and author who has more than 70 honorary doctorates and awards to her name, has been awarded yet another accolade.
It was announced on Monday that she will deliver the 1994 Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities, which SHELDON HACKNEY,chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, called "the highest award the United States Government gives for distinguished intellectual achievement in the humanities."


A Delicate Balance on Korea
President Clinton has to walk a tightrope to conduct nuclear diplomacy in Korea.
In considering military deployments to reassure South Korea, Mr.
Clinton must take care not to rattle a suspicious and unpredictable North Korea.
His pending decision to dispatch Patriot missiles to the South has alarmed the North.
True, the Patriots, which defend against missile attack, pose no threat to Pyongyang.
But given their hit-and-miss record in the Persian Gulf, they may do more to guard Mr.
Clinton from assaults by hawks at home than to protect air bases in South Korea.
So why rush their delivery?


Colgate-Palmolive Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


A McCaffrey Client Reviews an Account
ITT Hartford Insurance said yesterday that it had placed in review its estimated $3 million to $5 million corporate and product advertising account, a day after McCaffrey &amp; McCall, its agency since 1967, was absorbed by Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide in New York.


Review/Theater; Tales of the City From Bogosian
ERIC BOGOSIAN doesn't have to come on all coiled and snapping to make an impression, although he usually does.
At one point in "Pounding Nails in the Floor With My Forehead," his rough and riotous one-man show at the Minetta Lane Theater, he plays a very comforting doctor.


C. S. Vanden Broeck, Investment Banker, 74
Claude S. Vanden Broeck, an investment banker, died on Saturday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 74 and lived in Ridgewood, N.J.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus, his family said.


Avon Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Men, Too, Are Victims of Domestic Violence
To the Editor:
As a battered man, I take serious issue with "A Million Mrs. Bobbitts" (editorial, Jan. 28).


Nominee for Pentagon Job Gets a New Post
The candidate forced to withdraw last month as President Clinton's choice to head a new Pentagon peacekeeping policy job, is finding a home on the National Security Council where he will probably do much the same work, but will not need Senate confirmation.
Administration officials said today that Morton H. Halperin, a 55-year-old former director of the Washington office of the American Civil Liberties Union, will be shortly become a Special Assistant to the President in charge of promoting democracy and humnan rights overseas.


A Free-for-All in Communications
With Congress suddenly intent on bringing the nation's communications laws into the digital age, telephone and cable television companies all say they favor nothing more than wide-open competition.
But now, as the debate quickly descends to the gory details on how to make that happen, the smiles and platitudes are giving way to name-calling and a scramble for special protections.


Lessons in Hoops and Heart in Teams of Two Races
Gerard Papa is proud that the Flames, the basketball program he founded 20 years ago, has helped more than 6,000 youngsters from Bensonhurst and Coney Island play, learn a little responsibility and catch precious breathing space.
"We're brothers," said Aki Davis, a 12-year-old player in the program, which serves 400 youths, ages 8 to 20, each year.
"All of us stick up for each other."


Mayor Fights Ad at Shea On Tobacco
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would press for the removal of a large billboard advertising Marlboro cigarettes at Shea Stadium, saying that it had a bad influence on children watching the New York Mets.
The billboard, under the huge video screen in left-center field and in full view of fans and television viewers, is a target of antismoking advocates, who filed a lawsuit last summer to force the city to remove it, arguing that it teaches children to associate cigarettes with athletic success.


FIGGIE MAY SELL ITS RAWLINGS UNIT
Figgie International Inc. took the first step yesterday toward dismantling its conglomerate structure, saying it was considering selling its Rawlings Sporting Goods division.
Last month, Figgie, a Willoughby, Ohio, maker of industrial products like hydraulic pumps and mobile lifts for the construction and maintenance industries, announced plans to dispose of noncore businesses.
Rawlings, of St.
Louis, is the leading maker of baseball gloves and protective sporting equipment and supplies baseballs for Major League Baseball and basketballs for the National Collegiate Athletic Association.


Children Frightened by Gunfire Plead With Congress for an End to Violence
Every day, on average, 13 American children die in shootings, either in murders, accidents or suicides.
And experts on violence say the death rate is steadily growing.
Today, 11 teen-agers whose lives have been somehow touched by the killing appeared before Congress to plead for an end to the mayhem.


Athens Journal; Under Acropolis, Art Meets Politics, Explosively
If Melina Mercouri is made at all uncomfortable at the threat of being taken to court, it does not show.
Indeed, as the onetime movie star again takes up the cudgels for art and antiquity as Greece's Minister of Culture, she seems almost to relish the fray.
Since she and other Greek Socialists returned to power in October, Ms.
Mercouri has served notice of an array of plans to refurbish her nation's heritage, from Athens to the Aegean.
She has also become embroiled in something of a brawl.


Reviews/ Film; The Pods Are at It Again: Hello! Anybody There?
It's impossible to prove this, but I think a pod person stole Abel Ferrara's soul while he was making "Body Snatchers."
The world wasn't begging for another remake of "Invasion of the Body Snatchers," Don Siegel's creepy 1956 classic about aliens who hatch out of pods and replace thinking individuals with conformist doubles.
Philip Kaufman's wittily paranoid 1978 version holds up beautifully today.


A Resignation Sends Albany Into a Debate
The resignation of Environmental Commissioner Thomas C. Jorling to work for International Paper has surprised many officials and lobbyists here and has prompted some environmentalists and one lawmaker to question whether he showed favoritism toward the paper industry in recent years.
Mr.
Jorling, who has largely won praise from environmental groups during his tenure as head of the Environmental Conservation Deprtment, defended himself today and said his decisions involving paper companies that have been questioned by environmentalists were made before any job discussions with International Paper.
But news of his new job renewed a debate -- familiar in Albany, Washington and other capitals -- about the potential for trouble when regulatory officials leave government to work for an industry they once regulated.


Reviews/ Film; Writer Tries a Lot of Sex To See if It Aids Creativity
Can sexual passion unleash a creative deluge?
It is a possibility that Lucy (Leslie Hope), a frustrated writer living in Toronto, pursues with a ravenous intensity in Gerard Ciccoritti's "Paris, France."
The Canadian film, which opens today at the Quad Cinema, goes gleefully over the top in several ways at once.
It has more explicit sex of more different varieties than can be found in any recent nonporn film.
And its feverish eroticism is matched only by its literary pretentiousnsss.


Police Offer Baseball-Like Trading Cards, but of Themselves
Maybe, just maybe, a 1994 Sgt.
Steven Harris will never fetch the $35,000 of a mint 1952 Mickey Mantle.
But so what?
Baseball-like trading cards of police officers, which a few units of the New York Police Department began passing out yesterday, may never be worth as much as the ones with major leaguers.
But what they lack in authenticity, backers say, they make up in idealism.


Cardinals Add Some Punch With Hiring of Ryan
Last season, when Buddy Ryan was the Houston Oilers' defensive coordinator, he punched Kevin Gilbride, the offensive coordinator, on national television in a game against the Jets and castigated the Oilers' run-and-shoot offense as "chuck and duck." But someone out there loved him, and yesterday that someone, Bill Bidwill, the owner of the Phoenix Cardinals, hired the cantankerous and outspoken Ryan for four years as head coach and general manager.
Ryan's hiring was the latest major development this week in the National Football Conference's Eastern Division, long known as the strongest of the National Football League's six divisions.
On Sunday, the Dallas Cowboys won their second straight Super Bowl.
On Wednesday, the Washington Redskins signed Norv Turner, the Cowboys' offensive coordinator, as their head coach.


Critic's Notebook; When Hollywood Could Be Naughty
THE "moral importance of entertainment" was once very much on Hollywood's mind.
"It enters intimately into the lives of men and women; it affects them closely; it occupies their minds and affections during leisure hours; and ultimately touches the whole of their lives. A man may be judged by his standard of entertainment as easily as by the standard of his work." The real power of those words lies not in their truth, which is self-evident, but in the way they kept Hollywood in line.
As part of the paper cudgel known as the Motion Picture Production Code, first formulated in 1930, later revised and then seriously enforced beginning in 1934, those statements accompanied a set of rules that will strike present-day readers as curiously familiar.
The same strictures still apply, but in inverse fashion.
Practically everything the Production Code cited as anathema has become commonplace, not to say even preferable, in films today.


A New Look for an Old Sign


On Stage, and Off
Upstairs, Downstairs
One building, two stages and two Off Broadway shows going in different directions; the downstairs show is going out, the upstairs show is probably going down.
The building is at Broadway and 76th Street, where at the Promenade Theater on the ground floor, David Rabe's play "Those the River Keeps" opened on Monday, got dreadful reviews on Tuesday and is to close on Sunday.
The estimated loss to investors is $400,000.


No Answers, No-Shows, Or Comment for Nets
As the Nets continued to try to figure out whether to sign or trade Derrick Coleman, the team practiced today.
And everyone showed up.
"No one is missing in action," said Coach Chuck Daly.
"We had all 12 here today. Twelve angry men. That's an upset."


Health Management Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sharpton Says He Will Run For the Senate
The Rev.
Al Sharpton, who had been considering a run either for Governor or for the United States Senate, said he has decided to challenge Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan in the Democratic primary.
Mr.
Sharpton announced his decision in a taped interview to be broadcast on Sunday.
"People are not hearing anything but theories and 'I wish it was 50 years ago' from the Senator," he told Gabe Pressman on the "News Forum" program to be broadcast on Channel 4, WNBC-TV.
"People should vote their interests, and Mr. Moynihan has not addressed those."


Japan's Crisis Delays Economic Plan
Even after agreeing to drop a bitterly disputed tax plan in a hail of criticism, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's coalition Goverment grew more divided today, delaying the completion of a critical package of measures for reviving Japan's recession-battered economy.
The delay disappointed business executives, who had hoped that after achieving a measure of success in a major battle last week over reforming the election system, the Government would quickly take steps to get the faltering economy back on track.


Kelly Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
FETAL TESTS: WHEN ANY RISK IS TOO GREAT
A rapidly growing number of younger women, health-care professionals say, are ignoring conventional medical standards and having tests to detect chromosomal disorders in fetuses.
Below age 35, the risk of miscarriage from the test is greater than the risk of genetic defects.
But those who call earlier tests a waste of health-care dollars, the women point out, don't have to rear a severely disabled child.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  AIMING SCHOOL CUTS AT ADMINISTRATORS
How many administrators does it take to run the New York City public school system?
Although it might seem the beginning of a bad joke, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani raised the questions in his plan to eliminate the job of every other manager at the Board of Education's headquarters at 110 Livingston Street -- as much a symbol of bureaucratic resilience as the Pentagon.
News analysis, Page 25.


Knowledge Gap On Health Issue
For all the debate about health policy in recent months, a large number ofAmericans have little information about the basic proposals for restructuringthe system, according to a poll released this week.
Even after being read a description of the alternatives for change, only 54percent said they recalled hearing or reading anything before the interviewabout the concept of "the employer mandate," the poll found.


Devils Prey Upon The Weak
The Devils got precisely the remedy they needed tonight to end a three-game losing streak at a home and a four-game streak without a victory.
They played the Ottawa Senators, a team with one victory in 19 games, a team that had trouble setting up its power-play unit in the offensive zone even with a two-man advantage.
Ottawa provided ample avidence why it has the worst record (9-39-7) in the National Hockey League, why it is the worst team killing penalties and next-to-last with the man advantage.


Marvel Entertainment Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Moscow Virtuosi  Carnegie Hall


A Spin, a Broad Smile and 'Hello, Nancy!'
Flashing her familiar smile, Nancy Kerrigan dazzled a crowd of more than 4,500 tonight at Northeastern's Matthews Arena in her first public skating exhibition since she was assaulted Jan. 6 in Detroit.
"This is so special," Kerrigan told the crowd.
"It's been a really tough month for me and I'm ready to go. I can't wait to get there."


Ogden Projects Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Schools Ordered To Desegregate In Philadelphia
In a suit that had been in court for more than two decades, a state judge ruled today that the Philadelphia school district had not done enough to desegregate its schools.
Judge Doris A. Smith of the Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania, which has jurisdiction over litigation involving state agencies, said she would appoint a master or team of education experts to develop a desegregation plan and impose it on the district, a task that the school district argues is impossible because 75 percent of its 191,000 students are black or of Hispanic descent.


Coghlan's and O'Sullivan's Eyes Don't Quite Smile in the Millrose
It was a good night and a bad night for the Irish milers last night at Madison Square Garden.
Two (Niall Bruton and Eamonn Coghlan) won, a third (Marcus O'Sullivan) almost won, and one of the winners (Coghlan) was disappointed because he lost an opportunity to make history.
The occasion was the Chemical Bank Millrose Games, the 87th annual edition of America's premier indoor track and field meet.
A sellout crowd of 17,488 watched a big upset in the featured Wanamaker Mile, a race O'Sullivan had won five times in eight years.


PARAMOUNT BACKS REVISED VIACOM BID, REJECTING QVC'S
Late yesterday, the board of Paramount Communications Inc. endorsed Viacom's revised bid for the company and rejected QVC Network Inc.'s bid.
The news was expected, since Viacom's bid included more cash and more protection against Viacom's stock declining after a merger.
Although the board and its advisers are exploring ways to assure that the process will end on Feb. 14, when the tender offers for each side expire, it did not announce any definitive changes in the bidding rules.
As the rules now stand, a company must receive 50.1 percent of Paramount's stock to win the company.
But there has been some concern that neither side would get that much stock.
Paramount's stock was down $1.625 yesterday, to $76.50, while QVC fell $2, to $43.875, and Viacom lost 62.5 cents, to $37.875.


INSIDE
Jury Gets Evers Slaying Case
After hearing closing arguments in the third trial of the white supremacist accused of murdering the civil rights leader Medgar Evers, a jury began its deliberations.
Page 7.
Health's Universal Quandary
The debate over the future of health care in the United States centers on whether the nation can and should provide everyone with health insurance.
News analysis, page 8.
Prodding Korea's Neighbor
Talking of sanctions, the United States asked China to press North Korea to open its nuclear installations to inspection by Feb. 21.
Page 5.
Security Warning on Internet
Users of the Internet, a web of computer networks, have been warned of a rash of break-ins into government and university computers.
Page 37.
Giuliani and School Cuts
Mayor Giuliani said he would consider other ways to save money in the schools if the Chancellor could not cut 2,500 administrative jobs.
Page 23.


CHRONICLE
The teen-age Palestinian boy from Ramallah on the West Bank, who presented an award to SHIMON PERES at the Regency Hotel on Thursday, certainly knew how to seize the moment.
"Thank you for putting an end to the bloodshed," the youth said to Mr.
Peres, the Foreign Minister of Israel, speaking before a crowd at a Seeds for Peace benefit dinner.
"Now I hope we can have our own state with our own capital: East Jerusalem."


Unemployment Is Put at 6.7% By New Method
Severe winter weather crimped the expansion of business payrolls in January as the Government's new method for sampling the nation's households showed an unemployment rate of 6.7 percent, the Labor Department reported today.
But while the job figures were difficult to interpret, analysts said they regarded the data as consistent with an economy still moving briskly ahead in the early weeks of the year after unsustainably rapid growth of 5.9 percent in the final three months of 1993.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Sid Selvidge  Singer and Guitarist World Financial Center


U.S. and France to Form Bosnia Working Group; 9 Killed Waiting for Food
Mortar shells slammed into a line of people waiting for food today, killing 9 people, 3 of them children, and leaving at least 15 wounded.
Relief workers were measuring out portions of flour just before noon on a spring-like day that brought crowds out into the sun when the first round landed in Dobrinja, a neighborhood that has suffered particularly heavy damage during the 22-month Serbian siege of the city.


Aide Accused Of Stealing From Author
The former bookkeeper for Anne Morrow Lindbergh, the author and widow of Charles A. Lindbergh, has been charged with embezzling an estimated $136,000 from Mrs.
Lindbergh's checking account, according to the police in Darien, Conn., where Mrs.
Lindbergh lives.
The bookkeeper, Susan Colby Jones, who was hired two years ago to pay bills for the 87-year-old Mrs.
Lindbergh after she was incapacitated by strokes, has been charged with two counts of first-degree larceny.


Partisan Jab From Gephardt in Health Debate
Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, asserted today that Republicans' opposition to President Clinton's health care proposals was just another example, like their original hostility to Social Security and Medicare, of unwillingness to improve people's lives.
In the most partisan shot Democrats have fired on the issue, Mr.
Gephardt said, "Every time we try to lift people up, they say it's socialism, it's big government, it's tax and spend.


Weicker Sets Goal of Health Care for All by 1997
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said today that Connecticut, home to some of the nation's largest insurance companies, would not wait for Congress and President Clinton to overhaul health care, but would move on its own with a plan to provide coverage for all state residents by 1997.
"This is not in contention with anything that comes from Washington," Mr.
Weicker said at a news conference at the State Capitol.
"It's only that I have the very strong feeling that if we act as has been laid out before you, we're going to cross that finish line long before the Federal Government."


Arcadian Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fetal Test Focuses the Health-Care Debate
Jeannie Evans was pregnant last year and had no reason to expect her child would be born with any problems.
She was 28 years old, and her risk of having a baby with a birth defect caused by abnormal chromosomes was 1 in 435 -- too low, according to standard medical opinion, for her to undergo an amniocentesis test and court an even greater chance that the procedure might cause a miscarriage.


A Rise in Internet Break-Ins Sets Off a Security Alarm
Citing computer-security violations of unprecedented scope, security experts have issued a warning that unknown assailants have been breaking into scores of government, corporate and university computers connected to the global Internet communications network.
Saying that it had been "flooded" with reports of computer break-ins in the last week, the federally supported Computer Emergency Response Team broadcast its warning late Thursday night over the Internet, a web of computer networks used by an estimated 15 million people in the United States and abroad.
Sophisticated software, secretly planted on various computers throughout the Internet, has allowed unknown intruders to steal passwords and electronic addresses from legitimate users, computer security experts said yesterday.


Nathaniel B. Abbott, Educator, 82
Nathaniel B. Abbott, an educator who taught at the Millbrook School for 35 years, died on Wednesday at Crouse Memorial Hospital in Syracuse.
A former resident of Millbrook, N.Y., and Princeton, N.J., he was 82 and recently lived at the Nottingham retirement community in Syracuse.
He had a brief illness, the school reported.


Alberta Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fleet Mortgage Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Edith Weisbuch, Philanthropist, 89
Edith Weisbuch, a proponent of progressive education and benefactor of Brandeis University, died on Jan. 29 at her home in Kings Point, L.I.
She was 89.
The cause was cardiopulmonary complications, said her son Thomas B. Weisbuch.


Dimitrov Theory Omits Spanish War
To the Editor:
In "The Dimitrov Conspiracy" (Op-Ed, Jan. 22), Stephen Koch, chairman of the writing division of Columbia University, theorizes that Georgi Dimitrov, a Bulgarian Communist, was acquitted on complicity in the burning of the German Reichstag in 1933 as a result of a secret deal struck between the Nazi and Communist secret services, and by extension between Hitler and Stalin.


Commercial TV Goes East, 'Ghostbusters' in Tow
When the first nationwide commercial television station in Eastern Europe went on the air in the Czech Republic this morning -- and this evening opened prime time with the 1984 Hollywood movie "Ghostbusters" dubbed into Czech -- American and European media companies were watching as closely as anyone.
For foreign media executives, one question was paramount: Can enough Czechs be weaned away from decades of staid state television to allow the commercial newcomer to make money?
Judging from the mounting competition for licenses in Eastern Europe, the answer has already been assumed, and it is yes.


New York Drivers Need Strong Anti-Theft Law
To the Editor:
While auto theft has dropped slightly in New York City from its peak rates in 1990 (news article, Jan. 23), there is much to be done to combat this big and costly plague.
A car is still stolen on the average of every five minutes somewhere in the five boroughs, costing New Yorkers more than $500 million in annual property losses.
It is estimated that upward of 70 percent of the premium for comprehensive coverage in the downstate area is attributable to auto theft.


Felix J. Colangelo, Wool Promoter, 72
Felix J. Colangelo, the retired president of the Wool Bureau in Manhattan, died on Jan. 29 at his home in Jericho, L.I.
He was 72.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said a daughter, Emily.


Knowledge Gap On Health Issue
For all the debate about health policy in recent months, a large number ofAmericans have little information about the basic proposals for restructuringthe system, according to a poll released this week.
Even after being read a description of the alternatives for change, only 54percent said they recalled hearing or reading anything before the interviewabout the concept of "the employer mandate," the poll found.


Yankees Gaze At Gregg Olson
Gregg Olson threw for 20 minutes yesterday before team officials at Yankee Stadium as the Yankees pondered whether the right elbow of the former Baltimore relief pitcher was healthy enough to earn him a contract offer.
General Manager Gene Michael declined to release results of the medical tests conducted on Olson's elbow, but said the Yankees would make a decision about him in the next week.
Olson, who might not be ready to pitch by opening day, is also being sought by Toronto.


Jury Rules Against Forfeiture Of Hell's Angels' 3d St. Home
The Hell's Angels may keep their Manhattan home, a jury ruled yesterday, rejecting Government efforts to seize the motorcycle club's notorious hangout on the Lower East Side.
Ending a three-week civil trial in Federal District Court in Manhattan, jurors voted that lawyers for America's best-known bunch of Harley-riding, tattooed nonconformists had successfully proved that the Hell's Angels Motorcycle Club's East Coast Valhalla was not used for drug deals, as charged in a Government lawsuit.


Ryland Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arrest in 2 Fatal Stabbings
A 16-year-old Bronx youth confessed to stabbing his mother and her boyfriend to death in their bedroom yesterday, the police said.
The youth, Eli Vega, called the police yesterday evening to report the deaths of his mother, Judith Ayala, 37, and her boyfriend, Russell Smith, 34, in their apartment at 3366 Decatur Ave. in the Norwood section.
"The son said he discovered the bodies," said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
"The officers took him in to question him and he confessed." They refused to release a motive for the killings or any details given by the youth, who was arrested at 8:45 P.M.
Ms.
Ayala was found lying on her bed, and Mr.
Smith on the bedroom floor, Sgt.
Haimeck said.
Investigators did not find the murder weapon, she said.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Gilbert Associates Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yankee Rookie Is Keeping Suitcase Stickers Licked
Russ Davis was consumed by the trade rumors this off season, waiting helplessly and wondering whether the Yankees really were going to dispatch him to San Diego as an essential element in a deal for pitcher Andy Benes.
Maybe his major league career would never get started in the Bronx.
The third baseman thought he had escaped the speculation after being married on Dec. 30 in Gatlinburg, Tenn., and trekking to the Great Smokey Mountains on his honeymoon.
There would be no rumors to bother him and his wife, Adryne.


Giuliani Reshuffles Portfolios of Deputy Mayors
For the second time since he named Ninfa Segarra as a Deputy Mayor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has redefined her duties.
The Mayor said yesterday that he had shifted the city's array of health agencies out of Ms.
Segarra's portfolio and given them to Peter J. Powers, the Deputy Mayor for Operations, who has emerged as Mr.
Giuliani's most powerful aide.
He said that Ms.
Segarra had taken over supervision of the Housing and Preservation Department, which had previously been under John S. Dyson, the Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development.


Foremost Corp. of America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Cascade Natural Gas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pistons Trade Elliott to Rockets
SEAN ELLIOTT was traded to the Houston Rockets by the Detroit Pistons yesterday for forwards ROBERT HORRY and MATT BULLARD and two second-round draft choices, the Pistons announced.
Elliott, 26, and in his fifth National Basketball Association season, has averaged 17 points per game.
An All-Star last season for the San Antonio Spurs, he was acquired by Detroit in the off season for DENNIS RODMAN.
Despite their 32-11 record, the Rockets have had trouble scoring when opponents are able to stifle HAKEEM OLAJUWON.
Houston coaches believe they need another scoring threat to relieve that pressure. (AP)


Giuliani Open On How to Cut School Budget
After meeting a second time with the Schools Chancellor, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would consider other ways to save money in the school system if the Chancellor could not find 2,500 positions to cut from the system's administrative staff "after an intensive good faith effort."
Mr.
Giuliani said the Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, must still trim $292 million from the board's budget for the next fiscal year.
But he appeared to soften his insistence that the brunt of the savings come from the reduction of 2,500 jobs he proposed to trim what he called the "bloated bureaucracy" at the Board of Education.


In Fishkill, a New Team Steps Up to the Plate; Minor-League Club Excites Baseball Fans in the Economically Ailing Hudson Valley
It may be buried under 16 inches of snow and studded with evergreen, pine and birch trees, but when Skip Weisman drives past the 20-acre field wedged between Route 9D and Interstate 84, he sees baseball.
"The lights are on and a game is going on," Mr.
Weisman says, conjuring the daydream he has each night as he heads home from work.
"The scoreboard's lit up. There's a packed house. There's green grass. There's brown dirt."


Editors' Note
An obituary on Jan. 17 reported the death on Jan. 14 of Dr.
Bernard D. Davis, a Harvard Medical School professor who was a pioneer in bacterial genetics.
The first sentence and much of the obituary were devoted to a dispute over an article Dr.
Davis wrote in 1976 about academic standards in the admission of minority students to medical schools.
Although the controversy was reported extensively in The Times at the time, and was therefore well represented in the newspaper's clipping file, it was not the dominant fact in Dr.
Davis's career, as a number of scientists have explained in letters to The Times.
The Jan. 17 obituary relied excessively on this file, in place of necessary reporting on the range of Dr.
Davis's career.


David S. Olton, 51, Neuroscientist Who Explored Memory, Is Dead
Dr.
David S. Olton, a psychology professor at Johns Hopkins University who researched the brain's memory systems, died on Tuesday at a friend's home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 51 and lived in Phoenix, Md., a suburb of Baltimore.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, a university spokesman said.


Dr. Bernard Davis, 78, Professor And Leader in Genetics Research
Dr.
Bernard D. Davis, a Harvard Medical School professor who was a pioneer in bacterial genetics research, the senior author of a standard medical textbook on microbiology and a widely known writer on the social implications of modern genetics, died on Jan. 14 at his home in Belmont, Mass.
He was 78.
The cause of death was prostate cancer, said his wife, Elizabeth.


U.S. PLANS TO PUSH GIVING F.B.I. ACCESS IN COMPUTER CODES
Turning aside vehement objections from computer makers, communications companies and civil rights groups concerned about privacy, the Clinton Administration adopted a technology today that would enable law enforcement agencies to intercept coded telephone and computer communications.
The technology is meant to solve a difficult problem created by the explosion in electronic communications.
With commercial coding technology becoming more affordable and more convenient almost every day, law enforcement agencies say it is becoming increasingly difficult to carry out traditional forms of wiretapping.


Knicks Go Distance, But Hawks Get Decision
The Atlanta Hawks met every challenge tonight.
When the Knicks got rough, the Hawks got rougher.
When the Knicks rallied, the Hawks bent, but they did not break.
By the time the game ended, the Knicks had the message, and their six-game winning streak was over.
The Hawks are a different team this season, a team determined to be a serious factor in the National Basketball Association's Eastern Conference.
Leading throughout the second half, Atlanta rolled to an impressive 114-102 victory before a sellout crowd of 16,368 in the Omni, putting the Hawks (32-11) half a game ahead of New York (32-12) atop the East.


The Five Stages of Weathering
It was while she was standing in line at a token booth on Monday, toe-deep in a big puddle, that a New Yorker realized she had reached the psychiatrist Elisabeth Kubler-Ross's fifth stage.
Dr.
Kubler-Ross, however, was talking death.
The New Yorker was talking weather.
First, in early January, came denial.
Thirty hours of snow, sleet, freezing rain and a soupcon of hail were an aberration, a blip in the great scheme of things.
Besides, all that ice left the city looking slick and shiny.


Sports of The Times; The Hammer Is a Year Older
HENRY LOUIS AARON will wake up in Atlanta this morning to yet another milestone: his 60th birthday.
Aaron, his wife and four of their five children will celebrate six rich decades of life with 142 invited guests at the Governor's Mansion tonight.
Sixty.
Aaron laughed when I asked whether he ever thought at 18 that he would be a senior citizen.
"I had no concept of growing old," he said in his rich baritone voice.
"You know how it is when you're young. You never think about turning 60. You never think about dying. You just think about tomorrow and the next tomorrow."


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., acquired a seat belt business in Italy from the automotive supplier Gilardini, which is majority owned by Fiat Group.
Terms were not disclosed.
MOBIL CORP., Fairfax, Va., plans to increase its capital and exploration expenditures by $600 million this year, from $3.6 billion to $4.2 billion.


No Headline
A heavy burden has been lifted.
We in Vietnam have felt that we were not allowed to participate in the world as full citizens because of the embargo.
Now at last we are allowed to forget the war. -- LAM THANH SY, a teacher in Ho Chi Minh City.  [ 1:1. ]


Classical Music in Review
Anthony Newman  Organist St. Bartholomew's Church Manhattan


Classical Music in Review
Mannes Orchestra  Alice Tully Hall


Ogden Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inmate Fears Death Because Prison Won't Finance Transplant
If DeWayne Murphy were not in Federal prison, he would be on a waiting list for a heart transplant or might even have had one by now.
But the Federal Bureau of Prisons, which is responsible for his medical costs, does not pay for organ transplants, so the 33-year-old Mr.
Murphy is living in a medical ward at the Rochester Federal Medical Center in Minnesota, agonizing over his case.
One prisoners' rights advocate argues that by not financing a heart transplant for Mr.
Murphy the Bureau of Prisons has converted his four-year sentence to a death sentence.


Pacific Telecom (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Farmers Eager to Test Drug to Get More Milk
On Jim and Jack Winkel's 1,100-acre dairy farm in this snowy prairie town, milk is produced with the aid of remote sensing devices, computers, advanced telecommunications equipment, automatic milking machines, stainless steel chillers and an array of diagnostic equipment and pharmaceuticals.
Such gadgets, and the brothers' good sense in how to use them, have made the Winkel Dairy Farm one of the most efficient milk producers in Michigan, the nation's seventh-largest dairy state.
Next week, the brothers expect to receive one more high-tech aid: a genetically engineered growth hormone that its manufacturers say will almost immediately increase their production by at least 5 percent, and perhaps 20 percent.


U.S. and France to Form Bosnia Working Group
After their sharp dispute last week over policy in Bosnia, France and theUnited States are quietly attempting to convene a high-level working group that would coordinate European and American peacemaking efforts in the Balkan war andtake these efforts in a new direction.
French and American officials said today that a first meeting of the groupcould take place next week, just before long-stalled peace talks among the threewarring factions in Bosnia resume in Geneva on Thursday.
The United States wouldbe represented by Ambassador Charles Redman, the United States special envoy to the Bosnian talks, and France by top Foreign Ministry officials.
Accord Reached Last Week
The officials said an outline agreement to set up the group was reached lastweek by the American Secretary of State, Warren Christopher, and France'sForeign Minister, Alain Juppe even as they clashed over French requests that theUnited States put pressure on the Muslim-led Bosnian Government to end the war.


Review/Theater; With Simple Props of Paper, A Dramatic Lesson Unfolds
"No eating, drinking, gum chewing or feet on the seats unless you take the shoes off," said the usher.
At the Kaye Playhouse, the mitten-on-a-string crowd was out in force for the inventive Paper Bag Players' latest assortment of music, messages and merrymaking, "The Paper Bag Players, Rain or Shine."


Maxus Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Clinton's Jog Is No Escape
A day after lifting the trade embargo on Vietnam, President Clinton left the White House today for an early-morning jog and ran smack into a reminder that some of his neighbors were far from happy with his decision.
Mr.
Clinton did not deviate from his favorite route, which takes him toward the Lincoln Memorial along the Reflecting Pool -- and past a stand adjoining the Vietnam Memorial where memorabilia are sold.
It was not yet 8 A.M., but two veterans were waiting for him.


Magma Copper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.O.C. Official Says Harding Should Skate
A prominent member of the International Olympic Committee said today that Tonya Harding should be allowed to skate in the Winter Games unless she confesses or is convicted in connection with last month's assault on Nancy Kerrigan.
"You've got a tiger by the tail," said Richard Pound, a Montreal attorney and a member of the I.O.C.'s executive board.
"You come from a country with a long tradition of presumption of innocence. I don't think an accusation is enough. Grand juries can indict fire hydrants in the U.S. You couldn't take that seriously. Absent either a conviction or a confession, I don't think the U.S.O.C. has much of a choice."


Harley-Davidson Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


City Hall Focuses on School Managers and Gets a Fuzzy Image
How many administrators does it take to run the New York City public school system?
Although it might seem the beginning of a bad joke, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani raised the question in his plan to eliminate the job of every other manager at the Board of Education's headquarters at 110 Livingston Street in Brooklyn -- as much a symbol of bureaucratic resilience as the Pentagon.
Through what many say is bureaucratic obfuscation, no one inside or outside the school system can agree on how many managers, trainers, curriculum experts and support staff are included in the $7 billion school budget, let alone who should stay, who should leave, whose task is essential and whose is bloat.


Central La. Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coach Suspends Three Michigan Players
Three University of Michigan basketball players were suspended yesterday and will not play today against Michigan State for a violation of team policy, Coach STEVE FISHER said.
In a news release, Fisher said he learned of the policy violation by JIMMY KING, RAY JACKSON and CHRIS FIELDS on Wednesday. (AP)


Senators Take a Cautious Stand on School Prayer
Just a day after voting to withhold Federal money from schools that inhibit "constitutionally protected" prayer among students, senators approved a measure today that would allow the nation's public school children to have a brief period of contemplative silence during the school day.
The two measures, initially posed as alternative ways that senators of all persuasions could address the politically sensitive issue of prayer in schools in an election year, were adopted as the Senate moved toward passage of a popular bill to enhance academic standards in public schools.


Delay in Picking Envoy to India Is Attacked
A Senate subcommittee today sharply criticized the State Department official who oversees relations with India over the Clinton Administration's failure to fill the Ambassador's post in New Delhi.
She replied that the Administration hoped to have a nominee soon but left unclear who it would be.
For months, Administration officials had said President Clinton intended to appoint former Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn.
But the nomination was held up pending an investigation into his efforts to obtain a visa for a Hong Kong businessman with a criminal record -- an inquiry that ended without charges last week.


Ferro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.M. Asks for More Time on Electric Cars
The General Motors Corporation is sincerely trying to develop an electric vehicle consumers will buy but needs more time than state regulations allow, John F. Smith Jr., G.M.'s president and chief executive, said today.
In a speech here, Mr.
Smith appeared to be defending G.M.'s electric vehicle program against assertions in an article in The New York Times on Jan. 28.
"We are not putting our electric vehicle act on the road and planning for a flop, as was implied in one of the news articles last week," Mr.
Smith said.


Tosco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


General Instrument reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lions, Led by Freshman Guard, Make Penn Work for Ivy Lead
It was not supposed to be this difficult.
Penn, a heavy favorite over Columbia, found itself in a fight tonight.
It took nearly one half, but the Quakers finally responded, struggling to a 67-55 victory at the Palestra to assume sole possession of first place in the Ivy League.


Vietnam Welcomes U.S. Decision on Embargo; Hanoi's Response Subdued
Government officials welcomed President Clinton's lifting of the United States trade embargo on Vietnam in measured terms today.
But even though this capital, unlike Ho Chi Minh City in the south, has never known what it is like to have the United States as a trading partner, many ordinary Vietnamese here greeted the American action as a significant boost to the festive mood building up for Tet, the lunar new year holiday beginning on Thursday.


Brooklyn Jewel Robbery Leads to Fatal Gunfight
What began yesterday as a jewelry store robbery in Brooklyn turned into a wild car chase, including two collisions, a carjacking and an attempted carjacking, and ended with two people wounded by gunfire and one robber dead, the police said.
By midnight yesterday, only one of the six surviving robbers had been arrested, the police said.


Times Mirror Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


World War II Use of 'Holocaust' May Have Come From Poland
To the Editor:
In "Don't Cut Off Debate About the Holocaust" (letter, Jan. 1), Irene Zdziarski states that "The word 'Holocaust' in World War II was first used by Soviet Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee . . . in the December 24, 1942, daily bulletin of the Jewish Telegraphic Agency." However, the text of the communication in our possession refers to "atrocities that the Nazis have inflicted upon Jews in all occupied countries," without using the word "Holocaust."


Charles J. Schreiber, Public Relations Executive, 64
Charles J. Schreiber, a public relations executive and a governor of the Overseas Press Club of America for the last 25 years, died on Jan. 21 at his home in Rowayton, Conn.
He was 64.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, his family said.


U.S. and France to Form Bosnia Working Group
After their sharp dispute last week over policy in Bosnia, France and theUnited States are quietly attempting to convene a high-level working group that would coordinate European and American peacemaking efforts in the Balkan war andtake these efforts in a new direction.
French and American officials said today that a first meeting of the groupcould take place next week, just before long-stalled peace talks among the threewarring factions in Bosnia resume in Geneva on Thursday.
The United States wouldbe represented by Ambassador Charles Redman, the United States special envoy to the Bosnian talks, and France by top Foreign Ministry officials.
Accord Reached Last Week
The officials said an outline agreement to set up the group was reached lastweek by the American Secretary of State, Warren Christopher, and France'sForeign Minister, Alain Juppe even as they clashed over French requests that theUnited States put pressure on the Muslim-led Bosnian Government to end the war.


NBB Bancorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Herman's in an Accord on Reorganization
Herman's Sporting Goods Inc., the bankrupt sporting goods chain, said yesterday that it had reached agreement with its creditors on a reorganization plan, clearing the way for the company to emerge from bankruptcy protection this summer.
Under the proposal, which needs the approval of the United StatesBankruptcy Court, creditors would receive more than 90 cents' worth of cash and equity for each dollar they are owed.
In exchange, the unsecured creditors, most of which are suppliers like Nike, Reebok and Authentic Fitness, have agreed not to sell their $68 million in claims to third-party investors.


Timber Accord Destroys Forests
To the Editor:
Rich and poor countries of the world, you report Jan. 23, "have agreed on a draft accord that would put forest preservation on a par with the commercial demands of the global timber industry." You lead the reader to believe that this revision of a 1983 agreement protects tropical forests.
The International Tropical Timber Agreement is foremost a commodity agreement to promote tropical timber in the world's market.


With Fed Raising Rates, Bond Review Is in Order
WHEN the Fed announced that it was moving to raise short-term interest rates yesterday, the nervousness of already high-strung bond investors went up a notch.
But even before the announcement, their duty was clear: ease out of long-term bonds, gratefully pocketing the run-ups of recent years.
On the details, of course, advisers differ.
James B. Stack of Investech Research in Whitefish, Mont., sees short-term rates rising "up to 1.5 percent" by the end of the year; with 60 percent of his model portfolio already in cash, he urges others to make quick exits.
"There's no rush," countered Mary Malgoire, a financial planner with Malgoire Drucker in Bethesda, Md.


Robert E. Murray, Executive, 57
Robert E. Murray, a managing director of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company Inc. and former head of its American Depositary Department, died on Monday at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 57 and lived in Point Lookout, L.I.
The cause was cancer, a company spokesman said.


American Re Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


American Water Works reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Vietnam Welcomes U.S. Decision on Embargo
In the crowded streets of a city still better known to the world as Saigon, there was a sense today that the war was finally over, the last battle concluded half a world away in the corridors of the White House.
The news that President Clinton had decided to lift the American trade embargo against Vietnam reached here today shortly before dawn, and by breakfast it was the only topic of conversation to be found in much of Ho Chi Minh City, the city that the Americans had to flee in humiliation a generation ago.


For $6, a Trip to Another Season


Cocaine Seized in Industrial Machine Imported from Venezuela


First Hawaiian (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Defense Secretary Puts High-Tech Expertise to Use
The new Defense Secretary, William J. Perry, is an insider not only at the Pentagon but also in Silicon Valley, now the heartland of high-tech military electronics.
Mr.
Perry, who was confirmed, 97 to 0, by the Senate on Thursday night, has helped put together several high-tech military deals.
They are good examples of the strategic thinking that has made Mr.
Perry prominent among the elite corps of Silicon Valley's technologists and venture capitalists.
They included the Chrysler Corporation's purchase of Electrospace Systems Inc. for $367 million and the Boeing Company's acquisition of Argo Systems Inc. for $275 million.


Farm &amp; Home Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Coleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hype About Health
On the surface, the health care arguments all week were about price controls and employer payments and bureaucracy, as two leading business groups came out against President Clinton's proposals and Representative Jim Cooper's more modest plan attracted increasing attention.
The arguments, and especially the accompanying slogans and exaggerations, obscure an unusually serious enterprise with few parallels since World War II, a real three-way debate about the future of health care in the nation.
The issue is whether the nation can and should provide everyone with health insurance.


2 Posts, but Only 1 Goalie Between Them
They were teammates for three years at the University of Maine, alternating as starters.
The rivalry between Mike Dunham and Garth Snow escalated here tonight to determine who will be Team USA's starting goaltender at the Lillehammer Games.
After a five-game stretch in which he permitted a torrent of goals, Dunham was superb even though Team USA lost to Sweden's B squad, 3-0.
It was the first shutout against the United States on its pre-Olympic tour.
The team has an overall record of 37-17-5, 22-9-1 when Dunham starts and 13-5-2 with Snow.
Other goalies are 2-3-2.


Business Digest
The Economy
The Federal Reserve nudged short-term interest rates higher.
But economists said the move would not raise the rates that Americans paid on home mortgages or car loans, and was not likely to have an immediate effect on the health of the economy.  [ Page 1. ]


Raymond James Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Beliefs; The Funniest Rabbi Contest: when it comes to stand-up comedy, most should sit down.
There may be a lot of witty rabbis around, but two out of three have no future as stand-up comedians.
That rule emerged on Monday from Round 2 of the Funniest Rabbi in New York Contest.
The contest is the idea of Cary Hoffman, the owner of Stand-Up N.Y., a comedy club at West 78th Street and Broadway in Manhattan.
He has organized competitions for the Funniest Lawyer, Funniest Wall Streeter, Funniest Taxi Driver (English-language division) and Funniest Police Officer.
He has also done Funniest Unemployed Person, a particularly handy category since it includes most stand-up comedians.


Sale Is Set For Boston Newspaper
Rupert Murdoch said today that he would sell The Boston Herald to its publisher of the last 10 years, Patrick J. Purcell.
The sale will clear the way for Mr.
Murdoch to buy back the local Fox television station, WFXT, Channel 25.
He was forced to sell the station in 1989 by the Federal Communications Commission, which prohibits companies from owning two media outlets in the same market.


Crossland Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Inquiries Proceed As Harding Skates On
As figure skating officials in Colorado Springs prepared to announce on Saturday the result of an inquiry into Tonya Harding's knowledge of the assault on Nancy Kerrigan, investigators here continued to examine evidence in the case and measure her credibility against what else they have found.
The five-member panel investigating whether Harding violated the United States Figure Skating Association's code of ethics adjourned today in Colorado after a five-and-half-hour meeting without making a decision.


Old National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


World War II Use of 'Holocaust' May Have Come From Poland; Syndrome Known in '52
To the Editor:
In "Don't Cut Off All Debate About the Holocaust" (letter, Jan. 1) Irene Zdziarski cites a bibliography by my Norwegian colleague Leo Eitinger and myself, of references to "1,600 medical articles, 'Psychological and Physical Effects of Concentration Camps,' a post-acute stress disorder, popularized by Patrick Buchanan as Holocaust survivor syndrome."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE 6.00 6.00 6.00
DISCOUNT RATE 3.00 3.00 3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS* 3.25 3.12 2.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS 3.20 3.12 2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS 3.36 3.25 3.07
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES 5.87 5.76 6.30
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS 6.35 6.30 7.15
TELEPHONE BONDS 7.25 7.21 8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS** 5.46 5.43 6.22
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Canfor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Observer; In Comatose Mumble
All the ingredients are in place for the making of another fine mess in the best Laurel and Hardy tradition.
First, almost every politician in Washington needs something that can be called a "health care bill" and needs it quick.
In time for autumn campaigning, in fact.
Second, there is absolutely no consensus in Washington about what this wondrous "health care bill" should do or be.


A Surprise Resignation In Publishing
William M. Shinker resigned unexpectedly yesterday as head of the adult trade division at HarperCollins, the publishing house where he has worked for the last 10 years.
George Craig, the company's chief executive, said he had promoted Mr.
Shinker's deputy, Jack McKeown, to take Mr.
Shinker's place as group vice president and publisher of the adult trade division.


Valley Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Borg-Warner Automotive reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


John Wickham, 85; Innovative Farmer In Suffolk County
John Wickham, an innovative agricultural scientist who was a pioneer in the planting of grapes and other fruits in Suffolk County and whose family farmed in Cutchogue for 300 years, died on Thursday at Eastern Long Island Hospital in Greenport.
He was 85.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter, Parnel Wickham-Searl.


Ralph Farnworth, Actor, 71
Ralph Farnworth, a character actor who specialized in musicals, died on Wednesday at his home in New York City.
He was 71.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Tess Elliott.


Corrections
A dance review on Thursday about a performance by the Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance Company on Tuesday at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College misidentified the performer of the solo in "A Stravinsky Montage." She was Donna Scro, not Joelle Van Sickle.


Getting In on Savings Bank Conversions
When the Green Point Savings Bank converted to stock ownership a week ago, its stock soared 27 percent on the first day of trading.
Depositors who bought shares of the Flushing, Queens, institution in advance booked a tidy paper profit.
Similar deals remain plausible.
Although bank regulators and Congressmen are concerned about windfalls going to bank officials and have put such conversions on hold, their efforts may merely delay the inevitable.
About 1,200 mutual savings institutions remain, and 75 have more than $500 million in assets.


Chrysler Recalls Neon Cars Again, This Time for Faulty Engine Part
For the second time since its new Neon model went on sale last month, the Chrysler Corporation has recalled the subcompact to repair a defect.
To replace the defective part, an electronic engine control system, Chrysler will halt the production of Neons at its assembly plant in Belvidere, Ill., for at least a week.
The recall will slow delivery of a car that had generated great consumer interest because of unusual styling, low price and a vigorous advertising campaign.


Review/Dance; Martins Tries to Fit Rachmaninoff Into the Mold
After Tchaikovsky's genius paved the way, it was common for Russia's most eminent composers to write original music for the ballet.
Stravinsky did so, as did Prokofiev.
Oddly, Rachmaninoff did not.
Part of the explanation might be found in "Symphonic Dances," a ballet that Peter Martins has set to Rachmaninoff's 1940 score of the same name.
The work, led earnestly by Nikolaj Hubbe and Darci Kistler, was given its premiere by the New York City Ballet on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.


Opening to a New Vietnam
President Clinton did the right thing for the United States this week in ending the 19-year-old ban on Americans' doing business with Vietnam.
For Mr.
Clinton, it was an act of political courage.
Had his predecessors been able to take a larger view of American interests, they would have lifted the embargo years ago.
Vietnam has been changing dramatically for nearly a decade.
Most of the differences that drove Hanoi and Washington to war in the 1960's and 1970's and kept them at odds through the early 1980's have disappeared.


Russian Astronaut Kept Busy Aboard Discovery


Utilities and Asian Markets Off in Early '94
Specialized stock funds that invest in only one sector of the market captured the limelight in the first two weeks of 1994.
Because of their limited scope, these funds are usually more volatile than diversified stock funds.
Investors sometimes have trouble sitting tight when share prices fluctuate: assets of health care funds, for example, have slid to $4 billion, from $6 billion in 1991, when such stocks were flying high.
Among the losers early this year were utility funds, which have suffered from an uptick in interest rates.
Most of the laggards, however, were victims of profit taking in the emerging markets of Southeast Asia, which enjoyed terrific run-ups last year but have fallen back.
Pacific stock funds were hit hardest, not surprising given their 55 percent average return last year.
Foreign and world stock fund categories were also penalized for Southeast Asian holdings.


Former Florida Coach Attempts Suicide
CHARLEY PELL, who was dismissed from his job as Florida football coach nearly a decade ago after an investigation into widespread recruiting violations, is suffering from depression and tried to kill himself, his doctor said yesterday in Jacksonville, Fla.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5 HEADY ERA OPENS IN VIETNAM
Armed with checkbooks and marketing plans, American business people began flooding back onto the streets of Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, to capitalize on the lifting of the American trade embargo against Vietnam.
In the streets, many people reacted with excitement.  1


U.S. Is Seeking Tougher Embargo Despite the Strain on Haiti's Poor
Despite growing concern that the embargo on Haiti is not working and is badly squeezing that nation's poor, the United States said today that it would ask the United Nations Security Council next week to impose tougher sanctions on Haiti.
The proposed new sanctions, which aim to show Haiti's military leaders that the world will not back down in its campaign to force them to restore democracy, would broaden the current embargo on fuel and arms to include almost everything except food and medicine.


Watson Finds Game Where It All Began
One of golf's more enduring love affairs -- Tom Watson and Pebble Beach Golf Links -- was renewed here today.
Playing in the second round of the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am, across the links he regularly trod as a student at nearby Stanford, Watson rekindled the relationship and restarted his golf game.
Watson, 44, shot an airtight round of 67 that was as cool and flawless as the day that embraced the Monterey Peninsula.
He didn't bogey a hole, and begins the weekend one stroke behind the leader, Davis Love 3d, who had seven birdies in a round of 66 and stands alone at 135, 9 under par.


Sensible Rezoning for the East Side
On Monday, a City Council committee will vote on zoning changes for Manhattan's Upper East Side -- significant changes that would prevent developers from building any more of those tall, skinny towers that New Yorkers have every reason to hate.
The residential rezoning appears headed for approval, as it should be.
These sound new rules -- the result of years of work by community groups and the City Planning Commission -- would rectify weaknesses in zoning regulations.
The current zoning allows developers to put up very tall residential buildings in exchange for building public plazas at street level.
The idea seemed to make sense: give developers a bonus of more stories for their buildings if they provide some public space.
Only it didn't work out that way.
The plazas turned into extensions of the apartment towers they surrounded, rather than usable space for the public.
Some plazas also created maintenance and safety headaches, encouraging co-op boards to make them even less accessible to the public.


Paul Revere Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Student Defends Decision On Islam Nation Speaker
Michael Burton, cutting his teeth on the rough edges of democracy, has not seen many weeks like this one in his 22 years.
The undergraduate is head of the Trenton State College committee that has invited Khalid Abdul Muhammad to speak.
Mr.
Burton has received four death threats -- two of them this week -- but he is standing firm about welcoming Mr.
Muhammad, the Nation of Islam spokesman who was demoted Thursday by the organization's leader, Louis Farrakhan, after making anti-white and anti-Semitic remarks in a speech at Kean College in Union, N.J.


Review/Theater; Embracing Dostoyevsky And the Big Questions
There could be few more daunting tasks for any theater company than to try to reduce "The Brothers Karamazov," Dostoyevsky's final disputation with God constructed around a murder mystery, to a mere three hours' traffic on the stage.
Happily, David Fishelson and the Jean Cocteau Repertory are dauntless.
The company has mounted a solid production of Mr.
Fishelson's adaptation, which remains faithful throughout to the spirit, if not always to the letter, of Dostoyevsky's towering masterpiece.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Enja All-Stars  Sweet Basil 88 Seventh Avenue South (above Bleecker Street) Greenwich Village Through tomorrow


A Charles Kuralt Visit Turns Into 15 Years
It is one of the myths of television news, Charles Kuralt intones in his familiar voice, as deep and mellow as a cello's, that nobody watches segments about the arts.
As evidence, Mr.
Kuralt points out that people have been watching his "Sunday Morning" on CBS in respectable numbers for 15 years, and nothing has distinguished this program as much as its coverage of subjects like music, painting, sculpture and architecture.


Aspin Steps Down


Noble Drilling Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Perot Attacks Clinton's Health Plan and Flirts With an Alternative
Never one to stay out of the spotlight too long, Ross Perot tried to take center stage today with the opening of a national conference of his political organization.
And who should he invite but Representative Jim Cooper, whose health care plan has become a leading alternative to the one being peddled by the President.
For his part, Mr.
Perot assailed President Clinton's proposal for national health coverage as too costly and too reliant on a Federal bureaucracy.
He also suggested that Mr.
Cooper's more modest plan would be better.


Houston Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Baron Alessandro Albrizzi, Photographer and Writer, 59
Baron Alessandro Rubin de Cervin Albrizzi, a photographer and writer who chronicled the gardens of Venice, Florence and New York, died on Thursday in Venice.
He was 59 and lived in Venice.
The cause of death was cancer, said his companion, Hiram Williams.


Worker Claims Discrimination By AIDS Group
An employee of Gay Men's Health Crisis has filed a lawsuit in Federal court against the group, asserting that he was discriminated against because he has AIDS.
The suit by James A. Fielding, who served as coordinator of volunteers for the AIDS agency, charges "acts of disability discrimination" and asks for $1.7 million in compensatory and punitive damages.
Mr.
Fielding, who is in the hospital with hepatitis, said he was denied a fair chance to compete for a position that required him to work weekends because of fears that he would call in sick frequently.


Petro-Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Orleans Mayor's Race Heats Up
Mardi Gras is fast approaching, with its usual excesses in tow, but this year New Orleans is grappling with more serious concerns as well.
Voters here are trying to choose a new mayor who can cure an excess of ills: high crime, blighted housing, an economy still coughing from the collapse of oil prices, a loss of faith in City Hall, and middle-class flight to the suburbs.
And just around the bend, there will be the need to cope with a giant casino planned for downtown.


Illinois Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
There are perhaps 200 tournament players who have won several national championships, in some cases so many that they have lost count.
There are a thousand times that number who have never won one, and are resigned to the fact that they never will.
And in between there are those who have had one proud moment of triumph.
One of these was Alice Stakgold of Newark, Del., who died of cancer on Monday.
Away from the bridge table, she had been an energetic worker for many volunteer organizations, and was formerly president of the Service League of Northern Virginia.


CHRONICLE
Could this be a scene for a Woody Allen movie?
A party at midnight on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive?
Never mind that this has been a bone-chilling winter; New York Hospital is giving a party there tonight at midnight.
Doctors, nurses, trustees and supporters will turn up, said Dr.
DAVID B. SKINNER, president of the hospital, to watch the arrival of the first piece of the platform on which the hospital's new building will be constructed.
It will span the Drive, from 68th to 70th streets.
"A barge will carry a 300-foot crane across the river that will lift a 760-ton platform up onto six columns, so we are having a good old barn-raising to watch," Dr.
Skinner said.
The F.D.R. will be closed for the event.


Q and A
Mutual Fund Returns  Q. How are annualized total returns for mutual funds figured?
ELAINE EDELMAN, Manhattan  A. To do the calculation, you first assume an initial investment is made at the net asset value of the fund at the beginning of a period of, say, one, three or five years.


Atlanta Gas Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Caution, Lane Ends!


Bruncor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Leave Politics Behind At China Culture Park
To the Editor:
Thank you for "China Becomes Theme Park, but Cultural Debate Remains Real" (news article, Jan. 9), on the opening of the Splendid China theme park at Kissimmee, Fla.
I wish to set the record straight on the spelling of my name and other points.


Executive Changes
BECKMAN INSTRUMENTS INC., Fullerton, Calif., appointed Dennis K. Wilson, vice president and treasurer, to be vice president of finance and chief financial officer, replacing George Kilmain, who retired.
HARDEE'S FOOD SYSTEMS INC., Rocky Mount, N.C., named Al Schnitzlein executive vice president of Hardee's and general manager of its Roy Rogers division, succeeding Ron Powell, who resigned earlier this year.


People's Bank (Conn.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


OnBancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Why the New Feminists Sound Different
To the Editor:
Re Anna Quindlen's "And Now, Babe Feminism" (column, Jan. 19):


Risky Choices in the World of Long-Term Care
When his mother was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, Anthony Fresco, a divorces engineer from Huntington Station, L.I., knew he had to make som elong-term arrangement for her care.
Even though he sought advice from a lawyer, some of his financial decisions proved to be less that optmal.
"When something like this happens, you panic," Mr.
Fresco said.
"I would have been better off if I had taken some time to think things through. The best advice I can give someone else is to go to a care manager." To find someone who know Medicaid rules can provide referrals, contact your local departments for social services and the aging.


Woman Is Arrested In Death of an Infant
A 27-year-old Queens woman was arrested last night in the death of her newborn baby.
The police said the woman, Renee Davis of 206-55 46th Avenue, gave birth alone in the bathroom of her Bayside home.
She then wrapped the baby boy in a plastic bag and dropped him in the backyard of an adjoining house early yesterday morning before going to a her job in a nearby factory, the police said.


Whirlpool Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rangers Open the Vault For New Gonzalez Deal
At the Texas Rangers' news conference yesterday to announce a new contract for their young star Juan Gonzalez, the club president was asked about the owners' recently adopted revenue-sharing plan.
"The first revenue sharing we're doing," Thomas Schieffer said, "is with Juan."


Kotashaan Is Horse of Year
The French-bred horse Kotashaan, who won racing's Eclipse Award two weeks ago as the grass champion of 1993, was crowned with the sport's ultimate honor, the title of Horse of the Year, at the Eclipse Awards dinner last night in New Orleans.
In the bloc voting format used, Kotashaan was the 2-1 winner over another grass horse, Lure.
He beat Lure, 13-7, in the Thoroughbred Racing Association Vote and 65-53 in the National Turf Writers Association ballot, but the Daily Racing Form voters favored Lure, 41-38.


Corrections
A chart with an article in Your Money on Jan. 22, about the taxes that must be paid for nannies and other household workers, omitted the cost of workers' compensation in New York City.
A couple paying a household worker $20,000 a year in the city would owe about $425 in annual premiums for workers' compensation in addition to state disability tax.


Rubbermaid Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


L.I.R.R. Union Says It May Go on Strike
Long Island Rail Road workers who have gone without a raise since 1990 said today that they would go on strike on Feb. 17 unless they got a new contract, but the railroad said a new Federal cooling-off period would block any job action until June.
Edward Yule Jr., the general chairman of the United Transportation Union, said there would be a walkout at 12:01 A.M.
Feb. 17, at the end of an initial 120-day cooling-off period sought by the railroad in October.
He urged Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to direct the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the railroad's parent agency, to resume talks.


Continental Baking Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Mozambique's New Army Is Uniting Old Enemies
After spending 7 of his 22 years pursuing guerrillas through the scorpion-infested hills of Mozambique, war-weary Sgt.
Joao Antonio has found a job that, he is told, makes him a pioneer of peace and a harbinger of democracy.
He has joined the army.


Farrakhan Is Bitterly Denounced By House Black Caucus Member
A senior House member of the Congressional Black Caucus said today that the lawmakers had held three unpublicized meetings with Louis Farrakhan, the head of the Nation of Islam, over a long period before their relationship with him ruptured this week.
In a written message made public today, Representative Major R. Owens, a Brooklyn Democrat, bitterly denounced Mr.
Farrakhan's movement as a "hate-mongering fringe group" that he said was spreading "dangerous poison" and must be repudiated.
He also expressed indignation at the notion that the caucus had ever established a formal relationship with the Nation of Islam, as the caucus chairman, Representative Kweisi Mfume of Maryland, said in September.
Mr.
Owens said that Mr.
Farrakhan had asked for all three meetings with the caucus, and that most members had insisted that the meetings be kept private out of concern that outsiders would misinterpret their purpose.
Unhappiness in the Caucus
Mr.
Owens's statement is perhaps the strongest attack on Mr.
Farrakhan by a member of the black caucus since a debate erupted over a vitriolic attack on whites, Catholics and Jews by a senior aide to Mr.
Farrakhan.
It also is the strongest hint so far at unhappiness among some of the caucus's 40 members over the decision by Mr.
Mfume to link the group to Mr.
Farrakhan's movement.
A spokesman for Mr.
Mfume declined to comment on Mr.
Owens's remarks, and said the Congressman had decided to say no more about the matter.
Mr.
Owens could not be reached for comment today, and aides to several other caucus members declined to discuss the statement on the record.
In September, Mr.
Mfume had appeared with Mr.
Farrakhan at a black caucus legislative seminar and announced what he called a "sacred covenant" between the two groups to work on the problems of blacks in America.
But that relationship came under scrutiny in recent days after Khalid Abdul Muhammad, a minister and representative of the Nation of Islam, delivered a ferocious attack on whites and other religions in a speech in November at Kean College in Union, N.J.
Speech Termed 'Repugnant'
In the speech Mr.
Muhammad called Jews "bloodsuckers" of the black nation and said Pope John Paul II is a "no-good cracker." He also called for blacks in South Africa to rise up and kill whites in that country.
On Thursday, under growing pressure to reject the remarks, Mr.
Farrakhan said he was demoting Mr.
Muhammad and called his speech "repugnant," "malicious" and "mean-spirited." But Mr.
Farrakhan stopped short of repudiating the speech, saying it included some "truths."
Reaction to Mr.
Farrakhan's remarks among prominent black officials has been muted.
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson issued a statement Thursday commending Mr.
Farrakhan for disciplining his aide and called for an end to harsh words on all sides, but did not address the substance of Mr.
Farrakhan's remarks.
In a statement today, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People said the organization was satisfied with Mr.
Farrakhan's actions and was prepared to believe that he "is neither anti-Semitic nor racist." Again, the statement did not address Mr.
Farrakhan's remarks.
The organization's executive director, Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., said the N.A.A.C.P. now plans to sponsor a meeting of black leaders that Mr.
Farrakhan had previously proposed.
Mr.
Owens's reaction today was considerably stronger.
In his statement, he said the desire of the caucus and other black groups for public unity was "being exploited by a frustrated, misguided and unproductive fringe crowd."


Dime Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fishermen's Protest Turns Violent in France


Entergy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.R.S. Pays Informants (But Reward Is Taxable)
YOU won't find Federal tax form 211 at the local post office.
After all, filers do not use the document to report income or expenses.
They use it to report tax cheats -- and claim a share of any taxes recovered as a result of their efforts.
During the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, Americans filed 11,393 of these simple, one-page claims.
About 7 percent of them led to financial rewards.
Rewards are paid only when the information is not previously known or available in public records.


Ralston Purina Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Fed's Move Jolts Stock and Bond Markets
The Federal Reserve sent an Arctic blast through Wall Street yesterday, chilling the stock and bond markets and raising questions about the future of this year's remarkable rally in equities.
Although traders have talked about higher interest rates for months, they were taken aback when the Fed suddenly announced the first increase in short-term interest rates in five years, a move that raised overnight interest rates to 3.25 percent from 3 percent.


Kansas City Life Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Horsham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Chia Journal; Where Did the Don Get His Fortune?
With steaks sizzling on charcoal, the waiters in cowboy hats, a band playing "ranchera" country music, and Colombian walking horses prancing through the dining room, La Margarita del Ocho steakhouse has become the latest popular family outing for Bogota residents.
But helping to pack the parking lot of the 700-seat restaurant 15 miles north of the capital is the star quality of the restaurant's new owner, Fabio Ochoa Restrepo.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Carolyn and Michael Leonhart Singer and trumpet player Michael's Pub 211 East 55th Street Manhattan


Review/Music; Zubin Mehta Visits With a Gift of Mahler
On the day Kurt Masur announced his plans for his fourth season on the podium of the New York Philharmonic, his predecessor, Zubin Mehta, took over Carnegie Hall for the first of two concerts with the Israel Philharmonic.
The program on Tuesday evening was part of Carnegie Hall's two-season Mahler cycle, and was devoted fully to the Second Symphony, the "Resurrection." Tonight, Mr.
Mehta and the orchestra are to play a work by Pavel Haas, the Brahms Second Symphony and the Sibelius Violin Concerto, with Itzhak Perlman.
Does absence make the heart grow fonder?
Perhaps it's too soon to tell.
In sections of the five-movement work -- particularly in the delicate, almost Haydnesque Andante moderato and the sublime choral finale -- Mr.
Mehta was at his best.
But the kind of emotional abandon that gives Mahler's titanic scores their urgency and dimension was not always in generous supply.


Ruling Is Seen as a Threat To Preferences in Bidding
By invalidating a New York City program that gives preferential treatment to women and members of minority groups who bid on municipal contracts, a State Supreme Court judge may have undermined incentive programs for other businesses in the city, regardless of the race or sex of their owners.
On Monday Justice Walter B. Tolub ruled that the city's affirmative action "price preference" violated a state law that requires government agencies to accept the lowest bids in awarding contracts.
The preference, allowing women and members of minority groups to bid up to 10 percent higher than their competitors, is one provision of a broader two-year-old program intended to increase the participation in city contracts of companies that have often been excluded.


MBIA Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Competing Suitors Emerge For Newspaper in Britain
A full-blown fight erupted today for control of The Independent, the innovative British newspaper that has fallen on hard times.
The battle's first round went to Anthony F. J. O'Reilly, the chairman of the H. J. Heinz Company and the owner of Ireland's largest newspaper publishing company.
Mr.
O'Reilly, who has long sought a toehold in the British newspaper business, bought a stake of nearly 25 percent in Newspaper Publishing P.L.C., the parent company of The Independent and The Independent on Sunday, for $:18.4 million in cash, or $27.6 million.
The price was equal to $:3.50 for a share of the closely held company.


Pennsylvania Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


'63 MURDER CASE GOES TO THE JURY
The jury in the third trial of Byron De La Beckwith on charges of murdering the civil rights leader Medgar Evers in 1963 began deliberations today after seven days of trial.
Jurors deliberated for five hours before Judge L. Breland Hilburn of Hinds County Circuit Court allowed them to adjourn for the evening, saying he did not want them to be "uncomfortable" in their deliberations.
They are to meet again on Saturday.


Artists' Insurance Policies Tell All
History remembers the pianist Ignace Paderewski as a virtuoso, a gifted composer and a statesman.
Mutual of New York remembers him as a darned good insurance risk.
In 1921, Paderewski, then 61 and living in Paso Robles, Calif., applied for a $50,000 policy, and an investigator was assigned to report on his health, habits and net worth.
The report to New York couldn't have been more satisfactory.
Paderewski earned about $200,000 a year and spent money "very freely." How freely?
"I might mention that when he goes to the 'movies' in Paso Robles, he pays them $20 not to play the organ while he is there."


Federal Reserve, Changing Course, Raises A Key Rate
After five years of falling interest rates that helped pull the American economy out of recession, the Federal Reserve nudged short-term rates higher today with the aim of prolonging the current economic expansion by preventing a short, unsustainable burst of growth.
The Federal Reserve increased the rate for overnight loans between banks by a quarter of a percentage point, to 3.25 percent.
This reversal in monetary policy will scarcely affect the interest rates that Americans pay on home mortgages or car loans, economists and business executives said, nor is it likely to have any immediate effect on the health of the economy.
But it set off a strong reaction in the stock market, which fell sharply after the Federal Reserve announcement.


Review/Music; A Chorus of Strong Voices Recalls The Pure Force of Marian Anderson
As might have been expected, the tribute to Marian Anderson on Thursday evening at Aaron Davis Hall offered some splendid singing, not least in recorded examples of Anderson's own incomparable artistry.
But the most stirring moment came in the least accomplished bit of vocalism.
The poet Maya Angelou, who was to open the program with a reading, sang instead: "Comin' Through the Rye," of all things, with a delightful Scottish burr on "rye." Her technique was, uh, shaky, but no matter; her speech, let alone song, is more mellifluous than most singers' best efforts.


The Lion Whines About Mr. Adams
When President Clinton granted a two-day visa to Gerry Adams, the wise course for an unhappy British Government would have been to cut its losses and dismiss the matter as an internal U.S. affair -- as the British initially seemed to be doing.
Then early this week, Prime Minister John Major and his Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, inexplicably threw a fit.
The U.S.
Ambassador to Britain was summoned to Downing Street for a harsh lecture, and the British public was treated to the peculiar TV spectacle of a Larry King interview on CNN with Mr.
Adams, in which an actor spoke the Sinn Fein leader's responses.
Under British law Mr.
Adams can be seen but not heard on television, and instead of challenging this bizarre censorship, CNN cravenly chose to comply.
A similar ban in the Irish Republic was allowed to lapse on Jan. 19, and Mr.
Adams's voice can now be heard by many Britons with access to Irish radio and TV.
If Mr.
Major is indeed serious about his Government's new peace initiative on Northern Ireland, he should also be ending censorship and encouraging debate.
The British media, however, lack our safeguards for free speech, making them much more vulnerable to politicians' whims.
In this case it seems appropriate to ask just what the old lion is afraid of.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Barrasso Is Back, but Lemieux Isn't  Pittsburgh goalie Tom Barrasso, making his first start in over a month, stopped 29 shots and Martin Straka and Joe Mullen each had two goals and an assist as the Penguins rallied to defeat the Red Wings in Detroit, 6-3, last night.
Barrasso had missed the last 14 games with a sprained knee.
The Pittsburgh star Mario Lemieux, still recovering from off-season back surgery, missed his 35th straight game.
Lemieux participated in the Penguins' morning skate yesterday, but left after a few minutes. (AP)


Coslet Speaks Out About His Dismissal
BRUCE COSLET, the former Jets coach, said he never refused to hire an offensive coordinator, a reason cited by General Manager DICK STEINBERG for his firing on Jan. 7.
"I welcomed somebody taking the pressure off me," he told the Madison Square Garden Network in taped interviews.
"I was all for it." (AP)


U.S. Urges China to Pressure North Koreans to Open Nuclear Sites
The United States, supported by Britain, France and Russia, appealed to China today to put renewed pressure on North Korea to open its nuclear installations to international inspection and warned they will start pressing for Security Council sanctions against the Pyongyang Government if it has not done so by Feb. 21.
This is the starting date for a three-day meeting of the 35-nation executive board of the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency, which, in the absence of any new North Korean concessions by then, is expected to endorse the agency's view that it can no longer give the the assurances it needs to about the peaceful nature of North Korea's nuclear program.


Man in the News: Bernard William Nussbaum; Litigator on a Tightrope
To many, Bernard W. Nussbaum, the White House counsel, embodies the notion that the difference between New York and Washington is sometimes more than just 240 miles.
In the 12 years or so before he became the President's chief lawyer last January, Mr.
Nussbaum was among a handful of top New York lawyers who helped chart the corporate takeovers of the 1980's.
His tactical decisions affected the flow of millions of dollars and he was celebrated for his wit and intellectual nimbleness.


Bronx Man Is Charged in Robbing of 14, Including Many Elderly
The 92-year-old woman, less than five feet tall, showed a visitor to her Bronx apartment the bruises on her arms, still plainly visible two weeks after the attack.
"My whole face was like this," she said.
"He hit me on my face when I yelled for help. No one came."
On Thursday, the police arrested a man and charged him with 14 robberies in the Bronx since Dec. 3, crimes in which the victims were pushed into their apartments or cornered in elevators.
The police said that five of the people preyed on by the suspect, Nathaniel Wilson, 25, of 2350 Ryer Avenue, were women over the age of 75.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Lonnie Smith, outfielder, on a minor-league contract.


Public &amp; Private; Filling The Vacuum
The actor Danny Glover played Kean College Thursday evening.
Among other things, he recited a poem by Langston Hughes in his rich and sonorous voice:
O, let America be America again --


Woman Hit by Falling Ice From High-Rise
A large chunk of ice fell from a high-rise building in midtown Manhattan on Friday night, hitting a 24-year-old woman who was crossing 33d Street between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue, the police said.
The woman, Jill Gardenfeld of Flushing, Queens, suffered a broken shoulder and internal chest injuries.
She underwent surgery early Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and was unconscious yesterday afternoon.


North Korea's Huge Military Spurs New Strategy in South
While the world is focused on North Korea's program to develop nuclearweapons, an equally serious buildup in conventional troops and equipment in the North has prompted United States military commanders to overhaul their plans fordefending South Korea.
Over the last year, North Korea has used its huge array of artillery andtroops near the heavily fortified border to try to intimidate the United States and its Asian allies from dealing too sternly with it on its nuclear weaponsplans.


SUNDAY, February 6, 1994; Are Puppets Taking Over the World?
And, in the Grammy category Best Musical Album for Children, the nominees are -- by and large -- not human.
Barney, Aladdin, the Muppets and Tim Burton's nightmare crew all have albums that are up for the award.
Though a lot of human beings were no doubt involved in the production of the albums, the characters themselves are at best hybrids.
The humans nominated are Peter, Paul and Mary, for their album "Peter, Paul and Mommy, Too." So are children going to think that only puppets and cartoon characters are good singers?
Is this bad?
For children?
For puppets?
For singers?
At least Bert and Ernie aren't in the running; that would be altogether too complicated.


Sports of The Times; The Great Jordan Experiment
THE basket doesn't move. The baseball does.
Quite simply, that's the difference in the two sports for Michael Jordan, in his transition from soaring at altitude as arguably the best basketball player in history to settling his spikes into the dirt of a batter's box in learning how to hit major league pitching.


Are Your Dreams Hollywood Material?
It's no secret that movies pervade the popular culture -- but just how much?
In the book, "The Phantom Empire," Geoffrey O'Brien posits that movies are so much a part of our psyches that memories of them often substitute for actual memories based on personal experience, invading our thoughts and dreams.


10 Men Put 300 Years at I.B.M. to Use
IS there life after I.B.M.?
Yes, say 10 former I.B.M. executives who together have had almost 300 years of experience at International Business Machines.
Now they have joined forces and built a business of their own.
Their business, Multinational Market Services Group, is a high-tech marketing-consulting concern in White Plains specializing in helping companies anticipate and manage market changes, said Stanley Freid, the 65-year-old founder of the group who during his 31 years at I.B.M. held positions ranging from international business manager to senior manager of direct marketing.


What Do Men Want?
To the Editor:
It is no accident that the same issue of The New York Times in which the Book Review featured Richard A. Shweder's essay "What Do Men Want? A Reading List for the Male Identity Crisis" (Jan. 9), the Magazine contained a photo spread in which male shoe designers modeled their own pumps.


Pride Goeth
In the absence of a celebrity scandal or a political controversy, the focus in Colorado this season has returned to skiing.
But it's not quite skiing as usual, not with the bizarre new apparatus that is the talk of the slopes: the Constant-Force Articulated Dynamic Struts.
Called simply CADS, it consists of high-strength, tension-controlled rods that extend from the top of the ski boot to a harness strapped around the waist and thighs.
It was designed to give skiers with decrepit knees and sore legs a new lease on the sport.
But the visual effect is lethal.
The rods, which graze a skier's derriere, look like something a proctologist might have invented.


Judith Lee Hettler, George Grune Jr.
Judith Lee Hettler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Hettler of Atlanta, was married there yesterday to George Vincent Grune Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Grune of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
James L. Collins Jr., a Disciples of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Peachtree Christian Church.
Mrs.
Grune, 34, is a director of marketing at Discovery Communications Inc. in Bethesda, Md., the company that operates the Discovery Channel and the Learning Channel on cable television.
She graduated from Northwestern University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the owner and president of JRH Associates Inc., a telecommunications consulting company in Atlanta.
Her mother, Miriam F. Hettler, is the director of children's choirs at the Cathedral of St.
Phillip, in Atlanta.


SUNDAY, February 6, 1994; New Kick From Cocaine
The coca plant, not the cocoa plant (see item at far right) but the one cocaine comes from, may have a new use.
When cocaine is sprayed on tomato plants, it freaks out the tomato hornworms.
They become hyperactive and develop tremors.
At higher concentrations than occur naturally in the coca leaves, cocaine kills the worms.
An analogue of cocaine might make a safe pesticide, according to scientists.
In the meantime, could confiscated cocaine be dumped on spots like golf courses (see below), where other pesticides are problematic?
If so, golfers should follow Bill Clinton's youthful example.
Don't inhale.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York HOUSE
1.
Emergency Aid: Vote on an amendment to an emergency aid bill that would delete $1.2 billion earmarked for the Pentagon.
Rejected 260 to 158, Feb. 3.


The Professorial Workload
To the Editor:
I recently left a successful industry career to teach and conduct research at the University of California.
My experience has been that working as a professor is more work for less money.
If Mr.
Sanders is truly interested in "recruiting more competent, energetic professors," he is going about it all wrong by writing a statistically unfounded, mean-spirited, anti-academic letter.
JONATHAN GRUDIN  Irvine, Calif., Jan. 17


Marcy Dunn, Mikel A. Lehrman
Marcy Dunn, a daughter of Lois and Gerald Dunn of Neponsit, Queens, was married last evening to Mikel Alan Lehrman, the son of Deborah B. Lehrman of Los Angeles and Bruce J. Lehrman of Farmington Hills, Mich.
Rabbi Allan Blaine performed the ceremony at the Harvard Club of New York City.
The bride, 28, graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
She is the vice president and a partner in Sar-Dun Knitwear, an apparel manufacturer and importer of which her father is the president.
Her mother is a social worker at Martin Van Buren High School in Queens Village, Queens.


Speeding Around Track, Blair Hears Distant Clock
IN countries like Norway and the Netherlands, where speed skaters are superstars, people turn and gawk at Bonnie Blair.
They are polite about it, in their generally excellent English, but they let her know they recognize her as the winner of three Olympic gold medals.
She thinks she likes the attention.
"It's very unique," Blair said recently.
"These people know you in your uniform, they know your skating style, they know your times, they know you in street clothes. I can still go about my business, but it's nice."


Corrections
A picture caption and a chart on Jan. 16 comparing Golden Globe awards and Academy Awards misidentified the Academy Award-winning film for 1944.
It was "Going My Way," released in 1943; "Casablanca" won the Academy Award in 1943.


Corrections
An article on page 14 of the New Jersey Weekly today includes an outdated reference to a chamber music concert by the pianist Rudolf Firkusny and principal players of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra, scheduled for today at the Newark Museum.
After the section went to press, the concert was canceled because Mr.
Firkusny has the flu.


Dusting Off an Old Roman Nose
MORE than 80,000 people pass through the Metropolitan Museum of Art each week.
Monday is the day of rest.
"A Monday job" means maintenance or inspection of some kind, the dusting of a Roman sculpture, the moving of an Egyptian statue.
It is a day to take a measurement at the request of a scholar, or to examine the pencil drawing underneath a great painting, or to open a display case and remove a rare item, place it in a small box cushioned with cotton and photograph it.
It is a day for technicians and conservators and curators to hover over "The Heart of the Andes," a painting by Fredric E. Church that 3,000 people lined up on the streets of Greenwich Village to see in 1859.
A watercolor reproduction shows rays of light that are no longer obvious on the painting.
Have they faded?
Infrared and ultraviolet cameras are cast across the mountain landscape.
There is no definitive answer.


Battered Democrats Try New Direction
The New Jersey Democratic Party, weakened by its losses in legislative and gubernatorial elections in the last three years, voted on Friday night to break with the leadership aligned with former Gov.
Jim Florio.
Members of the state committee, meeting in Cranford, gave their support in a closed-ballot election to Brendan Thomas Byrne Jr., the son of the former Governor, who will serve as state Democratic chairman at least for the next two years.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
109.25
109.90
124.35
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7623
1.7425
1.6591
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3287
1.3245
1.2616
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4770
1.4960
1.4460
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$386.55
$377.30
$327.80
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Raising the Flag for Capitalism
To the Editor:
Ray Jenkins ("Socialism's Noble Aims," Viewpoints, Jan. 23) seriously misses the mark in terms of understanding capitalism, socialism and the major tragedies of the 20th century.
Mr.
Jenkins's definition of socialism's goals is really a definition of the best principles of capitalism, namely "teamwork, concern for one's fellow citizens, cooperation. It calls for sharing and pulling together. It calls for people to see themselves as part of the whole."


The Kenmore: Crime Haven, but Also Home
Nathanael West, the author, lived at the Kenmore Hotel, Dashiell Hammett wrote part of "The Maltese Falcon" there, and S. J. Perleman regularly stopped by for lunch and a swim in the pool.
Today, the Kenmore, at 23d Street and Lexington Avenue, is described by city officials and the police as one of the city's worst single-room-occupancy hotels.
For several years, the 23-story, 650-room building has been "the epicenter of crime in the neighborhood," said Police Officer Scott Kimmins, whose beat covers the Kenmore.
Last year it was the site of 58 arrests, most on narcotics charges.
In the last few weeks a drug dealer was arrested for stabbing a resident, Officer Kimmins said, and a woman was jailed for assaulting a fellow tenant and stealing her money and food stamps.
A few months ago, an elderly woman survived being stabbed and stuffed in a closet.


The Winter Olympics: A Preview
Skiers, jumpers and, of course, skaters gather next weekend for the XVII Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway.
About 2,000 athletes from at least 65 countries will be there, some well known like Nancy Kerrigan, the skater, others less so like Espen Bredesen, a skier (above).
A 12-page section looks at the sports and the complete TV schedule.
SportsSunday, section 8A.


Shannon J. Beaty, John C. Jones Jr.
Shannon Jane Beaty, the daughter of Marjorie Ingalls Beaty of Plum Island, Mass., and John S. Beaty of Belmont, Mass., was married yesterday to John Charles Jones Jr., the son of Joanne Jones Stives of East Windsor, N.J., and the late Mr.
Jones.
The Rev.
Suzanne Schafer-Coates, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony in the Ayer Memorial Chapel at the Peddie School in Hightstown, N.J..
Mrs.
Jones, 27, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a retail planner at J. Crew Inc. in New York.
Her father is a physicist and chemist at the Thermo Electron Corporation in Waltham, Mass.
Her mother is a painter and sculptor.


At the Bruce Museum, an Anthology of Personalities on View
IT looks as if the exhibition of art, pure and simple, is a thing of the past, to be replaced by the show with a topic.
This can be anything from AIDS to the environment, the Soviet Union-that-was or even, as seen recently in New Jersey, women suffering from eating disorders.
Ethnocentric displays are still in evidence, notably those by American Indians, but it appears that competition is forcing shows by black artists into the background.
Whether or not this indicates that the need for them has diminished, the example now at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich may prove the point.
For one thing, it is a roundup of 19 artists that comes without the usual fanfare: Black History Month is mentioned only in a leaflet announcing peripheral activities; for another, it seems less a tribute to the artists than to the Reader's Digest corporate art collection, from which the works were drawn.


Gold Medal Here, Surgical Scar There
IT will come as no surprise in Norway if Deborah Compagnoni and Pernilla Wiberg each barrel their way to a second Olympic gold medal at age 23.
Compagnoni has been brilliant in giant slalom all season.
Wiberg has been brilliant in nearly every event.
But one look at their medical records will explain why their victories would be impressive.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
COLLEGE MEMOIR  ALMA MATER  A College Homecoming.
By P. F. Kluge.
Addison-Wesley, $22.95.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an essay in The Times Book Review on Nov. 14, about books on education, misspelled the surname of the author of "Character First: The Hyde School Difference." He is Joseph W. Gauld, not Gault.
A letter of Nov. 17 from Mr.
Gauld, asking for a correction, apparently went astray, and Mr.
Gauld wrote again on Jan. 4.


Photographer's Journal


Switch at Boston College
The president of Boston College resigned on Friday and accepted the new post of chancellor at the college.
The new chancellor, J. Donald Monan, 69, served as president for 22 years.
A college spokesman said the search for a new president would begin immediately.
As chancellor Mr.
Monan said he would help with strategic matters and the development of human and material resources.


Ideas &amp; Trends; In Some Places, Close Does Count
FOUR-TIME Losers. Super Dud Buffalo. Bungled Bills. Forever Damned.
If the headline writers were merciless, so was America.
After all, the Buffalo Bills had just set a professional sports record by losing the championship game four years in a row, thanks to last Sunday's loss to the Dallas Cowboys.
So the Bills were trashed in the aftermath as hapless losers, somehow defective as players and men.


Where a Star Is Born, And Then Ignored
"Oy, oy, oy," the tour guide said with a heavy sigh.
She had promised the busload of tourists that the bronze statue of the late Sonja Henie outside Frogner Park in Oslo would be illuminated.
It was not.
The darkness enveloping the statue of Norway's best-known athlete and three-time Olympic figure skating gold medalist was somehow appropriate even as the country is lighting the torch for its first Winter Olympics since 1952.


Florida, From a Blimp
Most people's experience of airships, better known as blimps, is gleaned mainly by looking up.
But Airship International, a Florida-based blimp operator, now offers scheduled sightseeing flights over Orlando in a blue, white and orange Gulf Oil blimp.
The 195-foot-long airship, which holds five passengers, takes off from Kissimmee Municipal Airport on clear, wind-free afternoons, Tuesdays through Sundays, and floats 1,500 feet over Disney World, Sea World and other local theme parks.
Being in a blimp is a lot like being in a living room with big windows, according to a company spokesman.
But without refreshments.
"The trip is only 45 minutes long," he explains.


Not the Center Of the Universe
To the Editor:
Tom Piazza's essay "Lincoln Center and Its Critics Swing Away"  [ Jan. 16 ]  makes a worthwhile esthetic point about the vital tension between individual expression and collective context in jazz.
But we're talking about Lincoln Center here, and the profile of the jazz program is exactly what you'd expect from a mainstream cultural institution.


Fearsome Challenge of Attaching Things to Walls
IF there is an equivalent among homeowners to writers or painters' block, it may occur when having to attach an object, even a simple one, to a wall.
Walls in most houses are essentially hollow.
Nails or screws driven into them without planning have little chance of entering a stud for backing, and there is even less chance that the location of a stud coincides with the spot for installing the fastener.


Once Mired in Deep Powder, Norway's WInter Knights are King
WHEN the Olympic poohbahs gathered in 1988 in Seoul, South Korea, to award the 1994 Winter Games to this picturesque, once obscure city, they were well aware of Norway's deep-rooted connection to winter sports.
They also knew Norway was no longer a winter sports juggernaut.


THE TALES A TABLE COULD TELL
Thatcher Freund's article "The Tales a Table Could Tell" (Jan. 16) was beautifully presented and of interest even to the great majority of us who neither collect nor know much about antiques -- a skillful mixture of mystery and tension. (Will Sotheby's get the table? Will the auctioneer reach the reserve price?)


'A Mighty Serious Charge'
To the Editor:
Tom Piazza ought to be ashamed of himself.
Here's a writer whom I've never met or spoken with, implying that New York's jazz critics, myself included, are motivated by racial animosity in their critiques of Jazz at Lincoln Center.
That's a mighty serious charge.
Among my relatives and ancestors are people who are black as well as white.
I found Mr.
Piazza's suggestion that I should be sent a mint julep offensive.


Obtaining Help: Who and How
From a flier circulated in Carroll Gardens by the City of New York.
Q.
How do I file a claim against the city for damages to my property from the water main break?
A.
A claim must be filed with the Office of the City Comptroller within 90 days of the occurrence or it could be denied.
Forms and information on how to file may be obtained through the Office of the Comptroller, Property Damage Claims Division, 1 Centre Street, Room 617, New York, N.Y. 10007; (212) 699-8750.
Q.
My insurance company says that I am not covered for the damage to my home by the water-main break.
What can I do?
A.
Contact the New York State Department of Insurance Consumer Services Bureau, at (212) 602-0434, or a private lawyer to clarify your coverage.
Q.
I heard low-interest loans will be available?
How can I apply?
A.
The Borough President has allocated $250,000 in low-interest loans for repairs to help ease the hardships inflicted on homeowners by the water-main break.
Homeowners who meet income-eligibility requirements can borrow up to $20,000 from participating banks through the Home Improvement Program.
Such loans must be used to correct substandard conditions, which may include masonry, roofing and plumbing repairs, boiler or furnace replacement and electrical rewiring.
The Borough President's office, the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, Citibank and the Carroll Gardens Association will work together to make these funds available to eligible homeowners.
For more information, call the Home Improvement Program at (212) 978-LOAN or the Carroll Gardens Association at (718) 858-0558.
Q.
For questions about my utility service, whom do I contact?
A.
If you have questions about a Con Edison bill or electricity, call (718) 802-6000; for a gas bill, the Brooklyn Union Consumer Appeals Bureau at (718) 403-5023; for telephone service, the Nynex president's help line at (800) 722-2300.
For questions or problems relating to the water-main break, call the Borough President's Action Center at (718) 802-3777 or the office of Councilman Stephen DiBrienza at (718) 858-5110.


Senator's Trial to Begin, Unsettling Texas Politics
Just months ago, Kay Bailey Hutchison won a landslide victory that made her the first female United States Senator from Texas.
Now she is facing a trial whose outcome could determine not just her own political future, but also the course of several statewide races this fall and perhaps even the balance of power between the two parties in Texas for years to come.
Mrs.
Hutchison, a Republican, is accused of misusing state employees and computers to help her vault from the State Treasurer's post to the Senate.
She insists that the charges are baseless and stem from a plot by Democrats who were enraged last June at her winning a seat that had been in Democratic hands since Reconstruction.
She was elected to fill the unexpired term of Lloyd Bentsen, who had been named Treasury Secretary.


Olympic Committee Holds Harding's Fate
Hours after a figure-skating panel recommended that Tonya Harding should face a disciplinary hearing for possible ethics violations, the United States Olympic Committee positioned itself to rule on Harding's eligibility before the Winter Olympics figure skating competition, which begins on Feb. 23.
The U.S.O.C. notified Dennis Rawlinson, one of Harding's lawyers, that it might ask the figure skater to appear in Norway before one of its boards.


When Landing a Role Is a Weighty Issue
SOME ACTORS ARE MASTERS of disguise; they employ exotic accents (Meryl Streep), they change their hairline (Ben Kingsley), they even change their sex, sort of (Robin Williams).
But to show they are really serious about a role, actors change their size.
Robert De Niro did it for "Raging Bull" in 1980, when he gained 50 pounds to play the aging boxer Jake LaMotta.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences recognized his efforts by giving him an Oscar for best actor for the performance.


A New Session, an Uncertain Agenda
AN election-year budget fuss?
A gun-control blunderbuss?
Property tax?
Spending whacks?
Casino gambling off the tracks?
If Dr.
Seuss were to write the script for this year's General Assembly session, there would probably be no more pratfalls, loop-the-loops and odd characters than what the lawmakers themselves will provide when the 12-week session convenes in Hartford on Wednesday.


Fearsome Challenge of Attaching Things to Walls
IF there is an equivalent among homeowners to writers or painters' block, it may occur when having to attach an object, even a simple one, to a wall.
Walls in most houses are essentially hollow.
Nails or screws driven into them without planning have little chance of entering a stud for backing, and there is even less chance that the location of a stud coincides with the spot for installing the fastener.


Hospital Is Object Of Rights Inquiry
The Federal Government has opened a civil rights investigation into a South Carolina hospital's program that uses the threat of both public exposure and jail to force drug-using pregnant women into treatment programs.
Dennis Hayashi, director of the civil rights office in the Department of Health and Human Services, said on Thursday that his office was investigating the program at the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston because all or nearly all of the women tested for drugs or sent to jail are black.


Provoking New Skirmishes In an Endless War of Styles
ANDRAS SCHIFF'S recordings of Bach's French suites and keyboard concertos are likely to provoke new skirmishes in music's obsessive war of styles.
From experiments in the new to explorations of the past, the how seems to take precedence over the what these days.
The way we do things, in other words, overshadows the spirit in which we do them.
Just as the avant-garde busies itself with the machinery and electrical circuitry of music-making, so proponents of period instruments and usage have made historically accurate methodology the groundwork for a new musical morality.
Mr.
Schiff, a pianist, is asking for trouble, for he is performing Bach on an instrument that in the composer's time existed only as the crudest of prototypes.
Early pianos, with their nascent ability to respond to the performer's touch in a forceful way, impressed Bach not at all.
Bach's public keyboard instrument other than the organ was the harpsichord.
For private entertainment he chose the faint-sounding and ever sensitive clavichord.


HOCKEY
Olympic hockey has evolved from an event marked by free speed and finesse, coupled with body-blasting.
But because it is played on a 100-foot-wide rink (15 feet greater than most National Hockey League arenas), it is faster, with less body contact, than most Americans are accustomed to watching.
THE SETUP: Olympic hockey has virtually none of the brawling of the North American pro game.
Instead, it is a contest of fluidity, skaters making use of the wide rink, slinging long passes, playing a controlled style.
You won't find players dumping the puck into the corners and chasing it, head down and ready for a collision.


Controversy Died Down; Wind Hasn't
Citicorp's tower, an impressive skyscraper, sometimes sweeps people off their feet -- literally.
Powerful winds sporadically swirling around it actually lift unwary pedestrians off the ground, neighbors say.
"I know it's hard to believe, but people get blown into midair," said Susan P. Chetwin, general manager of the Muzak office across the street on Jackson Avenue.
Her workers regularly use the tower for its Citibank branch and basement subway stop.


Study Finds Child-Neglect Deaths Are Highest in the South and West
Death rates among children because of neglect and abuse are higher in Southern and Western states than in other parts of the country, researchers have estimated after analyzing information from all states.
The researchers, from the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta and the University of Missouri, said their study found that death rates varied by region, state and metropolitan area.
They said the reasons for the variations were uncertain because there is no standardized system for collecting and reviewing data on child abuse.


BIATHLON
A combination of cross-country skiing (i.e., intense effort) and small-bore-rifle shooting (i.e., intense concentration) biathlon is a relative newcomer to the Winter Olympics.
Men's competition began in 1960; women's in 1992.
THE SETUP: All skiing techniques are permitted, but everyone uses the skating style.
Both the men and women compete in three events: two individual and one relay.
In the two shorter races -- the men's 10 kilometer and women's 7.5 kilometer -- competitors stop twice, once to fire five shots prone and once to fire five shots standing.
In the longer races -- the men's 20K and women's 15K -- competitors make four stops, firing a total of 10 shots prone and 10 more standing.
All targets are set at a distance of 50 meters.
The standing target is about 4.5 inches in diameter; the prone target about 1.8 inches, which is roughly the diameter of an Oreo cookie.


The Horny Dilemma
Toward the end of "Meet the Press," where I occasionally come on to shoot the wounded, we were discussing Whitewatergate.
David Broder of The Washington Post took issue with my suspicions of heavy financial scandal ahead.
"If you told me that Bill Clinton was very horny or very ambitious," Mr.
Broder opined over the NBC network, "I would have no trouble believing it. If you told me that he was money-hungry and was cutting corners for money, I'd say that doesn't sound like the Bill Clinton I know."
When the show ended, the Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter and columnist looked around and innocently asked, "Can you use a word like horny on television?" The only answer was yes, because he already had.
But has horny crossed the line from slang to colloquialism, from mild vulgarity to acceptable informal usage?


A Cafe Menu in a Victorian-Inspired Setting
LIKE that manic toy bunny in television advertisements, Westport's Hay Day, the produce store and deli, keeps on going, or rather, growing.
It has moved to a larger location on the other side of the Post Road, with ample room for adding a new restaurant, called Hay Day Market Cafe.
The new cafe -- two large rooms, plus a barroom with tables -- has an 1880's Victorian look, with lace-curtained windows, a pressed-tin ceiling, tulip glass sconces, pink brocade-like wallpaper, wood pilasters and bentwood chairs.
Columns with gilded capitals highlight the center door.


Collard Greens, With an Italian Twist
COLLARDS are invariably associated with the South and soul food.
Cooked long and slow, these big, sturdy, almost leathery leaves on meaty stalks become mellow and tender, often with a hambone or some pig's feet to enhance the flavor.
The cooking liquid is is known as "pot likker," a flavorful near-soup.
A splash of vinegar nicely balances the taste of the greens.
But collards need not be limited to this.
They are as good cooked just until they wilt as they are stewed slowly, in the more traditional fashion.
These inexpensive greens, sold in bunches of a pound or two, are sweeter tasting than cabbage and more succulent than Swiss chard.
They can be quickly stir-fried and then combined with pasta or mixed into an omelet or served as a side dish.


SPEED SKATING
THE SETUP: For the second time in Olympic history, speed skating will be held indoors.
The first time was Calgary in 1988.
This time, the skating site at Hamar resembles the overturned hull of a Viking Ship.
The Norwegians are mad about speed skating, and fans at the oval should spend the Games in a flag-waving, horn-blowing frenzy for the five races for men (500, 1,000, 1,500, 5,000 and 10,000 meters) and five for women (500, 1,000, 1,500, 3,000 and 5,000).
The oval at Hamar is exceedingly fast.
Dan Jansen of the United States set a world record at 500 meters on the Olympic oval in December, recording a time of 35.92 seconds.


G.O.P. Racial Strategy Aims to Woo Moderates; Unfair to Atwater
To the Editor:
You say that the G.O.P.
"wrote off the black vote" when the "race-mongering" Lee Atwater headed the Republican National Committee (editorial, Jan. 23).
That's unfair to Lee Atwater's memory.
On Feb. 26, 1989, you published an article by him titled "Toward a G.O.P. Rainbow," in which he wrote: "Making black voters welcome in the Republican Party is my pre-eminent goal . . . Our outreach to minority voters is not a short-term tactic. It is a long-term political necessity and, more than that, a moral imperative." He backed up his words with party resources.


Lucinda Childs Moves to a European Beat
FOR TWO DECADES, Lucinda Childs has made simplicity seem complex and complexity simple.
In the process, she thinks, her dances have grown steadily richer.
And that makes her happy because, as she said recently, "I like to move into new artistic territories and never want to repeat myself."
Her troupe, the Lucinda Childs Dance Company, is celebrating its 20th anniversary with a season at the Joyce Theater that opens on Tuesday.
The engagement, which features four new works, is the group's first in New York in five years, during which time Ms.
Childs was busy working in Europe.


Coghlan and Stones Prove There Is Something Left
For Eamonn Coghlan and Dwight Stones, two track and field heroes for the ages, the course is clear.
If at first you don't succeed, try again in two days.
On Friday night, in the Chemical Bank Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden, the 41-year-old Coghlan and the 40-year-old Stones tried to regain their glory with world masters records.
Neither made it, but they will resume their quest this afternoon in the Mobil Invitation meet at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va.


Casa Italiana Going Moderne?
The Landmarks Preservation Commission appears poised to take an unusual step: approve a plan for a post-modern stainless-steel staircase on the exterior of the landmark Casa Italiana, a replica of a formal Florentine palazzo at Columbia University.
Neighborhood critics say approval of the staircase would run counter to the commission's job of safeguarding the city's architectural heritage.
The commission tends to pursue this duty so seriously that it has refused to allow owners of landmark properties to replace windows or doors and has stopped SoHo and TriBeCa residents from planting trees because they are "historically inappropriate" for the area.


Davis Confounds Form To Upstage Brian Who
IT is a widely held belief that figure skating, like Spam, is precooked, the results predetermined, the judges having jumped to conclusions before the skaters have jumped onto the ice.
As a rebuttal, there is the case of Scott Davis.
Lost in the chilling attack on Nancy Kerrigan, and the subsequent unraveling of what apparently was a bumbling conspiracy to harm her, was this revelation: Maybe figure skating wasn't as staged as professional wrestling, after all.


Choosing the Right Vine for a Good Show
WHEN there is a fence in the garden, particularly an ugly one like a chain-link fence, many gardeners like to disguise it and cover the fence with a vine.
Sometimes this is a good thing.
Or possibly a vine is selected for its colorful blooms and handsome foliage to brighten a corner of the house.
This can also be a good thing.


How to Make a Killing in Show Business, Sort Of
FOR a sidesplitting evening in the theater, "Breaking Legs," a comedy by Tom Dulak at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, fills the bill.
If arguments might be made over the quality of the script or the talent of the actors, they do not matter.
This production is outrageously funny.
It is overacted, overdirected and overwritten to a degree that would, with a lesser-artistic team than this one, turn it into an overdone turkey.
Here the end result is an evening that will keep you laughing all the way home.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Irwin Bazelon, a composer, misstated the date for the premiere of his "Entre Nous" for cello and piano, with the Greenwich Village Orchestra.
It is today at 3 P.M., at Washington Irving High School in Manhattan; it was not last Sunday.


A la Carte; Burgers and Chicken
WILL tortillas and tacos ever rival hamburgers and fried chicken as the Island's favorite fast foods?
California Tortilla, a combination carryout and sitdown restaurant in Syosset with three or four more outlets on the drawing board for 1994, is getting ready to challenge the Colonel and Ronald McDonald.


Awards Honor Leading Designs
CHARLES IVES, America's crankiest composer, once scoffed, "Awards are merely the badges of mediocrity." Audio manufacturers think otherwise.
To them, the Grands Prix for outstanding design in sound equipment represent a coveted distinction.
Awarded each year by an independent jury convened under the auspices of Audio-Video International, a leading trade journal, these prizes are the audio equivalent of a Pulitzer.
The awards cover different classes of audio equipment, from minimal table-top models to semiprofessional sound gear.
Here are some winners that combine musical merit with reasonable cost.


LUGE
The only Olympic sport timed in thousandths of a second, luge - the French word for 'sled' - puts you on your back, inches above the ice, for about three-quarters of a mile at breakneck speed.
That's not the hard part: the 'slider' cannot see where he is going, so he recognizes bumps and turns by memory.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Capitals' Bondra Scores 5 Goals  Peter Bondra became the 10th player in N.H.L. history to score four goals in one period, then added another in the second period as the Washington Capitals beat Tampa Bay, 6-3, in Landover, Md, last night.
Bondra's five goals tied a team record set by Bengt Gustafsson in 1984.
His four goals in one period, in a span of 4:12, matched an N.H.L. record by Joe Nieuwendyk for Calgary on Jan. 11, 1989.
Bondra scored on four straight shots in the opening period against Daren Puppa.(AP)


Checking Into a Floating Hotel
LEAVING behind an already harsh winter and the usual everyday obligations, 18 members of our extended family converged on Miami early one Saturday morning in December.
We had come together for six days for a family reunion on the Sovereign of the Seas, Royal Caribbean Cruise Line's third-largest luxury ship, as we celebrated an 80th birthday, a 30th wedding anniversary and other markers in our lives.
I raced through the crowded airport toward a friendly-looking envoy from Royal Caribbean, who held aloft a sign welcoming passengers bound for the Port of Miami.
One of the two octogenarians in our party followed closely behind, pushed along in a wheelchair by an airport aide, while my 23-year-old son, Gabriel, grumbled next to me under the weight of an extra carry-on suitcase that I packed in a last-minute fluster.


For Jansen, No Grief, No Hesitation, No Doubt
Four years after the Calgary Games, during which his sister died of leukemia and he fell, not once but twice in races, Dan Jansen went back to the Olympics in 1992, hoping to win a gold medal, but hesitant to make his hopes public.
The pressure seemed to hold him back, as if the very mention of success were likely to bring about failure.


Streetscapes/The Osborne; Restoring a Stone Dealer's Idiosyncratic Building
EVERY suburb has one: A tile manufacturer who has made his house into a shrine of ceramic art, a window installer who has glazed every possible square inch of wall, a marble dealer who has turned his backyard into a quarry.
Anyone who thinks New York is too impersonal for such idiosyncrasy should go over to the northwest corner of 57th Street and Seventh Avenue to see what must be the biggest home-improvement advertisement ever ventured here, the 14 craggy stories of brownstone erected by Thomas Osborne, a stone dealer, in 1885.


The World; Cutting Itself Down to Size: Japan's Inferiority Complex
HOW'S this for a switch: A Japanese magazine takes Chrysler's newest compact car, the Neon, for a test spin in Texas and decides that Japan's auto industry has catching up to do: The Neon's doors fit better than those of a low-end Toyota or Honda.
The finish is nicer, the engine runs smoother. (And wasn't Chrysler the company that a few years ago needed Mitsubishi Motors to make small cars?)
And there was a front-page report in the Asahi Shimbun, one of Japan's largest dailies, last week: The latest trend among Japanese yuppies is to obtain a green card and move to America, the land of personal freedom and creativity.
"Japan," one applicant told the paper, "is making me feel as if I am suffocating."


Browsing Through the Art of Gutenberg's Galaxy
The German invention of movable type was as revolutionary for the 15th century as the computer was for the 20th.
The metal letters devised by Johann Gutenberg could be assembled and printed so rapidly that books and documents were mass produced after 1450.
Literacy, once reserved for the elite, spread swiftly to the masses.
The Gutenberg Bible, one of the most beautiful books ever printed, became the first substantial venture of Gutenberg, a goldsmith from Mainz.
Of the 180 copies made, 49 survive, 3 of which are exhibited in "Gutenberg and the Genesis of Printing," at the Pierpont Morgan Library through April 17.


Ideas &amp; Trends; 'Pot' Surges Back, but It's, Like, a Whole New World
BABY BOOMERS with fond memories of marijuana brownies and bong hits around the lava lamp may not be particularly alarmed by last week's news that pot is making a major comeback among teen-agers.
But the culture of cannabis, which currently goes by names like "chocolate tide" and "chronic," has grown considerably more dangerous in the years since the flower children left Haight-Ashbury to the cappuccino merchants.
More efficient agriculture -- new methods of harvesting and processing marijuana plants -- has made pot about 20 times more potent than the marijuana on the street in the '60's and '70's, drug treatment experts and law enforcement officials say.
And the dramatic increase in teen-age violence and the advent of AIDS, these experts say, have made any drug use that lowers inhibition far riskier.


Raising the Flag for Capitalism
To the Editor:
Ray Jenkins claims the sole motivation behind capitalism is "to make money," while socialism means cooperation and concern for others.
He couldn't be more wrong.


A Final Staten Island Homecoming
More than 1,000 people, from public officials to veterans to just plain neighbors, turned out yesterday to welcome the cruiser Normandy home to Staten Island after a 182-day Mediterranean mission.
There were bagpipes, red-white-and-blue balloons, an airplane pulling a welcome home banner and a little construction-paper sign saying, "We love you Dad."
But there was a deeper poignance than the joyful reunion of families who had not been able to share in the start of school, Christmas and the birth of 10 babies.
It was a final Staten Island homecoming for the Normandy, the only active warship stationed at the island's Homeport.


The World; The I.R.A.'s Moment In the Media Spotlight
SEVEN years ago, the chief spokesman for the British Government leaned back in London and guffawed mockingly when an American correspondent, asking about some officially secret aspect of the Irish troubles, invoked the public's right to know.
"My dear boy," the official chortled in reply, "this isn't America. There is no such thing as a constitutional 'right to know' in this nation."
There was payback in the extreme in New York last week when an enormous bonanza of American publicity burst like a pinata onto Gerry Adams, the political chief of the Irish Republican Army.
He finally took center stage in the world's media capital after having been denied a visa for 20 years.
By personally rejecting State Department advice and granting the visa, President Clinton himself struck open the celebrity windfall for Mr.
Adams in the name of trying to end the I.R.A.'s 25 years of urban guerrilla war against British control of Northern Ireland.


Viewpoints; Preview: The TV Guide of the Future
The Well, an on-line computer service in Sausalito, Calif., has about 200 electronic discussion groups.
Some members, mindful of the uneven quality of today's sparser TV offerings, mused about what the 500 television channels of the future might bring.
The members are identified by their computer "handles." Kadrey: The Airport Luggage Inspection Channel.
Direct video feeds from baggage X-rays around the world.


Trade vs. Human Rights
The raging arguments over relations with Vietnam and China are at the core of a sharpening debate in American foreign policy.
In a world where every nation's motto is now "export or die," where should the United States draw the line between its desire to export its values and its increasing requirement to export its goods?
During the cold war, the main debate was between idealists who argued that relations with other countries should depend on their human rights behavior and realists who argued that the United States could not afford militarily to isolate dictatorships in places like the Philippines or Iran, because their support was needed against Moscow.


A Radio Talk Show That Doesn't Run on Vitriol
Ray Suarez, THE NEWEST, least likely and perhaps fastest-rising figure in talk radio, says his show is not aimed at an elite audience.
It is a little tough at first to manage a straight face at this.
Mr.
Suarez, after all, works in the nation's most pointy-headed city, in a studio six blocks from the White House.
He sports a beard and a rumpled sweater.
He likes to muse about stuff like the "enormous consequences" of the global rise of the money-commodity economy.


Perfect Memory
To the Sports Editor:
To the nonfan, every baseball game looks like every other.
To the hooked fan, every game has the potential of making history, of becoming a game for the ages.


Schubert: Strings And Lieder
A BIT of Vienna in Westport, South African songs in New London, Japanese drumming in Storrs, a Siberian musician's debut in New Haven and Hartford are just a few of the international performances that await Connecticut music lovers this week.
The Viennese treats, edible and otherwise, are the offerings of Concorde, since the Chamber Music Society of Westport follows its all-Schubert program at 7 o'clock tonight with a reception featuring Viennese tortes, cookies and coffee.
On the agenda at the Westport Arts Center are lieder sung by the New Canaan soprano Megan Yost, a string trio and an octet.
For details, call 226-1806 or 661-4667.
Then, next Sunday afternoon at 3, one can hear the Haydn Trio of Vienna at the Stamford Palace for an afternoon of Beethoven, Kreisler, Strauss and Haydn (325-4466).


Can't Win for Losing
WOMEN AS WOMBS Reproductive Technologies and the Battle Over Women's Freedom.
By Janice G. Raymond. 254 pp.
San Francisco:  HarperSanFrancisco. $22.


After 12 Years, Boogie Is Back on the Merry-Go-Round
A chorus of merchants singing "Hi, Boogie!" greets Leonard Weinglass as he enters a sample room at Merry-Go-Round Enterprises' headquarters here.
The founder of the flashy retail company, recently humbled by bankruptcy, takes a moment to chat with the group of buyers reviewing spring merchandise for DeJaiz, one of Merry-Go-Round's chains.


Times Square, Minus the Sleaze
In a monthlong campaign that gets under way tomorrow, the Times Square Business Improvement District will attempt to present a new vision of the crossroads of the world.
THEME: "Times Square -- everything you want in a neighborhood." WHAT THEY'RE SELLING: Times Square Lite -- that is, clean and friendly (minus the crime and sin- city image that have plagued the area for the last 15 years).
MEDIA: Giant colorful ads with quirky statistics about Times Square -- 215,326 light bulbs, 3,537 lawyers, 1 Dave (Letterman) -- will be posted on buses around the city.
One-minute radio spots will be broadcast for two weeks and will echo the theme: "This neighborhood's got it all and it's getting better." Some 10,000 copies of a glossy brochure will be distributed to businesses like hotels, real estate agents, travel agencies and billboard companies.
A new area restaurant guide will be distributed to hotels, visitors bureaus and similar places.
CREATOR: Grey Entertainment and Media Inc., a subsidiary of Grey Advertising.
COST: $142,000, paid for by the Business Improvement District.
MARKET: Not so much the 20 million-plus visitors who come to Times Square each year.
They know it's the place to be, said Gretchen Dykstra, president of the Business Improvement District.
"We're trying to reach those New Yorkers who are still clinging to memories of the old image of decline and show them the opportunities with changing times." MARVINE HOWE


Los Angeles Debates Quake Aid for Illegal Aliens
As the city struggles to pull itself together after last month's earthquake, its social fissures have re-emerged in an angry debate over whether relief aid should be provided to illegal immigrants.
Coming on the heels of a proposal by Gov.
Pete Wilson to deny health and education benefits to undocumented aliens as one way to cope with the state's lingering economic slump, advocates for immigrants are complaining that these residents are again being made scapegoats for widespread hardships in a time of trouble.


Raising the Flag for Capitalism
To the Editor:
Mr.
Jenkins claims that socialism leads to cooperation between people.
He also claims that "faulty economic theory, or the usual human failings, have kept it from working."


Jan. 30 -Feb. 6: Heading Off Inflation; The Economy's Engineer Decides It's Time To Tap the Brake
To Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, the economy is like a giant locomotive, and his job as engineer is to keep it rolling steadily.
When the train reaches an incline, he must press the throttle.
To keep from picking up speed going downhill, he must apply the brake.
Last week, for the first time in nearly five years, Mr.
Greenspan decided it was time for the brake.
He announced Friday morning that the Fed was raising short-term interest rates slightly "to sustain and enhance the economic expansion."


Roadwork Lengthens Heathrow-London Trip
Travelers using Heathrow Airport should allow extra time -- up to 90 minutes during rush hour -- for journeys to and from London because of extensive construction under way on the M4 and A4 highways, which together make up the main 14-mile conduit between the airport and the city.
The road improvements, which are concentrated in the first seven-mile stretch of the A4 highway leading from London and along the seven miles of the M4 between its junction with the A4 and Heathrow, are planned through mid-September, and will result in more severe traffic congestion than usual.
The trip between Heathrow and central London usually takes from 50 minutes during off-peak times to one and a half hours during morning and afternoon rush hours.


Crime
Pinckney Benedict's stunning first novel, DOGS OF GOD (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21), tells an amazing story about forces of evil so dark and malevolent that one worries for the sanity of the storyteller who dared look the devils in the eye.
The Domini canes unleashed in this violent existential thriller were not whelped in the same litter as the Hound of Heaven that brought enlightenment to Francis Thompson.
They are, rather, human brutes like Tannhauser, a power-crazed mountain man whose infernal origins survive in the extra digits he bears on both hands.
"I was born with a tail, too," he confides.
"Little thing no bigger than your nose . . . twisty, like a pig's tail."
Tannhauser and his henchmen have taken command of El Dorado, an abandoned military installation at the top of Little Hogback Mountain in West Virginia, where they grow a huge cash crop of marijuana with the slave labor of illegal aliens.
For rest and recreation there are gang rapes, pornographic movies and the occasional barefisted boxing match, like the one that brings a young fighter named Goody to El Dorado.
A simple, gentle knight, Goody has the pure heart and deadly left hook to bring down the satanic Tannhauser and purify the Godforsaken landscape -- which the author, who has published two collections of short stories and who writes in a vein of rare, wild beauty, describes with the lyrical exactitude of Henry Thoreau on a metaphysical field trip to hell.


Editorial Notebook; Fear-Mongering on Health Reform
Thousands of Americans pronounce judgment on President Clinton's health care plan; probably fewer than a dozen have read its 1,364 turgid pages.
Perhaps that is why a five-page attack by Elizabeth McCaughey in The New Republic magazine has soared to prominence.
Conservatives, ranging from Senator Bob Dole to the columnist George Will, have embraced her broadside as gospel.
The rule seems to be if you know you don't like the plan but do not bother to master its details, let Ms.
McCaughey do your thinking.
But Ms.
McCaughey's analysis is careless, misleading and wrong.
Her litany of criticisms-by-page number gives the article an aura of scholarship.
But true scholars are precise; Ms.
McCaughey is not.
The White House labels Ms.
McCaughey's assertions as lies.
That implies that her distortions are deliberate, which may be unfair.
In any case, the issue is not her character but her fear-mongering falsehoods that threaten to warp the debate.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday, listing some of history's runners-up and second-place finishers in a variety of categories -- on the occasion of the Buffalo Bills' appearance in the Super Bowl -- misidentified the world's second-smallest nation.
It is Monaco, not San Marino.


When Fascism Was in Flower
THE BIRTH OF FASCIST IDEOLOGY From Cultural Rebellion to Political Revolution.
By Zeev Sternhell with Mario Sznajder  and Maia Asheri.
Translated by David Maisel. 338 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.


What Do Men Want?
To the Editor:
You need not be reminded that you cover books regardless of the sexual orientation of their authors or subject matter.
How distressing, then, to read Richard A. Shweder's exceedingly shallow survey of "male identity crisis literature," which lapses into the old bipolar male-female war-of-the-sexes mentality.
The relations of Mr.
Shweder's men are assumed to be heterosexual.
The dialogue is between feminists and "new" straight males.
How boring and un informed.


Where Sports Fans Find TV That's a Cut Above
WITH its polished pale wood floors, stylish display cases with baseball hats, hockey helmets, footballs and other emblems, the sleek store on East Post Road in White Plains could be mistaken for a minimalist version of a sporting-goods emporium.
On closer look, however, one sees that the headgear is next to bottles of shampoo and conditioner and posters of such athletes as Lou Gehrig and Dwight Gooden are hanging near other hair-care products.
For those whose idea of a barbershop summons up images of dilapidated chairs lined up in military formation, with tattered copies of Field and Stream, Popular Mechanics and Playboy as the only diversion, the Sports Cuts, a barbershop in the downtown business district here, is something else entirely.


Knicks And Magic Both Need This One
To avoid a wasted weekend, the Knicks need a victory this afternoon against the Orlando Magic.
Certainly, the Knicks would like to forget Friday night, when they were whipped, 114-102, by the Atlanta Hawks.
But the Hawks won't forget it.
It reaffirmed Atlanta's surprising status as a serious contender in the Eastern Conference.
And with the season past the halfway point, Atlanta, New York, and Chicago are in an unexpected three-way battle atop the East.
The Hawks had the East's best record, 32-11, pending the outcome of their game last night against the Cleveland Cavaliers.


Nuclear Roots Grow Into an Argentine Silicon Valley
TUCKED into a dense stand of evergreens, a group of low, whitewashed buildings with corrugated metal roofs give little indication of the activities within.
Maybe a conservation group.
Maybe a national park office.
The only clue is the parabolic dish on top of a red-and-white radio tower.
But inside the shaded compound, an elite team of Argentina's electronic and nuclear engineers are working, not exactly secretively, but with a very low profile.
In newly built "clean rooms," their primary project is a $7 million research satellite for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States, to be launched in mid-1995.


Below Canal St.: Bouley and Beyond
BOULEY **** (212) 608-3852; 165 Duane Street, near Hudson Street; $$$$; all major credit cards
A genteel French country atmosphere combines with the superb cuisine of the chef and owner, David Bouley, to make this Provencal restaurant one of the most exciting dining experiences in the city.
Enticing starters include roasted squash soup with chestnuts; roasted foie gras ravioli with savoy cabbage, and grilled eggplant terrine with a parsley sauce.
Superior main courses include Maine lobster with baby pea leaves and fresh asparagus in an herbal broth; braised sweetbreads with a Chablis and ginger-thyme sauce, and roast wild duck with a honey, lemon and thyme sauce, served with glazed root vegetables. (Review: 8/3/90) DUANE PARK CAFE * (212) 732-5555; 157 Duane Street, near West Broadway; $$$; all major credit cards
This comfortable spot is owned by Seiji Maeda, the chef, who was born in Japan and previously worked at K-Paul's Louisiana Kitchen in New Orleans and at Regine's and Huberts in Manhattan.
His is a beguiling contemporary American style with some Eastern accents.
Starters include rabbit confit atop an herb-and-mache salad and thin crispy potato galette; grilled shrimp and calamari with olives and skordalia (potato puree with garlic and olive oil), and tuna carpaccio with an onion-and-thyme jam.
Main courses include braised rabbit with cinnamon oil and shiitake mushrooms; roasted rack of lamb with grilled eggplant and potato gratin, and rigatoni with duck confit, sun-dried tomatoes and artichoke hearts. (Review: 6/1/90; revisited: 1/18/94) EL TEDDY'S


Chronology of Bosnia War
FEB. 29, 1992 Bosnia and Herzegovina declares independence.
Bosnian Serbs proclaim separate state.
Fighting spreads, and Sarajevo is soon surrounded.
MAY 27 A mortar attack on a bread line in Sarajevo kills 16.


Schools Weigh How to Extend Semester
THERE is a group of school officials from districts throughout northern Westchester who, in bad weather, make a series of phones calls beginning at about 4 A.M. to determine if they will recommend school cancellations to their respective superintendents.
They talk to their local police, school bus companies and highway crews.
And they talk to each other.
It was during the course of one of these conversations -- in the middle of a winter storm that resulted in the decision to cancel school for the seventh time last month -- that the idea of making commemorative T-shirts came up.
The shirts will read, "January 1994 -- The Month From Hell." They are already a hot item, and some of the biggest demand is coming from school superintendents themselves.


Master Of Ease
A RATHER contented Calvin Klein will be doubly honored when he steps up to the stage of the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center tomorrow night.
At the awards ceremony of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, he will be named designer of the year for both men's wear and women's wear.
Either award would be cause for celebration, but it is the first time the council has named one designer tops in both fields.
He is pleased, of course.
He is not blase about awards, despite the fact that two shelves in his office are filled with statuettes and plaques, including three in successive years from the Coty Fashion Critics' Awards, precursor of the current sponsors. (Ralph Lauren received Coty awards for men's and women's styles in 1976.)


This Lifter Is Fueled by Natural Power; Operating in a Drug-Free Environment, Ted Sobel Is Soaring Above the Field
Ted Sobel won the "grand salami," as he calls it, in the United States Power Lifting drug-free national championships in December in Ossining, N.Y., while "grunting like a piglet." And Karen, his one-time fiancee, probably didn't know a thing about it.
Sobel, in his red-white-and-blue wrestling singlet, lifted 760 pounds in the squat, 545 pounds in the bench press and 733 pounds in the dead lift, for a total of 1 ton 38 pounds to better his own world records in the bench and the total.


A Bittersweet Homecoming for Mariette Hartley
MARIETTE HARTLEY'S opening in "The Sisters Rosensweig" at the Shubert in New Haven on Tuesday is a Connecticut homecoming.
Ms.
Hartley, who was born in Weston in 1940, is chronologically equal, give or take a few months, to her stage counterpart, Sara, the eldest of the three sisters in Wendy Wasserstein's hit play, which will also have a two-week stop in May at the Rich Forum in Stamford.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 6, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
RUBY, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in New Orleans.
2
3
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The policeman Jack McGarvey on the trail of a serial killer in Los Angeles.
3
5
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
4
6
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
5
51
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
6
2
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
7
1
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a nurse's pursuit of him.
8
2
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
9
2
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
95
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
11
11
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
12*
1
SUDDENLY, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) A pediatrician finds romance after the death of her dear friend.
13
1
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P.D.
James. (Warner, $6.50.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state, the human race approaches its end.
14
1
SEDUCED, by Virginia Henley. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) To safeguard property she has inherited, a British noblewoman masquerades as a male.
15
7
THE INVITATION, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $5.99.) A famous daredevil pilot finds romance when she returns to her Colorado hometown.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
535
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
3
21
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
4
51
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
5
121
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
14
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
7*
8
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
8*
10
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
9*
14
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos by Walter Iooss Jr. and observations by the retired basketball superstar.
10*
10
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
11*
36
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
12*
10
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
13*
4
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
14
27
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
15*
135
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
16*
25
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
8
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
2
151
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
2
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
4
6
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


A Hot Summer of Bloodshed and Change
In the weeks before Medgar Evers's death, at a time when racial violence was as much a part of Mississippi life as the summer heat, both Mr.
Evers and his wife, Myrlie, lived each day with the thought it could be his last.
"We both knew the end was near," Mrs.
Evers said before the beginning of the murder trial that ended yesterday.
"You don't challenge a system like that without knowing the price to be paid. We lived with threats on a daily basis, and both of us knew in the last three weeks that it wasn't going to be long."


Wilderness Park Opening in New Orleans
The new Freeport-McMoRan Audubon Species Survival Center in New Orleans, dedicated to breeding endangered animals such as red wolves, Baird's tapirs, milky storks, Asian hornbills and Louisiana black bears, is largely off limits to the public.
A 130-acre portion of the 1,200-acre center, however, called Wilderness Park, is expected to be open to visitors by May.
It will have a nature trail about half a mile long, picnic tables and an educational display about the region, which is on the west bank of the Mississippi River in a section of New Orleans called Algiers, about 20 miles from downtown.


Jobs Center Faces Uncertain Future
DESPITE early success of the Westchester County Jobs Center, which opened here in October, the County Legislature cut the program from the 1994 budget, and officials are scrambling to find alternative funding.
The center -- part of County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke's four-year comprehensive economic development and job program to create more than 32,000 jobs over four years -- has served as a one-stop resource for unemployed workers and those who want to start their own businesses.
The center is a joint program of the Westchester County Association, the largest business organization in the county, and the county government. 'Duplication of Services
"We are trying to keep it open with existing resources," said Claire Palermo Flower, a spokeswoman in Mr.
O'Rourke's office.
"The Legislature cut new programs, and we are trying to figure out how to keep this thing alive." She said one alternative would be to use existing county office space and personnel to staff it.
The budget request to the Legislature had been for $88,645.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the wedding of Sara Mullen Graff (Sally) Cooke and Alexander K. (Ike) Lawrence was incorrect.
After the report was printed, Miss Cooke said the ceremony, scheduled for Jan. 29, had been canceled.


A Multicultural Marketplace With Health Care Upstairs
Hoping to build on a nascent increase in housing and commerce in the bleak neighborhood surrounding the Hub, city officials have given a development company conditional approval for an international marketplace at 149th Street between Brook and Bergen Avenues.
Envisioned as the centerpiece of a plan to transform 100,000 square feet of city-owned lots that have been vacant since the late 1970's, the marketplace would be a two-story building with restaurants, food stores and kiosks on the ground floor and a walk-in health clinic above, said one of the developers, Daniel Gerard.


Klan Asks to Collect Trash Near Black Homes
Everybody from the Boy Scouts to the Jaycees to a nudist club from Austin participates in the Adopt-a-Highway cleanup program administered by the State of Texas.
But now that members of the Ku Klux Klan have applied to help out, the state wants to hand them a Federal injunction, not a garbage bag.
A Waco-based group, the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, has petitioned to adopt a two-mile stretch of highway that runs right past a recently desegregated housing complex in the East Texas town of Vidor.
In return for keeping both sides of the roadway clean, the Klan would be rewarded with a sign recognizing its efforts.


SPEED SKATING
THE SETUP: For the second time in Olympic history, speed skating will be held indoors.
The first time was Calgary in 1988.
This time, the skating site at Hamar resembles the overturned hull of a Viking Ship.
The Norwegians are mad about speed skating, and fans at the oval should spend the Games in a flag-waving, horn-blowing frenzy for the five races for men (500, 1,000, 1,500, 5,000 and 10,000 meters) and five for women (500, 1,000, 1,500, 3,000 and 5,000).
The oval at Hamar is exceedingly fast.
Dan Jansen of the United States set a world record at 500 meters on the Olympic oval in December, recording a time of 35.92 seconds.


Savoie Fare
The late December sunset was both exhilarating and foreboding at the northern tip of Lake Geneva as the bus lurched along the ridges of the French Alps and climbed toward Haute-Savoie.
Near the lake and across the soft, upward roll of the valley, the snow was gentle pink powder.
The endless sheath of mountain ahead was glazed gray; the snow, having melted in the afternoon, was again frozen and unforgiving.
The land fell into glacial basins, as if it were plucked up and wrung out by a giant, all-knowing hand.
A defiance, both of human scale and human life span, seemed to echo off the western ridges, where the crystalline massifs are many millions of years old.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Mark S. Solak; Taking a Closer Look at the Death Penalty
THE only state's attorney in Connecticut to prosecute a death penalty case last year was Mark S. Solak of Windham County.
He persuaded a jury to levy the penalty against Terry Johnson of Mansfield, who killed Trooper Russell Bagshaw during a 1991 burglary at a gun shop in Windham.
That was only the fifth time a person has received the death penalty in Connecticut since the current capital felony law was put on the books in 1980.
No one has been executed in the state since 1960.


Collard Greens, With an Italian Twist
COLLARDS are invariably associated with the South and soul food.
Cooked long and slow, these big, sturdy, almost leathery leaves on meaty stalks become mellow and tender, often with a hambone or some pig's feet to enhance the flavor.
The cooking liquid is is known as "pot likker," a flavorful near-soup.
A splash of vinegar nicely balances the taste of the greens.
But collards need not be limited to this.
They are as good cooked just until they wilt as they are stewed slowly, in the more traditional fashion.
These inexpensive greens, sold in bunches of a pound or two, are sweeter tasting than cabbage and more succulent than Swiss chard.
They can be quickly stir-fried and then combined with pasta or mixed into an omelet or served as a side dish.


SKI JUMPING
THE SETUP There are three jumping events: two individual and one team.
The two individual competitions are held on separate, often adjacent, hills called the large hill and normal hill.
The team competition is held on the large hill.
THE SCORING Each competitor jumps twice, amassing points for distance and style.
Five judges determine the length of each jump from the takeoff to the landing and a complex table converts the distances to points.
Five other judges give scores of up to 20 points for the jumpers' style (the highest and lowest scores are dropped).
Form on the in-run, or the ramp, is not judged.
The scoring system awards about 50 percent for style and 50 percent for distance.
The jumper with the highest point total from the two jumps wins.
In the separate team competition, from the large hill, four men each jump twice.
In each round of jumps, only a team's three best scores are counted.


Q and A
Who's Responsible For Drain Repairs?
Q.
I live in a rent-controlled apartment.
Recently, the landlord billed me for work done by an outside contractor to clear a bathroom drain of excessive hair.
The landlord quotes from a two-year lease signed by us in 1962 as the basis for our responsibility.


Fearsome Challenge of Attaching Things to Walls
IF there is an equivalent among homeowners to writers or painters' block, it may occur when having to attach an object, even a simple one, to a wall.
Walls in most houses are essentially hollow.
Nails or screws driven into them without planning have little chance of entering a stud for backing, and there is even less chance that the location of a stud coincides with the spot for installing the fastener.


A Lion Dance to Usher in the Year of the Dog


For Ethan Stiefel, Overdrive Is Standard
ETHAN STIEFEL, VERY definitely the New York City Ballet's rising young star, turns up for an interview in the full regalia of a regular guy.
The logo on the 20-year-old soloist's T-shirt reads: "On the Eighth Day God Created Harley-Davidson." It is a reminder of the bikers' convention he attended in the Midwest last summer, covering 760 miles by motorcycle in one day.
Football, his childhood passion in Wisconsin, is symbolized by a cap from the Rose Bowl.
Another interest is criminology.
Mr.
Stiefel, a prison warden's son, plans to make it his major at Fordham University, where he has just enrolled.


LUGE
The only Olympic sport timed in thousandths of a second, luge - the French word for 'sled' - puts you on your back, inches above the ice, for about three-quarters of a mile at breakneck speed.
That's not the hard part: the 'slider' cannot see where he is going, so he recognizes bumps and turns by memory.


Fearsome Challenge of Attaching Things to Walls
IF there is an equivalent among homeowners to writers or painters' block, it may occur when having to attach an object, even a simple one, to a wall.
Walls in most houses are essentially hollow.
Nails or screws driven into them without planning have little chance of entering a stud for backing, and there is even less chance that the location of a stud coincides with the spot for installing the fastener.


Sports of The Times; From Sarajevo 1984 To Sarajevo Today
SNEG is in the mountains around Sarajevo again. But there's blood on the sneg now.
Sneg was the local word for snow 10 years ago when the XIV Winter Olympics were held in and around Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, when snow fell for 100 consecutive hours on this smoke-gray industrial city of high-rise apartments and Muslim minarets, when a California skier, Billy Johnson, predicted he would win the men's downhill on Mount Belasnica.


FOR HEALTH INSURANCE, WITH NO FRILLS
I have long admired and respected Peter G. Peterson for his public service and his efforts to bring some common sense to bear on the runaway Federal deficits of the 1980's ("For Health Insurance, With No Frills," Jan. 16).
But his prescription for no- frills health-care reform totally misses the point that President and Mrs.
Clinton have been making for months.


Missing Persons Department
To the Editor:
The real source of racial animosity at Lincoln Center is its failure to recognize the contributions of white jazz artists, living and dead.
To them Bix Beiderbecke, Benny Goodman, Bill Evans and Stan Getz never existed.
Neither do Michael Brecker, Joe Lovano or Ken Peplowski.
RANDY SANDKE  Brooklyn


Manager's Profile
Richard H. King  Fund: Warburg Pincus International Equity, $680 million in assets.
Manager since 1989 inception (Sponsor: Warburg Pincus Counsellors, New York City).


Town Rallies Behind an Ousted Chief
The Township Council zipped through the routine business on its agenda in about 15 minutes and then turned its regular Thursday night meeting into a pep rally for the former Police Chief, Arthur Montenegro.
About 200 of Mr.
Montenegro's supporters branded John J. Fahy, the Bergen County Prosecutor, a villain for taking over the Police Department, arresting Mr.
Montenegro and forcing his resignation for squelching a cocaine arrest in 1993, and for charging a popular Councilman, Lucien Zeppone, with running an illegal betting pool in his saloon on Super Bowl Sunday.
They also accused the Council of doing nothing to block Mr.
Fahy and his detectives.


66 Die as Shell Wrecks Sarajevo Market
A mortar shell exploded in the jammed central market here today, killing at least 66 people and wounding about 200 others in the worst massacre in the 22-month siege of Sarajevo.
The ramshackle market of rows of steel tables was packed with weekend shoppers when the single 120-millimeter shell hit at half past noon, sending shrapnel ripping through people bartering for second-hand clothes and used electrical appliances.


In Film Noir, the Past Is Present and Perfect
IN "RESERVOIR DOGS," QUENTIN Tarantino's darkly comic heist film, an efficient, amoral gangster played by Michael Madsen challenges the hotheaded professionalism of his partner in crime, played by Harvey Keitel.
"I bet you're a big Lee Marvin fan," he tells Mr.
Keitel.
By evoking Marvin, the quintessential heavy who was famous for throwing scalding coffee in Gloria Grahame's face in "The Big Heat" back in 1953, Mr.
Tarantino is tacitly acknowledging where his film comes from.
But, unlike many of his film-literate contemporaries who copied the style of postwar film noir, Mr.
Tarantino had the good sense to create something original.


Tons of Sand: Replenishing The Shoreline
Next month, workers for the Army Corps of Engineers will begin distributing sand along three and a half miles of beach in Sea Gate, Coney Island and Brighton Beach as part of an estimated $23.9 million restoration program, officials announced last week.
The project calls for two years of work to replenish the shoreline from Beach 42d Street in Sea Gate to Corbin Place in Brighton Beach.
Work will be done in 2,000-foot stretches, to minimize disruption to summer beach activities.


Manufacturers Oppose Clinton Plan
Arguing that the White House had ignored their pleas to amend President Clinton's health care proposals, the directors of the National Association of Manufacturers voted 56 to 20 today not to support the Administration's package "in its present form."
The resolution was the third blow this week to the Clinton plan from a major business organization, and perhaps the most damaging.
The association represents 12,500 manufacturers, large and small.
Nearly all carry health insurance for their 15 million employees, and in some cases the plans are more expensive than the Clinton proposals.
Nevertheless, the manufacturers vote showed that they considered the President's plan too costly.


3d 'No' on Health Plan
The influential National Association of Manufacturers voted against supporting the Clinton health care package, saying it was unacceptable "in its present form." The vote was the third, and perhaps most damaging, blow delivered to the plan recently by business groups.
Article, page 26.


She Has Health and Olympics
Don't jump to conclusions.
Just because two Olympians, Bonnie Blair and Chantal Bailey, come from the same hometown, that doesn't necessarily make Champaign, Ill., a hotbed of speed skating.
The fact is, they were passing friends in high school or at the rink.
Bonnie Blair comes from a speed-skating family, but Chantal Dunn Bailey wanted to be poetry in motion, a ballerina on ice.
"When I was 10, I watched the 1976 Olympics," said Bailey.
"I watched Dorothy Hamill and I said, 'That's what I want to be.' My parents gave me lessons. We washed cars. We did anything. My father, Raymond Dunn, picked up hubcaps from I-74. He worked as a janitor. He worked three jobs to make money."


Events in Braille
The Greater Hartford Tourism District recently began printing a Braille version of its quarterly events calendar.
The 33-page calendar, listing activities in Hartford and 20 nearby towns, is in Braille right down to the cover illustration of a horse-drawn sleigh.
It's the only municipal events calendar in Braille in Connecticut and possibly the only one in the country, according to Carl R. Augusto, president of the American Foundation for the Blind.


WHERE TO WRITE OR CALL FOR INFORMATION
Abercrombie &amp; Kent International, 1520 Kensington Road, Suite 212, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521; (708) 954-2944 or (800) 323-7308 outside Illinois.
Alaska Sightseeing/Cruise West, Fourth and Battery Building, Suite 700, Seattle, Wash. 98121; (206) 441-8687 or (800) 426-7702.


Pictures of Bronx Life In the Faces of Children
"I want you to think of the way you really are," Mark Brasz, a teacher at Public School 1, told his students as they posed for pictures.
The resulting photographs, and some candid ones, too, are now in an exhibition entitled "The Children of Melrose: Portraits From the South Bronx."
Mr.
Brasz went to the Bronx in 1979 to photograph graffiti on subway cars.
"I found something appealing about the community," he said.
"I thought, 'I better move here.' I thought it was one of the few remaining vestiges of community life in New York."


INSIDE
Vietnam's Business Rush
Now that American companies can trade with Vietnam, several are jumping right in.
But for some, Vietnam is down the list of priorities in Asia, behind markets like China, Thailand and Indonesia.
Page 11.
Zones of Disagreement
New York's request for Federal money for an "empowerment zone" has turned into a political brawl.
Page 39.


Smooth Rides Dayton Style
Chassis Dynamics, an Oxford, Conn., race-car builder, was chosen by Geoff Bodine, the stock-car racer who grew up in Chemung, N.Y., when Bodine decided to do something to help American bobsledders try to win their first medal since 1956 and first gold since 1948.
If the Bo-Dyn sleds, which are much quieter than the European versions and are generally considered easier to drive, turn out to be a big answer to ending the American medal drought, it will be no small coincidence that it was the stock-car branch of American motorsport that produced the sled.
For one thing, stock-car racing, of all forms of motorsports, operates under the strictest technological limits, to control costs and keep the richer teams from buying their way into the winner's circle.
Unlike Indy-car racing, stock-car racers cannot redesign their car or any major piece of it because rule-makers discourage it.


Pell Grants in Prisons Reduce Crime Rate
To the Editor:
"Tough and Smart on Crime?" (editorial, Jan. 27) leaves out one of the dumbest parts of a Senate crime bill you call, in part, "tough and dumb." The amendment by Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas bars prisoners from getting Pell grants to aid in their higher education.


BOBSLED
There will be no Herschel Walker around to fumble the start.
The running start is a completely human endeavor, 55 yards of pushing a sled and then hopping aboard for the ride.
So strong, fast athletes are recruited from other sports to get the sled going.
But the Americans learned in the 1992 Albertville Games that even a great competitor like Walker can't join the team in January and compete successfully against the world's best in February.
THE SET-UP The current American teams have been together since the push-off championships last September.
They will be handling sleds made in America and designed with help from Geoff Bodine, the former Daytona 500 winner.
In addition to aerodynamic changes from recent years, the handling mechanisms have been altered significantly from only two years ago.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BIOGRAPHY  GRANVILLE HICKS  The Intellectual in Mass Society.
By Leah Levenson  and Jerry Natterstad.
Temple University, $39.95.


Corrections
An answer in the Q &amp; A column on page 32 of the Travel section today about renting apartments in Paris misstates the telephone number for France U.S.A.
Contacts.
It is (212) 989-8989.


Lauren B. Gordon, Jay Mandelbaum
Lauren Beth Gordon, the daughter of Emmy Gordon of Houston and the late Harvey A. Gordon, was married in New York last evening to Jay Phillip Mandelbaum, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Mandelbaum of Old Westbury, L.I.
Rabbi Seth J. Sternstein officiated at the Pierre.
Ms.
Gordon, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Texas at Austin and is a vice president in international fixed-income sales at Salomon Brothers in New York.
Her mother is a sales associate at John Daugherty Realtors, a real estate agency in Houston.


To Petrenko, Olympics Worth More Than Gold
VIKTOR PETRENKO dug his skate blades into the ice and covered his gap-toothed grin with both hands.
He had just completed a nearly flawless performance in the technical program at the European championships, and his compact frame was quivering with emotion.
This was no exhibition, no routine evening's work in yet another North American arena with only the applause meter as his judge and jury.
This was genuine competition, exactly the kind of forum he had been craving when he sat down with his American agent, Michael Rosenberg, last spring and laid out his plans to regain eligibility for the 1994 Olympics.
While the voluble Rosenberg railed on about the "high six-figure" earnings Petrenko would be kissing goodbye during the coming professional season and the damage an Olympic flop could inflict on his future drawing power, the Ukrainian with the Las Vegas, Nev., address calmly turned, and according to Rosenberg, said: "Michael, I am an athlete. The Olympics says I can come back, so I must go back."
End of conversation.
End of high six-figure earnings, at least temporarily. 'Nothing to Lose'
"I have nothing to lose," said Petrenko, who turned 24 in June.
"Skating is what I live for."
Skating has certainly shaped his life.
Born in the Black Sea port city of Odessa in what was then the Soviet Union, Petrenko began working with the coach Galina Zmievskaya at the age of 10.
He has never had another teacher, and in the summer of 1992, several months after he won the gold medal in the Winter Olympics in Albertville, France, their long association took on an added dimension when Petrenko married Zmievskaya's daughter, Nina, in Odessa.
The newlyweds soon set up house in Las Vegas, a city where ice is usually restricted to cocktail glasses.
Petrenko picked it as his professional training base because one of his friends was the director of skating at the Santa Fe Ice Rink, which lies in the Nevada desert about 10 miles away from the myriad, man-made distractions of "The Strip."
"I see a lot of casinos, but I don't play; I don't like to gamble," said Petrenko, who owns a comfortable townhouse near the Sante Fe rink in a fenced-in development (Rosenberg prefers the term "gated community.")
After headlining a 72-city ice show tour and participating in the 59-city Tom Collins tour, Petrenko flew back to Odessa with Nina in June last year to begin preparations for his third Olympics.
Once again, he will be marching behind a different flag in the opening ceremony.
Won Bronze in Calgary
In 1988, Petrenko won bronze for the Soviet Union in Calgary, finishing behind Brian Boitano and Brian Orser.
In 1992, he won gold while representing the euphemistically titled Unified team.
This year, he will be skating for Ukraine.
"It will be a great chance to skate for a new country; it makes me more happy," he said.
Petrenko would be happier still if his surrogate sister-in-law, Oksana Baiul, could soar to a gold medal of her own.
Baiul, who won the world championship last year at age 15, was taken in by Zmievskaya in 1992 after losing her mother, Marina, to cancer and her coach, Stanislav Koritek, to a secure job in Canada. (Baiul's father, who is still alive, left the family when she was an infant.)
Petrenko has been supportive of Baiul from the start, supplying her with equipment and financial assistance.
The two skaters have developed a close relationship, training together with Zmievskaya for the last five months on the soft, unpredictable ice of the Odessa Sports Palace.
Though some could question Petrenko's decision to train in such conditions (he recently felt obliged to purchase a skate-sharpening machine for the rink), he claims to have never hesitated.
"My family is in Odessa, and all my friends; it's home," he said.
No Illusions
But Petrenko harbors no illusions about the role of figure skating in a nation where people remain concerned with finding and affording their daily bread.
"There are no popular athletes in Ukraine," he said.
"People are more interested in political situations. Yeltsin and Kravchuk are more popular than athletes. People are too busy thinking about what's going to happen tomorrow." He was referring to the Russian president, Boris N. Yeltsin, and the Ukrainian president, Leonid Kravchuk.
Perhaps.
But when a Russian television broadcaster erroneously reported last month that Petrenko was in danger of not qualifying for the final round of the European men's competition (he ended up winning), hundreds of Ukrainians were interested enough to call the federation and express their shock and dismay.
"Our director was pretty busy for a day," said Vladimir Geraschenko, a spokesman for the figure-skating federation.
Whether Petrenko can bring a psychological lift to his troubled homeland depends a great deal on his ability to skate cleanly.
In all his years as a world-class competitor, he has always stumbled in either his original or free program in the big events.
In Albertville, he fell on a triple axel in his long program but still won because nobody else kept their feet either.
This time, the competition will be considerably stiffer with Boitano, a healthy Kurt Browning and two emerging talents in Scott Davis and Elvis Stojko.
"Most of all, I want to be in the Olympics and do a good job of showing my programs," Petrenko said.
"What place I get doesn't matter."
It might matter to his earning power, but even Rosenberg, the man who monitors the cash flow, has learned to live with that risk.
"Viktor always laughs with me that he is going to do three more Olympics," Rosenberg said.
"I tell him I'll catch up with him when he's 40."


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on Jan. 16 about the architecture of new elementary schools in New York City misstated the location of P.S. 6 in Brooklyn.
It is in Flatbush, not Bedford-Stuyvesant.


Tails and Dancing Shoes
The 39th Annual Viennese Opera Ball, at the Waldorf-Astoria, Jan. 28.


Here's Where Your Shirts Go
INSIDE a white brick building that gleams like an urban iceberg in the frosty winter light, some 40 people are sorting, scrubbing, pressing and boxing what New York wears to work and play.
Each day some 1,400 pounds of laundry pass through this cavernous, 10,000-square-foot factory in Long Island City, Queens.
Shirts, pants, underwear and socks make colorful jumbles in wheeled canvas carts and whirl in big metal washers and dryers.
Button-down shirts dance like synthetic-fiber spirits on hangers lining steel racks.


Brooklyn Woman Urging an End To an Argument Is Shot to Death
A Brooklyn woman who was the mother of four children was shot dead as she leaned out her second-floor window late Friday after urging her boyfriend to stop arguing with two men outside, the police said.
The woman, Carmen Fernandez, 31, was killed about 11:40 P.M. while her friend, Joseph Delgado, climbed the stairs to the apartment at 233 Cleveland Street in East New York.


Wall Street; Curbing the Hard Sell in Insurance
STATE insurance regulators are becoming increasingly alarmed about improper sales activities in their industry and are looking to the securities industry for ideas on what to do.
While the securities industry is far from solving its perennial problems with improper sales tactics, it still could be the model that could help life insurance regulators head off suggestions that there be a Federal regulator of insurance companies.


Raising the Flag for Capitalism
To the Editor:
Ray Jenkins displays the worst behavior of an American leftist: After a lifetime of enjoying the freedom and the high standard of living of American capitalism, he feels guilty!
There is a simple cure: Take up residency in one of the remaining socialist countries, like Cuba or China, and try to live and make a living there while they still have their "noble socialist aspirations." But hurry, before their noble aspirations cause them to cease to exist.


Corrections
A brief report last Sunday describing high-fashion hair salons in Manhattan, with an article about a quarrel between a salon owner and a stylist, referred incorrectly to the lighting fixtures at the Garren salon at Henri Bendel.
They were designed by Christopher Barriscale, the architect responsible for the salon's interior design; they are not by Lalique.


Anita L. Perrone, Myron D. Ronis
Anita Louise Perrone, a real estate broker, was married yesterday in New York to Myron David Ronis, an architect.
Both work in New York.
Judge Robert Brownstein, a retired judge of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn, officiated at the Lotos Club.
Mrs.
Ronis, 42, is the director of relocation for the Corcoran Group, a real estate agency.
She graduated cum laude from Long Island University.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Perrone of Dix Hills, L.I.


SUNDAY, February 6, 1994; Rare Guitar Woods
Music may soothe the savage breast, soften rocks and "bend a knotted oak" as Congreve said.
But according to the Fauna and Flora Preservation Society in London, it's not kind at all to ebony and rosewood trees, at least not when played on a guitar.
The society is calling on makers of guitars and other stringed instruments, as well as makers of clarinets and harpsichords, to search for new materials to replace rare ebonies and rosewoods.


A Reluctant Defense Of Barnes &amp; Noble
To the Editor:
In response to Rosanna Trestman's letter of Jan. 30, and her statement that the discount policy of the Barnes &amp; Noble superstore forced Eeyore's bookstore out of business. . .
I, too, as a lifelong Upper West Sider with a love for Eeyore's, was prepared to hate Barnes &amp; Noble for its threat to the little stores.
Eeyore's had a highly specialized, talented and even entertaining staff that, after a brief inquiry, could almost magically find books (little known ones, as well as classics) perfectly suited to each child's needs, interests and tastes.


Pricing to the Market in Silicon Valley
To the Editor:
I found it difficult to be moved by Neil R. Henry's plight, as described in "Job Crunch: The Slamming Doors of Silicon Valley" (Jan. 23).
Hard times for the 31-year-old, it seems, means deigning to seek jobs in the $40,000 to $60,000 range, rather than at the $80,000 a year he previously was fortunate enough to earn.
It's kind of like being priced out of the market for a Rolls Royce, but staying in the running for, say, a Jaguar, while the rest of the world is getting a 100,000-mile tuneup on the old Ford wagon.
KATY ODELL WILSON  Saranac Lake, N.Y., Jan. 23


Body of Washington Hts. 'Mayor' Is Found
One month after he disappeared, Siegfried Lowenthal, 89, the man known to some as "the mayor of Washington Heights," was found dead yesterday in the snow off the Henry Hudson Parkway in Upper Manhattan.
The cause and time of death were unknown, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a spokesman for the Police Department.
He said an autopsy would be performed today.


A Bittersweet Homecoming for Mariette Hartley
MARIETTE HARTLEY'S opening in "The Sisters Rosensweig" at the Shubert in New Haven on Tuesday is a Connecticut homecoming.
Ms.
Hartley, who was born in Weston in 1940, is chronologically equal, give or take a few months, to her stage counterpart, Sara, the eldest of the three sisters in Wendy Wasserstein's hit play, which will also have a two-week stop in May at the Rich Forum in Stamford.


SUNDAY, February 6, 1994; The Criminal Pose
Cops call it "walking the perp." It's the moment when the captured suspect is displayed as trophy and may strike his own sad or rebellious stance.
Herewith, a guide to three classic poses.
The Beast at Bay: His crimes are horrendous.
He is not treated as human, and he doesn't appear as such.
The spectator feels only revulsion.
Chikatilo was caged in a Soviet courtroom.
The Grinning Punk: He's defiant.
Unrepentant.
He may even play the moment as a triumph.
The Old Pro: He ignores society's attempt to stigmatize him.
He dresses better than the cops.
Cuffed or not, he owns the arena.
He may even, like Gambino, have the air of a pastor about to hear, rather than give, a confession.


Germans Are Finding 'I Spy' Is Not Funny Game
As the German Olympic team prepares to depart for Lillehammer, Norway, athletes and officials are deeply worried about the prospect of new scandals tying athletes to the former East German secret police.
Senior German sports officials have called on all athletes who served as informants for the secret police, which was known as the Stasi, to confess their connections before the Games.


Cortny Schlidt and James L. Decker
Elisabeth Cortny Schlidt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew J. Schlidt Jr. of Mequon, Wis., was married yesterday to James Leigh Decker, a son of Geraldine G. Decker of New Hyde Park, L.I., and the late Richard L. Decker.
The Rev.
Gregory M. Spitz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Gesu Church in Milwaukee.
Mrs.
Decker, 27, is known as Cortny.
She is an associate equity analyst with Kemper Securities Inc., a securities brokerage in Chicago.
She graduated from Marquette University and she and her husband received master's degrees in international management from the American Graduate School of International Management.


Alan &amp; Alan Robin M. Kantor and Alan D. Belsky
Robin Melissa Kantor, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Steven Kantor of Grymes Hill, S.I., is to be married today to Alan David Belsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Belsky of Malvern, Pa.
Rabbi Judah Newberger will officiate at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Belsky is a marketing representative for Ciba Pharmaceuticals in Summit, N.J., and an auctioneer for the New York City Sheriff.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Bridgeport.
Her father is an internist in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Linda Kantor, is a real estate broker for Monogram Realty in Silver Lake, S.I.


What Do Men Want?
To the Editor:
It would seem that Richard A. Shweder believes that by labeling a thing, he -- and his readers -- have understood it.
He labels the much-disputed but little-examined genre of books by men about men and masculinity "crisis literature." He briefly identifies an incomplete stack of books, labels them entertaining but useless and neatly discards his pile.


Miller, on 67, Trails by 1; Watson Is 2 Shots Behind
All week long, the script here on the Monterey Peninsula has read like something out of Ponce de Leon's travel diary.
You want the fountain of youth?
Find 17-Mile Drive in Carmel and take the winding road up to The Lodge at Pebble Beach.
First it was Arnold Palmer, 64, charging into the picture on Thursday with a 69 and then it was Tom Watson, 44, shooting the lights out on Friday and today it was Johnny Miller, 46, rediscovering his game and shooting a 67 that put him just one stroke out of the lead going into the final round of the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.


Reader by Reader and Town by Town, A New Novelist Builds a Following
This essay is the second of two parts about the marketing of a first novel and the beginning of a writer's career.
"Art must be practiced as a trade, at all events in our time. This is the age of trade." George Gissing "New Grub Street" (1891)
WHEN Marly Rusoff is lucky, a book sells itself.
When she's not, a handle can be hard to come by.


For Moynihan, Health Before Heritage
When the White House overrode the recommendations of its own diplomats and granted a temporary visa to allow Gerry Adams, the Irish republican leader, to attend a conference in New York last week, it made no secret that the move was urged by two of the nation's most prominent Irish-American politicians: Senators Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York.
One unnamed Administration official, quoted in The Washington Post, went so far as to describe the pair as two "800-pound gorillas," vital to passage of President Clinton's domestic agenda on welfare and health care this year, with the suggestion that Mr.
Moynihan had linked visa politics to his policy vote.


Four Exhibitions Open Vienna Jewish Museum
The Jewish Museum of the City of Vienna is inaugurating its new permanent quarters with four exhibitions touching on Jewish life in the city.
One, on view to May 15, is called "This Is Where Teitelbaum Lived . . ." The exhibit notes that there were 16 Teitelbaums listed in the 1938 city phone book and none in the 1993-94 book.
It features historical maps of Vienna on which visitors can walk as they view objects and texts that document the history and culture of the city's Jews.
A second, "Song of Songs," includes paintings and sculptures by Heinz Mack interpreting the biblical Song of Solomon; it closes Feb. 13.
The other two, which continue until March 5, are photographic exhibitions focusing on Sigmund Freud and his followers: "The Freudians," featuring photographs by Nachum T. Gidal from the 13th International Conference of Psychoanalysis held in Lucerne in 1934, and "Wien IX, Berggasse 19," photographs by Edmund Engelman of Freud, in his 80's, and his apartment taken in 1938, soon before Freud was to leave Vienna following Nazi Germany's annexation of Austria.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
VALENTINE DOINGS
A valentine concert, "Songs of Love and Passion," will be presented on Saturday evening and next Sunday afternoon by Opera Ama Deo in the Great Hall at Christ Church, Episcopal, in Ridgewood.
The audience will be seated at tables and served Champagne, sparkling beverages, desserts and coffee during the concert of scenes from great romantic operas, including "Tosca," "Carmen" and "Pagliacci."
Mark Delavan, a baritone with the New York City Opera, will be joined in the performance by Reegan McKenzie and Kimberly Hughes, sopranos; Geralyn Keely, mezzo, and David Huff, tenor.
Cynthia Powell, artistic director of New Jersey opera company, will accompany them on piano.
The concert will begin at 8 P.M.
Saturday and at 4 P.M. next Sunday.
Tickets are $15 in advance and $20 at the door, with part of the proceeds benefiting the church's social outreach programs.
Reservations are recommended.
The church is at Franklin Avenue and Cottage Place.
Information: (201) 652-2350.
Heart-shaped curly grapevine wreaths will be decorated during a valentine workshop on Saturday at the Hermitage in Ho-Ho-Kus.
Participants will add eucalyptus, capia, roses, statice and other everlasting flowers to 13-inch wreaths and finish them off with French-wired ribbons.
The instructor will be Cheryl Wiley, who will provide the materials from her farm, Herbs, Spice and Everything Nice.
The workshop will be held from 9:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M. in the Rosencrantz House, adjacent to the Hermitage at 335 North Franklin Turnpike.
The fee is $40 for instruction and materials.
Reservations are required and may be made by telephone.
Information: (201) 445-8311.  MEMORIAL STOMP
The New Jersey Jazz Society will present its 25th annual Pee Wee Russell Memorial Stomp at 1 P.M. next Sunday in the Grand Ballroom of the Hyatt Regency Hotel in New Brunswick.
The tribute to the career and music of Charles E. (Pee Wee) Russell, who was a major jazz figure for four decades before his death in 1967, will include presentation of the society's honor awards to the pianist Joe Bushkin and others.
The groups performing will be Robbie Scott's 10-piece New Deal Swing band, David Ostwald's Gully Low Jazz band, the Cocuzzi-Dale Swingtet, Ed Polcer's Quarter-Century Stomp All-Stars and Wayne Goodman's New Orleans Jazz Band from William Paterson College in Wayne.
Tickets are $20, or $2 for students with proper identification, and will be available at the door.
The hotel is at 2 Albany Street.
Information: (201) 377-2409. CLASSICAL GUITARIST
Christopher Michael Kenniff, an award-winning classical guitarist who is working toward a master's degree in music at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, will be featured in a "Music at Corpus Christi" concert this afternoon in Chatham Township, where he formerly lived.
Mr.
Kenniff received a bachelor's degree in music magna cum laude at Southern Methodist in July.
He took first place at the National Federal of Music Clubs Biannual Student Audition in Classical Guitar, held in April, and was the winner in guitar at the 1992 Texas Music Teachers' annual collegiate competition.
In addition, he has been awarded merit scholarships at the university, at the Manhattan School of Music in New York City and at the Bowdoin Summer Music Festival in Maine.
The concert at 4 P.M. in Corpus Christi Church will include selections by Scarlatti, Haydn and Bach that have been transcribed for guitar and works written for guitar by the Spanish composers Fernando Sor and Julian Orbon, the Mexican composer Manuel Ponce and the contemporary Japanese composer Toru Takemitsu.
There is no admission charge, but a donation of $10 is suggested.
The church is at 234 Southern Boulevard.
Information: (201) 635-0070. STRATEGIES FOR ARTISTS
Strategies for performing, visual and literary artists to market their talents effectively will be offered in a two-part workshop that will be held from 7:30 to 10 P.M. tomorrow and Tuesday in Montclair.
Intended for artists at all experience levels, the workshop, "The Artist as Entrepreneur: How to Promote Yourself as an Artist in Business," will be co-sponsored by the Montclair Arts and Cultural Alliance and the Montclair Art Museum.
Publicity, advertising, networking, finding market niches and creating a professional presentation will be among the topics covered.
The workshop will be led by Marcia Mungenast, a communications consultant and writer who was formerly a dancer, choreographer and teacher.
Eleven arts professionals who have developed successful careers for themselves and or others will be featured in a panel discussion on Tuesday.
They will answer questions and provide advice in specific fields.
The sessions will be held at the museum at the corner of South Mountain and Bloomfield Avenues.
Registration is $25, or $20 for students.
Information: (201) 744-1717. 'FROM THE INSIDE OUT'
Among the musical artists participating in the workshop at the museum will be Peggy Schecter, co-artistic director of the New Jersey Chamber Music Society, who will be busy on Friday playing the flute for one of the innovative programs that enhance the ensemble's reputation.
The event will be the third annual "From the Inside Out," informal family programs in which Robert Kapilow gives the audience a participatory appreciation of classical music by focusing on a composition as it was written, in segments and sometimes rewriting segments in the style of a lesser composer to demonstrate the choices that distinguish genius.
Mr.
Kapilow, a composer and the host of "What Makes It Great?" on National Public Radio, will deal with the subject "Bach's 'Brandenburg Concerto No. 2:' Who Owns It?" at 8:30 P.M. in the Union Congregational Church, 176 Cooper Avenue in Upper Montclair.
Ms.
Schecter and other members of the society with the Essex Quartet as guest artists will musically illustrate Mr.
Kapilow's presentation and perform the entire concerto.
Tickets are $18, or $6 for students.
Information: (201) 746-6068. MARY L. EMBLEN GROWTH OF A THEATER
After opening as a vaudeville house in 1927, the Ritz Theater in Oaklyn switched to popular Hollywood movies in the 1940's.
Foreign films were on in the 50's and 60's, X-rated films in the 70's.
Envisioning something live and legitimate at the Ritz, Bruce A. Curless leased the playhouse in 1986 and scheduled a season of theater.
It attracted 701 subscribers.
Last season's figure, 3,582, has been surpassed this season, said Nancy Seavy, the theater's public relations representative.
Subscriptions are still coming in, she said, for the current year, which began on Jan. 7 with "On the 20th Century," the flamboyant, stylish 1978 Broadway adaptation of the celebrated 1930's play and film.
With unorthodox Cy Coleman music, Art Deco designs that duplicate the luxury chromium-plated train of legend and performing requirements ranging from showy tap to high tessitura, this is the Ritz's most venturesome show yet.
"We couldn't have done it eight years ago," Mrs.
Seavy said.
"For this show, we can't have actors who can't sing, or singers who can't act. But now we're attracting talent that can handle it. And we've grown into a significant theater -- the only one known for big-time musicals in southern New Jersey."
Not that the Ritz puts on musicals only.
"Lend Me a Tenor" will follow "20th Century," which plays today at 2 P.M. and Friday and Saturday at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $10 for the matinee and $12 for evenings.
"Private Collection," a new series, is being added this season.
It willconsist of "Sweet Sue," by A. R. Gurney, from Feb. 18 to Feb. 20; a Shakespeare sampler, from April 8 to April 12, and a monthlong festival of music and dance programs, children's productions and one-act plays in June.
Information, including a full season schedule: (609) 858-5230. ALVIN KLEIN


SURFACING
RELATIONSHIPS  Monogamy books: The virtues of being two are promoted in several new books, including "Hot Monogamy" (Dutton), "The Couple's Comfort Book" (HarperSanFrancisco) and "The Erotic Edge" (Dutton), which offers erotica for couples.
MUSIC  Adult alternative radio: A growing number of stations are using "album adult alternative" programming, or "triple A." The music, including that of the Counting Crows, is less formulaic than most Top 40.
It rocks harder than "lite" music, yet is softer than heavy metal.
HEALTH  The "uni-cig" machine: To encourage people to smoke less, AKA, a club in SoHo, has a cigarette machine that dispenses one at a time -- for a quarter each.


Cushion Concerts Lead Youth Parade
YOUNGER listeners have a number of musical treats in store this week, starting this morning at 11:15 when Richard Kapp and the Philharmonia Virtuosi take their Cushion Concerts to the Rippowam-Cisqua School in Mount Kisco.
The program is devoted to Mozart's fairy-tale opera "The Magic Flute." Tickets will be available at the door.
At 3 P.M. today, the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College is presenting "Are You Ready, My Sister?" a play about Harriet Tubman, the heroic guide on the underground railroad.
Designed for children 6 and older, it is described as a "historical adventure story, with shadow puppets, audience participation, dramatic scenes and live music based on spirituals of the slave era." For reservations, the number to call is 251-6200.


Later Love
The stillness of the twilight is pierced by the pulsating beat of Stevie Wonder's "I Just Called to Say I Love You." Inside the Crestview Club ballroom, the singles crowd is swaying to the rhythm of the music.
Jessie Reiman, Laura Lacmann and Lee Carr have found a table near enough to the dance floor to be seen, but far enough away so they don't look desperate.
They say they are looking for companionship, not marriage.


The Big Bottom Line: Coleman Will Play
If news media leaks really kill deals, the President's budget would still be in Congress, he would already have thrown in the towel on health care and the trade embargo on Vietnam would have gone on forever.
Nothing in this country would ever get done.
John Madden would've spent the rest of his broadcasting career at CBS.
Michael Jackson would've changed his mind and gone to trial.
Jeff Gillooly would not have implicated the love of his life.


At the Bruce Museum, an Anthology of Personalities on View
IT looks as if the exhibition of art, pure and simple, is a thing of the past, to be replaced by the show with a topic.
This can be anything from AIDS to the environment, the Soviet Union-that-was or even, as seen recently in New Jersey, women suffering from eating disorders.
Ethnocentric displays are still in evidence, notably those by American Indians, but it appears that competition is forcing shows by black artists into the background.
Whether or not this indicates that the need for them has diminished, the example now at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich may prove the point.
For one thing, it is a roundup of 19 artists that comes without the usual fanfare: Black History Month is mentioned only in a leaflet announcing peripheral activities; for another, it seems less a tribute to the artists than to the Reader's Digest corporate art collection, from which the works were drawn.


Journal; 'Schindler's' Dissed
In a week in which Louis Farrakhan endorsed the "truths" in his aide's Kean College aria of hate about Jewish "bloodsuckers," here's one story about an angry confrontation between blacks and Jews with a tentatively happy ending.
On Martin Luther King Day last month, 69 students from Castlemont High School in Oakland, Calif., most of them black and Latino, went on a field trip to see "Schindler's List." An hour into the movie, a small but loud group of the students laughed and joked during a scene in which a Nazi shoots a Jewish woman in the head.
When others in the audience stormed out to complain, the theater's management stopped the film and ejected all the students.
Then someone called the press, throwing the story onto the front page and the community into an uproar.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about people shoveling snow in Hoboken, N.J., misstated the date.
The picture was taken in March 1993, not last month.


Coke Wars
COCAINE TRUE COCAINE BLUE Photographs and text by Eugene Richards.
Additional reporting by Edward Barnes.
Illustrated. 153 pp.
New York: Aperture. $40.


What Do Men Want?
To the Editor:
Thanks for Richard A. Shweder's essay.
However, weaning can't reasonably be blamed for men's social defects.
Authors of books about the male identity crisis will have to come up with something better than that.


New Castle Debates High Cost of Water
WHEREAS England's Newcastle-on-Tyne is famous for its proverbial abundance of coal, the town of New Castle is privileged to have a plentiful supply of an even more vital commodity -- water.
But for many residents of New Castle's water district, which includes Chappaqua and Millwood as well as some smaller communities from adjacent municipalities, the recent supply of plentiful water has proved to be a mixed and costly blessing.
After 30 months of construction, a state-of-the-art pumping station and filtration plant opened last September.


Unapologetic Tartabull Lets Others Do the Worrying
Danny Tartabull strolled onto the tiny Little League field at Michael Landon Park in Malibu, Calif., with a bucket of baseballs every day last week.
He softly tossed one ball after another to no one until about two dozen were scattered in front of him.
Then he retrieved them and duplicated the process, throwing to an invisible friend.
It must have looked strange.
There was Tartabull, the highest-paid player in Yankee history, collecting his 60-foot lobs over and over as he tried strengthening his controversial and still-mending right shoulder.
Even Tartabull laughed when told that the notion of a major leaguer not having a partner to play catch with was bizarre.
He laughed, but he had no plans to change his approach.


Lights! Camera! Europe!
IT'S another busy day at Hamster Productions, one of France's most successful television programming makers.
Pierre Grimblat, Hamster's president, is putting the final touches on the musical score for "L'Amour est un jeu d'enfants" ("Love Is a Children's Game"), a movie for Canal Plus, the French pay-television service.
Production is about to begin on the next installment of "Navarro," a long-running cop series that is consistently among the top-rated shows on TF1, the biggest French network.
"We are story makers and story tellers," said Mr.
Grimblat, summoning up traditions that France has fought to defend against what it views as American cultural imperialism.


Apres le Deluge: Who'll Pay?
In the 16 days since a water main ruptured in South Brooklyn, crumbling a half-block of roadway and flooding about 100 homes on the brownstoned streets of Carroll Gardens, residents who were forced to flee in 6-degree early-morning chill have been trying to piece their lives back together.
And most have only one pressing question as they face the prospect of repairing their homes: who will pay, their insurance companies or the city?
It appears it will be a long drawn-out battle to find the answer.


Mischief Count For Son-in-Law Of John Gotti
The son-in-law of John Gotti, the imprisoned head of the Gambino crime family, was arrested and charged with criminal mischief yesterday after he drove his Ford Bronco into a police officer's scooter in Jamaica, Queens, the police said.
The son-in-law, Carmine Agnello, 33, grew angry when he saw the officer give parking tickets to cars near Liberty Avenue and 150th Street about noon yesterday.
After complaining, Mr.
Agnello got into his truck and crushed the scooter, pushing it 10 to 15 feet up 15th Street, the police account said.
The officer was not on the scooter and was not hurt.


He Steals From the Rich and Gives to the Hicks
MERRY MEN By Carolyn Chute. 695 pp. New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.


Business Diary: January 31 - February 4
THE ECONOMY A Whiff of Inflation, and a Stampede Out of Stocks Inflation continues to hover just off stage, a dragon that never actually appears but whose menacing noises still keep the on-stage actors jumpy.
On Friday the Federal Reserve raised its Federal funds rate a notch -- to 3.25 percent from 3 percent -- and the financial markets acted as if someone had stolen their champagne.
It shouldn't have been a surprise, though.
Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, said earlier in the week that such a nudge might be needed to head off long-term inflation, and many people shrugged it off, saying things were going so well that a small rise couldn't do much harm.
But when the announcement came, bond prices fell and stocks tumbled, with the Dow industrials (after flirting with 4,000 earlier in the week) losing 96 points for the day, to 3,871 -- the eighth-biggest drop ever.
So has the bull market stumbled, or will investors decide that 3.25 percent still isn't that high?
It's a nervous weekend.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 Mondays at the Met: behind closed doors, a time to clean and move the treasures of the ages.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 Dept. of Everyday Mysteries: where do your shirts go after you drop them off at the cleaners?
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 17 Women's Health Show in SoHo; Brazilian Carnaval in Flushing.
MOVIE CLOCK 19 What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 20 Below Canal St., Bouley and beyond: El Teddy's to Taliesin to the Thai House Cafe.
SOAPBOX 21 Harlem, land of thwarted aspirations.
Plus Photographer's Journal and a firefighter's lament.


U.S. AGAIN WARNING OF MILITARY ACTION
Confronted with the deadliest single attack on civilians in Sarajevo, the United States today renewed threats of allied military action but gave no indication that it was prepared to become more involved in ending the fighting in Bosnia.
President Clinton met in the Oval Office with Vice President Al Gore, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Anthony Lake, the President's national security adviser, to discuss the attack, White House officials said.


Corrections
A picture caption on Jan. 23 with an article about dreadlocks omitted the name of the salon that styled the ornamented locks.
It is Locksmyths African Groomers.


Jan. 30 -Feb. 6: Short-Timers; Again the Chaos Embroils U.S. Troops in Somalia
The 5,000 American troops in Somalia are trying to wait out the next two months quietly before they return home, but circumstances in ever-chaotic Mogadishu are not cooperating.
Last week, 22 marines venturing outside their walled compound to escort two American diplomats to a meeting with Somali clan representatives fired into a crowded street in the capital, killing at least 8 Somalis and wounding 12 others.


'Life &amp; Love'
To the Editor:
The reviewer of my book "Life &amp; Love, Such as They Are" (Jan. 16) wonders "what elements belong in a novel of New York in the 90's." She need wonder no longer: "Life &amp; Love" is a novel of New York in the late 70's and early 80's.
Numerous details and events indicate time period, but it is explicitly stated at the beginning of a chapter that reads, "At the end of the 1970's, black was still the predominating color at funerals." The chapter covers a funeral in which a number of the major characters participate.
Wearing black, of course.
ANNA SHAPIRO  New York


He Could Stand the Heat
ON FIRE By Larry Brown. 182 pp.
Chapel Hill, N.C.: Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. $17.95.


Conversations/Roberta Cooper Ramo; The A.B.A.'s Party of the First Part Can Play as Many Parts as Anyone
ROBERTA COOPER RAMO, feeling tentative and utterly out-of-place and barely a fraction of her 24 years, visited her first courtroom in 1966, after completing her second year at the University of Chicago Law School.
Her mission was to spring a group of civil rights protesters, associates of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., from jail.
Before she could free her first clients, however, she first had to free herself -- from the bailiff.
"Sit down lady, sit down!" he declared, grabbing her dress for emphasis, as her case was called.
"This is for the lawyers!"
Mrs.
Ramo appealed to the bench -- to a judge who, she recalled last week, looked "both 800 years old and 800 feet high." He peered down at her over his glasses, listened to her explanation, then turned to the bailiff.
"Well," he finally said, "she looks like a lawyer to me."


Mutual Funds; Big Rewards Abroad, and Big Risks
BILLIONS of mutual fund dollars are flying across the Atlantic and Pacific in search of better returns, and investors have profited handsomely.
International stock funds gained 38.3 percent, on average, in 1993, compared with 12.6 percent for domestic stock funds.
This red-hot performance, though, may be blinding investors to some awfully big risks.
Because when foreign markets fall, the drops are often as sharp as the gains.


For Brooklyn Family, a Rare Find: Public Housing
Not far from the cramped Williamsburg apartment she shared with her four children, her brother and his family, Flor Roque watched the home of her dreams take shape.
It is in a boxy, red-brick apartment complex in an area pockmarked with factories.
But to Mrs.
Roque, who lived for four years doubled up with her brother waiting for public housing, the new buildings might as well be on Park Avenue.
"I cried when we found out we had made it in there," said Mrs.
Roque, who until last week took turns with her brother sleeping on the sofa in a two-bedroom apartment.
"We were so excited about it my kids could not sleep the night we found out. We've been inside and it is beautiful. It doesn't look like the projects."


Musicals From Way Back When for Now
"I FEEL LIKE A SALMON SWIMMING upstream," said Judith Daykin, the executive director of City Center.
"With multiculturalism now the buzzword," she added, her new series of musical revivals in concert form "is bucking a trend." The program, "Encores! Great American Musicals in Concert," could be called a Jurassic Park of musical comedy with starry casts.
It begins on Wednesday with "Fiorello!" (1959), followed by "Allegro" (1947) and "Lady in the Dark" (1941).
"These are works not likely to get produced," Ms.
Daykin said, "and we're hoping to carve out a niche for City Center with them." It's no secret that she is desperately seeking new audiences.
In a good year, City Center books perhaps 12 to 15 weeks of dance, which became its mainstay during the 1970's, when new audiences flocked to the Eliot Feld, Alvin Ailey and Paul Taylor companies.
Occasional traveling groups are not enough to keep the auditorium busy year round.
Unsure of the market for dinosaurs of song and dance, Ms.
Daykin sees the series as a test.
"We're approaching 'Encores!' in the most optimistic way," she said, "as a yearly event."


Education Key
To the Sports Editor:
I applaud Ira Berkow for "The Black Boycott Is a Bad Idea," (The Times, Jan. 13), concerning the possible boycott of games by the Black Coaches Association.
I was under the impression that colleges existed to provide an education so that the student can have a firm foundation to compete in society and contribute to their respective communities, not to be farm teams for the National Basketball Association.


From Shaw, Lots of Talk And a Stunt
HYPATIA TARLETON, the very model of a thwarted modern woman with sensual dreams, is bored to death with "unending talk and eternal cackle, cackle, cackle." After three hours of verbiage, she is told that there is nothing more to say.
Hypatia answers with uncontained glee: "Thank goodness!"
Curtain.


Hourlong Drama Is Back in Vogue, Minus Mayhem
FICKLE ARE THE TELEVISION networks.
Just a couple of years ago, they turned a cold shoulder to the hourlong drama, having concluded that viewers were no longer willing to sit still and pay attention as a story unfolded.
They continued to schedule a few, but without much hope.
Then came "Dr. Quinn" and "N.Y.P.D. Blue."


Sports of The Times; '94 Games Opening Act for The Show
IT'S going to be a zoo.
Every time there's a news conference, every time there's an open practice, it's going to be a stampede.
Thank goodness the Winter Games are held behind rigid security, demanding very limited, very specific, handy-dandy Juan Antonio Samaranch-Tom Mix Decoder electrobars credentials.
That will keep out the sheer numbers of the international gate-crashing, Eurotrashing, head-bashing paparazzi who would otherwise gravitate to the site of a megascandal like the Kerrigan-Harding Case.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SOVIET SYMBOLS
The work of nine contemporary Russian photographers goes on view today in the Gallery of Contemporary Art at Sacred Heart University, 5151 Park Avenue in Fairfield.
The show, titled "Monuments and Memory: Reflections of the Former Soviet Union" was mounted jointly by Sacred Heart University and the Akus Gallery of Eastern Connecticut State University in Willimantic.


Pol Pot, the Mass Murderer Who Is Still Alive and Well
A BODY COUNT may not be the best way to measure a man's evil, but it is a useful place to start.
And among the century's architects of mass murder, few apart from Hitler and Stalin could claim more victims than a pudgy, ever-smiling Cambodian who came to be known by his followers as "Brother No. 1." He was better known to the outside world by his nom de guerre, Pol Pot, the leader of the Maoist-inspired Khmer Rouge rebels of Cambodia.
In his crazed, four-year revolution in the 1970's to convert Cambodia into a Communist state purer than any other, Pol Pot mercilessly dispatched at least one million Cambodians -- and some experts say many more -- through starvation, execution and torture.


A Director Focuses on Children and Incest
The British film maker Andrew Birkin insists that his new movie, "The Cement Garden," is not necessarily about incest.
Yes, he says, the film, which opens on Friday, shows a brother and a sister making love.
But, says the 48-year-old director, who also wrote the screenplay, "The Cement Garden" is actually more about "freedom," "making connections" and "trying to escape from formal systems."
Not that the lanky, long-haired Mr.
Birkin is one to deny the lure of incest.
"In any relationship," he says, "it's love that matters. So, in this particular story, I don't see anything immoral about it. In the context of this film, it's the most natural thing in the world."


Jan. 30 - Feb. 6; Try Casting 'Tonya: The Movie'
FORGET the Bobbitts.
Forget the Menendez boys.
The Tonya Harding-Nancy Kerrigan epic has, according to agents and executives, aroused even more interest than Amy Fisher and Joey.
"As we speak," said Michael Black, an agent at International Creative Management, "there are many actresses taking ice skating lessons."
Bruce Vilanch, a veteran comedy writer, said: "It's wonderful television. It's got not one but two women in jeopardy, which is what they always want. You'll have a glamorous movie star playing Nancy and limping. Actresses like that. There's a big pain scene, when she gets hit in the leg. Audiences love that. And you get Neanderthal hit men. Perfect!"


Quality: High. Price: Low. Big Ad Budget? Never.
"MOM," says the boy in a cartoon in the supermarket journal, enjoying a President's Choice cereal, "is it possible that a cereal without its own TV commercial could taste so good?!!"
President's Choice may or may not be better than Kellogg's, but there's no question that this upscale private label, now appearing on cereal boxes and hundreds of other products in North America, has been a resounding success for its owner, the Loblaw Companies, Canada's biggest supermarket chain.


The Limits of Peacekeeping
The highly contentious debate over United Nations peacekeeping is healthy, for peacekeeping involves American resources and prestige and can involve American lives.
The rise of regional and internal conflicts poses difficult issues: What obligations does the international community have in such conflicts?
What U.S. role is consistent with our interests?


CROSS-COUNTRY SKIING
Normally an Olympic sidelight, this sport will be at center stage in Norway, where cross-country tracks are as common as basketball hoops in the United States.
THE SETUP Both the men and women will ski for gold in five races: four individual and one relay.
The Olympic races, which will all start in Lillehammer, will be held on five different circuits, ranging from 5 kilometers in length to 16.7 kilometers.
The men's 50-kilometer freestyle, for example, will consist of three laps on the 16.7-kilometer circuit, giving spectators in the stadium several chances to see the skiers.


Jazz Mythology
To the Editor:
Wynton Marsalis's attack on me in respect to my recent book, "Jazz: The American Theme Song" (Letters, Dec. 19), is regrettably typical of the jazz world, where mudslinging has replaced reasoned debate.
I can hardly answer all of Mr.
Marsalis's scurrilous charges here.
However, anyone interested in what I know about music might examine my text "Practical Music Theory," which was approved by a number of state boards of education for use in their high schools; or better, visit one of the places where I play jazz in New York.


Jan. 30 -Feb. 6: Human Rights Report; China Is Judged Harshly And Women Get Attention
Each year, when the State Department issues its report on human rights around the world, attention inevitably focuses on those findings that affect other parts of the nation's agenda.
This year, the State Department criticized summary executions in Iran, acts of genocide in Bosnia and violations in more than 100 other countries.
What drew more attention was its assessment of China, which was criticized for holding thousands of political prisoners, cracking down on freedom of speech and religion and putting dissidents in mental hospitals.
This critique is hardly academic; President Clinton has pledged not to extend China's preferred-trading status unless it makes significant progress on human rights, and the report seemed to leave him little room to do so.


Filling Trenches in the Pothole War; Repair Crews Fight Winter's Damage and Public Impatience
On a cramped section of Chambers Street across from the Municipal Building in Manhattan, Marc Reed and his crew were going about the cold, grimy business of repairing potholes when a cherry-red Nissan Sentra pulled out of its lane, squashed a traffic cone and swerved in their direction.
Mr.
Reed, an eight-year veteran of pothole repairs, finally slapped the hood of the Sentra and brought the car to a halt by walking in front of it.


Jumping 'V' Now Stands For Victory
EVEN Norwegians are fond of a good comeback tale especially if it involves one of their own in an Olympic year.
Espen Bredesen's worst-to-first saga begins, appropriately enough, in the middle of winter.
The month was January 1992, and all was far from well with the national ski jumping team.


Some Companies Sit Out the Rush to Vietnam
Now that American companies can trade with Vietnam, several are jumping right in.
But despite the emotional impact of President Clinton's decision to lift the trade embargo, for corporate America Vietnam is down the list of priorities in Asia, behind booming economies like China, Thailand and Indonesia.
Some companies rushed this week to announce deals with Vietnam.
Pepsico started to bottle soft drinks in Ho Chi Minh City.
American Express said it would soon issue credit cards.
United Airlines said it would begin scheduled service between Los Angeles and Ho Chi Minh City and Northwest Airlines wants to make scheduled flights there.
And Caterpillar said it would soon sell parts to repair Army bulldozers that the North Vietnamese had captured after Vietnam fell to the North in 1975.
A Small Market
Despite this flurry of activity, many corporate executives said Vietnam was still too small a marketplace to get their immediate attention.


Bombings Laid to Afrikaners Resisting Open Vote
When a bomb erupted two weeks ago on the threshold of the African National Congress office here, harming no one but shattering neighboring store windows, nobody was greatly surprised.
The countryside around this white town in the Orange Free State is a hotbed of Afrikaner zealotry.
Road signs are plastered with stickers declaring, "Here is the volkstaat," a reference to the Afrikaner homeland white separatists are demanding be carved from South Africa before the black majority votes.


Fashionable Is As Fashionable Does
To the Editor:
David Schiff's defense of Schoenberg against what he calls the "academic fashion" that treats him as "the evil genius of modernism" is curious considering the fact that just two years ago in the same Classical View column Mr.
Schiff himself consigned Schoenberg and most 20th-century classical music to oblivion.
Schoenberg's music, he wrote then, was too personal to last.


Praying for an Answer


Rentals in Jerusalem, Room Ratings Included
A service listing rooms for rent in private homes is now operating in Jerusalem.
The service, Boker Tov Jerusalem, or Good Morning Jerusalem, grades rooms from 1 to 4, depending on factors like proximity to center of town, whether there is a garden available and closeness to transportation.
Prices range from $23 to $54.
Some 200 rooms are included in a computer, which can be accessed at the Binyaney Haooma, near the city's Central Bus Terminal.


Stars of London's West End
IN a city that takes its theater seriously, surprisingly few London restaurants cater to theatergoers, whether they choose to eat before or after performances.
Most London restaurants don't start serving until around 8 o'clock.
Yet not everyone settles for pub snacks.
Theater people and their audiences rendezvous at any of the following restaurants, confident that the staff will bow to the demands of curtain times or the delays of a standing ovation.
Two of the following five restaurants offer fixed-price pre-theater menus.
The Ivy
Together with many of the city's stage productions, The Ivy is a revival, one that has been playing to packed houses since its reopening in 1990.
Toward the end of World War I what was then a small cafe became a watering hole for actors and writers, thanks largely to its strategic location near the intersection of theaterland's two main drags: Shaftesbury Avenue and Charing Cross Road.


'I SWEAR I WON'T CALL NO COPPER IF I'M BEAT UP BY MY POPPA'
The high-water mark of political correctness may have been Robert Redford's assertion, in the film's credits, that "no fish were killed or injured" in making "A River Runs Through It." But the new mark was set in Susannah McCorkle's article " 'I Swear I Won't Call No Copper If I'm Beat Up by My Poppa' " (Jan. 9).
Stop me if she was writing humor.
McCorkle paints a bleak picture that becomes all the more depressing if extended to its logical conclusion.
Imagine art houses retiring "Casablanca" because Rick smokes.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MUSIC AND MURDER  THE SOLOIST  By Mark Salzman. Random House, $19.


World Markets; London's High Looks Good to Last
ANOTHER week, another record.
It's been like that for the London Stock Exchange since the end of October, when the market began a sharp run-up after lagging behind other European bourses for most of 1993.
The Financial Times-Stock Exchange Index of 100 leading shares hit an all-time high on Wednesday after surging 38.8 points for the day, closing at 3,520.3, nearly 3 percent higher than at the beginning of the year.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $305,000
155 West 15th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. loft co-op; part-time doorman, elevator, fireplace; maintenance $1,136, 60% tax deductible, listed at $329,000, 17 months on market (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia; Debra Kameros Co.)


Where Meanings Can Be Meaningless
There is one thing you should remember when you go to "No Man's Land," Harold Pinter's exhilarating 1975 comedy now in revival by the Roundabout Theater Company: you don't have to figure out what it means.
Or better yet, it means whatever you think at the time you see it.
Because the work of no other contemporary playwright has been subjected to so much tortured explication, that point must be made immediately.
Otherwise, instead of enjoying a superlative Broadway performance, you're likely to become all solemn and defensive, like someone waiting to be hauled up in traffic court.
As you watch "No Man's Land," you're in the privileged position of witnessing an elegant revival of a work by the man who is possibly the greatest living playwright in the English language.
Christopher Plummer and Jason Robards are the stars, and the director is David Jones, whose 1983 "Betrayal" is still the best adaptation of a Pinter play on film.
"No Man's Land" is terse to a degree; it's as grim and scary as it is funny, and the splendor of its locutions sends you out of the Criterion Center walking on air.


Huskies Hand Calhoun A 'Missed You' Present
Connecticut 73, Miami 57
Donyell Marshall scored 20 points after a slow start and No. 5 Connecticut welcomed back its coach, Jim Calhoun, with a 73-57 Big East Conference victory over Miami last night in Storrs, Conn.


Choosing the Right Vine for a Good Show
WHEN there is a fence in the garden, particularly an ugly one like a chain-link fence, many gardeners like to disguise it and cover the fence with a vine.
Sometimes this is a good thing.
Or possibly a vine is selected for its colorful blooms and handsome foliage to brighten a corner of the house.
This can also be a good thing.


Little Recognition for Penn, But Even Fewer Setbacks
It is a ritual of sorts.
The current University of Pennsylvania basketball team has been doing it before home games for as long as the players can remember.
The pre-game meal is a rite of passage.
The site is always Smokey Joe's, a dimly lit off-campus bar and restaurant.
On Friday afternoon, before a victory over Columbia, the players were relaxed.


Oust Harding
To the Sports Editor:
I'm appalled at Ira Berkow's lowest-common-denominator thinking in support of Tonya Harding's membership on the United States Olympic Team ("Harding, the Games and Us," The Times, Jan. 29).


Glaciers And Poetry In the Rough
WHEN my husband and I decided to travel through Alaska's Inside Passage last August, we chose the Spirit of '98 -- 192 feet long, with a passenger capacity of 101 -- for its smallness and agility.
We wanted to edge near enough to glaciers to see and hear the icebergs break off, or calve; hug the shoreline tightly enough to watch the sea lions loaf and the bears forage; sail straight into the Sound where Alaska's humpback whales spend their summers.
The fact that our nine-year-old ship was retrofitted to resemble a Klondike steamer, complete with ornate plaster ceilings, sculptured mahogany bar and chandeliers worthy of the Gilded Age, was simply a matter of interest.
We didn't object to the theme; we just hoped they wouldn't play it to death.
In the event, the ship's turn-of-the-century fittings proved to be attractive and comfortable, and evocations of the Klondike era at get-acquainted and end-of-cruise parties added spark to the informal voyage.
The focus on the gold rush also prompted an awareness of Alaska's rough-and-ready mining history, reminding today's environment-conscious visitors that Americans a century ago went to Alaska for the gold, not for the scenery.


Islanders Get Lift as New Faces Chip In
There may be a pattern developing here, and it may be a good one for the Islanders.
Goalie Jamie McLennan made 33 saves today in his eighth game for New York this season, and he was a big reason why the Islanders won for the first time this season without scoring four goals.
The Islanders defeated Quebec, 3-2, in the Colisee.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BLACK HISTORY MONTH
Westchester is observing Black History Month through February and into mid-March with 100 events and exhibitions countywide.
Nearly 65 social, cultural and political organizations have contributed and a committee of people from museums, colleges, community groups and libraries have coordinated the programs.
The theme is "Empowering African-American Organizations: Present and Future," and a complete calendar can be got free of charge from the County Office of Cultural Affairs by calling 285-2922 or 785-6709.


WILLIAM T. VOLLMANN
Most likely you would not look twice at William T. Vollmann tonight, slumped on the bench of the downtown N train in his shapeless, grubby red parka and oversize jeans.
His face is blank, eyes distant behind large, rectangular glasses.
He is as unremarkable as Bernhard Goetz.
Because he looks as if he has probably passed the last 10 years in a windowless room behind a computer terminal, you would be surprised to hear that he has spent the last few months swashbuckling through Thailand, Somalia and Bosnia with a disregard for personal danger that would shame Hunter S. Thompson, or Jack London, or Errol Flynn.
Likewise you would not suspect him of a literary ambition more overweening than anyone's since Faulkner.
Vollmann has been sometimes considred part of a new wave of metafictional writers, including David Foster Wallace, Richard Powers and Susan Daitch; he is also sometimes grouped with quite a different movement known as "transgressive fiction," including writers like Catherine Texier, Joel Rose and Dennis Cooper.
In fact, while he has appropriated styles and techniques from both groups, he belongs fully to neither; the complexity of his work defies pigeonholing.


The Professorial Workload
To the Editor:
Albert Z.K.
Sanders ("Beg to Differ, Professor," Letters, Jan. 16) describes a faculty workload that doesn't resemble any I knew before I retired 11 years ago as chair emeritus, genetics and cell biology, at Washington State University.
He left out committee assignments, beginning with your graduate students' committee, those of other faculty, departmental committees, college and university committees, and search committees for faculty, deans and presidents, which require interviews and careful evaluations.


PHOTO FINISH
Think of a great moment in sports before the ascendancy of television, and you tend to see it as a still picture, like Babe Ruth's famous swing frozen in time.
Sports photos capture both beauty of form and force of personality.
In these pictures, from the "Sport Stories" exhibition that will open at the James Danziger Gallery in New York on Feb. 18, one can see the elegance, the emotion and the power that make sport an art.


Corrections
A chart with the continuation of a front-page article on Jan. 30, about an international research project on genetic coding, misstated the current name of one of the companies developing related technology.
The company is now known as the Darwin Molecular Corporation; its former name was Darwin Molecular Technologies.
The chart also omitted the names of three main scientists at the company.
They are David Galas, Lawrence Loeb and Julius Rebek.
It also misidentified one of the main financial backers of Darwin.
He is Lloyd Cotsen, not Frederick Bourke.


Doing the Honors
The Coalition of 100 Black Women's gala benefit and presentation of its President's Awards, at Tavern on the Green, on Jan 28.


No Headline
"It sends a message that it is no longer open season on 'jungle bunnies.' Medgar's life was not in vain, and perhaps he did more in death than he could have in life. Somehow I think he is still among us." MYRLIE EVERS, After her husband's killer was convicted.  [ 30:2. ]


POSTINGS: For AIDS, Respirator and Geriatric Patients; Brooklyn Adds a Nursing Home
The first nursing home in Brooklyn to have beds for AIDS and respirator-dependent patients will open later this month at the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center, the borough's largest private, nonprofit teaching hospital.
The $19 million Linroc Nursing Home will have 120 beds for residents with AIDS, 28 beds for ventilator-dependent patients and 80 beds for geriatric patients and those with Alzheimer's Disease and other dementias.


Tokyo's Tips for New York
Japan is getting its comeuppance these days, and getting it hard.
Its industries, it turns out, are not as invulnerable as everyone thought.
Its political system is even more corrupt than everyone thought.
And even its venerable bullet trains, which symbolize efficiency and technology, suffer from quality-control troubles.


Commercial Property/Subleases; The Manhattan Sublet Market Offers Surprises
CLEARLY, NationsBank had to move when its lease expired.
It loved being in the General Motors Building, on Fifth Avenue and 59th Street.
But it was bursting out of its 10,000 square feet, and the space's asbestos problems made repairs too costly.
The bank got the best of all worlds.
On Memorial Day, it moved into 13,000 square feet it had sublet for five years from Bank Austria, another tenant in the building.
And last month it sublet 6,000 additional feet from the rival bank, this time for eight years, and plans to move in on March 15.


In a Courtroom in Milan, Italian Society Is on Trial
Much of Italy's recent history is on trial these days in Milan's Palace of Justice, where it has unfolded like a Fellini epic: part drama, part farce, part tragedy.
It is the first case to come to trial in Italy's two-year-old wave of scandals, and on some days, hundreds of Italians line up at the courtroom door, vying to fill a narrow visitors' area while millions follow the proceedings on national television.


A Quietly Provocative Look at the Countryside
IT IS THE EASIEST THING IN THE world to leave New York every weekend and know nothing whatever about the working countryside.
The country is there to act as an amiable backdrop to the weekenders' leisure activities.
Just how completely the world has changed in that respect is made clear in an intelligent and quietly provocative exhibition at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven.
Called "Toil and Plenty: Images of the Agricultural Landscape in England 1780-1890," it has been organized with an evenhanded lucidity by an English art historian, Christiana Payne.


Take Me Out to the Ski Trail: Cross-Country as national Pastime
LAST May, Bjorn Daehlie briefly left behind the chill of his home in Nannestad, Norway, for Florida and his annual rendezvous with the sun.
Disney World was one of his destinations, and as Daehlie prowled the park's wide, artificial avenues in his shorts, he suddenly realized something unusual was happening.
Hundreds of rambunctious, perfectly normal children were racing past him without paying him the slightest bit of attention.


Black and Proud, All Month Long
TUESDAY, FEB. 8  7 P.M.
Lecture and discussion on racism, featuring Jill Nelson, author of "Volunteer Slavery," and Derrick Bell, author of "Faces at the Bottom of the Well." St.
Paul Community Baptist Church, 859 Hendrix Street, East New York.
Information: (718) 257-1300 OPENINGS  *
"Liberty and Justice for All," special photography exhibition chronicling 20th-century experiences of black Americans.
Through Feb. 28 at Nikon House, 620 Fifth Avenue, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 586-3907.
SATURDAY, FEB. 12  1 P.M.
"Spirit Black and Female," one-woman musical production featuring Linda H. Humes.
Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Jamaica, Queens.
Tickets $5 for adults, $3 for children under 12.
Reservations and information: (718) 658-7400.
OPENINGS  *
Smithsonian Institution National Associates, lectures and performances, Feb. 12, 13, 26 and 27.
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 534-1672, ext. 206.
SUNDAY, FEB. 13  8 A.M.
Fourteenth anniversary celebration of the church's location, featuring dance and theater presentations, and a reading by Samuel G. Freedman, author of "Upon This Rock," a book about the Rev.
Johnny Ray Youngblood and the church, to commemorate the book's release in paperback.
St.
Paul Community Baptist Church, 859 Hendrix Street, East New York.
Information: (718) 257-1300.
TUESDAY, FEB. 15  1 P.M.
"The Aboutness of Dance Theater of Harlem: The 25th Anniversary," a symposium featuring speakers and videotapes of the company.
The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza, Manhattan. 8 P.M.
"Duke Ellington: Piano in the Foreground," tribute featuring the pianist Mark Tucker.
Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street.
Tickets: $15 ($5 for students and seniors).
Box office: (212) 854-7799.
WEDNESDAY, FEB. 16  3:30 P.M.
"Winnie and Nelson Mandela," a film about the South African leader and his wife.
Bedford Branch of the Brooklyn Public Library, Franklin Avenue at Hancock Street.
Information: (718) 638-9544.
FRIDAY, FEB. 18  3 P.M.
After Dinner Opera performs Duke Ellington's "Queenie Pie," narrated by Mercer Ellington.
The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 870-1630 MONDAY, FEB. 21  4 P.M.
Five hours of poetry and jazz, featuring Amiri Baraka, Ardie Walser and Black Tie, the J.D.
Parran Jazz Ensemble and others, as part of the James Baldwin Literature and Music Series.
At Harlem School of the Arts Gathering Space, 645 St.
Nicholas Avenue, near 141st Street, Manhattan.
Suggested donation: $10.
SATURDAY, FEB. 26  1 P.M.
"Exploring the Tradition," Nafisa Sharriff and Friends performing West African dance, music and song.
At Jamaica Arts Center, 161-04 Jamaica Avenue, Jamaica, Queens.
Tickets $5 for adults, $3 for children under 12.
Reservations and information: (718) 658-7400.
SUNDAY, FEB. 27  3:30 P.M.
"Festival of Black Spirituals," featuring Cathedral Choir's annual performance.
"Black Arts on Display," focusing on black American art and music.
Mother A.M.E.
Zion Church, 140 West 137th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 234-1544. 1 P.M.
The uses of plants in African medicine, crafts and cloth through a tour of the Steinhardt Conservatory.
At 2:30, a musical program featuring chants, a folk-tale performance with traditional puppets, and a dance for an ancestral spirit.
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Brooklyn.
Information: (718) 941-4044.
OTHER SHOWS  *
"Seeds of Discord: The Politics of Slavery," an exhibition including letters, manuscripts and documents, from pre-Civil War through Reconstruction eras.
Through April 24.
Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 685-0610. *
Photographs by Augustus W. Harris.
Through Feb. 28.
At Countee Cullen Library, 104 West 136th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 491-2070. *
"A Tribute to African-American Contributions to Art and Culture." Through Feb. 28.
Hamilton Grange Library, 503 West 145th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 926-2147. *
An exhibition on the Afro-Caribbean diaspora.
Through Feb. 28.
Cortelyou Branch of the Brooklyn Public Library, Cortelyou Road at Argyle Road. *
"African Zion," exhibition featuring the sacred art of Ethiopia.
Through March 29.
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, 515 Malcolm X Boulevard (Lenox Avenue), near 135th Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 491-2265.
AT THE LIBRARY
The Brooklyn Public Library and the New York Public Library, which has branches in Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten Island, are offering presentations at branches all month.
The following is a sampling of events.
THE ROOTS OF RAP Interborough Repertory Theater at the Brooklyn Public Library.
Feb. 10, 3:30 P.M., Bedford Branch, Franklin Avenue at Hancock Street.
Feb. 14, 3 P.M., Coney Island Branch, Mermaid Avenue near West 19th Street.
Feb. 15, 3:30 P.M., Clarendon Branch, Nostrand Avenue near Farragut Road.
AFRICAN BURIAL GROUND Slide lecture.
Feb. 12, 2:30 P.M., Countee Cullen Library, 104 West 136th Street, Manhattan.
Feb. 17, 7 P.M., 96th Street Library, 112 East 96th Street, Manhattan.
Feb. 19, 2 P.M., Kingsbridge Library, 280 West 231st Street, the Bronx.
THE WINNIE WILSON PUPPET PLAYERS Musical and marionette variety show for children.
Feb. 8, 4 P.M., Parkchester Library, 1985 Westchester Avenue, the Bronx.
Preregistration required, at (718) 829-7830.
Feb. 16, 4 P.M., Macomb's Bridge Library, 2650 Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard, Manhattan.
CENTURIES OF BLACK ART Lecture on black painters, sculptors and artisans, presented by Barbara King.
Feb. 8, 3:30 P.M., Wakefield Library, 4100 Lowerre Place, the Bronx.
Feb. 15, 6:30 P.M., New Dorp Library, 309 New Dorp Lane, Staten Island.
Feb. 17, 6 P.M., Harlem Library, 9 West 124th Street, Manhattan.
Feb. 19, 4 P.M., West Farms Library, 2085 Honeywell Avenue, the Bronx.
RIVER NIGER AND OTHER DANCES Opus Dance Theater incorporates modern images and themes honoring African history, culture and music.
Feb. 19, 2 P.M., Fordham Library Center, 2556 Bainbridge Avenue, the Bronx.
Feb. 28, 6 P.M., 115th Street Library, 203 West 115th Street, Manhattan.
BLACK HISTORY MONTH: A CELEBRATION Narrators reading short stories by black American writers including Toni Morrison, Zora Neale Hurston and Alice Walker.
Each Thursday at 3 P.M., at the Andrew Heiskell Library for the Blind and Physically Handicapped, 40 West 20th Street.


BEST SELLERS: February 6, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
2
78
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
14
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
4
4
2
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
5
5
3
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
6
7
43
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
6
2
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in Buenos Aires in 1942.
8
9
24
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
9
8
47
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret presents problems for a young boy.
10
15
7
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
11
10
17
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
12
1
VOYAGER, by Diana Gabaldon. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman finds love while commuting between 18th- and 20th-century Scotland.
13
11
8
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men.
14*
7
THE ROBBER BRIDE, by Margaret Atwood. (Talese/Doubleday, $23.50.) A woman who long manipulated three friends suddenly reappears in their lives.
15
14
13
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A writer's family life is endangered by a madman.
16*
12
9
THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The story of Israel from 1948 to 1967.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
39
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
7
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
8
4
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
4
3
12
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
5
4
24
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
6
5
22
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
7
6
18
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
8
7
10
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
9
16
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
10
11
78
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
11*
10
18
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
12
12
27
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
13
13
3
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) A journalist looks at middle age through the prism of his favorite sport.
14
15
4
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
15
14
9
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
15
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
3
37
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
4
3
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
2
28
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's choices of recent books of particular interest) BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth, by Aharon Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of spiritual apprehension.
THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.
BITTER WINDS: A Memoir of My Years in China's Gulag, by Harry Wu and Carolyn Wakeman. (Robert L. Bernstein/Wiley, $22.95.) Mr.
Wu's memoir of 19 years in labor camps is grimly familiar as to abuse and deprivation but grotesque and surreal in its account of acting out each new political rectification campaign right in the heart of the prison system.
THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $19.95.) Romulus Ledbetter, Mr.
Green's protagonist, is a homeless, black, paranoid private eye who can be roused to propriety only by a case as interesting as the one Mr.
Green has dreamed up for his first novel.
CROSSING THE RIVER, by Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $22.) A novel, covering two and a half centuries, that presents a brilliantly coherent mythified vision of the irreversible African diaspora.
A FROLIC OF HIS OWN, by William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr.
Gaddis's fourth novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation.
GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A road novel that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.
HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise, humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die, omitting none of the clinical detail.
IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES.
Volume 2: The Economist as Saviour 1920-1937, by Robert Skidelsky. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50.) How Keynes reshaped the world's economy, made a lot of money and married a ballerina, by an economics professor whose mastery of many subjects seems to match Keynes's own.
JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart, by Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. (Random House, $27.50.) Prodigious research and outstanding narrative fluency mark this biography of Josephine Baker (1906-75), the irresistible American institution of French revues, cabaret and film.


SUNDAY, February 6, 1994; Are Bert and Ernie Gay?
In a world in which people suffer from acid indigestion and headache, in which children and grown-ups the world over go to bed each night with hangnails, in which there are pet dogs who have never had a wash and cut, you'd think people would have more important things to worry about than the sex lives of puppets.
But you'd be wrong.
There's a great deal of worry these days about whether Bert and Ernie of "Sesame Street" are gay.
TV Guide has run letters about them.
Parents in Mississippi were very exercised about the two appearing at the Tupelo Coliseum.
The Children's Television Workshop even has a prepared statement that it sends out concerning the puppet preference issue.


Wall Street; Towers Financial: What a Difference a Year Makes
THIS time last year, Steven Hoffenberg of New York City was being hailed as the "multimillionaire business executive" who would rescue The New York Post from extinction.
Last week, a court-appointed trustee in charge of Mr.
Hoffenberg's former empire, the Towers Financial Corporation, sued Mr.
Hoffenberg in Federal Bankruptcy Court for fraud.
Mr.
Hoffenberg would not comment on the suit, which accused him of "inventing hundreds of millions of dollars of wholly fictitious assets" to conceal that Towers always had been "hopelessly insolvent," with losses exceeding profits each year.
Mr.
Hoffenberg already has been sued by the Securities and Exchange Commission and by a host of investors who bought at least $400 million of Towers bonds and notes, from at least 1988 through 1993, on the strength of its questionable financial reports.
The Post was ultimately rescued by Rupert Murdoch.
Towers filed for bankruptcy last March and, last week, got court approval to unwind its businesses.
DIANA B. HENRIQUES


Putting the Queen in Queens
It will be several years before a monument to Catherine of Braganza, for whom the borough of Queens was named, is installed in Hunters Point.
But it is already beginning to take shape in a studio on the Upper West Side.
WHO?: A Portuguese princess, Catherine became Queen of England in 1662 by marrying Charles II.
Through trade with Portugal, she is said to have helped introduce tea to England.
And because her dowry included Bombay, England gained entry to India.
WHY QUEENS?: During the reign of Charles and Catherine, New York City passed from the Dutch to the English, back to the Dutch, then finally to England again.
Kings County (Brooklyn) was named for Charles, and Queens County for Catherine.
SIZE: The statue will be about 36 feet tall on a 50-foot-high base.
HOW FAR ALONG IS IT?: The project started with a 26-inch clay statuette with succeeding models that size in plaster, wax and then bronze.
Enlarged by the sculptor in stages for adjustments in its proportions, the statue is now in its second size, four feet tall.
The next incarnation will be at 10 feet tall, followed by full height.
SYMBOLISM: Catherine stands atop a large globe and holds a smaller one in her left hand, which convey her role in bridging the old and new worlds and also represent the diversity of Queens today.
THE BOTTOM LINE: $1 million; cost of base unknown.
WHO'S PAYING?: The Government of Portugal donated $270,000, and $730,000 more is to be raised there.
American donors will be asked to pay for the base.
FACING: Undecided.
The artist wants a rotating base to give Catherine a one-quarter turn with each season.
SPONSOR: Friends of Queen Catherine, a nonprofit organization promoting her contributions and Portuguese-American ties.
UNVEILING: Planned for 1998, the 100th anniversary of the consolidation of Queens into New York City.
B.L.


One Year in the Life of Yuri Tarnopolsky
MEMOIRS OF 1984 By Yuri Tarnopolsky. 239 pp.
Lanham, Md.: University Press of America.
Cloth, $47.50.
Paper, $18.95.


What Do Men Want?
To the Editor:
Richard A. Shweder displays a certain degree of talent for mocking satire.
I wish him well in his satirical writings.
I do, however, wish The Times would not confuse satire with literary review.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
NOW YOU KNOW By Michael Frayn.
Penguin, $9.95.
This novel offers as many dramatic scenes as one of the author's plays.
Showing the inner workings of a British "pressure group" (what Americans call a political action committee), it pits a jaded public crusader against a Home Office worker who is all too willing to give him the ultimate scoop.
"Mr. Frayn knows how to get the most out of every word his endearing, muddled characters utter," James Wilcox said here last year.
MARLENE DIETRICH By Maria Riva.
Ballantine, $14.
So what was she really like?
According to the author, the actress's only child, she was as self-involved and manipulative as one might imagine, yet possessed of a courage and an intelligence that even her detractors might admire.
Last year our reviewer, Molly Haskell, called this biography "the ultimate act of demystification, a startling and riveting work, completing, rather than competing with" other recent books about Dietrich.
One of them, Steven Bach's MARLENE DIETRICH: Life and Legend (Quill/Morrow, $15), also reissued, concentrates on the actress's career as trans-Atlantic superstar and wartime sweetheart.
"One rather special virtue of this book is that if you open it to the right pages in the right mood, you can practically hear the applause still ringing," Wilfrid Sheed said here in 1992.


Bronx Community Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1 Port Morris, Melrose, Mott Haven.
Last Thursday of month; next meeting is Feb. 24; 6:30 P.M.; Lincoln Hospital, 234 East 149th Street; (718) 585-7117.
Chairman: George Rodriguez DISTRICT 2 Hunts Point, Longwood; last Wednesday of month; next meeting is Feb. 23; 6 P.M.; Thessalonia Church, 951 Reverend Polite Avenue; (718) 328-9125.
Chairman: Roland Lopez DISTRICT 3 Morrisania; 2d Tuesday of month; next meeting is Tuesday; 6:30 P.M.; J.H.S. 98, 1619 Boston Road; (718) 589-6300.
Chairwoman: Marcella R. Brown DISTRICT 4 East and West Concourse, Mount Eden, Highbridge, Concourse Village; 4th Tuesday of month; next meeting is Feb. 22; 6 P.M.; 1650 Selwyn Avenue, Suite 11A; (718) 299-0800.
Chairman: Robert Hannibal Jr.
DISTRICT 5 Mount Hope, Morris Heights, Fordham University Heights; 4th Wednesday of month; next meeting is Feb. 23; 5:30 P.M.; East Concourse Hebrew Center, 226 E. Tremont Avenue; (718) 364-2030.
Chairman: Kenneth Fogarty DISTRICT 6 Bathgate, Belmont, Bronx Park South, Crotona Park North, East Tremont and West Farms; first Wednesday of month; next meeting is March 2; 6:30 P.M.; 1 Fordham Plaza; (718) 579-6990.
Chairman: Patrick Lochrane DISTRICT 7 University Heights, Norwood, Fordham, Bedford and Bedford Park; 3d Tuesday of month; next meeting is Feb. 15; 7 P.M.; 229A East 204th Street; (718) 933-5650.
Chairwoman: Nora Feury DISTRICT 8 Kingsbridge, Marble Hill, North Riverdale, Spuyten Duyvil, Fieldston; 2d Tuesday of month; next meeting is Tuesday; 7:30 P.M.; West 246th Street and Independence Avenue; (718) 884-3959.
Chairwoman: Joyce M. Pilsner DISTRICT 9 Bronx River, Castle Hill, Clason Point, Harding Park, Parkchester, Bruckner, Soundview, Unionport; 4th Thursday of month; next meeting is Feb. 24; 7 P.M.; Caldor Plaza, 1967 Turnbull Avenue; (718) 823-3034.
Chairwoman: Elizabeth Rodriguez DISTRICT 10 City Island, Throgs Neck, Pelham Bay, Country Club, Co-op City; 3d Thursday of month; next meeting, Feb. 17; 7:30 P.M.; Preston H.S., Schurz Avenue; (718) 892-1161.
Chairman: Tony Cannata DISTRICT 11 Allerton, Eastchester, Pelham Parkway, Morris Park; 3d Thursday; next meeting is Feb. 17; 8 P.M.; Knights of Columbus Mary Queen of Peace Hall; (718) 892-6262.
Chairman: Dom Castore DISTRICT 12 Wakefield, Woodlawn, Williamsburg, Baychester, Eastchester; 4th Thursday of month; next meeting is Feb. 24; 8 P.M.; 4101 White Plains Road; (718) 881-4455.
Chairman: Richard Gorman Schedules for community board meetings in other boroughs will appear in subsequent issues.


In the Region/Connecticut; Fairfield in the Van of Commercial-Market Recovery
IN just five years, Fairfield County's commercial real estate market took one of the worst tumbles in the New York metropolitan region -- from a 17.5 percent vacancy rate in 1987 to 25.4 percent in 1992.
But today it is in the forefront of Connecticut's recovery, with space being consumed at an accelerating rate.


Dues Dispute Roils the Life Of an Enclave
A dispute stemming from an unusual beach erosion measure has rocked the private enclave of Sea Gate.
The battle has led to major reductions in the community's police and sanitation forces and, some residents say, turned many residents against their Hasidic neighbors.
"Sea Gate is like living inside the city with all the comfort of living on Long Island, said one resident, Vitaly Pivtorak. "This has just totally disrupted our community."


Fond Memory; The Family Doctor Is Rarely In
THE debate over health care reform increasingly takes on the trappings of a morality play, but how should the doctor be cast?
Americans aren't sure.
They like their own doctors, but increasingly they think the profession is greedy and arrogant, according to surveys for the American Medical Association.
They think most doctors are genuinely interested in their patients, but they also think doctors charge too much and keep people waiting too long.
They cling to a golden view of the past: More than half agree with the statement that "Doctors don't care about people as much as they used to."


Science and Diplomacy Above the Horizon


She Has Health and Olympics
Don't jump to conclusions.
Just because two Olympians, Bonnie Blair and Chantal Bailey, come from the same hometown, that doesn't necessarily make Champaign, Ill., a hotbed of speed skating.
The fact is, they were passing friends in high school or at the rink.
Bonnie Blair comes from a speed-skating family, but Chantal Dunn Bailey wanted to be poetry in motion, a ballerina on ice.
"When I was 10, I watched the 1976 Olympics," said Bailey.
"I watched Dorothy Hamill and I said, 'That's what I want to be.' My parents gave me lessons. We washed cars. We did anything. My father, Raymond Dunn, picked up hubcaps from I-74. He worked as a janitor. He worked three jobs to make money."


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report on Jan. 2 about a Brooklyn school district's decision to seek a replacement for its superintendent misstated the board's vote.
As a reader pointed out in a recent letter, the vote, by the board of District 20, was 5 to 1, with 1 abstention and 2 members absent.


Oksana Baiul: A Little Bit of Heaven on Ice
AS she stood backstage in Prague last March, 15-year-old Oksana Baiul, suddenly aware that she was figure skating's world champion, began weeping.
The Ukranian turned to her coach and said, "These tears are God's kisses from my mother in heaven."
At 13, Baiul was orphaned when her mother, Marina, a French teacher, died of ovarian cancer.
So disconsolate was Oksana that, even three years later, she cannot discuss her mother's death.
But beneath this grief is a teen-ager mature beyond her years.
It is apparent in the heartfelt way she speaks, and in the joy and grace of her skating.


Story on School Costs 'Perpetuates the Palaver'
To the Editor:
Josh Barbanel's Jan. 23 article, "$7,512 Per Pupil: Where Does It Go?" asked a question that perpetuates the palaver.
It puts the emphasis on the performance of teachers and administrators.
The proper question to be asked and answered is, "Why Isn't There More?"
It serves America's future generations no purpose to accept as inevitable the three-card monte that characterizes just about all domestic spending programs from housing to health care to education.


Russia Won't Bankrupt Itself for Our Sake; Reformer Omissions
To the Editor:
Jeffrey Sachs offers misleading and mostly self-serving excuses for the catastrophic condition of the Russian economy in "The Reformers' Tragedy" (Op-Ed., Jan. 23).
While there is increasing consensus that the advice offered by experts from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund was neither helpful, given the political context, nor necessarily suitable, Professor Sachs's lament, that the reform movement was sabotaged when promised loans were not disbursed, misses the point.


Washington's Mixed Signals
The United States renewed threats of allied action in Bosnia but gave no firm sign that it is ready to become more involved in the conflict.
Page 13.


Collard Greens, With an Italian Twist
COLLARDS are invariably associated with the South and soul food.
Cooked long and slow, these big, sturdy, almost leathery leaves on meaty stalks become mellow and tender, often with a hambone or some pig's feet to enhance the flavor.
The cooking liquid is is known as "pot likker," a flavorful near-soup.
A splash of vinegar nicely balances the taste of the greens.
But collards need not be limited to this.
They are as good cooked just until they wilt as they are stewed slowly, in the more traditional fashion.
These inexpensive greens, sold in bunches of a pound or two, are sweeter tasting than cabbage and more succulent than Swiss chard.
They can be quickly stir-fried and then combined with pasta or mixed into an omelet or served as a side dish.


From Little and Obscure To Center of the Universe
AT the gateway of the Gudbrandsdalen Valley lies Lillehammer, where "Birch leg" Vikings carrying the infant prince Haakon spent Christmas 1206 while on the run from the rival Baglers, across the mountains in Osterdalen.
This southeastern Norwegian town of 23,000 residents seemed like a long shot to be host of the 1994 Olympics and had lost a bid for the 1992 Games, which went to Albertville, France.


No, The First Priority is; Stop Coercing Women
Reading Charles F. Westoff's critique of the "feminist" agenda for international population policy today, I am reminded of what the birth control pioneer Margaret Sanger said many years ago when charged with taking herself and the cause of reproductive rights too seriously.
She responded, deadpan, though with a characteristically dry wit: "I am the partisan of women who have nothing to laugh at."
Let us remember that we are talking here not just about abstract numbers on grids and charts, but about actual women living real lives.
Within the industrialized or "northern" countries of the world today, contraceptive use is nearly universal.
Approximately 325 million married women of reproductive age in the developing nations of the "south" now also practice some form of fertility regulation, along with the 34.5 million men who have been sterilized and 22 million condom users.


A French Touch Revitalizes the Menu
THE Inn on the Harbor in Cold Spring Harbor has received a much needed shot in the arm from Guy Peuch, a talented French chef formerly of the Water Club in Manhattan.
When the attractive Island restaurant opened in the spring of 1991, its good looks and water views drew accolades, but its menu was devoted to dreary Continental cliches that often failed.
Mr.
Peuch, who is the new chef and a 50 percent owner of the inn, has revitalized not only the menu and wine list, but also the whole atmosphere of the restaurant.
The well-trained staff, in white shirts, ties, suspenders and bistro aprons tied at the waist, has a snappy can-do attitude.


Nuclear Roots Grow Into an Argentine Silicon Valley
TUCKED into a dense stand of evergreens, a group of low, whitewashed buildings with corrugated metal roofs give little indication of the activities within.
Maybe a conservation group.
Maybe a national park office.
The only clue is the parabolic dish on top of a red-and-white radio tower.
But inside the shaded compound, an elite team of Argentina's electronic and nuclear engineers are working, not exactly secretively, but with a very low profile.
In newly built "clean rooms," their primary project is a $7 million research satellite for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration of the United States, to be launched in mid-1995.


ABOUT BOOKS
The Political Scene
IT seems that while Michael Aron, the senior political correspondent for the New Jersey Network, was reporting the 1993 gubernatorial race, he sensed a double opportunity from the seat at ringside.
Thus emerged his almost-instant book, "Governor's Race: A TV Reporter's Chronicle of the 1993 Florio/Whitman Campaign."


Bosnia: Lift the Embargo Now
Europe has failed miserably in its efforts to control the war in Bosnia.
The latest proof is the apparent entrance of regular forces from both the Serbian and Croatian Armies into the conflict.
There are credible reports of Croatian and Serbian incursion into Bosnia -- and of Serbia's bald plans to draft its entire population into the war effort.
And with news of the horrific loss of life in the latest attack on Sarajevo, it now makes more sense than ever to lift the United Nations arms embargo, which only hampers the Bosnian Government in its effort to defend itself.
In the past few weeks its army has managed to win back some of the territory stolen over the course of the war.
It should not be hobbled in this effort.


Photographs Didn't Do Justice to Stroke Article
Since April 1991, I have been a volunteer horticultural therapist with the Organization of People Undaunted by Stroke (OPUS).
This group has been a constant delight to me, and I have been touched by their sense of humor, deep compassion and respect for each other and their enthusiasm for any project presented to them.
They have taught me far more than I have taught them.
The article on Dec. 26  [ "The Long Road to Recovery After a Stroke or Other Disability" ]  explores this group in a personal way, but I found the photographs disappointing.
Only one of the three pictures captured the interpersonal dynamics that drive this small community.
The others depict an isolation and lack of dignity.


Joanne D'Apice and Robert Thornton
Joanne D'Apice, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. D'Apice of Lido Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Stevens Thornton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Thornton of San Antonio.
The Very Rev.
Salvatore Matarazzo performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer.


Life's Still a Cabaret
DOWNTOWN -- Hildegarde, the bubbly, sweet-voiced chanteuse who introduced "April in Paris" and "I'll Be Seeing You," turned 88 on Tuesday.
Before her birthday performance at Eighty Eight's, a cabaret in Greenwich Village, she was dining at a nearby cafe with her manager, Don Dellair.
Hildegarde, who still wears long white gloves to play the piano and was a one-name star entertainer long before Cher, Madonna, Prince and Liberace, said: "I'm very lucky to have a good manager, and he's tough, too. An artist needs that, yes?"


Ms. Gutmann, Mr. Weingast
Elizabeth Gutmann, a daughter of Stephen and Judith Gutmann of Larchmont, N.Y., is to be married there today to James Andrew Weingast, the son of Gerald and Frances Weingast of Ardsley, N.Y.
Rabbi H. Leonard Poller will officiate at the Larchmont Temple.
The bride, 27, graduated from the University of Rochester and received a master's degree in nursing from Columbia University.
She is a nurse and case manager at the New York University Medical Center in New York.


Scotland Will Not Prosecute 17 Nazi Suspects
Nearly three years after the Government began pursuing possible criminal charges against suspected Nazi war criminals living in Britain, lawyers for Scotland's Crown Counsel have said that no suspects now living in Scotland will be prosecuted or put on trial.
In a decision that was announced in Edinburgh on Thursday, the prosecutors said they had found insufficient evidence to bring charges against any of 17 suspects now believed to be living in Scotland, where the court system operates independently from the rest of Britain.


Veteran Arms Seek Employment, But Many Clubs Are Still Balking
The way Donald Fehr has heard it throughout his nearly two decades with the players union: "Clubs always say two things: They never make enough money, and they never have enough pitching."
Money aside for the moment, if they never have enough pitching, why are so many veteran pitchers jobless with spring training less than two weeks away?
Some of them are even left-handed.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Consumer credit, Dec., change in billions
$6.9
$5.9
Tuesday
Wholesale trade, Dec., percent change
1.0
0.7
Nonfarm productivity, 4th qtr., pct. change
4.3
3.9
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
422
380
Friday
Producer prices, Jan., percent change
-0.1
0.3
Retail sales, Jan., percent change
0.8
0.1
This Week's Developments
Monday
President's economic report released
Tuesday
Three-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
Ten-year Treasury note auction
Thursday
Thirty-year Treasury bond auction


Corrections
A recipe for sweet-and-sour pot roast in the food column on Jan. 23 gave incomplete instructions.
A corrected version follows.
1.
Place the meat in a deep bowl, add the white wine and vinegar and allow to marinate six to eight hours.
2. Preheat oven to 350 degrees.
3.
Remove the meat from the marinade, reserving the marinade, and pat the beef dry.
Heat the oil in a heavy three-quart casserole.
Add the beef and brown it on all sides.
Remove the meat from the casserole and add the onions and carrots and cook over medium-low heat until tender and lightly browned.
Stir in the garlic, then add the raisins, ginger, allspice and brown sugar.
Add the stock, the reserved marinade and the tomatoes.
Bring to a simmer, scraping the bottom of the pan.
Stir in the bay leaves and salt and pepper to taste.
Return meat to casserole.
4.
Cover the casserole and place in the oven.
Bake for about two hours, until the meat is tender.
5.
To serve, remove the meat from the casserole and slice it.
Arrange on a platter.
Reheat the sauce and check seasoninings.
Add some or all the lemon juice if the sauce does not seem tart enough.
Spoon some of the hot sauce over the meat and pass the rest.
6.
Alternatively, the meat can be refrigerated overnight in the cooking liquid and the next day the meat can be sliced and the sauce reheated before serving.
This will improve the meat's flavor and texture and allow the layer of chilled fat on liquid's surface to be removed and discarded.
Yield: 6 to 8 servings.


Neediest Helps Mother Gather the Pieces Again
At 7 A.M. on a typical day Angela Figueroa wakes up in the servant's bedroom of the Manhattan apartment where she is the part-time cook and housekeeper.
At noon she takes the subway to Queens, where she cleans the rectory of a Roman Catholic church and cooks for the pastor.
At 4 P.M. she returns to Manhattan to clean offices.


G.O.P. Racial Strategy Aims to Woo Moderates
To the Editor:
"The G.O.P.: Wising Up About Race" (editorial, Jan. 23) erroneously states Dwight D. Eisenhower was the 1960 Republican Presidential candidate.
No, it was Richard M. Nixon.


Pell Grants in Prisons Reduce Crime Rate
To the Editor:
"Tough and Smart on Crime?" (editorial, Jan. 27) leaves out one of the dumbest parts of a Senate crime bill you call, in part, "tough and dumb." The amendment by Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas bars prisoners from getting Pell grants to aid in their higher education.


Perot's Group Hears Clinton Rival on Health Care
In an awkward alliance that could hinder the Clinton Administration's drive to win public backing for its health care plan, Representative Jim Cooper, author of a rival proposal, stood side by side with Ross Perot today and made a vigorous appeal for his own plan.
Mr.
Cooper, a Tennessee Democrat, clearly did not want to be identified too closely with Mr.
Perot and did not even mention him in a speech to Mr.
Perot's national organization, United We Stand America.
Still, he was eager to lure Mr.
Perot's supporters, and he even sounded a bit like Mr.
Perot as he depicted the Clinton plan as too complicated and too reliant on "big Government."


Early Birds Get Cruise Discounts
THE word among cruise passengers is that no one these days is paying full fare.
There may be an exception, say, in the case of a ship going to a highly popular destination at a busy time of year, but even then it is unlikely that many of those on board have paid the published fare.
As a group, the world's cruise lines are doing quite well, running at about 80 percent of capacity, but to achieve that position, companies have had to compete vigorously, offering all sorts of incentives to fill cabins.


Team USA Is Sinking As Olympics Get Closer
Madison Square Garden it is not.
But they have luxury boxes ($25,000 a year for eight seats, Cokes extra) in a boutique arena in the middle of the Seine.
This is the hockey hotbed of France.
It also is home to the Dragons, the prime supplier of talent for France's Olympic team.
And tonight, Team USA faced that club, eight days before the same teams will meet, in earnest, in Norway for the start of their Olympic run.


Full House


Buffalo Toes
To the Sports Editor:
In "123,846 Happily Frozen Toes,"(The Times, Jan. 17) concerning weather conditions at Rich Stadium at the time of the team's playoff victory over the Raiders, I was a bit perplexed at the math skills of The Times's writers and editors.
Either The Times cannot multiply, or perhaps does not realize that that we in western New York have five toes on each foot, normally 10 toes per citizen.
The article states that there were 61,923 fans at the game, which produced "123,846 Happily Frozen Toes." Perhaps because of our slow economic times, you have confused those of us who live in the provinces with the two-toed sloth.
THOMAS R. BEECHER, JR.
Buffalo


Choosing the Right Vine for a Good Show
WHEN there is a fence in the garden, particularly an ugly one like a chain-link fence, many gardeners like to disguise it and cover the fence with a vine.
Sometimes this is a good thing.
Or possibly a vine is selected for its colorful blooms and handsome foliage to brighten a corner of the house.
This can also be a good thing.


Peter Greenaway Defends His 'Baby'
PETER GREENAWAY IS addressing an audience at Alfieri Atelier Cinema, an art house here, after the recent Italian premiere of his latest film, "The Baby of Macon." "While I was waiting outside in the foyer for the film to end, I couldn't help but hear that several people were booing," he said.
As usual, Mr.
Greenaway's intense brand of cinema had generated an equally intense response.
"Would those of you who booed my film please raise your hands?" the 52-year-old English director asked, less as a challenge than as an attempt to canvass reactions.
"And would you please tell me why you booed?"


What's Next For the King Of Pop?
SILENCE HAS DESCENDED ONCE AGAIN OVER the Michael Jackson camp.
A settlement, reportedly in the millions of dollars, will be paid to the boy who accused the superstar of sexual molestation; if the boy doesn't choose to testify, it's unlikely there will be a criminal case.
The harried public statements, the accusations and denials from lawyers, the glimpses of a performer who, Vanity Fair reported, regularly shared a bed with young boys (whether or not anything untoward happened) -- all will slip back into video archives and eroding memories.
There has been no admission of guilt; whether the settlement is hush money or an expensive way to avoid unscripted courtroom appearances is open to speculation.
Still, Jackson's public image has, perhaps irrevocably, been shifted from the pre-pubescent Peter Pan figure of Neverland Ranch to something far less innocent.
He probably won't be surrounded by children any time soon, on stage or in public.
Endorsement deals are unlikely; tours plugging his most recent album, "Dangerous" (1991), are doubtless over.


Jan. 30 -Feb. 6; Jump-Starting a Cure for Smog
An otherwise fractious group of 13 governments turned to Washington last week to see if they could jog the auto industry into further cutting smog along the Eastern Seaboard.
It was, in fact, only the latest of several efforts to do so by members of the Ozone Transport Commission, an air-pollution control organization set up under the Clean Air Act of 1990 that includes the states from Maine to Virginia, plus the District of Columbia.
The commission members asked the Federal Environmental Protection Agency to impose on them California's car emission standards, which are tougher than the Federal standards.
Two years ago, members of the group pledged to adopt the standards state by state, but lobbying by the auto and oil industries swayed many state legislatures the other way.


How William Levitt Helped to Fulfill the American Dream
William J. Levitt, Long Island's master builder, died Jan. 28 at the age of 86.
Following is an excerpt from "The Fifties" by David Halberstam describing how Mr.
Levitt revolutionized home building, creating Levittown and making the dream of owning a home a real possibility for thousands of middle-class American families.
OWNING a house came to be the embodiment of the new American dream.
As promised by endless Hollywood films, it represented fulfillment, contentment: confident dads, perky moms and glowing children, attending good schools and, later, college.
A house brought the American family together.
If the first great business figure of the American century was Henry Ford, the second, arguably, was William J. Levitt.


Scientists Lament Inaction on Abuse
The leaders of the National Academy of Sciences, the Institute of Medicine and the National Academy of Engineering say they are disappointed with efforts in reducing misconduct in science.
In a written statement issued this week, the officers of the three organizations contended that universities and Government agencies had failed to adopt definitions and rules to discourage misconduct.
They said they would hold meetings to try to draw attention to the issue.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
SOHO Exploring Women's Health Through the Arts
To draw attention to women's health issues, the New York Chapter of the Women's Caucus for Art is sponsoring a series of art exhibitions, performances, panel discussions, readings and video screenings under the heading "The Women's Health Show."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  SHELL KILLS 66 IN SARAJEVO  A mortar exploded in the jammed central market of Sarajevo, killing at least 66 people and wounding at least 200.
It was the worst massacre since the Serbian siege of the Bosnian capital began 22 months ago.  1  The United States renewed vague threats of action in Bosnia.  13


Recalling Screams Heard Round the World
On a cold February afternoon in 1964, Linda Plotnikoff, a lovesick 12-year-old from Sheepshead Bay, got her first glimpse of the mop-topped men of her dreams.
She had been standing for hours outside the Plaza Hotel, clutching a record album and waiting eagerly for the opportunity to be transformed into a shaking, sobbing mess.
And then, suddenly, in a window high in the hotel, the curtains parted.
The Beatles were looking down at the crowd!
Pandemonium in the streets!
Dozens of police officers had to restrain the hundreds of John-Paul-George-and-Ringo-crazed teen-age girls who tried to rush the doors of the hotel to get at their idols.


F.Y.I.
City of (Wise) Fools
Q.  How did New York come to be known as Gotham?
A.
According to legend, Gotham was a town in England that became known as the place of "wise fools" when its inhabitants tricked King John out of setting up house there.
When the king's men came riding through town to scout the location, the residents simply behaved like madmen.
The royal retainers rode off and a saying was born: "More fools pass through Gotham than remain in it."


Method and Madness; When Experts Err
The Haydn expert H. C. Robbins Landon recently hailed the discovery of Haydn's six lost sonatas as "the greatest musicological coup of the century." The haste of his retreat resembled that of the historian and Hitler expert Hugh Trevor-Roper, who proclaimed as genuine a purported trove of Hitler's diaries that proved to be blatant forgeries.
When musicologists or historians stumble, they stub only their own toes.
But when scientists err, there's usually more than an individual's faulty judgment to blame.
Scientific claims, after all, owe their authority to being the certified intellectual product of a community of experts.
In principle, the maker of a scientific discovery has tested his idea by rigorous experiment, and his professional peers have rigorously checked it for flaws before publication.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES
ANTIQUITIES  Seven Stories.
By John Crowley.
Incunabula, Box 30146, Seattle, Wash. 98103-0146, $25.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on Jan. 16 about an antique table referred incorrectly to the collection of Stanley and Polly Stone of Fox Point, Wis.
It was considered the greatest collection of American furniture in the Midwest, not west of the Mississippi River.


Viva Italia!
An exhibition of Italian photographs, the Rayburn Foundation, Jan. 27.


SUNDAY, February 6, 1994; Low-Impact Golf
Nothing is simple anymore, least of all golf.
Once an innocuous pastoral pleasure, troublesome only to the spouses of golfers and golfers themselves, the sport is now of great environmental concern.
Developers and course operators must deal with countless issues concerning wetlands and dry lands, riparian rights and pesticides, historic sites and endangered wildlife.
The National Golf Foundation, based in Jupiter, Fla. (more fairways than D.C.), has stepped into the breach with two new desk reference manuals: Golf Course Siting and Development and Operations and Maintenance.
The manuals have tips on environmental impact reviews, hiring a "wetland consultant" and who to turn to for research on new kinds of turf grass.


Nationalist Gains Shake Russia's Jews
The fragile confidence of Russia's Jews in their ability to make a free life for themselves here has been badly shaken by the rise of Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the Russian ultranationalist, and the setback suffered by economic reformers in the Russian Government.
Jewish officials and community leaders, so confident six months ago about creating a thriving Jewish life here, now speak in worried tones of the need to prepare their children and grandchildren to emigrate, just in case.
They say they do not want to overreact, but must prepare for a continuing shift toward xenophobia in Russian attitudes.


Looking Toward Budget, Giuliani Places His Bets
To understand the prospects of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's austere plan to balance New York City's $31.2 billion budget for the next fiscal year, it might be helpful to think for a moment about gambling.
Two years ago the administration of Mayor David N. Dinkins, faced with a tight budget and a tax-hostile public, proposed a lottery to raise money to hire more police officers.
It would be fun, and it would add $50 million a year to the city's coffers.


INTO THE IVORY TOWER
My brother's body lies dead and naked on a stainless-steel slab.
At his head stands a tall arched spigot that, with tap handles mimicking wings, easily suggests a swan in mourning.
His head is squarish and overlarge. (This, when he was a toddler, made him seem top-heavy and unsteady on his feet.) His widow's peak is common among the men in my family, though this one is more dramatic than most.
An inverted pyramid, it begins high above the temples and falls steeply to an apex in the boxy forehead, over the heart-shaped face.
A triangle into a box over a heart.
His eyes (now closed) were big and dark and glittery; they drew you into his sadness when he cried.
A horrendous wound runs the length of the abdomen, from the sternum all the way to the pubic mound.
The wound resembles a mouth whose lips are pouting and bloody.
Massive clamps are gouged into these lips at regular intervals along the abdomen.


ALPINE SKIING
In the ski areas of Kvitfjell and Hafjell, men and women will compete to the sound of cowbells clanging in five different events: slalom, giant slalom, downhill, Super-G and combined.
In every event, the 15 highest-ranked skiers are seeded and allowed to ski first, which is usually when course conditions are optimal.
If conditions are extremely poor, a few luckless, low-ranked skiers are occasionally sent out to ski before the seeded skiers in order to pack down the trail.
In a race made up of two runs, the top 15 finishers after the first run reverse order for the second run.
THE SETUP: Slalom (a Norwegian word) and giant slalom, both contested over two runs, are known as "technical" events because they require skiers to negotiate their way through red- and blue-flagged double poles known as "gates" by making dozens of quick, tight turns.
A slalom course must have a minimum of 55 gates for men and 45 for women.
A giant slalom course is longer, faster and more open, with a minimum distance between gates of about 13 feet as opposed to about two and a half feet in slalom.
Each run of a slalom and giant slalom is held on a different course.


U.S. Ice Dancer's Father Found Stabbed to Death
The father of a United States Olympic ice dancer, Elizabeth Punsalan, was found stabbed to death on Friday night at his home in Sheffield Lake, Ohio, outside of Cleveland.
The skater's brother was arrested and will be charged with aggravated murder on Monday, the Sheffield Lake police said today.
Rickey Punsalan was arrested after the police arrived at the home of his father, Dr.
Ernesto Punsalan, who was found lying in his bedroom with two stab wounds in the chest, police said.
Punsalan was pronounced dead upon arrival at St.
Joseph Hospital in Lorain, Ohio, the police said.


BENEFITS
For Safespace  TONIGHT -- A performance of "The Party," a one-woman show based on three short stories by Virginia Woolf, will raise money for Safespace, a center in the Times Square area for adolescents who are homeless or infected with H.I.V.
Kathleen Chalfant, who appears in "Angels in America: Millennium Approaches," will star in the program at the Manhattan Penthouse, 80 Fifth Avenue at 14th Street.
A 7 P.M. cocktail buffet will precede the performance.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 865-1541.
A New Year's Celebration  WEDNESDAY -- The Community Research Initiative on AIDS, which supports the experimental work of physicians and scientists, is sponsoring a Chinese New Year dinner-dance beginning at 7:30 P.M. at the Universalist Church, 160 Central Park West at 76th Street.
The actress Joan Chen and the film director Ang Lee will be honored.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 924-3934.
For Tibet House  THURSDAY -- Paul Simon, Philip Glass, Edie Brickell, the Roches, the poet Allen Ginsberg and others will perform at Carnegie Hall, beginning at 7:30 P.M., in a benefit for Tibet House of New York, a nonprofit center dedicated to preserving Tibet's cultural heritage.
Tickets, $20 to $75, from (212) 247-7800, or at the Carnegie Hall box office.
A Victorian Party  THURSDAY -- The Museum of the City of New York, 1220 Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, will host its 10th annual winter ball.
The museum will be decorated to resemble a Victorian skating party.
Dancing begins at 9 P.M. and a dessert buffet will be served.
Black tie.
Tickets, $110, from (212) 534-1672, extension 246 or 253.
Valentine Auction Benefit  THURSDAY -- Stockard Channing will be the host of an auction and a cocktail buffet at the Puck Building, 293 Lafayette Street at Houston Street.
The AIDS Resource Center, which provides housing and support services to homeless people with AIDS, will benefit.
An auction preview begins at 5 P.M., followed by silent and live auctions of vacation trips to France and Bermuda, theater tickets and artwork from Larry Rivers, Robert Rauschenberg and others.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 633-2500.
Mardi Gras Party  THURSDAY -- The Mainstream Foundation, which provides financial support to organizations in the New York area that seek to end homelessness, is sponsoring a Mardi Gras dance party beginning at 6:30 P.M. at Nell's, 246 West 14th Street at Seventh Avenue.
Hors d'oeuvres will be served and there will be a cash bar.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 969-0078, or $40 at the door.
A One-Woman Show  THURSDAY -- Barbara Feldon will appear in "Love for Better or Worse," a one-woman show that will be a fund-raiser for the educational programs of the Orchestra of St.
Luke's.
An 8 P.M. cocktail party will precede the show and dancing will follow it, all at the Universalist Church, 160 Central Park West at 76th Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 840-7470, or $60 at the door.
Asia Society Benefit  THURSDAY -- The Asia Society celebrates the Chinese New Year with a 7:30 P.M. dinner-dance at the society's headquarters, 725 Park Avenue at 70th Street.
A traditional celebration begins at 8:30 P.M. and will include a lion dance and a raffle of a weekend stay at the Plaza Athenee Hotel, restaurant meals and other items.
Traditional dress or festive attire.
Tickets, $75, or $50 for the post-dinner festivities alone, from (212) 288-6400, extension 265.
For Romanian Orphans  THURSDAY -- The Princess Margarita of Romania Foundation will hold a fund-raiser to aid orphaned children in Romania, beginning at 6 P.M. at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue.
Among the items featured at the silent and live auctions are vacation trips to the Moroccan palace of the late Malcolm Forbes and Le Crillon in Paris, and jewelry from Van Cleef &amp; Arpels and Tiffany &amp; Company.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 759-7812.
Maple-Leaf Ball  SATURDAY -- A ball sponsored by the Canadian Women's Club of New York will benefit the organization's scholarship fund for Canadian music students.
The event will honor Phyllis Lambert, an architect who founded the Canadian Center for Architecture in Montreal.
The 7:30 P.M. cocktail reception at the Pierre will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $200, from (212) 397-0200.
Benefit for Deaf Theater  SATURDAY-- The New York Deaf Theater Ltd., now in its 14th season of presenting plays to the hard of hearing, will benefit from an auction at the Stanley Kaplan Penthouse in Lincoln Center.
The evening will begin with a 7 P.M. champagne reception.
Restaurant dinners, theater tickets and artwork will be auctioned.
Tickets, $75 at the door.
Information: (212) 924-9491, or TTY (212) 924-9535.
For Hale House  FEB. 13 -- Hale House, now in its 25th year of aiding children, will benefit from an awards dinner that will begin at 6:30 P.M. at the Plaza.
The organization will honor the entertainer Chita Rivera; Dr.
Mitchell S. Rosenthal, president of Phoenix House, and Rabbi Bruce M. Cohen, president of the Interns for Peace program for Palestinian and Israeli children.
A musical review featuring performances by the songwriters Cy Coleman, John Kander and Fred Ebb, and the actors Geoffrey Holder, Lisa Mordente and others, will follow the presentation.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 721-1443.
Concert for Children  FEB. 13 -- Daisy Eagan, who won a Tony Award for her role in "The Secret Garden," and Danny Gerard, who starred in "Lost in Yonkers" on Broadway, will head a cast of more than 25 young actors and dancers in a series of musical vignettes that will benefit the children's programs of the Broadway Cares-Equity Fights AIDS organization.
The program begins at 6:30 P.M. at the TriBeCa Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers Street at Greenwich Street.
Tickets, $10, from (212) 840-0770.
Inside the Op-Ed Page  FEB. 14 -- Frank Rich and Anna Quindlen, columnists for The New York Times, will discuss "Life on the Op-Ed Page" at 7:30 P.M. at St.
Luke's School, 487 Hudson Street (at Grove Street), in Greenwich Village.
A question period will follow.
Tickets, $30 at the door, benefit the school's financial aid program.
Information: (212) 924-5960.
Couples Who Care  FEB. 14 -- Marian and Andrew Heiskell and Mary and Laurance Rockefeller are among the honorees at a Valentine's Day dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria sponsored by the Citizens Committee for New York City.
The organization helps volunteer and neighborhood groups in the areas of poverty, drugs, safety and youth counseling.
The event will begin with a cocktail reception at 7 P.M.
Peter Duchin and His Orchestra will perform.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 685-0113.


Rx for the Road
It's a long way from Philadelphia to Vero Beach, Fla. -- 1,086 miles, to be precise, on I-95.
So to remove some of the drive's uncertainty, John McConnell, a retired marketing executive, devised a travel guide that lists rest areas, welcome centers and mileage between strategic cities, like Richmond and Savannah, Ga.
The guide, printed on two sides of a blue 3-by-5 1/2" card, fits in a pocket or glove compartment. To order, send $1 and a stamped, self-addressed envelope to Council on Aging, Box 2102, Vero Beach, Fla. 32961.


On Sunday; Dr. Telephone Explains It All For You
WEARY from painting Lolita's toenails in the motel room?
Call Tel-Med at (212) 434-3200, a wondrous telephone encyclopedia of health advice, and punch in directory No. 175: "Fears of the After-40 Man." Listen to the recording of professional counseling worthy of Humbert Humbert, that most such fears follow largely from our youth-oriented culture.
Or sample the voice of Dr.
Donald Douglas, who cleverly speaks in soothing, natural pauses over at recording No. 275 so that "your un conscious mind and I can have an understanding" as he offers baritone strophes of lulling advice on "How to Fall Asleep." "It may not be necessary to finish this recording," he confidently predicts, leaving nothing in the way of the arms of Morpheus but, perchance, call-waiting.
It is worth phoning just for the Proustian thrill of the sleep doctor's adult variations on childhood's old "Good night, Little Toe. Good night, Big Toe."


Co-op Policy On Subletting
To the Editor:
The "Your Home" column on Dec. 12  [ "Sublet Policy in Co-ops" ]  is correct in suggesting that co-ops should rethink their restrictions on subletting.
These constraints make no sense in today's world and, particularly, in today's marketplace.


Where He Stands Especially Tall
To the Editor:
Alex Ross's article on Neemi Jarvi's recording career, "From Jarvi, Billions and Billions of Records and Still Counting"  [ Jan. 16 ] , was good reading, but it failed to mention that he is the conductor of the Detroit Symphony Orchestra -- something we Detroiters are very proud of.
More than ever, Detroit needs all the positive press it can get.
SUE MARX  Detroit


New Yorkers Fighting One Another Over Federal Aid
The Federal Government is planning the largest inner-city development effort in more than a decade, New York City has deep problems, and its senior Congressman sponsored the law creating the program.
So everyone from the Hudson to the Potomac takes it for granted that New York will be one of six urban areas to receive $100 million to create an economic "empowerment zone."


Jan. 30 -Feb. 6; 'Because I SAY It's Bad for You'
If ever there were a myth too good to die, the sugar myth seems to be it.
Sugar, the story goes, sends some children spinning into a frenzy.
And even though study after study has found that sugar has no effect on behavior, many parents continue to insist that it does.
Scientists say children may indeed act crazed when they eat sugar.
But, they caution, expectations, excitement over that sugary treat, and the power of suggestion all have powerful influences on behavior.
That is why most researchers design their studies to make sure the children and their parents do not know when they are eating sugar.


Choosing the Right Vine for a Good Show
WHEN there is a fence in the garden, particularly an ugly one like a chain-link fence, many gardeners like to disguise it and cover the fence with a vine.
Sometimes this is a good thing.
Or possibly a vine is selected for its colorful blooms and handsome foliage to brighten a corner of the house.
This can also be a good thing.


'I Said Sequined!'
The freight elevator in Isaac Mizrahi's loft building in SoHo stops.
A fast-moving, white-haired woman named Polly Allen Mellen appears in the showroom.
Tossing her clothes on a bench, she strips to a black bra and black tights.
A minute later, she is in a short shift made from recycled beer cans, doing a shimmy in the mirror.
"Love it," she says to Mr.
Mizrahi, who shimmies along.
They are some pair -- the 30-ish fashion designer in baggy plaid pants, the 60-ish fashion editor in disks stamped from Miller Lite cans.


A Time to Ponder Where Blacks Stand
LAST Sunday, Anni Moss the black singer and actress known to audiences by her first name -- kicked off Black History Month on the local weekly radio program Dreamsounds by playing "Stand for Something," a rap song recorded by the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis.
In choosing the song -- which invokes the names of black heroes like the slave leader Nat Turner and the educator Mary McLeod Bethune -- the WRTN-FM radio host sounded one of the keynote themes for the month of celebrations, lectures and workshops that began last week throughout the county.
A Continuing Struggle
"Now more than ever, blacks need to take control of our destiny," said Anni (pronounced ah-NEE).
"We have to take the initiative and not wait for others to call on us."


The Fine Art of Fun
Beaux Arts benefit for the National Academy of Design, Jan 28.


Ronni Janoff and Barry Weinstein
Ronni Nanette Janoff, a caterer in Livingston, N.J., was married there last evening to Barry Alan Weinstein, a founding partner of Goldstein, Weinstein &amp; Fuld, a law firm in New York.
Rabbi Samuel Rosenberg performed the ceremony at the Crystal Plaza, a banquet hall where the bride works.
The bride, 36, graduated from New York University and received her culinary training at the New School for Social Research.
She is a daughter of Dorothy E. Finkel of Boca Raton, Fla., and the late Harold Janoff, and a stepdaughter of Emanuel M. Finkel.


In America; Kids Know the Real Deal
I first heard of Evans Jean some months ago when his teacher, a woman named Ellie Weiss, showed me his autobiography.
Mr.
Jean was a senior at an alternative high school in Brooklyn, the Bushwick Outreach Center, and he had the peculiar idea that he could escape the rampant evils of the inner city by working hard and getting an education.
He wanted to be a nurse.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 23 about modern English butlers misstated the distinction achieved by Lady Astor in the British Parliament.
In 1919 she became the first woman to sit in the House of Commons, not the first elected to it.
The first was Countess Markiewicz, an Irish revolutionary, who was elected in 1918 but in protest refused to take her seat.


Jumping 'V' Now Stands For Victory
EVEN Norwegians are fond of a good comeback tale especially if it involves one of their own in an Olympic year.
Espen Bredesen's worst-to-first saga begins, appropriately enough, in the middle of winter.
The month was January 1992, and all was far from well with the national ski jumping team.


Sound Bytes; Charting the Course at Intel
THE rap against the players in the computer industry -- the people and the companies -- is that so few can ride more than one wave of technology.
They have a hard time shifting gears to make successful transitions.
Andrew S. Grove, president and chief executive of Intel, is certainly an exception, both personally and professionally.
Born Andras Grof, he fled Hungary after the Soviet invasion in 1956, arriving in New York with little money or English.
Undaunted, he worked and studied his way through City College of New York to graduate near the top of his class and then left for California.
In 1967, Mr.
Grove joined a fledgling Silicon Valley company called Intel as president.
After years of success, Intel was in trouble in the mid-1980's.
Under Mr.
Grove, the company gulped hard, pulled out of the memory-chip business and bet its future on microprocessors.
Today, Intel dominates the market for the computer-on-a-chip "brains" that run personal computers.
Last month, the Santa Clara, Calif., company reported a record $2.3 billion profit for 1993.


Photos With Few Cliches And an Unlikely Setting
NO. 395 Kings Highway is fairly typical of its time (1910) a manorlike residence, comfortable looking but not inelegant, and one of many lining this boulevard here.
Architecturally, the structure, with a pitched roof pulled down, like a bonnet over a face, has a hint of the Normandy farmhouse as well as a touch of Tudor.
Inside are rambling rooms with low ceilings and a lot of dark wood paneling.
When covered with snow, the place becomes a veritable Christmas card.
It is nonetheless home to the Perkins Center for the Arts and has been since 1971, when it was given to the town by its owners, the Perkins family, and the center named for them was incorporated.


Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro has long been considered one of the world's most beautiful, and most hedonistic, cities.
Vistas of dramatically forested mountains backing surf-lapped beaches make Rio undeniably stunning, but it is also home to more than five million people, many of them miserably poor.
Street crime is a major concern -- the city has established a special police force to protect tourists -- and visitors should leave valuables at their hotels.
Even with Carnival beginning next weekend, all is not just carefree fun in the tropical sun.
Ardent defenders say that Rio is misunderstood, and in some ways it is a city of contradictions.
Rio may have more than 20 miles of white sand beaches, but it is not a resort.
Brazilians may be among the world's most amiable, affectionate people, but the criminals among them can be cunning.
Visitors should be prudent.


A Readers' Guide To Jeeve's Occupation; When Socks Mattered
To the Editor:
Re "The Jeeves of Today Remains Loyal" (Jan. 23): In our world where we make our own tea, and press our own pants (if they get pressed at all), the distinction between butler and "gentleman's personal gentleman" (as Jeeves described himself) may not mean much.
But in the world of P. G. Wodehouse, where the decision to wear purple socks shook the foundations of civilization, it meant a great deal.
DANIEL COHEN  Cape May Court House, N.J.
Jan. 28, 1994


Poet on a Tightrope: Fighting Injustice With a Tad of Whimsy
"DO I need teeth, I ask myself in sleep," David Ignatow writes in a poem of 30 years ago.
I am loved by my daughter,


Questions Of Style for European Champions
As the European figure skating championships drew to a close here last month, two questions were left hanging in the clamming pre-Olympic air: Has Surya Bonaly finally come far enough?
Have Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean ultimately gone too far backward?
Bonaly, the 20-year-old from France, won her fourth consecutive European title, beating the defending world champion, Oksana Baiul of Ukraine, by smoothly presenting two programs loaded with her usual collection of difficult jumps and eye-catching spins.
What made her performance all the more intriguing was that she did it with a different model of skate on each foot.
Bonaly and her ever-attentive mother/coach, Suzanne, have struggled for the last two years to find skates that cause her no pain when she performs.


Corrections
A recipe for sweet-and-sour pot roast in the food column on Jan. 23 gave incomplete instructions.
A corrected version follows.
1.
Place the meat in a deep bowl, add the white wine and vinegar and allow to marinate six to eight hours.
2. Preheat oven to 350 degrees.
3.
Remove the meat from the marinade, reserving the marinade, and pat the beef dry.
Heat the oil in a heavy three-quart casserole.
Add the beef and brown it on all sides.
Remove the meat from the casserole and add the onions and carrots and cook over medium-low heat until tender and lightly browned.
Stir in the garlic, then add the raisins, ginger, allspice and brown sugar.
Add the stock, the reserved marinade and the tomatoes.
Bring to a simmer, scraping the bottom of the pan.
Stir in the bay leaves and salt and pepper to taste.
Return meat to casserole.
4.
Cover the casserole and place in the oven.
Bake for about two hours, until the meat is tender.
5.
To serve, remove the meat from the casserole and slice it.
Arrange on a platter.
Reheat the sauce and check seasoninings.
Add some or all the lemon juice if the sauce does not seem tart enough.
Spoon some of the hot sauce over the meat and pass the rest.
6.
Alternatively, the meat can be refrigerated overnight in the cooking liquid and the next day the meat can be sliced and the sauce reheated before serving.
This will improve the meat's flavor and texture and allow the layer of chilled fat on liquid's surface to be removed and discarded.
Yield: 6 to 8 servings.


The Whole World Is Watching
BEFORE most Americans knew a triple axel from a triple play, before Tonya Harding's life went from hard times to Hard Copy, before Nancy Kerrigan became America's victimized sweetheart and her attackers became America's most wanted, these Winter Olympics figured to be a placid gathering in Lillehammer, Norway, of familiar participants and redundant accomplishment.
Only two years have passed since the last Winter Games in Albertville, France.
Many athletes have remained in training, not having to shelve their Olympic hopes for the customary four-year wait.
Bonnie Blair and Alberto Tomba are back hoping to win their fourth and fifth gold medals; Dan Jansen is back, too, still hoping to win his first.
The idea behind this Olympic restructuring, the separating of the Winter Games from the shadow of the Summer Games, was partly to give the smaller, quaint Winter Olympics their own identity.
Now they have one.
The wrong one.


Just Explain Yourself
To the Editor:
Sharon Stone should not be allowed to leave the breakfast table without a word of explanation as to why she was wearing a see-through blouse in a restaurant at 10 in the morning  [ "The Ultimate Question: Can Sharon Stone Act?" Jan. 16 ] .
If it wasn't for gaining all eyes, then for what?


United Airlines -- or Divided Airlines? A Buyout Question
THE pilots' and machinists' unions of United Airlines have pledged that if their bid to gain control of the company succeeds, employees will at last live up to United's name and put to rest the nickname "Untied Airlines" that many employees have long used.
They may be promising too much.


Miss D'Agostino, Mr. Christensen
Sarah Ann D'Agostino, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen I. D'Agostino of Hobe Sound, Fla., was married last evening to Robert Lee Christensen Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Christensen of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Msgr.
Thomas F. Heneghan performed the ceremony at Church of Our Saviour in New York.
Mrs.
Christensen was until recently the manager of special events at Tiffany &amp; Company, in New York.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of D'Agostino Enterprises Inc., a private investment company in Hobe Sound.
She is a granddaughter of Nicholas N. D'Agostino, who founded D'Agostino Supermarkets Inc.


No, The First Priority is; Stop Coercing Women
Reading Charles F. Westoff's critique of the "feminist" agenda for international population policy today, I am reminded of what the birth control pioneer Margaret Sanger said many years ago when charged with taking herself and the cause of reproductive rights too seriously.
She responded, deadpan, though with a characteristically dry wit: "I am the partisan of women who have nothing to laugh at."
Let us remember that we are talking here not just about abstract numbers on grids and charts, but about actual women living real lives.
Within the industrialized or "northern" countries of the world today, contraceptive use is nearly universal.
Approximately 325 million married women of reproductive age in the developing nations of the "south" now also practice some form of fertility regulation, along with the 34.5 million men who have been sterilized and 22 million condom users.


Taking the Show to a Higher Level
It is one of the few boat shows that will agree to tell you how many people attended (28,000 last year).
And, despite the focus on sales, most sailors will concede it is the social event of the year.
The sport's top professionals take the opportunity to mingle.
And for $12 to $20 a day for a ticket, pricey by most boat show standards, the public is invited to join in, too.
If sailing had an Academy Awards, Sail Expo '94 would be it.


Diane R. Sarnoff, Jason A. Kanefsky
Diane Robin Sarnoff, a daughter of Howard and Miriam Sarnoff of West Hempstead, L.I., is to be married today to Jason Aaron Kanefsky, a son of Gloria and Albert Kanefsky of Far Rockaway, Queens.
Rabbi Yosef Kanefsky, a brother of the bridegroom, will officiate at Temple Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.


The Nation; Stereotyping Men, Women and Juries by Trial and Error
JAMES PAUL LINN likes women.
He likes the way they think.
He likes the way they respond to him.
And when they are in a jury box, Mr.
Linn says, he can usually get his client off the hook.
That, says the former Texas prosecutor who is now a defense lawyer in Oklahoma City, is why he has spent the last 42 years trying to pack his juries with women.


Sports of The Times; Boston Fans Welcome Home Their Nancy
THE city opened its heart when Williams came home from crash-landing fighter jets in his second war.
The city roared out a welcome whenever Orr tried to come back from his own knee problems.
And the city bowed down when Bird returned from his back injuries.
But never was it quite like this, the entire Boston area sending 4,500 delegated representatives to a funky little arena on St.
Botolph Street to welcome back "Boston's Own." That title means something in this special homespun city that looks so good with its red brick buildings covered with a mantle of snow.


In Jackson Heights, a New Building Evokes the Past
THE stamp of Georgian and Tudor architecture lies heavy on the brick apartment buildings and row houses of Jackson Heights, the Queens community whose distinctive character was recognized last month when the City Council approved a Jackson Heights Historic District.
In the vibrant commercial district of Jackson Heights -- 37th Avenue, especially near 82d Street, and on 82d Street itself between 37th Avenue and Roosevelt Avenue -- the designation should be an influence toward harmony in what is now a wild variety of contemporary store signs.
Any new construction will have to meet standards promoting design compatibility as well.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Hightstown; A Borough With Respect for Its Roots
HIGHTSTOWN, a hole-in-the-doughnut borough surrounded by East Windsor Township, was once the bustling service center of a rich New Jersey farming region.
Today, it is a well-preserved historic municipality.
Cunningham's Pharmacy, opened in 1877, was the site of the borough's first telephone exchange in the late 1890's and is still in business today on the corner of Main and Stockton streets.
And The Hightstown Gazette, a weekly newspaper established in 1849, is the paper of record for Hightstown and East Windsor.


What Do Men Want?
To the Editor:
What do men want?
Men do not want to be women in male skin.
Men do not want to cry before they reach 40, just when women are no longer interested in their tears.
Men want to protect their women and their brood.


Born to Be Seen as Well as Heard
Miles Davis (1926-91) was not just one of the most influential musicians in the history of jazz; he was also one of the most charismatic, and one of the most photogenic.
He stares out from the pages of MILES DAVIS: The Man in the Green Shirt (Holt, $40) with an intensity that is almost tangible.
Even as a very young man in a very conventional mid-40's publicity shot, he has fire in his eyes; even as a ravaged-looking sexagenarian, his eyes hidden behind huge sunglasses, he holds himself like a man born for the spotlight.
As a visual record of a remarkable career, this book is exemplary.
Unfortunately, the photographs accompany a text by Richard Williams that is by turns pedestrian and bizarre (and marred by the occasional factual error).
Mr.
Williams, a veteran English music journalist who now writes about sports for The Independent, does a workmanlike job of rehashing the salient facts of Davis's life.
When he attempts to provide a fresh perspective on the great trumpeter's music and mystique, however, the results can be downright silly.
The book's title, for example, is a reference to what Davis wore in the striking photograph that graced the cover of his 1958 album "Milestones." Mr.
Williams lucidly explains why this recording was one of the most significant of Davis's career, but wildly overreaches himself by attempting to make the curious case that the picture and the shirt were as significant as the music.
For all his heavy breathing, he fails to demonstrate that Miles Davis's green shirt was anything more or less than a nice-looking shirt.
Similarly, "Miles Davis: The Man in the Green Shirt" is ultimately no more or less than a nice-looking coffeetable book about a brilliant musician.
PETER KEEPNEWS


Weddings With a View
Who can forget Cary Grant and Deborah Kerr in "An Affair to Remember," Fay Wray and King Kong in "King Kong" or, for today's young lovers, Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan in last year's "Sleepless in Seattle"?
The Empire State Building has been a dramatic backdrop to a number of cinematic love affairs.
So by extension, "it's a natural wedding site," said Elizabeth Rodgers, a spokeswoman for the 34th Street Partnership, which is co-sponsoring what is hoped to become an annual affair.


The Don of Duke
THE EDGE OF NIGHT By Frank Lentricchia. 182 pp. New York:  Random House. $21.


Technology; For 'This Old Field,' a Costly Renovation Project
WHEN Phillips Petroleum brought Norway into the oil industry by discovering the Ekofisk field 180 miles off the country's southwest coast in 1969, Phillips figured it might be able to continue production through the 1990's.
And certainly, Phillips officials thought at the time, they would phase out production many years before 2011, when its oilfield development license from the Norwegian Government would expire.
But now, thanks to technologies that promise to keep the North Sea oil flowing from Ekofisk into the 21st century, Phillips is thinking about investing an additional $3 billion to $4 billion in the field -- if the terms are right.


Citicorp's Tower: Still a Majestic Misfit
The Queens skyline changed forever in 1989, when the 50-floor Citicorp tower opened in Long Island City, a shimmering skyscraper looming over a drab neighborhood of squat warehouses, factory lofts and row houses.
Critics charged that the 658-foot tower -- promoted as the tallest building on the Eastern Seaboard between Boston and Charlotte, N.C., outside of Manhattan -- would overwhelm the neighborhood.
Some feared, and others hoped for, impending gentrification.
A second tower was envisioned across the street, speculation brought increased property prices, and one realty broker talked of "the Madison Avenue of Long Island City."


Russia Won't Bankrupt Itself for Our Sake
To the Editor:
Although we in the West long condemned Communism as ideological, United States officials and journalists discuss the Russian crisis in terms scarcely less so.
We insist on using "reform" as a synonym for our own prescription for economic shock therapy -- and make it impossible to identify not only Russia's overriding interests, but also our own.


FREESTYLE SKIING
A combination of figure skating with gymnastics, freestyle skiing is one of the newer Olympic sports, with moguls gaining medal status in 1992 and aerials becoming a medal sport in Lillehammer.
THE SETUP: In moguls, skiers race a qualifying and final run down a steep course about two football fields long, cluttered with moguls, or snow bumps, while incorporating two upright jumps.
In aerials, the skiers jump off a chute to perform their two jumps (like in skateboarding), and are judged for takeoff, height and distance (called the air of a jump), execution and landing, among other criteria.
THE SCORING: For moguls, think figure skating with a clock, complete with music and scoring on a scale of 0 to 7.5 points.
Judges decide how well a skier tackles the moguls (50 percent of his score) and the air of the jump (25 percent) and then his total time (another 25 percent).


On the Soup Line, Extraordinary People
To the Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's Jan. 30 column, "No News. Just Another Day in the Soup Line," shows one man's snapshot of people who eat in emergency food programs like Holy Apostles Soup Kitchen.
Seemingly to the author's surprise, it reveals that the folks on the line are remarkably ordinary in their behavior.
They run the gamut from cheerful to surly, enterprising to sluggish.
People waiting in line for perhaps their only meal of the day don't wear their hearts on their sleeves or tell their life stories to a nearby stranger.


POSTINGS: Winter Seasoning; Alternatives to Salt for the Sidewalks
Lot's wife looked back at her burning city of Sodom and was turned into a pillar of salt; New Yorkers this snow-filled season look down at their feet and feel that their frozen city has been metamorphosed into a sidewalk of salt.
And that, says the New York Landmarks Conservancy, is like rubbing salt in a wound.
Rock salt, which promotes the melting of snow and ice, also "causes the erosion of masonry surfaces, particularly where the base of the brick or stone building meets the sidewalk," said Mark Weber, head of the Technical Preservation Services Center of the nonprofit Landmarks Conservancy, and "isn't even effective at temperatures below 22 degrees Fahrenheit."


A Fan of Modern Playwrights Is Still Stylishly Out of Fashion
TELL MAX STAFFORD-CLARK he's an anomaly and the director smiles in agreement.
After three decades in the British theater, the 52-year-old Londoner knows how unfashionable a lifelong devotion to new writing can be.
In England anyway, starry classics, musicals and the occasional foray into film and television tend to make reputations and pay mortgages.
By contrast, Mr.
Stafford-Clark prefers the pleasures of bringing to life commissioned scripts away from the commercial hurlyburly, as he is now doing with Timberlake Wertenbaker's "Three Birds Alighting on a Field." The play, which starts as a satire of the frenzied art world in the late 1980's and deepens into an examination of a well-heeled Englishwoman's search for a soul, opens Tuesday at the Manhattan Theater Club.
It arrives in New York some two and a half years after its London bow at the Royal Court Theater, where it was nominated for an Olivier Award and starred Harriet Walter, who is repeating the role in New York.
Also in the cast are Daniel Gerroll, Zach Grenier and Robert Westenberg.


HOCKEY
Olympic hockey has evolved from an event marked by free speed and finesse, coupled with body-blasting.
But because it is played on a 100-foot-wide rink (15 feet greater than most National Hockey League arenas), it is faster, with less body contact, than most Americans are accustomed to watching.
THE SETUP: Olympic hockey has virtually none of the brawling of the North American pro game.
Instead, it is a contest of fluidity, skaters making use of the wide rink, slinging long passes, playing a controlled style.
You won't find players dumping the puck into the corners and chasing it, head down and ready for a collision.


Late-Game Charge of the Devils' Brigade
Just when it appeared that Tom Barrasso was unbeatable in goal for the Penguins, the Devils exploded for four goals in 2 minutes 46 seconds of the third period tonight.
The display was enough for a 7-3 triumph over the Penguins, who played without Mario Lemieux.
Claude Lemieux and John MacLean led the Devils with two goals each against Barrasso, who faced 40 shots.
Bruce Driver, Scott Niedermayer and Aleksandr Semak had the other goals for the Devils.


A Paper Deliverer's View of Change
HOME delivery of newspapers remains the last bastion of daily personalized service, outlasting deliveries of milk, bread, diapers and dry cleaning, even outdoing the mail carrier's six days a week visits.
After four decades of delivering newspapers 365 days a year to homes in Summit, Mel Stein is retiring from running the Hill City News Service, a job he is passing on to his son, Joel.


Dehere Runs Second At Gulfstream Park
Pistols and Roses opened the season for racing seniors today when he won the $300,000 Donn Handicap at Gulfstream Park for the second year in a row.
But he was upstaged by the young and elusive Dehere, the juvenile champion of last year and early favorite for the Kentucky Derby this year, who raised some eyebrows when he ran second at odds of 1-9 in a $39,000 allowance race.
Dehere led all the way until he was nailed in the final 100 yards by Ride the Rails.
And as they flashed home, Ride the Rails moved three-quarters of a length in front, and the celebrated Derby favorite was beaten for the third time in his last four starts.


Skirting the Issue
Last fall, I received a call from a producer at "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung," asking me if I'd agree to an on-camera interview for Bill Geist's segment on the "revolution" in men's wear.
The interview, lasting over an hour, covered such topics as the unconstructed business suit, the increased use of lighter-weight fabrics, ties as an option rather than an obligation, big sloppy sweaters, big sloppy pants and men reluctantly embracing their new status as sex objects.
What dominated the finished segment, however, was a hefty guy in a skirt, pretending to amble up Fifth Avenue on his way to a time clock.
It ended with Geist, also in a skirt, longing for his four-button blazer.
What the piece never acknowledged was New York's impervious reaction.
Most passers-by did no double takes, heaved no guffaws, kept their index fingers in their pockets.
Those that didn't seemed more distracted by the minicam than a pair of hairy calves.
Which is as it should be.
Pareos, kilts, skirts -- whatever you call them -- have been coming down the runway for almost a decade now, and except for an occasional sighting at the beach, that's where they've stayed.
No designer with a bank loan has his fingers crossed that men will soon be standing in front of their closets, going I don't know -- long or short?
Skirts keep coming because men's clothing is about parameters.
And you can't blame designers for trying to give themselves a wider playing field.


At Work; Old Age Is No Place for Sissies
NOMINALLY, there was good news from a report on pension coverage released late last year.
The Employee Benefit Research Institute in Washington reported that the decline in coverage, which appeared in the mid- to late-1980's to be occurring at roughly the speed of light, especially for participants in traditional defined-benefit plans, had flattened.
The increasing number of women in the labor force covered by pensions -- up 3 percentage points, to 66.7 percent in 1991 from 63.7 in 1987 -- helped stop the decline.
Coverage of men continued to drop slightly, to 68.5 percent in 1991 from 69.8 percent in 1987.
In fact, the rise in women's coverage continues a trend that began in the 1980's, even while men's coverage was dropping dramatically as "good jobs," with hefty wages and benefits, vaporized in the contracting manufacturing sector.
"I would hypothesize that has to do with the continuing integration of females into the mainstream work force," said Paul Yakoboski, the report's author.
"More are entering as college graduates at higher levels that tend to be covered. They used to be at the lower-skill level, where you don't find much coverage, male or female."


The World; Battle of Algiers, the Sequel
GUN battles between the army and rebels, after a three-decade hiatus, resound once more in the alleys of the Casbah here and in the razor-backed Atlas Mountains to the south.
It is a shock to the aging generals who rule Algeria.
Many of them served in the French Army of the 1950's and only just in time switched loyalties during the war of independence.
The current insurgency, by Islamic militants who accuse the generals of betraying the anti-Western revolution they once led, is a bitter reminder of how far these generals have fallen from grace.


Health Care Costs And Single-Payer Plan
We at New Jersey Citizen Action found Mrs.
Roukema's comments in the Jan. 2 "2 Reports Vary on Health Care Costs" somewhat bewildering.
First, Mrs.
Roukema says she would have liked to have heard from Citizen Action at her Dec. 6 House Subcommittee on Labor and Management hearing.
As a member of the subcommittee, Mrs.
Roukema creates the invitation list for its hearings.
Had she wanted to hear from Citizen Action, New Jersey's largest citizen coalition, she should have invited us or, at least, notified us.


U.S. Approves Sale of Warplanes to Argentina
Almost 12 years after losing the Falkland Islands War to Britain, Argentina has won a diplomatic battle to rearm its military over British objections.
Earlier this week, the United States agreed to sell the Government of President Carlos Saul Menem 36 A4M Skyhawk jet attack planes with advanced radar technology in an effort to requip Argentina's air force.


Signs Signal Both Profit and Controversy
THE best-known 7,200 square feet along the East River in Hunters Point, Queens, have been under reconstruction recently in a factory on 12th Avenue in Manhattan, not far from the Hudson River.
What is being rebuilt is a 60- by 120-foot Pepsi-Cola sign, the unofficial landmark of Hunters Point, which dates to 1936.
It rises over a Pepsi bottling plant immediately north of the site on which construction of the enormous Queens West project is to begin this year.


Questions Of Style for European Champions
As the European figure skating championships drew to a close here last month, two questions were left hanging in the clamming pre-Olympic air: Has Surya Bonaly finally come far enough?
Have Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean ultimately gone too far backward?
Bonaly, the 20-year-old from France, won her fourth consecutive European title, beating the defending world champion, Oksana Baiul of Ukraine, by smoothly presenting two programs loaded with her usual collection of difficult jumps and eye-catching spins.
What made her performance all the more intriguing was that she did it with a different model of skate on each foot.
Bonaly and her ever-attentive mother/coach, Suzanne, have struggled for the last two years to find skates that cause her no pain when she performs.


More Worries Along Hudson Street
To the Editor:
Not only has it been a major assault on the senses ("That Mess on Hudson Street," Jan. 30), but the "complicated, attenuated and obstreperous reconstruction of Hudson Street" is also having an affect on the buildings adjacent to it.
When large trucks and buses roll through the street now, there are major rumblings and vibrations through my building as there never were before.


Arshile Gorky: Late Years of a Tragic Figure
"GORKY ALWAYS HAD HIS OWN image. You know, it's like a flavor. The feeling, the way he painted the things, the way he drew. It was terrifically Gorky." So Willem de Kooning once recalled his close friend Arshile Gorky.
De Kooning was not quite right, however.
Gorky didn't always have his own image, and his flavor emerged only in his last decade, after a self-imposed apprenticeship during which he immersed himself so deeply in the art of Cezanne, Picasso and other European masters that for years he seemed most like a ventriloquist.


Corrections
A recipe for sweet-and-sour pot roast in the food column on Jan. 23 gave incomplete instructions.
A corrected version follows.
1.
Place the meat in a deep bowl, add the white wine and vinegar and allow to marinate six to eight hours.
2. Preheat oven to 350 degrees.
3.
Remove the meat from the marinade, reserving the marinade, and pat the beef dry.
Heat the oil in a heavy three-quart casserole.
Add the beef and brown it on all sides.
Remove the meat from the casserole and add the onions and carrots and cook over medium-low heat until tender and lightly browned.
Stir in the garlic, then add the raisins, ginger, allspice and brown sugar.
Add the stock, the reserved marinade and the tomatoes.
Bring to a simmer, scraping the bottom of the pan.
Stir in the bay leaves and salt and pepper to taste.
Return meat to casserole.
4.
Cover the casserole and place in the oven.
Bake for about two hours, until the meat is tender.
5.
To serve, remove the meat from the casserole and slice it.
Arrange on a platter.
Reheat the sauce and check seasoninings.
Add some or all the lemon juice if the sauce does not seem tart enough.
Spoon some of the hot sauce over the meat and pass the rest.
6.
Alternatively, the meat can be refrigerated overnight in the cooking liquid and the next day the meat can be sliced and the sauce reheated before serving.
This will improve the meat's flavor and texture and allow the layer of chilled fat on liquid's surface to be removed and discarded.
Yield: 6 to 8 servings.


Rose Nussbaum Justin; Lawyer, 83
Rose Nussbaum Justin, a lawyer who held legal positions in New York City government, died on Jan. 17 at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
She was 83 and lived in the Bronx.
The cause was heart disease, said her daughter, Gail Justin.


The Pros and Cons of Antilock Brakes
A LOT of snow.
A lot of ice.
A spate of misery for much of the eastern part of the country.
And a spate of questions for me, most of them about antilock brakes.
And, I must say, the queries have surprised me.
ABS (which originally meant Anti-Blocking System and now has come to stand for Antilock Braking System) has been around for decades, first on airliners and later on trucks and cars.
But the questions indicate that a great many people seem not to know what it is or how to use it.


Carrie Trautwein, J. A. Hammond Jr.
Carrie Louise Trautwein, the chief financial officer of Travelers Managed Pharmacy Inc., was married yesterday in Boston to Dr.
Jonathan Acton Hammond Jr., a cardiothoracic surgeon.
Both work in Hartford.
The Rev.
Samuel Thames Lloyd 3d performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Hammond, 30, works in the pharmacy benefits subsidiary of the Travelers insurance company.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Victor Rudolf Trautwein Jr. of Evanston, Ill., and the late Joanne Murphy Trautwein.
Her father, now retired, was the financial director of the book division of R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons, the printing company, in Chicago.


Laurie M. Nemeth and Helmut Roth
Laurie Miriam Nemeth, a daughter of Lenore S. Nemeth of Manhasset Hills, L.I., and the late George Nemeth, was married in Hawaii on Thursday to Dr.
Helmut Roth, the son of Hildegard and Kurt Roth of Kirn/Nahe, Germany.
Judge Boyd Mossman of the Second Circuit Court of Hawaii officiated at the Kapalua Bay Hotel in Lahaina, Maui.


Touring South Africa's Black Townships
AT 9 each morning, when most tourists in South Africa are scanning the game parks for rhino or setting off for a day sampling Cape chardonnays, Ali Kahn loads his minivan for a look at the other side.
His five-hour expedition follows the route of the Cape's mixed-race, or "colored," residents as they were forcibly moved in the 1960's from the choice, waterside neighborhoods of Cape Town to the desolate Cape Flats townships.
Then he continues through the teeming black townships of Guguletu and Crossroads, and the sprawling shack metropolis amid the sand dunes of Khayelitsha -- places few whites, South African or foreign, ever venture.


Britten's Venice: The Met Takes A Second Look
In 1921, 10 years after he had completed "Death in Venice," Thomas Mann wrote to Wolfgang Born, whose illustrations for a special edition of the work, Mann felt, had captured certain "spiritual elements" of his story.
For a writer, he observed, it was a "moving experience to have a product of his mind taken up, reproduced, celebrated, glorified by an art that appeals more directly to the senses: graphic art or the theater, say." In the new Metropolitan Opera production of Benjamin Britten's "Death in Venice," which opens on Monday evening, all the contemporary arts are blended into a pictorial vision that creates both a real and a psychological world.
The production, shared with Covent Garden in London, where it was presented in 1992, is by the same English team that first staged the opera, in 1973 at the Maltings, near Britten's home in Suffolk, and later at Covent Garden and the Met: Colin Graham, director; John Piper (who has since died), set designer, and Charles Knode, costume designer.
Yet this is no revival.
In fact, the old production no longer exists; the original sets were destroyed by fire, and the costumes are in rags.


World Leaders Express Shock and Outrage at Blast
President Clinton today led an international outpouring of outrage and horror at a mortar shell attack on a crowded Sarajevo market that killed at least 66 people and wounded about 200.
He called on the United Nations to identify the attackers urgently and directed Secretary of State Warren Christopher to consult with allies on "appropriate next steps."


If You're Thinking of Living In/Hightstown; A Borough With Respect for Its Roots
HIGHTSTOWN, a hole-in-the-doughnut borough surrounded by East Windsor Township, was once the bustling service center of a rich New Jersey farming region.
Today, it is a well-preserved historic municipality.
Cunningham's Pharmacy, opened in 1877, was the site of the borough's first telephone exchange in the late 1890's and is still in business today on the corner of Main and Stockton streets.
And The Hightstown Gazette, a weekly newspaper established in 1849, is the paper of record for Hightstown and East Windsor.


Ballet Fever
Awards and benefit, American School of Ballet, Jan. 31.


The Voices of Harlem's Past


Endpaper; Thinking About You
Monday.
I'm worried about Heidi.
A friend of mine visiting from L.A. says Heidi is interviewed on the news there all the time and looks tired and run-down.
She's so thin.
I'm sure Dr.
Fleiss has given her excellent nutritional tips.
But since when has a child paid attention to a parent's advice?
Heidi, Heidi, listen to your father.
Tuesday.
The Wall Street Journal warns that many Americans overuse over-the-counter drugs.
I've only read about Heidi using prescription medication like Percodan and Quaaludes.
Still, I'm concerned.
The Journal also mentions that 36 percent of 18-to-34-year-olds plan to purchase a recreational vehicle.
I hope that Heidi is one of them.
She needs a break.
What if Heidi's trial is on Court TV?
That's quite an ordeal.
Just watching Leslie Abramson from 3,000 miles away during the Menendez trial was exhausting.
Heidi should take some time off in a Winnebago now.
Instead, she's promoting a new line of sleepwear.
Admirable, yes.
Idle hands are the devil's playground.
But she's obviously working too hard.
I myself have just joined a gym and think Heidi should too.
And if I could get her to join Equinox, I'd get a free month.
Wednesday A.M.
Heidi refers to her arrest for drugs and pandering as The Troubles.
She is obviously a serious person.
I hope she received her invitation to the Tikkun Conference of Liberal and Progressive Jews.
Tikkun is "disappointed with the degree to which the Clinton Administration has been able to follow through on its commitment to a politics of meaning." Heidi probably is too.
I hope Heidi can attend the Tikkun conference.
There's a workshop called "Twenty-somethings: Finding Our Voice." P.M.
Equinox has the best shampoo.
Sometimes I go just to wash my hair.
I read in Vanity Fair that Heidi's $1.6 million house has the feel of a sorority.
So does Equinox!
All those naked women gossiping in the locker room.
Today, eavesdropping, I learned that if you're allergic to it, you can return all your makeup to a department store.
Thursday.
There was an article in the paper about rotary phones.
I have a rotary phone in my bedroom and am often vilified as a Luddite for it.
But now many neighborhoods are requesting that their push-button phones be replaced by old-fashioned rotary phones in order to prevent drug dealers from beeping their couriers from corner Touch-Tone phones.
I have never had a drug dealer beep a courier from my bedroom phone, and now I know why.
If Heidi does join my gym and I get a chance to chat with her in the locker room in a sorority-like fashion, I will strongly recommend she change her telephones to rotary instruments.
The Vanity Fair article mentioned some exchange of small packets -- I hope they were not over-the-counter remedies -- that could easily have been prevented by this simple change.
Friday A.M.
I really miss Leslie Abramson.
To take my mind off her, I drive with a friend to Montauk in an ice storm for the annual winter weekend beach walk of the American Littoral Society.
Trying to be brave myself, I think of Heidi, how brave she's been.
And loyal.
"I can't get mad at them," she says of the young women who have been arrested and agreed to testify against her.
"I won't turn on them. Not those girls. . . . I just know them. . . . I know them." P.M.
We arrive early and after dinner hear a lecture by Mickey Cohen, for whom I would travel six hours in a snowstorm any day.
Mickey is a naturalist and a brilliant teacher.
He told us all about Yankee Whaling.
I do not have a strong predisposition for lectures on Yankee Whaling, but Mickey can talk about fungus (and often does) and make its life cycle sound like a wonderful 19th-century novel.
If only Heidi had come.
The Vanity Fair article about her says a lot of her friends have deserted her.
So she needs some ways to fill her evenings.
Will she have to go to jail?
Maybe it will be a growth experience and she'll study law there, or Yankee Whaling, or help incarcerated mothers, the way Jean Harris did, while Charlie Sheen and Robert Evans just keep going to shallow Hollywood parties and exposing themselves to secondhand cigarette smoke.
Who says prostitution laws are unjust?
Saturday.
Walked on the beach.
Mickey pointed out garnets and red seaweed, which is used to make agar, a sponge, star coral and a long spiny thing with a row of little packets that he said was a case for whelk eggs.
Each little packet contains lots of tiny whelks.
One of them sticks its stomach out of its shell and eats up its siblings.
All the empty little shells are left behind.
Maybe Vanity Fair should do a piece on whelks.
Maybe Heidi should call Elizabeth Taylor.
Liz is also loyal.
Maybe she'd join the gym.
Sunday.
So cold the tide pools were frozen.
Rocks covered with an icy glaze.
Saw one harbor seal, a gannet, some mergansers.
Decided not to worry about Heidi anymore.
She wouldn't like it.
No culture of victimization for her!
It was Heidi herself who said, "Every man was taken advantage of" about those who paid $3,000 for sex, and I think she may have a point.
Drove home into the sun, tired but eager for the Tikkun Conference next weekend.
"Recent attempts to construe women as sexually passive and in need of much public protection," the flier says, "and detailed guidelines for men about acceptable sexual behavior has stimulated an important debate about the relationship between private life and public concerns." Heidi, you have already contributed so many important insights to this debate.
See you there!


IN SHORT: FICTION
WORLD WAR II NOVEL  LOVE AND INFAMY  By Frank Deford. Viking, $24.


Swept Away by the Hit Man's Daughter
PRIZZI'S MONEY By Richard Condon. 241 pp. New York: Crown Publishers. $20.


Whitman Challenges The Teachers
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman challenged the New Jersey public school teachers' union today with a recertification proposal that would attack teacher tenure and with a tuition-voucher plan for a troubled urban school district.
Her challenge to the all but unshakable tenure granted to public school teachers and to the state's support for public school financing is the first major political fight for Mrs.
Whitman since she became Governor three weeks ago.


Harbor Carte
HUDSON RIVER CLUB ** (212) 786-1500; 250 Vesey Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Amid blond paneling, fabric-covered banquettes and Hudson Valley School paintings, this handsome restaurant offers sweeping views of New York Harbor.
The American fare by Waldy Malouf, the chef, is seductive.
To begin, there is pumpkin-apple soup with bacon and cinnamon croutons or sea scallops with rosemary and a warm potato salad.
Entrees range from grilled venison with chestnut and celery root puree to roasted aged pheasant with riesling wine sauce and cranberries. (Review: 2/16/90; revisited: 1/21/94)


SCHOOLS NOMINEE WITHDRAWS NAME
The corporate executive picked by Gov.
Pete Wilson of California to run the state's public school system has withdrawn his candidacy, citing partisan politics and intense opposition from professional educators.
The executive, Sanford C. Sigoloff, had won national recognition in the 1980's as an executive who turned around failing corporations like the Wickes Companies, a retailing and building-supply conglomerate.
In November he was nominated by Mr.
Wilson to serve out the last year of a four-year term as the Superintendent of Public Instruction.


Looking Up at the Libraries: A Guide
NEW YORK CITY'S public libraries are poised to celebrate a great victory: Come spring, most of the more than 200 branches will be open six days a week.
This may not seem all that extraordinary.
But the open doors will represent a significant rise from years of not-always-genteel poverty, the first time since the 1940's that so many libraries have stayed open for so long.


The Clinton Difference? Not Much in the Budget
The budget President Clinton will send to Congress on Monday, the first to be prepared by a Democratic Administration in 13 years, varies only slightly from what a Republican President would have submitted.
Mr.
Clinton will indeed ask for a little more money for the kinds of programs Democrats normally favor, like education and construction of public works.
But Administration officials who worked on the budget calculate that as a practical matter, they had the flexibility to propose changes in barely 1 percent of Government spending: less than $20 billion in a total budget of about $1.5 trillion.


Jan. 30 -Feb. 6; Show of Muslim Solidarity in Sarajevo


White Supremacist Is Convicted Of Slaying Rights Leader in '63
The white supremacist who witnesses said had bragged about killing Medgar Evers three decades ago was convicted of murder today and immediately sentenced to life in prison.
Byron De La Beckwith, 73, had avoided conviction in two previous trials in 1964, when all-white juries deadlocked.
But this time, nearly 31 years after Mr.
Evers, the black civil rights leader, was shot to death outside his house near here, a jury of eight blacks and four whites delivered a unanimous verdict of guilty after six hours of deliberation.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Below-Ground Hunters
IT was as if Captain Kidd was teaching the course.
With buried treasure the subject, 10 students gathered round a small table in the back of a store in East Patchogue and sat mesmerized.
"There's a little treasure hunter in all of us," the instructor, Fred Krupowicz, said.
"And Long Island is Treasure Island."


Students Act as Curators at Manhattanville
THE Hudson River Contemporary Artists, a group formed in 1915, until recently often showed at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers.
The group has lost that home base but is establishing a new one at Manhattanville College here, where an unusual art course is bringing undergraduates together with professional artists.
The course, called Contemporary Gallery Perspectives, is taught by a sculptor and former member of the Hudson River Contemporary Artists, Ann Bavar.
On the first day of the college's second term last month, Ms.
Bavar could be found in a swirl of activity as she and her students hung a new show by the Hudson River group in Manhattanville's Brownson Gallery.
The gallery, a 50-by-25-foot space in the middle of the college's art department, is run by the department's faculty and students.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
BROOKLYN HEIGHTS A Marlboro billboard that blocked views and violated city regulations came down last week, panel by panel, and its frame, according to the Buildings Department, is to follow this week.


Harding Ordered To Appear At Hearing
Hours after a figure-skating panel recommended that Tonya Harding face a disciplinary hearing for possible ethics violations, the United States Olympic Committee positioned itself to rule on Harding's eligibility before the Olympic skating competition begins Feb. 23.
The U.S.O.C. notified Dennis Rawlinson, one of Harding's attorneys, that it may ask her to appear in Norway before its games administration board, which resolves all disputes that have not been settled by the time the American delegation leaves the United States.


Blackford Oakes, One Stand-Up Guy
A VERY PRIVATE PLOT  By William F. Buckley Jr. 272 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


Fighting The Tax Assessor
ALONG with the flu, icy sidewalks and other winter woes that afflict New Yorkers around this time of year should be added the arrival of the tentative property assessments from New York City's Department of Finance.
Mailed out near the end of January, they act as an early warning system for property owners, informing them of their anticipated tax bill for the fiscal year that starts in July.


No Point Guard, No Chance
Before Seton Hall and Georgetown took the floor at the USAir Arena today, the Hoyas beat the Pirates on a dramatic 3-point buzzer-beater in a scene for a movie to be titled "Above The Rim." No such heroics were necessary in the real game as Georgetown improved to 12-6 and 6-4 in the Big East with a 71-51 victory.
Leading by 5 points at the half, the Hoyas ran away early in the second half as Othella Harrington and Robert Churchwell sparked a 20-4 run that gave the Hoyas a 52-31 lead with 11 minutes 52 seconds to play.


When Troopers and Truckers Aren't Good Buddies
AT mid-morning on a cold day in January, truck drivers lined up at the State Police weigh station on Interstate 95 in Greenwich are not a particularly happy lot.
For truck drivers, the ordeal of having their vehicles weighed and inspected for safety violations is an onerous experience, even on a nice day.
On a cold day in winter, with the threat of snow or ice, it is just more dismal and time consuming on a job that values time.
It may also be expensive.
Fines for overweight trucks can run into thousands of dollars.
Even worse, an unsafe truck may be taken off the road until it is fixed.
And the driver may be arrested.


Redmen Hold On To Upset Providence
The world turned right again for St. John's last night.
The Redmen, who had lost eight of their last nine games and had looked pitiful in several, held on against Providence through the tense final minutes and beat the Friars, 73-69, at Alumni Hall.


Habitats/The Beige Palace of Stapleton; Making a Lemon a Peach
ANN WILLIAMS had not smoked in 16 years, but when she started trying to get a mortgage for a huge house on Staten Island that needed work, she started again.
Leaning against her new black stove in the just-completed kitchen, puffing her second cigarette in 30 minutes, she said she had promised everyone she would quit as soon as the family moved in.


POSTINGS: 4 Floors in a Historic District; Interior Design School Moves
The New York School of Interior Design has officially set up shop in the Upper East Side Historic District.
It moved into its new digs at 170 East 70th Street early last month, and classes began Jan. 24.
The East 70th Street building, a 93-year-old four-story Beaux Arts structure built as a carriage house by the architect C. P. H. Gilbert, doubles the space the school had in its old East 56th Street home.


Troupers And Angels
A Wooster Group fete, from its newest sponsor, at the Drawing Center, Jan. 31.


SUNDAY, February 6, 1994; Drink It While You Can
Hot cocoa is having a renaissance, with a growing $200 million market, and new flavors everywhere: Irish creme, Suisse chocolate truffle, orange cappuccino.
But the wild cocoa gene pool may be dwindling out there in the diminishing rain forest.
Scientists at the Cocoa Research Unit at the University of the West Indies in Trinidad are trying to find and preserve cocoa bean genes and are hunting $16 million for an endowment.
Nestle, Carnation, Swiss Miss -- time to help the bean that feeds you.


Sunscreen May Be Skin Cancer Villain
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Mouse Study Raises Doubts About Sunscreens" (Science Times, Jan. 25).


Secretary Bentsen's Trusty 707
To the Editor:
With "Economic Revolution: The 10-Day Tour" (Jan. 23), there was a photo of Secretary of the Treasury Lloyd Bentsen standing in front of his trusted steed, an early Boeing 707 described as the same plane that returned John F. Kennedy's body to Washington from Dallas in November 1963.
The implication was that Secretary Bentsen was traveling in a relic, a throwback to the 1950's that had problems getting to Moscow in a single leap.


RECORD BRIEF
Saint-Saens: Piano Quintet in A minor, 'Le Carnaval des Animaux,' 'L'Assassinat du Duc de Guise' Ensemble Musique Oblique.
Harmonia Mundi France HMC 901472; CD.


A Reader's Guide To Jeeves's Occupation
To the Editor:
Re "The Jeeves of Today Remains Loyal -- to Himself" (The Week in Review, Jan. 23): Jeeves is not a butler.
He is a valet or manservant.
Lord Peter Wimsey's Bunter had the same job.
As sole servants of their employers, Jeeves and Bunter performed some butlerlike tasks, such as ushering in guests, but they were also responsible for laying out clothes for their masters.
Stephens in "Remains of the Day" would not be involved in such intimate matters.


The Executive Computer; Using 'Usability' to Sell Spreadsheets to the Masses
WHEN Borland International Inc. cut the price of its Quattro Pro for Windows spreadsheet last fall to $49 from $495, it expected to pick up a few new users of the product, and so the company went to some lengths to make it easier to use.
But even Borland says it was surprised when market research showed that 41 percent of sales were to first-time spreadsheet buyers.
Of course, Borland's recent publication of that number immediately drew haughty rejoinders from the spreadsheet leaders, Lotus and Microsoft, whose spreadsheets for Windows continue to list for $495 (although in many cases, can be purchased for something closer to $100).


School Vouchers And the Constitution
In the Jan. 2 article "Plan for School Vouchers Seems to Pick Up Steam," Jersey City's Mayor, Bret Schundler, is quoted as saying that "if the parents choose a religious school, that's their First Amendment right."
Well, not exactly.
It is one thing for parents to choose to send their children to religious schools.
It is quite another to do it using taxpayers' money.


Competition, Storytelling And No Trolls
To broadcast the Winter Olympics from Lillehammer, CBS figures it doesn't have to change much from the formula it followed two years ago.
The network liked the 18.7 Nielsen rating it earned in prime time, so why revamp?
The network broke even on its broadcasts from Albertville, France, won the prime-time ratings on 15 of the 16 nights and expects to do at least as well in Norway on its $295 million investment (plus production expenses).
But there will be a few changes.


For Jansen, No Grief, No Hesitation, No Doubt
Four years after the Calgary Games, during which his sister died of leukemia and he fell, not once but twice in races, Dan Jansen went back to the Olympics in 1992, hoping to win a gold medal, but hesitant to make his hopes public.
The pressure seemed to hold him back, as if the very mention of success were likely to bring about failure.


Recovery of Seized Jewish Assets Sought
In a mission both diplomatically sensitive and legally complex, a coalition of Jewish groups is negotiating with Eastern European countries to recover -- or at least receive compensation for -- properties that were seized first by the Nazis and then by the Communists.
Communal and private assets believed to be worth billions of dollars are at stake.


BIATHLON
A combination of cross-country skiing (i.e., intense effort) and small-bore-rifle shooting (i.e., intense concentration) biathlon is a relative newcomer to the Winter Olympics.
Men's competition began in 1960; women's in 1992.
THE SETUP: All skiing techniques are permitted, but everyone uses the skating style.
Both the men and women compete in three events: two individual and one relay.
In the two shorter races -- the men's 10 kilometer and women's 7.5 kilometer -- competitors stop twice, once to fire five shots prone and once to fire five shots standing.
In the longer races -- the men's 20K and women's 15K -- competitors make four stops, firing a total of 10 shots prone and 10 more standing.
All targets are set at a distance of 50 meters.
The standing target is about 4.5 inches in diameter; the prone target about 1.8 inches, which is roughly the diameter of an Oreo cookie.


REJECTED MEXICAN MAKES A COMEBACK
In the ritual world of Mexican politics, there is no death more horrible than the one Manuel Camacho Solis suffered on Nov. 28.
That Sunday, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari buried a dagger in the life's dream of his old friend, then the Mayor of Mexico City.
Passing over Mr.
Camacho as his successor, Mr.
Salinas directed leaders of the governing party to name the less experienced Social Development Secretary, Luis Donaldo Colosio, as their candidate for presidential elections in August.


Philanthropy and Accolades
A benefit for the UJA-Federation, the Waldorf-Astoria, Jan. 31.


What Do Men Want?
To the Editor:
Regarding the men's movement literature, Richard A. Shweder failed to ask what could be not only the most straightforward but also the most telling question: who is actually reading this stuff?
Could it be, typically, mostly women?
Not men at all?
Except for parodists?
SARA JASPER COOK  Peekskill, N.Y.


Jan. 30 -Feb. 6: Dangerous Shortage; The Blood Supply Needs a Transfusion
Donating blood is simple and safe.
But assuring steady supplies of blood is difficult, in part because blood must be used within 42 days.
Blood bank inventories generally are lowest at Christmas and New Year's, and in summer.
But this winter, the a shortage was the worst and longest since World War II, prompting national emergency appeals to which Americans responded.
Last week, inventories increased to a 3- to 5-day supply in most areas, but some still had only a two-day supply as of Friday.
Inventories had dropped to dangerous levels in 40 cities -- less than a day's supply in some.
The national appeals for emergency donations that were issued by the American Association of Blood Banks and the American Red Cross were the first in their history.


Betsy Fishman and Herbert Rosenfeld
Betsy Rachel Fishman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence M. Fishman of Miami, was married last evening to Herbert Lawrence Rosenfeld, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Isadore Rosenfeld of Purchase, N.Y.
Rabbi Seth H. Frisch performed the ceremony at the Biltmore Hotel in Coral Gables, Fla.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received a law degree.
She is an associate at the Boston law firm of Ropes &amp; Gray.
Her father is a professor of medicine at the University of Miami School of Medicine and the chief of endocrinology and associate chief of staff for research at the Miami Veterans Affairs Center.


The Stew of Hate
Religious and racial bigotry never recede entirely, witness the ebb and flow of Klan membership over the past century.
Over a much shorter historical cycle, the candidly racist Nation of Islam has waxed and contracted in the 60 years since Elijah Poole, son of a Georgia preacher, changed his name to Elijah Muhammad and took over leadership of the sect.
Starting in the days when they were known in the white press as the Black Muslims, the group has posed problems for mainstream civil rights organizations.
The Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. criticized their espousal of violence, but he couched that criticism carefully for fear of disrupting black political solidarity.


Data Bank/February 6, 1994
Data Bank/February 6, 1994
Construction Spending
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
2.6
2.1
2.6
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.7
0.5
0.5
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
1.2
1.7
1.2
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.6
0.5
0.7
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.2
0.9
Employment*
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
In thousands
122,000
120,700
120,400
Unemployment/Rate*
In thousands/percent
8,700 (6.7)
8,200 (6.4)
8,300 (6.4)


North Korea's Huge Military Spurs New Strategy in South
While the world is focused on North Korea's program to develop nuclearweapons, an equally serious buildup in conventional troops and equipment in the North has prompted United States military commanders to overhaul their plans fordefending South Korea.
Over the last year, North Korea has used its huge array of artillery andtroops near the heavily fortified border to try to intimidate the United States and its Asian allies from dealing too sternly with it on its nuclear weaponsplans.


Julia T. Bohlen, David G. Perry
Julia Trowbridge Bohlen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Upton Curtis Bohlen of Washington, was married there yesterday to David Goddard Perry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger Adams Perry Jr. of Wellesley, Mass.
The Rev.
Campbell Gillon performed the ceremony at Georgetown Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Perry, 30, is the president of Pacific Strategies Inc., a marketer of environmental technology in Washington.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father, who is retired, was the Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs in the Bush Administration.


Windfall


THE TALES A TABLE COULD TELL
Thatcher Freund, in his delicious article, concludes, "In the life of a thing, there is no safer home than a museum."
Not always.
When I asked the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston for a photo of a 17th-century Japanese screen, part of a collection sent there so that it would be "safely housed forever," I discovered it no longer owned the screen.


. . . And Furthermore
To the Editor:
David Schiff's essay "Schoenberg, Alive (Gasp!) and Well"  [ Jan. 16 ]  quotes me misleadingly.
He quotes what I say about the later Schoenberg in a long sentence from my book "Musical Elaborations" but by chopping it out of context gives a wrong impression of what I mean.
Here is what I wrote (Mr. Schiff's extract is italicized): ". . . Schoenberg, a revolutionary in music and later in life a deeply conservative proto-monarchist Jew, one of whose ethnic/nationalistic works (aside from "Moses und Aron") was a Zionist drama, "Der biblische Weg," based on Theodore Herzl, or rather on his enterprise as reinterpreted by Schoenberg."


Taylor Gave up the Globe for World of Hockey
THEY skate in serpentine trails, in groups of five: faster and faster on the edges, defying gravity, like a kick-line of Radio City Rockettes gone haywire.
Tim Taylor, gray-haired, trim and erect in his USA warm-up suit, exhorts them ever faster as he stands on his skates at the blue line, his players move around him, some falling from exhaustion or unable to keep up.


Under the Louvre, Le Snack
When the Carrousel du Louvre underground shopping mall opened in November, a North American-style concept entirely new to the French was introduced: the food court.
Set on the mezzanine of the Carrousel just off I. M. Pei's upside-down pyramid, the Restorama has settled in the cultural heart of Paris.
Designed by Camdi International, a Canadian company that has installed several food courts in North America, the Restorama was intended to harmonize with the Carrousel's architecture, favoring warm-colored wood, unpolished-metal columns and glass panels.
One wood-paneled wall is studded with video screens showing nature scenes.


Familiar Headline: Irish Upset U.C.L.A.
Notre Dame 79, U.C.L.A. 63
Once again, Notre Dame played a rude host to U.C.L.A.
Monty Williams scored 28 points and Notre Dame roughed up the No. 4 Bruins, 79-63, yesterday for its fifth consecutive home victory against U.C.L.A.


The Executive Life; Can't Stand the Heat? Well, Try the Kitchen
WHILE some executives relax on the golf course or at the opera, others prefer to spend leisure hours in the kitchen.
Not deterred by deepest winter, they sear, saute and simmer away the cares of the office.
Occasionally, they even find business applications for their cooking skills.
Take Ken Nitzberg, president and chief executive of Devon Capital Management, a real estate investment advisory firm in Emeryville, Calif.
Mr.
Nitzberg's wife, Joanne, who does not work outside the home, once signed the two of them up for a couples' cooking class as a way of getting him out of the office earlier in the evening.
Mr.
Nitzberg discovered other benefits.
After a high-stress day, cooking is a way to "get all your aggressions out and not go to jail for it," he said.


Sarah Curtis, Lee Hetfield
SARAH CURTIS, 25, and Lee Hetfield, 24, met three years ago when she was a senior at Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass., and he was a junior at the University of Massachusetts, also in Amherst.
She asked him to dance at a semiformal party at Hampshire, where "semiformal" invites everything from thrift-shop gowns to cross-dressing.
Soon, they were sweethearts.
"We went to Sarah's graduation from Hampshire and that's when we met Lee," recalled Sarah-Anne Curtis, an aunt of the bride.
"I rushed off with John, her father, and said, 'Is this serious?' And he said, 'Oh, it'll never work. He's much too nice to her.' But it did work!"


From Homelessness to Basketball
WHEN Donald Taylor, 23, is on the court for the Fairleigh Dickinson University basketball team, he seems like any other carefree athlete his age.
But, unlike most college basketball players, he arrived at his destination in a much more difficult way.
Mr.
Taylor, a 6-foot-2-inch guard for Fairleigh Dickinson who is averaging 8.8 points a game for the Knights, is now living the dream of playing big-time college basketball.
But before realizing that dream, he had to survive a nightmarish childhood in New York City.


Q and A
Apartments in Paris  Q. My husband and I would like to rent an apartment in Paris for one or two weeks.
Could you help us with the names of rental agents? -- Elizabeth Johnson, Virginia Beach, Va.
A.
One useful source of information for names of agents and for individuals renting their own apartments is France U.S.A.
Contacts, a magazine produced every 14 days in Paris and airfreighted on the day of publication to New York.


Protest Aside, Wyoming Coyote Hunt Begins
About 200 hunters spread over tens of thousands of acres of the stark prairie of northeastern Wyoming this weekend to track down and kill as many coyotes as they can.
Bret Taylor, president of the Gillette Chamber of Commerce, said he had organized the hunt in response to ranchers' complaints that coyotes were costing them thousands of dollars a year in lost livestock.


CLINTON PROPOSING $30 BILLION SHIFT IN FEDERAL BUDGET
Hamstrung by overall spending limits set by law, President Clinton will send to Congress on Monday a 1995 budget that will propose cutting more than $30 billion from Government programs to pay for increases for crime prevention, homelessness and other priorities, according to Government documents and Administration officials.
Mr.
Clinton will propose ending some programs and squeezing others, like heating aid for the poor and public housing for the elderly.
At the same time, more money will be sought for programs like job training, education for poor children under Head Start and highway construction.


Death and Domesticity Mix At Trial of 11 Cult Members
For four weeks at the Branch Davidian trial here, the chief prosecutor, Ray Jahn, moved relentlessly to lay out a minutely detailed case, as jurors dozed through a parade of captured firearms and a droning recitation of gun transactions.
But all that changed this week, when Kathryn Schroeder, one of the wives of the Branch Davidian sect's leader, David Koresh, testified for two days about suicide pacts, mercy killings and spiritual beliefs that the 31-year-old mother of four called a theology of death.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
A Big Break ($8 Million) On Winter Heating Bills
The Brooklyn Union Gas Company has announced an $8 million refund to customers that should take some of the bite out of this winter's heating bills.
While refunds are often given after colder-than-normal months, $8 million is particularly high, said Bob Loftus, a company spokesman.
Refunds last year, given for only February and March, were $3.5 million each month.


Bishop's Killing Puts Focus on Persecution in Iran
The funeral this week of a Protestant Bishop believed to be the victim of security forces brought into focus the rise in harassment against religious minorities in Iran.
Bishop Haik Hovsepian Mehr, 49, Chairman of the Council of the Assemblies of God Church, was "silenced," Protestant church members say.


Fewer Jurisdictions Might Lower Taxes
The Q&amp;A about Dr.
Anthony A. Cupaiuolo  [ "Caught in a Maze of Local Government," Jan. 16 ]  struck a chord.
I just moved here from Texas and find the political organization of Westchester bewildering.
Is this why property taxes seem so much higher in Westchester than Connecticut (which has no county governments)?


The World; America Opens the Door To a Vietnam It Never Knew
AN old friend, a Vietnamese diplomat in his 40's, thinks of his life as a definition of cultural dissonance.
A northerner, he remembers French colonial education before 1954, followed by Chinese Maoism and then Soviet Communism, all of which left their colonial residues on his Vietnamese soul.
Now, once again, he admits, shrugging, it's the turn of the smiling, big-handed Americans, whom he fought rather bravely during the Vietnam War.
"For us," he once said, "Chinese is the language of the ancient enemy and brother, from whom we sprang. French is the language of love. Russian is the language of arguments. English is the language of money, the language of our future."
The American war in Vietnam -- which for Vietnamese was only the last, bloodiest and most puzzling chapter of a much longer war for national unification and independence -- had very little to do with the Vietnamese themselves.
The last time the Americans came in earnest it was in the name of ideology, of anti-Communism, domino theories and the rest, which happened to coincide with the moment a young pair of Kennedy brothers felt the need to prove their toughness to the world.


We're All Good Friends Here; A Small State Can't Help It If Its Politics Seem to Be Cozy
THE Governor's wife was a partner in the state's most influential law firm.
Their associate in a real estate venture owned a savings and loan association.
When the S.&amp; L. got in financial trouble, it hired the Governor's wife to plead for a special stock scheme before the state banking regulator, an old friend, whom the Governor had appointed and whose own law firm once provided legal representation to the same S.&amp; L. When the Governor and his wife needed legal advice themselves on the matter, they turned to a law partner of the wife who had gone to kindergarten with the Governor.
That, of course, is what happened in Arkansas when Bill Clinton was Governor, and it is a central element of the Whitewater case that is now under investigation by a special counsel.


A Library, a Refuge
JUST minutes after 3 o'clock on most afternoons, an old flower shop on Third Avenue in East Harlem undergoes a staggering transformation.
Dozens of young children, teen-agers and parents push through the glass door and head for the bookshelves and reading tables in what are now the temporary quarters of the Aguilar branch of the New York Public Library.
The onslaught of the "after-school crowd" is a noisy, chaotic affair.
But it is the sound of victory for Christiana Pinto, Aguilar's head librarian, who has spent more than a decade battling drug dealers, crumbling walls and budget cuts to insure that the little library, one of the few anchors left for this neighborhood, survives.


Profile; From Brooklyn, Around the World, To Mobil's Top Job
Lucio A. Noto, who will soon replace Allen E. Murray atop the Mobil Corporation, is not typical of the men who have risen to the top of international oil giants.
He's the Brooklyn-born son of the leader of a union local comprising mostly Italian immigrants.
He rose through the ranks at Mobil in planning and marketing, rather than winning acclaim with big finds in the exploration division.
And he made his reputation not in this country but overseas.
Little-known at headquarters here until recent years, he was until last year a dark horse in the race to run the $64 billion company that is the nation's fourth-largest.


The 'Nimby' Wars: View From a Backyard
THIS is about a real backyard, not a symbolic "Not in My Backyard" backyard, but a pretty little apron of concrete and chlorophyll outside the glass doors of the first-floor kitchen and dining room of a neat, narrow town house on West 12th Street.
The owners of the backyard, Robert Wagner and Alice Ericsson, bought their house two years ago, days before their first child was born, for $800,000, which, they say, represented their savings and a gamble on their future.
Now, their backyard is a frontier for a local skirmish in one of the basic urban battles of the 90's.


Relaxation Techniques
You're hearby warned.
Getting dressed just got tougher.
Actually it's really simpler, but until you figure out how, it could prove tricky.
Here's what's happened: Unlike other seasons, when men's-wear designers were all over the map with absolutely no consensus about jacket cut, pant legs, or even shirt shape, suddenly harmony reigned.
You've heard the old rumor about how all the food in Chinatown comes from one central kitchen under Mott Street.
Well, this spring, it's as if men's-wear designers in Milan, Paris and New York clandestinely traded recipes and came up with a surprisingly inclusive, comprehensive family dinner -- with a few a la carte items, of course.
The revolution was last year.
This year, men's wear is coming together.
The renegades have taken pity on the diffident.
The traditionalists have taken a deep breath, then let go.
Those who routinely parade around plumed like mummers tried acting naturally, while those that can't handle the rainbow stopped trying.
No one is demanding a complete overhaul anymore, and the unifying word is comfort.
And that is a good thing.


Will the Big 3 Stay on the Road To Success?
WHAT a difference a recovery can make in Detroit.
Only yesterday, it seems, the Big Three chiefs and President Bush flew to Tokyo complaining about "getting our brains beaten in," to use Lee Iacocca's vivid expression.
Today the Big Three, exemplified by Chrysler's stunning turnaround, are selling cars almost as fast as they can build them.
With improved American quality and Japan's higher prices, Detroit's models indeed represent superior value, a claim that is finally holding water.


Love Conquers Wolf
SECOND NATURE By Alice Hoffman. 254 pp. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


Smooth Rides Dayton Style
Chassis Dynamics, an Oxford, Conn., race-car builder, was chosen by Geoff Bodine, the stock-car racer who grew up in Chemung, N.Y., when Bodine decided to do something to help American bobsledders try to win their first medal since 1956 and first gold since 1948.
If the Bo-Dyn sleds, which are much quieter than the European versions and are generally considered easier to drive, turn out to be a big answer to ending the American medal drought, it will be no small coincidence that it was the stock-car branch of American motorsport that produced the sled.
For one thing, stock-car racing, of all forms of motorsports, operates under the strictest technological limits, to control costs and keep the richer teams from buying their way into the winner's circle.
Unlike Indy-car racing, stock-car racers cannot redesign their car or any major piece of it because rule-makers discourage it.


The Flow Of the Future
A rare sighting on the streets of Manhattan: three long black gabardine coats by the Belgian designer Ann Demeulemeester.
It may well be a prophetic look in the design of coats, with the rigid construction of recent times being replaced by a soft fluidity that merges tailoring with dressmaking techniques.
This particular coat is cut in the style of a wrap dress with ribbon ties for closings that two women (above, center and right) tied with the ends loosely flowing, which emphasized the unbroken line of the silhouette.
Another woman (on left and right, shown from the front and the back) preferred to mark the waistline with her ties.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York HOUSE
1.
Emergency Aid: Vote on an amendment to an emergency aid bill that would delete $1.2 billion earmarked for the Pentagon.
Rejected 260 to 158, Feb. 3.


Sarah Woodhall, Alexander Hoffert
Sarah Elizabeth Woodhall, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jonathan A. Woodhall of Bethlehem, Conn., was married yesterday to Alexander Steven Hoffert, a son of Mrs.
Paul M. Shupack of New York and Dr.
Marvin J. Hoffert of Boston.
Marie H. Wallace, a justice of the peace in Litchfield, Conn., performed the ceremony at the Litchfield Inn.
Ms.
Woodhall, 23, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Manhattanville College and is a listings associate at Sotheby's International Realty in New York.
Her parents founded the Woodhall School, a nonprofit school for boys, in Bethlehem.
Her mother, Sally Campbell Woodhall, is the school's director, and her father its director of development.


Dr. Wilbur J. Gould Dies at 74; Throat Surgeon to Famous Voices
Dr.
Wilbur J. Gould, a Manhattan throat specialist whose professional skills enabled the ailing voices of stage and opera stars to rise to Broadway's cry that the show must go on, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Maureen. He was 74.


Collard Greens, With an Italian Twist
COLLARDS are invariably associated with the South and soul food.
Cooked long and slow, these big, sturdy, almost leathery leaves on meaty stalks become mellow and tender, often with a hambone or some pig's feet to enhance the flavor.
The cooking liquid is is known as "pot likker," a flavorful near-soup.
A splash of vinegar nicely balances the taste of the greens.
But collards need not be limited to this.
They are as good cooked just until they wilt as they are stewed slowly, in the more traditional fashion.
These inexpensive greens, sold in bunches of a pound or two, are sweeter tasting than cabbage and more succulent than Swiss chard.
They can be quickly stir-fried and then combined with pasta or mixed into an omelet or served as a side dish.


Russia Won't Bankrupt Itself for Our Sake; Let's Support Research
To the Editor:
Prof.
Jeffrey Sachs, my colleague and neighbor, may be right (Op-Ed, Jan. 23) that now is not the time to give the Government of Russia large-scale economic help.


FIGURE SKATING
Until now, the Olympics were open only to so-called amateur figure skaters.
At the urging of Brian Boitano and others, however, professional skaters have been allowed to regain "amateur" status for Olympic competition.
What this means is that, for the first time, Olympic champions will be competing against each other at these Lillehammer Games.
In the men's competition, for instance, Boitano, the 1988 gold medalist, will skate against Viktor Petrenko of Ukraine, the current Olympic champion.
Katarina Witt, a two-time gold medalist will also return, as will ice dancers Jayne Torvill and Christoper Dean, the 1980 champions.
THE SETUP There are four events at the Olympics, singles for men and women, pairs and ice dancing.


Police Academy Fades Away
The Koch administration announced it in early 1989 as the anchor of an ambitious plan to revitalize the South Bronx.
The Dinkins administration delayed it, because of concerns about its cost.
Now, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has announced that the construction of a new eight-story police academy just southeast of Yankee Stadium at 153d Street and Park Avenue will be scrapped altogether to help close the city's $2.3 billion budget gap.


Daly Is on Hand to Honor Vinnie Johnson
After letting the Detroit Pistons celebrate the retiring of Vinnie Johnson's No. 15 for the entire first and second quarters and a long intermission, the New Jersey Nets ended the festive mood in the Palace by going on a 33-16 surge in the third quarter on the way to a 107-100 victory tonight.
The Pistons' Joe Dumars put on a one-man show scoring 16 of his game-high 42 points in the first quarter after which the struggling 10-35 Pistons had a 30-15 lead.
Lindsey Hunter came off the bench to chip in 10 of his 15 points in the second quarter when the Pistons stretched their lead to its longest of the night, 21 points.


Competition, Storytelling And No Trolls
To broadcast the Winter Olympics from Lillehammer, CBS figures it doesn't have to change much from the formula it followed two years ago.
The network liked the 18.7 Nielsen rating it earned in prime time, so why revamp?
The network broke even on its broadcasts from Albertville, France, won the prime-time ratings on 15 of the 16 nights and expects to do at least as well in Norway on its $295 million investment (plus production expenses).
But there will be a few changes.


Corrections
A recipe for sweet-and-sour pot roast in the food column on Jan. 23 gave incomplete instructions.
A corrected version follows.
1.
Place the meat in a deep bowl, add the white wine and vinegar and allow to marinate six to eight hours.
2. Preheat oven to 350 degrees.
3.
Remove the meat from the marinade, reserving the marinade, and pat the beef dry.
Heat the oil in a heavy three-quart casserole.
Add the beef and brown it on all sides.
Remove the meat from the casserole and add the onions and carrots and cook over medium-low heat until tender and lightly browned.
Stir in the garlic, then add the raisins, ginger, allspice and brown sugar.
Add the stock, the reserved marinade and the tomatoes.
Bring to a simmer, scraping the bottom of the pan.
Stir in the bay leaves and salt and pepper to taste.
Return meat to casserole.
4.
Cover the casserole and place in the oven.
Bake for about two hours, until the meat is tender.
5.
To serve, remove the meat from the casserole and slice it.
Arrange on a platter.
Reheat the sauce and check seasoninings.
Add some or all the lemon juice if the sauce does not seem tart enough.
Spoon some of the hot sauce over the meat and pass the rest.
6.
Alternatively, the meat can be refrigerated overnight in the cooking liquid and the next day the meat can be sliced and the sauce reheated before serving.
This will improve the meat's flavor and texture and allow the layer of chilled fat on liquid's surface to be removed and discarded.
Yield: 6 to 8 servings.


To Close the Budget Gap, Why Not Sell Central Park?
To the Editor:
Having read Jules Feiffer's essay about the possible privatization of WNYC ("I Need Civility, Calm . . . WNYC," Jan. 30), I would like to suggest some other potentially lucrative opportunities for selling city property and closing the budget gap.
Parking spaces.
We give these away or rent them for a pittance.
Why not auction them off to the highest bidders.
The new owners would be responsible for keeping them clean and free of snow, eliminating the need for city street sweepers.
Doing away with meter maids would be a further saving and would also reduce the city's stress level.


On the Lam


In Tough Mood, Britain Pursues Absent Parents
When Gerry Nelson and his first wife divorced five years ago, she got the house and he agreed to pay $150 a month in child support for their daughter and figured the deal was done.
But after Britain overhauled its system of child support last year by taking responsibility for setting and collecting payments, Mr.
Nelson's agreement, like those of thousands of others, is being undone and he will at least have to increase his payments by 100 percent.


U.N. SEEKS POWER FOR BOSNIA STRIKES
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali asked NATO today for authorization to order punitive air strikes against Serbian gun positions around Sarajevo.
He already has the authority to unilaterally request NATO air power to defend peacekeeping troops in Bosnia, but he cannot order punitive attacks.
In a letter today he sought NATO approval to order punitive air strikes if he deems them necessary.
So far he has not requested punitive strikes.


In Land of French Fry, Study Finds Problems
More than 30 years ago, the king of fast food hamburgers and the patriarch of potatoes came together for a meeting that would change the American meal and create a new breed of corporate farmer.
Ray Kroc, founder of the McDonald's nationwide restaurant chain, and J. R.  Simplot, the food processing and chemical magnate in Idaho, forged a deal to make perfect french-fried potatoes -- upright, bright, cheap and free of molds.
They would look the same whether they were sold on the Jersey Shore or in a drive-through in Idaho.


Review/Dance; Monte Troupe Experiments With Making Visions Real
Elisa Monte and David A. Brown set dancers swirling.
Their choreography for the Elisa Monte Dance Company at the Joyce Theater abounded in curving patterns and flowing lines.
Both choreographers know a multitude of ways in which dancers can embrace or carry one another.
Despite all this activity, the offerings on Tuesday night were oddly insubstantial.
A discrepancy between intention and actuality was especially apparent in the collaboratively choreographed "Vejle/Border Crossing," a premiere to a recording of "Chrysanthemums," a composition for strings by Puccini.
"Vejle," the program note said, is the Danish town in which this duet for Christian Canciani and Ted Thomas was created.


In San Jose, Knight-Ridder Tests a Newspaper Frontier
The newspaper of the future may -- or may not -- be here.
Last May, The San Jose Mercury News started a series of electronic services available by computer, telephone and fax.
It calls them electronic extensions of the newspaper -- on-line copies of the contents of the newspaper, news updates, news conference transcripts, electronic "chats," movie theater schedules and more.


Bridge
Partners who have devoted many hours of work to develop sophisticated bidding styles gain some advantage over less-determined rivals.
One form of team play, popular in Britain, sharply diminishes this advantage: the players are required to play with each other team member in turn.
The only American event in which this rule applies is the Betty Kaplan Teams, which was played Saturday at the Greater New York Bridge Association's Newcomers Sectional tournament at the Ramada Hotel, Seventh Avenue and 32d Street in Manhattan.
The winners were Adam Wildavsky and Ann Raymond, both of Jackson Heights, Queens; Michael Massimilla of Manhattan, and Steve Nellissen of Ramsey, N.J.


Clintons' Whitewater Investment: Details of a Land Deal That Soured
The Ozark air smelled of easy profits on Aug. 2, 1978, when Arkansas's hottest young politician walked into a tiny bank here and set in motion what has become one of the most closely examined sets of financial transactions in the state's history.
At age 32, Bill Clinton was in the midst of the campaign that a few months later would make him the nation's youngest governor.
With a meager salary, few assets and no business experience, he was scarcely in a position to ride a land boom, even one that seemed to promise lucrative returns at low risk.


Eyes of Met Board Find New Titling Highly Readable
In the eight months since the Metropolitan Opera announced that it was working on an experimental titling system that would provide translations of operas on computer screens mounted on the backs of seats, the company has kept its progress shrouded in secrecy.
But late last month the Met invited its board to look at a working prototype of the system, which was designed and largely built by the house's technical staff.
Both Bruce Crawford, the president of the Met, and Joseph Volpe, the general director, said the response to the demonstrations was overwhelmingly positive, even among those board members who object to titling on the grounds that it dilutes the experience of opera.
But a perfected system is not expected to be in place before the 1995-96 season.


Sterling Software reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


O for a Usable Map
To the Editor:
This country has never produced good detailed road maps.
Britain, France, Italy, Germany and others have excellent maps at all usable scales, even showing foot paths.


Review/Television; A Long Look at Sports As a High-Stakes Game
In the course of calling attention to some fouls of professional sports, "Power Plays" also demonstrates how a promising encounter can be turned into a routine match.
The six desultory hours begin tonight with basketball and boxing and dribble on over the next two days to football, baseball and hockey.
Despite some juicy examples of big money at play, the narrationless series is less revealing than repetitious, a disappointingly low scorer.
Michael Jordan stars in the opener -- "Be Like Mike" -- not for his athletic wonders but for the success of his handlers in turning him into an all-purpose product plugger.
Among his celebrated enthusiasms: Wheaties, McDonald's, Gatorade, Chevrolet, Farley's Fruit Snacks and, of course, Nike sneakers.
Mr.
Jordan concedes that until signing up with Nike, he played pretty well in footwear by Converse and Adidas.
"It's not the money," explains the man who has made at least $40 million from endorsements.
An even more amusing line comes from the multimillionaire's agent, David Falk, who says earnestly that if anything, his client is being underpaid.


Not So Super Superfund
It is hard to think of a government program with a wider gulf between ambitions and results than Superfund, the program enacted in 1980 to clean up thousands of toxic waste dumps across America.
The Clinton Administration now advances a promising plan to redo that law.
With health care on the agenda, Congress may not have the political stamina to address Superfund.
But it should; every day that the present law is in operation represents another day of misdirected resources.
Hastily written by Congress in response to the Love Canal disaster in upstate New York, where 20,000 tons of chemical wastes buried by the Hooker Chemical Company were suspected of causing miscarriages, birth defects and cancer, Superfund has failed on nearly every count.


Review/Music; A Baritone Sings a Story By Schubert
Many, of late, have predicted or flat-out proclaimed the death of the song recital.
The outlook is bleak, to be sure, but the rumors of total demise are at least slightly premature.
The Austrian baritone Wolfgang Holzmair, for one, is alive and well, as he showed at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Friday evening, in a gripping performance of Schubert's great song cycle "Die Schone Mullerin," with Thomas Palm at the piano.
Mr.
Holzmair is a performer of considerable experience.
Although he made his New York debut only a year ago, he was already widely traveled in Europe and had caught the attention of connoisseurs in this country through a series of excellent recordings, including a youthful "Schone Mullerin" of a decade ago on the Preiser label, with Jorg Demus as pianist.


Washington Energy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Legalizing of Casinos Gains in Albany
A long dormant proposal to legalize casino gambling in New York State is gaining broad support in the Legislature, spurred by the wildfire spread and Midas-like success of casinos along the Mississippi River, across the border in Quebec and on an Indian reservation within the state itself.
Supporters say casinos will create jobs, attract tourists and generate millions in tax revenues.
But what is really driving the proposal forward this time is a weakening of the opposition: with casinos sprouting mushroom-like throughout the northeast, it has become more difficult to argue that they are an aberrant industry best isolated in Atlantic City and Nevada.


Ketchum Announces Account Changes
The Los Angeles office of Ketchum Advertising has been awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $23 million to $28 million.
And, Ketchum's New York office has parted ways with a client on an account with billings estimated at $9.5 million.
Pacificare, a division of Pacificare Healthcare Systems in Cypress, Calif., named Ketchum Los Angeles to handle its estimated $15 million to $20 million account, previously at Baxter Stone Advertising in Santa Ana, Calif.
The agency was awarded the account on Friday after a four-month review that also included the Los Angeles offices of Ogilvy &amp; Mather and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi.


Accounts
*
Celebrity Cruises, New York, has consolidated its account at Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, which already handles the company's Celebrity line.
Korey, Kay was awarded the Fantasy Cruises account, previously at Grey Entertainment and Media, New York.
Combined billings were estimated at $15 million. *
Keller's Creamery, Harleysville, Pa., has consolidated its account at Greene &amp; Company, Allentown, Pa., which already handles the Keller's Light butter brand.
Greene was awarded the Hotel Bar and Hotel Bar Light butter brands as well as Keller's dairy products, previously divided among various agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.


Review/Theater: Ricky Jay and His 52 Assistants; An Artful Deceiver Baffles His Audiences
Ricky Jay is an exceptionally easy man to listen to.
His voice, which flows steadily throughout the evening of sleight-of-hand tricks he is performing at the tiny Second Stage Theater, is calm, softly rough-edged, self-amused and distinctly nontheatrical.
For much of his enthralling one-man performance, "Ricky Jay and His 52 Assistants," which has been directed by David Mamet, one has the feeling of being less in a theater than in the apartment of a new, mildly eccentric friend who has brought you up to demonstrate aspects of a beloved hobby.
The wall between performer and audience seems truly nonexistent.


Washington Heights Man Died From Cold
An 88-year-old Washington Heights man found frozen in the snow off the Henry Hudson Parkway on Saturday after being missing for a month died of hypothermia, the New York City Medical Examiner said yesterday.
But it was unclear if the death was accidental or a result of foul play, and a police investigation of the circumstances continued.
The victim, Siegfried Lowenthal, who left his apartment at 255 Cabrini Boulevard, at 187th Street, on Jan. 5 and never returned, had been the object of an extensive search by the police, relatives, friends and residents of Washington Heights, where he had lived for 70 years and was well known.


Repeat in Right Sequence: Lap No. 1, No. 2 . . .
Suzy Favor Hamilton won the women's seven-eighths-of-a-mile race today in the Mobil Invitational indoor track and field meet.
The problem was that it was a mile race, and she inadvertently stopped one lap short.
So while Hassiba Boulmerka of Algeria, the 1992 Olympic 1,500-meter champion, won the mile, as she did Friday night in the Chemical Bank Millrose Games in Madison Square Garden, Hamilton was standing near the finish line.
She was smiling at her blunder, as surprised as anyone else that a 25-year-old Olympian would make a rookie mistake.


New Vietnam Combat: Coke vs. Pepsi
In what seems the realization of the worst nightmare of a generation of dedicated Vietnamese Communists, the Vietnam War has now given way to the opening volleys of the Cola War.
In the first days after a 19-year-old American trade embargo against Vietnam was lifted, most large American consumer products companies are still nowhere to be seen here.
Their people are not yet in place; their advertising campaigns are still weeks away.


Esquire Seeks Rebound As Writer's Magazine
As brash new publications like Details and Men's Health vie to reinvent the genre of men's magazines, Esquire is being even more daring.
It is going back to its roots.
At a time when most magazines are struggling for new ways to remain vibrant in the face of interactive media, CD-ROM's and the charms of cyberspace, Edward Kosner, the new editor in chief of Esquire, wants to re-establish it as a writer's magazine.
He says the magazine that made its name by publishing Hemingway, Fitzgerald, Steinbeck and Nabokov can regain its luster by strengthening its commitment to literature.


Margeotes Fertitta Gets Beverage Job
Adirondack Beverages, a regional beverage company in Scotia, N.Y., that markets flavored seltzers and soft drinks, has selected Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weiss in New York City to handle its account, previously handled in-house.
Initial billings were estimated at more than $2 million; the company plans to expand its product offerings and broaden distribution to markets, including New York City.


Montana Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Liberty Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Happy Returns for Bulls in Phoenix
Suns 89, Bulls 88
This time, the last shot didn't drop.
Scottie Pippen missed from the corner as time expired yesterday, and Phoenix held on to defeat Chicago, 89-88.


CHRONICLE
LIZ TILBERIS , the editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar, has a full appointment book this month.
Tonight, for example, she is to present the award for art direction to Fabien Baron, the magazine's creative director, at the awards dinner of the Council of Fashion Designers of America at the New York State Theater in Lincoln Center.
Next Tuesday, she is to receive a lifetime achievement award at Winternight '94, the annual benefit for the Lighthouse, before 800 people in the Waldorf-Astoria.
In between there are all the routine meetings, luncheons and other obligations of being at the helm of a major fashion magazine.


Castle &amp; Cooke Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Whitewater Origin: Boom That Fizzled
In August 1978, a 32-year-old Arkansas politician with big prospects but little money took out the biggest loan of his life.
He and a banker-developer friend were buying into a land speculation that local businessmen believed promised big money at little risk.
What Bill Clinton got instead, 15 years later, was a special prosecutor appointed to look into a host of questions and charges that have been dogging his Presidency.


Olympians Learn Lessons In Sacrifice
At first, they cavorted on Utah Beach.
The young men who, on Monday, will officially be named the United States Olympic hockey team visited the Normandy beaches today.
And what had been planned by Coach Tim Taylor as a prod to their patriotism and pride somehow became something more by the end of the day -- for him and his players.


World Economies


Alfa Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Navy Has Long Had Secret Subs For Deep-Sea Spying, Experts Say
The United States has for decades operated a fleet of specially equipped submarines whose secret work is to comb deep waters for military intelligence virtually unobtainable by any other means, experts in naval warfare say.
These spy submarines are the Navy's counterpart to reconnaissance satellites, but better in some respects.
Not only can they examine distant objects on the ocean floor, but in some cases they can retrieve or manipulate them.


Sarajevans Mourn and Rage While Life and Death Go On
The hallways of Kosevo Hospital, which on Saturday were streaked with the blood of victims of the worst massacre in Sarajevo's 22-month-old siege, were immaculately washed the first thing this morning as Sabira Abdugrahmanovic leaned against the clean wall sobbing uncontrollably, her grief as fresh as the day.
Her father, Murat Hodzic, 64, was sitting in his apartment this morning when a sniper, firing through the window, hit him in the back of the head.


Romance in the Air


Consumer's Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Recalling an Innovator Of Film Choreography
Twenty years after his death, the choreographer Jack Cole still stirs extreme passions among those most familiar with his pioneering work in Hollywood and on Broadway.
Nonetheless, his name is hardly a household word to a mass public that saw the results of Cole's originality and singular eclectic style: Rita Hayworth vamping through "Gilda" with the elegance of a high-class burlesque queen; Marilyn Monroe and Jane Russell, nondancers but showing plenty of leg in the staircase dance of "Gentlemen Prefer Blondes," and the dynamic fusion of jazz and Indian classical dance in "Kismet" that was Cole's enduring signature.


Slovaks Come Out Loser in Break With Czechs
One year into its independence, Slovakia's dour economic and political mood stands in sharp contrast to the brighter trends on the other side of the border in the Czech Republic.
With higher unemployment and inflation and even poorer growth than in the Czech Republic, Slovaks are beginning to see that they got the worse part of the bargain when Czechoslovakia split in two on Jan. 1, 1993.


Three Young Turks choose an old pro to help give their creative work new life and attract business.
THE thirty-something principals of a young agency are turning to a fifty-something creative talent to help spur additional growth.
Ryan &amp; Partners, a small New York shop, has hired Neil Drossman, a copywriter known for humorous campaigns for products as disparate as cat food and carpets.
Mr.
Drossman, 53, has become an executive vice president and co-creative director as well as an equity partner in the agency, which is being renamed Ryan Drossman &amp; Partners.


Why the Military Needs Milstar Satellites
To the Editor:
You argue in "The Pentagon's Pterodactyl" (editorial, Jan. 21) that a high-capacity commercial communications satellite can do the job of Milstar.
The Defense Department uses a combination of dedicated military and commercial satellites for its communication needs.
These needs range from general traffic through must-get-through-at-all-costs messages, which control battlefield operations and risk the lives of our forces.


Johnny Miller, a Sand Blast From the Past, Wins
There is always something of an unreal sense here at Pebble Beach, a sort of vaguely mystic quality to the golf and the surroundings.
But old Pebble Beach has never been as mysterious and dreamlike as today when, out of the mists of time, a retired golfer stepped up and won the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
Johnny Miller, 46, playing in just his fifth tournament since 1990, reappeared today like some specter from another era.
He then beat his nerves and he beat Tom Watson down the stretch to capture his first tournament victory since he won right here seven years ago.


Donors Repay Kind Fates With Gifts to the Neediest
Late last year George S. Cole of Elmhurst, Queens, was informed that the company where he had worked for 24 years was phasing out his division.
At the age of 50, he faced the daunting prospect of trying to find another job.
"Very fortunately for me, and unlike so many others facing a similar situation, I did manage to find another position elsewhere in the company," he wrote in a recent letter to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"The fates have indeed been kind this year."


The War Is Over
It will surprise many people with whom I have worked on behalf of missing servicemen from the Vietnam War that I applaud President Clinton's decision to lift trade sanctions against Vietnam.
The veterans' groups that have criticized the President should be aware that commencing trade with Vietnam can help the P.O.W./M.I.A. cause.
Yesterday's announcement that Hanoi will release the remains of additional American soldiers is a promising first step.
In July 1993, Mr.
Clinton indicated four areas in which Vietnamese assistance in the search for missing Americans was needed.
An intensive diplomatic effort, with Vietnamese cooperation, has achieved significant progress in all four:


Walter Havighurst, Writer and Teacher, 92
Walter Havighurst, a retired professor at Miami University in Ohio whose works of fiction and nonfiction were largely about the Midwest, died on Thursday at his home in Richmond, Ind.
He was 92.
The immediate cause was unclear, said a niece, Ruth Neff of Richmond, but he had Alzheimer's disease.


Universal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sunrise Medical Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Where Three-Strikes Plan Takes Us in 20 Years; Encouraging Murder
To the Editor:
Bill Clinton, Mario Cuomo and other shortsighted politicians clambering aboard the "three strikes" bandwagon (news article, Jan. 25) are going to kill the very crime victims they are trying to protect.


Review/Dance; Applying Zen To the Art Of Movement
Sun Ock Lee attempted to lead her audience into a state of spiritual enlightenment in "Zen Dance: Lotus V," which her Zen Dance Company performed on Thursday night at St.
Mark's Church.
The aroma of incense filled the space.
Throughout the production, which lasted slightly more than an hour, slides of shrines and sacred Buddhist statues were projected on the walls and ceiling of the church's sanctuary.
The accompaniment included compositions by Raphael Mostel and recordings of Buddhist chants.
The dancers also chanted and played percussion instruments.


U.S. Airlifts 46 Sarajevo Wounded to Germany
Dozens of people wounded in a mortar attack on a crowded Sarajevo street market on Saturday began a long journey to recovery today, traveling by air and road to a United States military hospital here as part of the war's largest single medical evacuation.
Two United States Air Force C-130 cargo planes and a Russian-built Ilyushin aircraft chartered by the International Committee of the Red Cross flew 46 wounded patients along with 79 members of their families from Sarajevo to the United States air base at Ramstein.
The C-130's, flown by the 435th Air Wing based at Rhein-Main Air Base near Frankfurt, touched down at about 8 P.M. after a two-hour flight.


Review/Theater: X Train; A Long Trip by Subway Into Surrealistic Depths
Harold Dean James's play "X Train" follows a middle-class black man in his 30's on an extended subway ride from Coney Island to Queens by way of Manhattan.
A soundtrack of subway sounds and the playwright's evocative videography in which the New York cityscape flashes by outside the car windows lend the production a rich urban atmosphere.
So do the performances by a dozen actors playing a cross section of New York riders who enter and leave the car at regular stops.
In the opening scene the central character, Joshua Hudson (Jesse N. Holmes), banters with the audience, shows off his Bill Blass suit and tells bad jokes about John and Lorena Bobbitt.
Next he presents a witty fantasy of subway euphoria in which a bunch of normally grim commuters burst out of their defensive shells and become hysterically convivial.
The party culminates in an impromptu wedding.


Ewing Stifles Magic's O'Neal
The Knicks played yesterday afternoon's game with an attitude -- a winning attitude.
When Shaquille O'Neal caught the ball in the low post, the Knicks' defense surrounded him as if he had a winning lottery ticket.
And Patrick Ewing's rivalry with O'Neal brought out the best in Ewing, who had 32 points and 9 rebounds and outplayed O'Neal before a capacity crowd at Madison Square Garden in a nationally televised game.


U.S. Envoy in Dublin Offers to Help North's Protestants Get Hearing
Jean Kennedy Smith, the American Ambassador to the Irish Republic to the south, has offered to help prominent Protestant politicians here get a hearing in the United States for their belief that Northern Ireland should remain part of the United Kingdom, a senior Ulster Unionist Party official said today.
His statement was confirmed by the American Embassy in Dublin.
Such action, reaching across the border to the British province, which is officially under the purview of the American Embassy in London, appears to go beyond the bounds of Mrs.
Smith's job.


Lucian Freud Work As a Late Arrival
Lucian Freud hasn't slowed down since the Metropolitan Museum of Art opened an exhibition of his work on Dec. 16.
Last week, in fact, Mr.
Freud took the unusual step of delivering his latest painting to the Met so that it could be added to the show.
The work is "Naked Portrait," a 52-inch-square painting of Nicola Bateman sprawled nude on a dark leather couch.
Ms.
Bateman, who works with Leigh Bowery, the artist's favorite model, appears in two other paintings in the exhibition: "And the Bridegroom" and "Evening in the Studio." Mr.
Freud's newest painting is one of the few in the exhibition that depict a figure captured as if in motion.


Panel Lists Recommendations for New Nassau Legislature
Nassau County would have a part-time legislature whose members hold two-year terms and make an initial salary of $39,500 a year under a proposal adopted by a commission to revise the county government.
But the commission has yet to come to grips with the key issue in its revision, which was ordered last spring by a Federal court: creating legislative districts that comply with the constitutional principle of one person, one vote.


Police to Carry More Rounds For Semiautomatic Weapons
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton announced yesterday that he was authorizing officers to carry additional rounds in the 9-millimeter semiautomatic handguns being phased in by his department.
The announcement by Mr.
Bratton, providing for a magazine of 15 rounds rather than 10, removed a limit imposed by his predecessor when the Police Department introduced the semiautomatic weapon last year.
The 10-round magazine was preferred by Raymond W. Kelly, then the Commissioner, to address concerns that officers in stressful situations would empty their guns and possibly wound bystanders.


Cracks in Haiti's Military Widen, Aiding Efforts to Restore Aristide
For the first time since international sanctions were reimposed on Haiti in October, serious tensions have increased in the military, and this could help efforts to restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President, diplomats and Haitian political experts say.
The tensions are underscored by a rivalry between the country's two most powerful military officers, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and Lieut.
Col.
Michel Francois, who have strongly disagreed on how to resolve a political crisis that began with the ouster of Father Aristide in September 1991, the diplomats and political observers said.


Control Data Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Istanbul Journal; In Vastly Changed World, Patriarch Sees Chances
From his vantage point above the often-smoggy waterway called the Golden Horn, Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew, spiritual leader of the world's 270 million Orthodox Christians, surveys a world that sometimes seems just as murky.
His patriarchate -- dappled with rare crosses in a city whose myriad minarets betoken another faith -- has been stoned.
Christian graves have been desecrated.
Adversaries have accused him of building a "second Vatican" at the heart of a country that, though secular by law, is overwhelmingly Muslim.


Political Memo; Perot's Shadow Leaves Group's Outlook Uncertain
Once again, Ross Perot proudly declared today that his organization, United We Stand America, was redefining from the grass roots how Government should work.
"You've heard me say a hundred times," the Texas billionaire said, "I'm incidental to this organization."
But the group's state leaders spent the weekend here behind closed doors, struggling about how to define themselves and whether that means moving away from Mr.
Perot's shadow.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Many employers have turned to open-ended H.M.O.'s, having found in them a way to tame rising health care costs while giving employees freedom to choose their own doctors and hospitals.
These point-of-service plans have gone from a little-used option to become the nation's fastest-growing type of health plan.  [ Page A1. ]


Reversal of Misfortune: Diller Takes On (Gasp!) Shea Stadium
As the one-time head of Madison Square Garden Sports Group, Jack Diller surely saw more than his fair share of circus acts.
And athletes broken of spirit and body after boxing matches in the Felt Forum.
And surely no team epitomized the frustration of near-misses in hockey championship runs more than the Rangers.
Perhaps that is why Fred Wilpon and Nelson Doubleday ultimately decided that Diller was just the person to close out the circus that has been the New York Mets, to fix the ball club's broken and battered image and help end its losing ways.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 PRESSURE FOR ACTION IN BOSNIA
President Clinton said there would be no immediate military retaliation for a mortar attack that killed 68 people in a Sarajevo marketplace, and he urged the country's warring factions to make peace.
But his comments seemed to run against a growing sentiment in Congress and in Europe for military action.
A1


In a Land of Miniatures, No Repair Is Too Small


Chemed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Always Tonya Harding
As a little girl, Tonya Harding was all guts and gusto, a fearless figure skater.
Twenty years later, not much has changed.
SportsMonday, C1.
Joseph Cotten Is Dead
The Broadway and Hollywood actor, best known for his work with Orson Welles in "Citizen Kane" and "The Third Man," was 88.
Page B8.
The Perot Mission
Ross Perot's organization has its people in place, but at a weekend meeting, members were still trying to decide just what to do.
Page A12.
On the Electronic Doorstep
The San Jose Mercury News is offering what it calls electronic extensions of the newspaper, with computer, telephone and fax services.
Page D1.


The Tourist Athlete Gets Snowed Out of These Games
Bonnie Blair is back.
So are Nancy Kerrigan, Viktor Petrenko, Marc Girardelli and, for all those who never enjoy a dull moment, Alberto Tomba.
With a one-time-only gap of two years between these Winter Games and their predecessors in France, plenty of yesterday's heroes have postponed the inevitable for a shot at today's glory.


Haverty Furniture Cos. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nets See More Robinson Than They Can Stand
Although John Lucas, the San Antonio coach, had already told the news media exactly how he felt about David Robinson, he peeked over the gaggle of reporters interviewing the 7-foot-1-inch center after tonight's 104-102 overtime victory to say it one more time: "David, you're the best in the business."
Robinson certainly was the best player on the court tonight.
He scored a game-high 36 points, grabbed 12 rebounds and made the 2 free throws that provided the winning margin with 4.1 seconds left in overtime.


Treasury's Schedule Offers Major Auctions This Week
The Treasury will hold several major auctions this week.
The schedule begins with with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Tuesday, there will be an auction of 3-year notes, and on Wednesday, 10-year notes will be sold.
A sale of 30-year bonds is scheduled for Thursday.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.20 percent and a six-month bill was at 3.36 percent.
In when-issued trading, the three-year bill was being offered at a rate to yield 4.77 percent; the rate for the 10-year note was 5.85 percent and the 30-year bond was at 6.36 percent.


Awards Are Planned For Health Care Ads
An international awards competition for health care communications is being introduced by the New York Festivals, an organization in Chappaqua, N.Y., that presents annual prizes in advertising categories including broadcast commercials and print advertisements.


National Sanitary Supply Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Woman and Infant Killed In Fire Intended for Another
Nursing a jealous grudge and armed with a can of gasoline, a Queens man set out yesterday for revenge against his brother for dating his former girlfriend, but instead killed a woman and her infant daughter by setting fire to the brother's Long Island City apartment building, officials said yesterday.
Flames roared through the three-story brick building at 29-05 Broadway, near 31st Street, at 3:20 A.M., filling the building with overpowering heat and choking smoke and turning the stairwell, the only escape route for nine people on the third floor, into a deadly inferno.
Firefighters rescued four adults and three children, using ladders to pluck several from a balcony, but they were unable to save Elmelia Roldan, 27, and her 2-month-old daughter, Elizabeth.


This Saturday-Night Show Was a Bit Different


Foiled on Early Bids, Islanders Go Quietly
During warm-ups before the third period, Islanders goalie Ron Hextall stared at the ice.
Even the intermission music failed to inspire.
His teammates skated past -- in the usual small circle -- and a few gently tapped him in the shin pads, in support, or perhaps in sympathy.
Hextall's 20-plus victory season from a year ago is quickly fading into memory.
There's another goalie, Jamie McLennan, on the bench with two straight victories.
No, veteran goalies on winning streaks don't need love taps on the pads.
Goalies who give up four goals in two periods do.


Storm Warnings on Health Care
President Clinton's health care bill was roughed up several times last week.
Splashy opposition came from three business groups.
But the more damaging blow came from the state governors, who adopted principles strikingly different from the President's.
Debate is raging at two levels.
There is dispute over purpose: Should every American be guaranteed coverage?
And there is dispute over architecture: How should health care institutions be configured?
The President promised to veto any plan that fails to provide universal coverage, but will negotiate over architecture.
He learned last week that two powerful constituencies have not accepted either part of the bargain.


METRO DIGEST
DEATH OF A LEGEND: SHEA &amp; GOULD
For a change this year, Milton S. Gould, the 84-year-old paterfamilias of the law firm Shea &amp; Gould, decided to wait out the winter in a pastel house with a pool and a dock in Naples, Fla.
And that is where he was last week, reeling from a bitter blast from New York: while he was on vacation, the partners in the scrappy law firm that bore his name voted it out of existence.
A1.


Mandela, Campaigning, Brings Hope and Rebuke
Nelson Mandela had watched a cow being artificially inseminated.
He had cuddled some children and kicked a soccer ball for photographers.
He had reveled in the intoxicating pandemonium of a star-struck black township.
Now it was time for the candidate to meet white voters, and the conventions of this Western-style political campaign seemed to call for an hour or two of gentle courtship.


Canadian Tire reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


An End to a Law Firm That Defined a Type
For a change this year, Milton S. Gould, the 84-year-old paterfamilias of the law firm Shea &amp; Gould, decided to wait out the winter in a nice pastel house with a pool and a dock in Naples, Fla.
And that is where he was last week, reeling from a recent bitter blast from New York: While he was on vacation, the partners in the scrappy law firm that bore his name voted it out of existence.


If Players Don't Sleep Now, They May Miss Out Later
In the fast-moving world of college basketball, a wink of an eye can mean a lot.
Bryan Caver, the Seton Hall point guard, took too many winks -- he said he overslept and missed a class -- and thereby incurred a mandatory suspension for the game against Georgetown at Landover, Md., on Saturday.


In Rate Move, Fed Tries to Address Fear of Future
Behind the Federal Reserve's decision to raise interest rates on Friday -- and its precedent-shattering decision to announce the move -- lies a striking phenomenon: despite years of slowing inflation, the American people do not believe that prices will stay fairly stable and that interest rates will stay low.
The evidence for this sentiment can be found not in polls but in the decisions that millions of Americans make on consumer credit every year.
Consider home loans.
Four-fifths of all home buyers take out fixed-rate mortgages, even though such loans have interest rates nearly twice as high as those for one-year adjustable-rate mortgages.


American Business Products reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


E.P.A. Critics Get Boost in Congress
Antiregulation forces in Congress have won their first big skirmish of the year, derailing a bill to elevate the Environmental Protection Agency to a Cabinet department.
The House vote on Wednesday sent a clear signal that environmental legislation this year will have to run a Congressional gantlet of provisions intended to ease the burden of regulations on industries, private property owners, and state and local governments.


Formal Ruling On Paramount
The Delaware Supreme Court handed down a 51-page formal opinion late Friday in which it described the basis for its initial ruling on Dec. 9 that favored QVC Network Inc. in the battle with Viacom Inc. to acquire Paramount Communications.
In its opinion, the court elaborated on its conviction that Paramount, by agreeing to sell control to Viacom, had essentially put itself up for sale.
Paramount's lawyers had argued that the company was entering into a long-term alliance with Viacom and was thus not obligated to consider other takeover offers seriously.


Abroad at Home; The End of Pretending
In one bloody moment the hypocritical facade of President Clinton's empty policy on Bosnia crumbled.
The mortar shell that killed 68 people as they shopped in Sarajevo's market Saturday brought an end to the pretense that America had a meaningful policy.
Mr.
Clinton inherited a Bosnian horror from European appeasers and President Bush.
After a weak show of wanting to act he essentially withdrew from the problem, hoping Americans would forget it.


Newmont Gold Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Green Forest reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Earthquake Coverage, With Electronic Extras
The Los Angeles earthquake was the kind of story that tested all forms of journalism.
At The San Jose Mercury News, that included the newest form: the electronic extension of the newspaper.
For some planners of Mercury Center, as the newspaper's electronic arm is known, the earthquake was an opportunity to turn theory into practice -- and, perhaps, to help establish precedents for the kinds of coverage newspapers can provide for important events.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Louisville Rolls On  The freshman guard DeJuan Wheat scored 21 points and led an early second-half run that carried No. 9 Louisville to its eighth straight victory, 78-62, over Vanderbilt yesterday in Louisville, Ky.
Louisville is 18-2 over all, and Vanderbilt dropped to 10-8. (AP) Kansas 94, Nebraska 87: In Lawrence, Kan., Steve Woodberry made a 3-pointer and then slammed home the first dunk of his career in the final two minutes as No. 3 Kansas (20-3, 5-2 Big Eight) turned back Nebraska (12-6, 2-4) to hand the Cornhuskers their fourth straight loss.
The Jayhawks are the first Division I team to win 20 games this season. (AP) Purdue 87, Iowa 78: In Iowa City, Glenn Robinson scored all of Purdue's points in a 13-4 second-half run and finished with 34, leading the No. 8 Boilermakers (18-3, 6-3) to the Big Ten victory over Iowa. (AP) No. 1 Penn State Women Win: In State College, Pa., Jackie Donovan made two free throws with 20 seconds left to lead No. 1 Penn State past No. 8 Iowa, 63-61, in a women's game.
Donovan scored only 6 points for the Lady Lions (18-0, 9-0 Big Ten). (AP) GOLF  It's Norman by a Stroke  Greg Norman, too sick to even lift a club the day before competition began, won the Johnnie Walker Classic yesterday in Phuket, Thailand, by one stroke over Fred Couples.
Norman, who said he incurred a lung infection while playing in the Dubai Classic last month, finished with a four-under-par 68 yesterday for a 277 total on the 7,049-yard, par-72 Blue Canyon Country Club course.
"Beware of a sick golfer," Norman said.
He took over the world's top ranking from Nick Faldo, who failed to make the cut. (AP)
Trevino Wins Playoff: Lee Trevino won a sudden-death playoff in Key Biscayne, Fla., after Kermit Zarley pulled his drive into a lake on the fourth extra hole of the Royal Caribbean Classic. (AP)
FOOTBALL  Hebert Lifts N.F.C.
Bobby Hebert, a late replacement for the injured Troy Aikman in the Pro Bowl, engineered a pair of second-half scoring drives yesterday to lift the National Conference to a 17-3 victory over the American Conference in Honolulu.
The Atlanta Falcons' quarterback completed 4 of 6 passes for 68 yards, including a 15-yard touchdown pass to Cris Carter of the Minnesota Vikings 1:19 into the final quarter.
Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason, operating in a no-huddle offense, guided the A.F.C. to the field goal by Pittsburgh's Gary Anderson.
Tight end Brent Jones of the San Francisco 49ers broke his right ankle in the first half.
He will be able to begin working out again in six to eight weeks, which means he should be ready far in advance of training camp. (AP)
SKIING  German Wins Super-G
Hilde Gerg showed why she is a rising star on the German team yesterday in Sierra Nevada, Spain, with a surprising World Cup victory in the Super-G.
The 18-year-old Gerg, the youngest member of the German team, recorded her first World Cup victory with a half-second decision over Isolde Kostner of Italy. (AP)
Tomba Warms Up With Victory: Alberto Tomba warmed up for the Lillehammer Olympics with a World Cup victory in the slalom in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany.
In the final slalom before the Games, the Italian won by more than a second over Tomas Fogdoe, covering the two runs in 1 minute 32.47 seconds. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  2 Victories for Runner  Joel Mascol of Wingate turned in two impressive performances yesterday in the Public Schools Athletic League Brooklyn indoor championships at the West 168th Street Armory.
The 18-year-old senior from St.
Vincent's in the Windward Islands group won the 55-meter dash in 6.2 seconds, tying the P.S.A.L. indoor record, and the 300 meters in 34.6 seconds, 11th best on the career New York State list.
Boys and Girls captured the Brooklyn team title with Rohan Hepburn leading the Kangaroos with firsts in the 1,000 (2 minutes, 32.2 seconds, second fastest in the United States this year) and 1,600 (4:28.8).
In the Bronx P.S.A.L. meet at the same site, Rob Overby won two events, the 55 meters (6.3 seconds) and 300 (36.6 seconds), to pace DeWitt Clinton to the team title.
Seton Hall Wins Team Title: Flirtisha Harris led Seton Hall to its fourth consecutive team title in the Metropolitan Intercollegiate women's championship at Seton Hall's field house yesterday.
St.
John's was a close second, scoring 22 points in the final event, the heptathlon, to finish with 136 points to Seton Hall's 141, and Manhattan was third with 128.
Harris, a Seton Hall senior, won the 55-meter dash in 6.94 seconds 0.01 off her meet record, lowered her own meet record in the 200 meters to 24.04 seconds and anchored the Lady Pirates' 4x400-meter team to victory with a 54.6 carry.
Senn and Wells Win Titles: Carol Senn won the women's title and John Wells the men's crown yesterday in the Metropolitan Athletics Congress-Chemical Bank pentathlon championships at Fordham University.
Senn tallied 3,189 points on the track and in the field, while Wells garnered 2,783.
The high school winners were Tonneda McBride of Curtis, Staten Island, with 1,956 points, and Rodrigo Neiva of Edison, Queens, with 2,882.
AUTO RACING  New Cars Defeated  The new built-for-racing World Sports Cars were soundly beaten yesterday in the season-opening Rolex 24 Hours in Daytona Beach, Fla., a race dominated by production-based race cars.
The winner in the 24-hour race at Daytona International Speedway was a Nissan ZX300, co-driven by Paul Gentilozzi, Scott Pruett, Butch Leitzinger and New Zealander Steve Millen. (AP) TENNIS  Graf Routs Navratilova  A week after winning the Australian Open, Steffi Graf overwhelmed Martina Navratilova, 6-2, 6-4, yesterday in the championship of the Pan Pacific Open in Tokyo.
Graf, 24, made 82 percent of her first serves at speeds of up to 104 miles an hour.
Navratilova, 37, made only 66 percent.
The tournament was the first this year for Navratilova, who is in her final season in singles competition.
Graf evened her record against Navratilova at 9-9. (AP) Gustafsson Prevails: Magnus Gustafsson beat top-seeded Sergi Bruguera, 6-4, 6-2, to win the Dubai Open in United Arab Emirates.
Rosset Wins in Marseilles: Fourth-seeded Marc Rosset of Switzerland won his second consecutive Marseilles (France) Open by beating No. 5 Arnaud Boetsch, 7-6 (8-6), 7-6 (7-4). (AP)


Essay; I Dream of Genie
Five thousand years ago, ancient man invented writing.
Five hundred years ago, Renaissance man invented the printing press.
Fifty years ago, modern man invented the computer.
Five years ago, postmodern man, or person -- by conceiving of all knowledge as a universal salami, sliceable and compressible -- put the world of information at our beck and call.
We have not yet felt the impact of that most recent revolution of communication.
Here's a way to grasp the potential of digitization and compression:


Elderly Angered by Changes For Courses at New School
Some of them make their way to class with the aid of walkers or wheelchairs.
Others who are in their 90's have trouble completing reading assignments in less than two weeks.
But the 550 members of the Institute of Retired Professionals are for the most part enthusiastic students of a daunting variety of academic subjects at the New School, and now they are angry.
What has them upset is a proposal by New School administrators to change an adult learning program that has been jointly sponsored by the institute and the New School for more than 30 years.


Reliance Electric Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Insurers Fear $2.5 Billion in Quake Costs
Insurance companies are expected today to announce losses of $2.5 billion from the Los Angeles earthquake last month.
That loss is only a small part of the total damage, now estimated at $20 billion or slightly less, but enough to make it the third-most-expensive disaster ever for insurers.
Although 5 of the 10 most expensive insurance losses since 1950 have occurred in the last five years, the flurry of claims does not seem to have caused a severe increase in the cost of insurance, except in some coastal areas at risk of hurricanes.
Still, higher prices for insurance to protect homes and buildings in other regions have been widely forecast.


Patents; The Patent Office Takes a Stand on International Patent Policy, But It's Confusing to Many
THE first big international policy announcement to be made during the tenure of Bruce A. Lehman as the Patent Office Commissioner rankled some people, pleased others and left just about everybody scratching their heads.
The Commerce Department, which oversees the Patent Office, issued a news release two weeks ago announcing that for now the United States would retain its system of awarding patents to Americans on the basis of the date of invention, rather than "harmonizing" its patent policy with the first-to-file system used by other industrial countries.
In that system, patents are granted on the basis of the date of application.


CLINTON RULES OUT A QUICK RESPONSE TO BOSNIA ATTACK
Resisting pressure to use force in Bosnia and Herzegovina, President Clinton said today that there would be no immediate military retaliation for Saturday's mortar attack in Sarajevo and urged the country's three warring factions to make peace.
Mr.
Clinton's comments seemed to be running against sentiment in Congress and in Europe for military action.


Sharpton Is Rebaptized As Baptist in Brooklyn
The Rev.
Al Sharpton, who was ordained a Pentecostal minister at the age of 10, was rebaptized as a Baptist yesterday, officially joining the religious tradition of the civil rights advocates he said he reveres and emulates.
Mr.
Sharpton, his wife, Katherine, and their children, Dominick, 7, and Ashley, 6, were among a dozen people baptized during the service at Bethany Baptist Church in Brooklyn.
But many in the congregation made no secret that they had come to see Mr.
Sharpton, a fixture on the political scene who has said he will run for the United States Senate for the second time.


Giuliani Vows to Preserve Hospital Care for Poor
Seeking to reassure critics of his plan to turn over some city hospitals to private control, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would insist that a contractual agreement with any potential buyer of a municipal hospital insures health coverage for the poor.
Mr.
Giuliani has long made clear that he would like any agreement the city reaches with private hospitals or health-care groups to assure care for the indigent.
But Mr.
Giuliani's assurances, on the WABC-TV program "Eyewitness News Conference," were among his most emphatic.


Ryland Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Where Three-Strikes Plan Takes Us in 20 Years; Requires Death Penalty
To the Editor:
The "three strikes, you're out" law will result in a bloodbath for victims and the police unless we back it up with a national and speedy death penalty.
Is this what we really want?


Review/Music; Beethoven and Shostakovich on War
When John Corigliano's Symphony had its premiere a few seasons ago, several critics described the piece -- an angry response to AIDS -- as musical poster art.
One could argue with the implication that symphonic music cannot deal affectingly with immediate issues, but there was some truth in the description.
Musical poster art goes back a long way, as does suspicion about its musical worth.
Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic presented an exhibition of musical poster art on Saturday evening, in a series of concerts that runs through tomorrow evening.
The subject is war and propaganda, and the works at hand are Beethoven's "Wellington's Victory" and Shostakovich's Seventh Symphony, the "Leningrad."


Racketeering Ruling Leaves Some Uneasy
To the Editor:
"When Is Protest Not Protest? When You Call It Extortion" (The Week in Review, Jan. 30) lists Greenpeace as co-signer of a friend-of-the-court brief for respondents in National Organization for Women v.
Scheidler, on anti-abortion protests.
Greenpeace made no submission to the Supreme Court in this case.


Books of The Times; From Gangs to Teams, Against Long Odds
Hardball  A Season in the Projects  By Daniel Coyle Illustrated. 317 pages.
G.
P.
Putnam's Sons. $22.95.
The Cabrini-Green Homes, on the North Side of Chicago, may not be the worst public-housing project in America, as Daniel Coyle observes in his heart-rending book, "Hardball: A Season in the Projects." The project's notoriety has been exaggerated somewhat because of its accessibility to the news media, Mr.
Coyle writes, and because of its proximity to the Gold Coast, which ranks only below the Upper East Side of Manhattan "as the wealthiest city neighborhood in the United States."


WPL Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Report Says Ice Dancer's Brother Had a History of Mental Problems
Ricardo Punsalan, the brother of the Olympic ice dancer, Elizabeth Punsalan, had been released from a psychiatric hospital hours before he was arrested in the stabbing death of their father, according to a published report today.
A spokesman for St.
Joseph's Hospital and Health Center in Lorain, Ohio, said state law prohibited him from confirming or denying the report in The Plain Dealer of Cleveland that Ricardo Punsalan had been a patient at its Hope Center psychiatric unit.


Arkansas Paid for Road That Aided Land's Value
Several months after Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, bought land in the Ozarks, the partners in the company that sold it to them began negotiations that eventually led the state to pave a two-mile road to the company's property, at a cost of more than $150,000.
The road passes about a half-mile from the Whitewater property that the Clintons owned, making both parcels easier to reach, and therefore, real estate experts say, more valuable.


NATO to Hold Emergency Talks on Sarajevo Attack
Western Europe and the United States agreed today to hold an emergency NATO meeting on Bosnia, with France saying the allies should deliver an ultimatum to the Serbs: lift the siege of Sarajevo or face the military power of the West.
As a chorus of horror and indignation rose from European leaders over the mortar shell attack on Saturday on the main Sarajevo market, which killed at least 68 people, Germany issued its strongest statement yet on the Bosnian war, calling for air strikes and condemning "the blood bath among civilians caused by the Serbian besiegers of Sarajevo."


Review/Dance; The Essence Of Being Alone
There were choreographic patterns of great complexity on view on Friday night when Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance presented a program of works by Mr.
Louis at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College.
But the most memorable offering was the American premiere of "Alone," a solo of eloquent simplicity.
Mr.
Louis never moved far from one spot.
By confining himself to only a few points in space, he made the empty stage around him seem a vast void.
Although he kept turning from side to side, as if expecting someone to enter, no one was ever there.
Nor was there anyone to touch when he spread his arms wide.
From time to time as he danced to recorded music by Astor Piazzola, he clenched his fists, then bent over and drummed them quietly on the floor.
Yet he always preserved his decorum and never exploded into rage or grief.
At the end of the solo, he slumped in dejection.


Lieut. Gen. Eugene Tighe Jr., 72; Led Study on American P.O.W.'s
Lieut.
Gen.
Eugene F. Tighe Jr., who headed the Defense Intelligence Agency from 1978 to 1981 and investigated the possibility that of American prisoners of war remained in Indochina, died on Jan. 29 at his home in San Diego.
He was 72.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his son Steven.


Always Tonya: As Cool as Ice But Troubled
She was always different.
When other little girls were tentative and shy, Tonya Harding was all guts and gusto, a fearless figure skater who couldn't succeed fast enough.
When she learned about such things as championships, gold medals and the Olympics, all she ever wanted was everything.
Twenty years later, not much has changed.


Market Place; Wall Street's Bulls Count on Small Investors
The stock market plunge on Friday left millions of small investors looking to Wall Street to find whether the longest bull market in history has finally run out of steam.
And Wall Street is looking right back at them.
Many market savants say the rally's fate is in the hands of individual investors, who poured $128 billion into equity mutual funds in 1993 alone.
Since 1990, they have used every dip in the Dow as a chance to go bargain hunting.
And their buying has pushed stock prices back up, contributing to the three-year bull market.
Wall Street hopes that happens again.


Robert Half International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Looking Out for No. 2; As Cutbacks Loom, Queens Clamors for Its Fair Share From City Hall
Claire Shulman, the formidable Borough President of Queens, had just vowed to "break anybody's head who tries to take my cultural money and put it in the Metropolitan Museum of Art" when her chief aide cleared her throat, a bit nervously.
A towering pile of blue budget books had just arrived from City Hall, and Alexandra Rosa, Ms.
Shulman's chief of staff, found in them a line of numbers her boss wasn't going to like.


Japan Auto Makers Navigate a Leaner U.S. Market
Japanese auto executives do not have to be reminded about the Chrysler Corporation's new Neon, the small car with the low price that has been dubbed a "Japanese car killer." It is just the latest threat to Japanese auto manufacturing, which these days finds itself in the unaccustomed role of being on the retreat in a growing American market.
But the Neon has already been recalled twice because of defects, a portent perhaps that any notion of knocking out the Japanese may be fanciful.


General Signal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Paging Inc., Minneapolis, an initial public offering of 3.5 million common shares.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.


Joseph Cotten, 88, Is Dead; Actor on Stage and in Films
Joseph Cotten, a leading man who shifted easily between Broadway and Hollywood, died yesterday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 88.
The cause was pneumonia, his business manager and attorney, Hugh Robertson, told The Associated Press.


Smog
Preliminary 1993 ozone data shows that this summer's intense heat produced an increase in smog in the region.
Smog, or ground level ozone, is created in sunlight by the interaction of chemicals from gasoline or car engines and nitrogen oxides.
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut all saw a jump in the number of days the federal standard for ground level ozone of 120 parts per billion was exceeded.
Although ozone violations have been decreasing over the past ten years -- partly because of cleaner fuels and the gradual replacement of older cars -- the 12 Eastern states from Virginia to Maine agreed last week to impose more stringent auto emission standards to control smog.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Consumer Credit . . .
Dec.
Tuesday  Productivity 4th Qtr.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Retail Sales . . .
Jan.
Producer Prices . . .
Jan.


TV 'Clutter' Grew In 1993, Study Says
Commercial "clutter" on television -- the time devoted to material other than programming -- reached a record high in 1993, according to a widely followed annual report, after a decrease in clutter was found in 1992.
The Commercial Monitoring Report, sponsored by the American Association of Advertising Agencies and the Association of National Advertisers, monitored broadcasts in the New York metropolitan area during a week in May and a week in November.
It found that in prime time, an increase in promotional spots and credits during programming contributed more to the increase in clutter than did an increase in commercials.
Among broadcast networks in prime time, the study said, ABC's nonprogramming minutes were the lowest and Fox's were the highest.


Newmont Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


H.M.O.'s That Offer Choice Are Gaining in Popularity
Addressing one of the thorniest issues in the debate on health care, employers across the country have found a way to tame rising costs while still allowing their employees the freedom they covet to choose their own doctors and hospitals.
Often called open-ended H.M.O.'s, or point-of-service plans, such plans have gone from a little-used option to become the fastest-growing type of health plan in the nation.
Open-ended plans gained more than 3.4 million members from January 1992 to June 1993, including half of all people who joined health maintenance organizations in that period.
The country's largest H.M.O., Kaiser Permanente, started offering an open-ended plan to some of its members just last month.


American Barrick Res.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


California Quake Is Lifting Hopes Of the Governor and a Challenger
The deadly earthquake that moved mountains and toppled buildings here last month also changed the political landscape of California, shifting the terrain in a crucial race that will pit an unpopular Republican Governor against one of two Democratic challengers for his job.
There is widespread agreement that the earthquake on Jan. 17 breathed new life into the political fortunes of Gov.
Pete Wilson.
The quake also jump-started the underdog primary campaign of John Garamendi, the state's Insurance Commissioner, and raised questions about whether Kathleen Brown, the California Treasurer and Democratic front-runner, is the inevitable winner she once seemed.
The main beneficiary of California's latest calamity, political experts in both parties agree, is Mr.
Wilson, a veteran at coping with disasters and whose job performance ratings improved in the weeks after the earthquake, according to a statewide poll.


Carlisle Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


No Headline
I've been a surgeon for nearly 38 years, and I thought I had learned professionally the habit of seeing blood and death.
But I keep seeing the scenes of yesterday -- it seemed unreal. -- DR.
KEMAL DRNDA, chief of surgery at a Sarajevo hospital.  [ A8:1. ]


Sports of The Times; The All-Star Shooter From the C.B.A.
HE had missed 10 of his 14 shots, but a shooter keeps shooting.
And as John Starks waited at the scorer's table midway through the fourth quarter yesterday with the Knicks holding a shaky 75-70 lead over the Orlando Magic, he knew his responsibility as a shooter.
"When I came off the bench," he would say later, "I knew it was time for me to take over the game."


New Orleans Sends 2 Lawyers to Mayoral Runoff
New Orleans voters paused from Carnival events on Saturday to choose two candidates for mayor: Donald Mintz, a lawyer and civic leader, and Marc Morial, a lawyer and State Senator.
Of 152,527 ballots cast in the primary, Mr.
Mintz received 56,269 votes, or 37 percent, and Mr.
Morial, 49,530, or 32 percent.
Their five main opponents trailed far behind.


To Test a Trolley
A privately owned and operated trolley across mid-Manhattan on 42d Street would be faster, cheaper and cleaner than the buses that ride the route now, and a lot cleaner than the cars and taxis a trolley system would displace.
But neighborhood resistance could block this innovative project before its potential is even explored.
Cities all over the world have turned to street-level light-rail systems, particularly for clogged downtown areas.
There are two dozen in the United States, operating or underway, including one in New Jersey connecting to commuter ferries.


Study Suggests It Is Easy To Banish Squeegee Men
An eight-week Police Department study of squeegee men shows that officers can easily drive them away from the entrances to bridges and tunnels where most of them work.
But some law-enforcement officials acknowledge that stopping them from cleaning windshields could push them toward more serious crime.
The study, which accompanied a crackdown on squeegee men during October and November, found that aggressive patrolling and arrests, typically for disorderly conduct, reduced their numbers by two-thirds.
Since then, freezing temperatures and continued enforcement have kept the numbers down, the police said.


Athlete Escapes Sarajevo's New Round of Death
After 11 months of being trapped, Igor Boras thought he had escaped war-torn Sarajevo on Friday.
By the time he arrived at the Olympics, the hemorrhaging had caught up to him.
On Saturday, as he walked through the Oslo airport, Boras looked up at a television screen.
He could not believe what he saw.
Bodies were stacked where bread and macaroni and beans had once been in Sarajevo's central market.
Sixty-eight were dead, some 200 wounded by a mortar attack.
A prosthesis lay on the ground, attached to a boot but no longer to a person.
Boras did not want to see any more.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; If advertisers are cautious about 'N.Y.P.D. Blue,' how will they react to Michael Jackson's return?
NBC is broadcasting a two-hour special this month featuring Michael Jackson, and it is expected to be one of the highest-rated programs on television this year.
But no one involved suggests that the show will bring the network anything like full value for those ratings.
Though NBC executives still promise the program will sell all its commercial time, several advertising agency executives said they would not recommend that any client buy time on the show.


Foes of Balanced Federal Budget Focus on Effect on Social Security
Hitting one of the capital's most sensitive political nerves first, opponents of the proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget have asserted that it would lead to cuts of $1,000 a person in Social Security benefits.
The amendment's defenders disagreed, pointing out that lawmakers treat Social Security very gingerly.
And Senator Paul Simon, the Illinois Democrat who is the measure's chief sponsor, said that Social Security recipients would be helped by the amendment because it would strengthen the economy and reduce the deficit.


Clinton Is Selling Plan in Texas
President Clinton began his first out-of-town sales trip for his domestic agenda since Christmas today as part of an effort to shift the public focus from defeats dealt to his health care plan last week.
After three business groups ignored the White House's wishes and publicly criticized the plan, Mr.
Clinton and his aides hope his appeals can begin to resonate again outside Washington.


Odds Rise, But Dehere Still Eyes Holy Bull
Dehere came back from his losing 1994 debut strong, sound and ready to tackle the next milestones on the road to the Kentucky Derby, his trainer insisted today even as the odds on the colt were growing longer in Las Vegas, Nev.
The 2-year-old champion of 1993 ran second to Ride the Rails in an allowance race Saturday at Gulfstream Park, and some oddsmakers were quoting him now as high as 12-1 to win the Derby.
But his trainer, Reynaldo Nobles, said the colt was fit and would confront the undefeated Holy Bull in the Fountain of Youth Stakes on Feb. 19 en route to the Kentucky Derby on May 7.


Kentucky Takes Charge Behind a Late Rally
The best teams learn to endure.
They learn to make the decisive adjustments that can separate best from better at tournament time.
They go beyond safe nonconference scheduling to create the kind of experience that brought a dose of March here this afternoon, when Kentucky came from behind in the final two minutes to defeat Massachusetts, 67-64, in a game that sends both teams forward.
Kentucky (18-3) held the Minutemen to two field goals in the last 6 minutes 18 seconds and withstood two potential game-tying shots in the final nine seconds.
The first was a 15-foot shot by Edgar Padilla, the freshman guard who played 33 minutes because of the continued absence of Mike Williams, who has not returned since his mysterious collapse in the loss at Cincinnati on Jan. 27.


Son of an Ex-Leader Wins a Tight Battle To Head Costa Rica
Jose Maria Figueres Olsen, the 39-year-old son of the founder of the modern Costa Rican democracy, won the Presidential election today, defeating Miguel Angel Rodriguez , a wealthy entrepreneur who promised to continue the Government's austerity policies.
In a victory speech Mr.
Figueres promised to help the country's poor and called for "a prosperous nation, but one which shares its prosperity."


Hospitals Must Continue to Help Underserved Communities
To the Editor:
A Jan. 24 front-page article laid out many of the concerns about reduced specialization at New York City's teaching hospitals under the Clinton health reform plan.
Painful realignment will certainly follow major structural changes in the patchwork system that encompasses training new physicians, service to often underserved populations and medical research.
Most will agree that a shift to training more generalists for community-based settings is essential.
The great fear is that the transformation will fracture a delicate balance without an effective replacement.


DiMaggio: Familiar Face for a Stadium Opener
Joe DiMaggio looked down wistfully from his perch in the press box at some 5,000 fans watching a legends game at Fort Lauderdale Stadium, a game he orchestrated for a nearby children's hospital, which also bears his name.
"I'd like to be down there enjoying the game with the fans," the Yankee Hall of Famer said.
"But it wouldn't work out. You don't get to see the game. And the people around it are distracted."


Weis Markets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


CHRONICLE
It will be a trip down memory lane, too, for FAY WRAY when she attends a ceremony tomorrow in Washington for the publication of the American Film Institute's catalog of 1930's films.
The 3,800-page, three-volume catalog contains 5,528 entries and 1,200 pages of indexes.
A staff of 12 worked for five years on the project, watching more than 4,000 movies.


Snap-On Tools Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Where Three-Strikes Plan Takes Us in 20 Years
To the Editor:
It is disheartening to see intelligent political figures like President Bill Clinton and New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo embracing with shameless enthusiasm the "three strikes and you're out" proposal.


Once Welcomed, Black Artists Return To an Indifferent France
Attending a conference here last week on the relationship between black American artists and Europe, Prof.
Henry Louis Gates Jr., the chairman of the department of Afro-American studies at Harvard University, was surprised to find himself mistaken for a taxi driver.
"There I was standing in the lobby of my chic Latin Quarter hotel, in my handmade suit, Burberry coat and Paul Stuart scarf, when this French couple comes up to me and asks whether I'm their cabdriver," Professor Gates said.
"I was polite, I just said no. At the time I was angry, but thinking about it later, I was furious. Those guys just weren't seeing me."


Boy's Arrest Is Greeted With Sorrow, Not Surprise
With a paint roller in one hand, a bucket of plaster in the other and a toolbox slung to his waist, young Philbert Strawder was a picture of pride and grave intensity that day last summer when he volunteered to help his building's handyman do his chores.
As his neighbors and friends remember it, the day was scorching hot, many of the older teen-agers were standing at the corner, and the nearby schoolyards were filled.
But the youth stuck to his job hour after hour, helping lay down a new tile floor in the basement of the Brooklyn apartment house.
One neighbor recalled, "He didn't look left or right."


Landlord Slain in a Robbery And Superintendent Is Injured
A father of nine children was shot to death yesterday after collecting rent in a Brooklyn building he owned and the building's superintendent was seriously wounded in what appeared to be a failed robbery attempt.
Abraham Pollack, of Monsey, N.Y., had just finished his weekly trip to the building at 126 Graham Avenue in Williamsburg to pick up the rent, when a man with a handgun confronted him in the foyer and demanded the money, the police and a witness said.


Bosnians Airlifted to Germany From Sarajevo





Clinton Budget Underscores New Priorities in Lean Times
His flexibility severely limited, President Clinton yesterday sent Congress a new budget that reflected somewhat different priorities from those of his Republican predecessor but that included no bold innovations.
The budget for the 1995 fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1, is the first to be prepared by a Democratic President in 13 years.
It forecasts spending of $1.5 trillion and a deficit of $176 billion, the lowest since 1989.
Most of its outlines had already been disclosed.


Accounts
*
Blue Cross/Blue Shield Association, Chicago, to Tassini &amp; Paglia, Chicago, to handle national advertising, previously inactive.
James A. Paglia, president at the agency, confirmed a report of the assignment in Adweek this week.
Though billings have yet to be determined, Adweek estimated them at $10 million to $15 million. *
Boral Bricks Inc., Augusta, Ga., to the Joey Reiman Agency, Atlanta, as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Patterns
Anne Klein Updated
Saks Fifth Avenue was the first store, 25 years ago, to introduce Anne Klein &amp; Company sportswear to its customers, and today, it's the first to introduce the new Anne Klein, that designed by Richard Tyler, with a 2,000-square-foot shop in its store.


Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sensormatic Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Handy &amp; Harman reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S. Aide Sees More Help by Hanoi on M.I.A.'s
The Defense Department official in Vietnam leading the investigation of the fate of Americans missing from the Vietnam War predicted today that President Clinton's decision to lift the 19-year-old trade embargo on Vietnam would result in greater cooperation from Hanoi.
The investigator, Lieut.
Col.
John C. Cray, made the comments after attending a somber ceremony at Noi Bai International Airport here to watch Vietnamese officials turn over what are believed to be the remains of at least 12 Americans who died in the war.


Classical Music in Review
'Karna' 'A Shadow Puppet Opera'  La Mama Theater Annex 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday
"Karna: A Shadow Puppet Opera," by Barbara Benary, is a Westerner's rendering of Javanese musical and theatrical style using an excerpt from the Indian epic "The Mahabarata." Barbara Pollitt operates the flat leather shadow puppets from behind a backlighted screen, in the wayang kulit style of puppeteering.
Ms.
Benary heads Gamelan Son of Lion, a New York ensemble of resonant xylophones, gongs and drums built and tuned after the Javanese fashion.


Information Resources
Shares of Information Resources Inc. continued their slide yesterday as investors reacted to management's disclosure on Friday that fourth-quarter earnings might be less than half of the 34 cents a share forecast by analysts.
The software-services company attributed the shortfall to a "temporary delay" in signing new clients.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
John Sculley quit as chairman of Spectrum Information Technologies, suing the president of the Long Island company for fraud.
Mr.
Sculley contended that he was deceived by the company's management about accounting practices and an S.E.C. investigation.
The move comes three and a half months after Mr.
Sculley left his job as chairman of Apple Computer.  [ Page A1. ]


Review/Music; Full Circle For Mexican Festival
Sonidos de las Americas: Mexico offered a weeklong festival of concerts wrapped in one small history lesson.
Eight events scattered around Manhattan, the Bronx and Queens spread the word on two generations of composers.
It also sorted their aims into opposing categories: one, the need to be Mexican; the other, a need not to be Mexican at all.
The last piece played, "La Noche de los Mayas," was theoretically this festival's starting point.
Written as movie music by Silvestre Revueltas in 1939 and performed by the American Composers Orchestra at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon, its four movements exude an elephantine, wholly irresistible generosity.
Booming pentatonic melody signals Mexico's pre-Columbian foundations.
Brisk dances expressed in slippery meter changes describe a culture at play.
Next a country broods.
At the end it explodes: a jungle of percussion, a rhythmic tangle of volcanic energy.


Florida Rock Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Small Budget Steps, Right Direction
What's the difference in budgetary emphasis between President Bill Clinton and President George Bush?
Try $14 billion.
That's the amount the Clinton Administration has found in a very tight budget to pay for its investment initiatives.
It is tempting to dismiss the redirection of $14 billion in a $1.5 trillion budget as tinkering.
But the Administration deserves more credit than the raw numbers suggest.


CTS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Illness Is Forcing Chancellor Of SUNY to Resign From Post
D.
Bruce Johnstone, the Chancellor of the State University of New York, announced yesterday that he is stepping down, effective March 1, because he has cancer.
Trustees to the largest state university system in the country scheduled a special meeting in New York for today, reportedly to discuss a temporary replacement for Dr.
Johnstone.
But they are not expected to make a decision until their Feb. 24 meeting, at which time they will also outline the process for finding a permanent replacement for Dr.
Johnstone.


It's Harvard and B.C. in Beanpot Final
Harvard was too quick, too clever and too tenacious for Boston University tonight at the 42d annual Beanpot tournament -- this city's annual midwinter salute to college hockey.
The Crimson, ranked No. 3 in the country, defeated the No. 2 Terriers by 4-2 before a capacity crowd of 14,448 at Boston Garden.
Harvard, which won the tournament a year ago, will play Boston College for the championship here next Monday night.


Man Admits Killing a Child Dumped in a Brooklyn Chute
Last May, the strangled body of 4-year-old Kayesean Blackledge was found at the bottom of a trash compactor in a Brooklyn housing project.
Yesterday, Stephan Poole, the husband of the boy's legal guardian, confessed to having taken the child to the project from their Jersey City home after a dispute with his wife and choking him because he "cried more."


U.S.O.C. May Hold Hearing On Harding
The United States Olympic Committee is "leaning" toward calling Tonya Harding before its disciplinary board to determine whether she should be removed from the Olympic team, an Olympic official familiar with the committee's plans said tonight.
A decision on whether to hold the hearing could be announced on Tuesday, with a tentative hearing date set for Feb. 15, the official said.
"Nothing is final, but to say we're leaning in that direction would be accurate," said the official, who insisted on anonymity.
"The most important step is that the athlete be given fair notice."


Jefferson-Pilot reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


St. Jude Medical Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wheelabrator Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Pop; Merengue Fest for the Ears
For three hours of nonstop music, the rhythm of merengue reigned on Saturday night at Radio City Music Hall.
The speedy boom-chicka-boom, paced by tambora drum and guiro (metal scraper), was pumped out by six hit-making groups.
Each band was a notch better than the previous one, so the music traced a rising curve of professional jubilation.
Like other dance music, modern merengue doesn't offer much variety.
The rhythm arrives fast or faster, carrying dance exhortations or laments about lost love; in a ballad, the beat is a double-time undercurrent.
As trumpets, saxophones and keyboards weave arpeggiated riffs through the syncopation, the vocals soar and sob.
Every group had a song rhyming bailar (to dance) and gozar (to have a good time); every group had uniforms and dance routines.
The variations were in the nuances of arrangements and the proportions of dance, humor and romance.


Downey Savings &amp; Loan Association reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Classical Music in Review
Dresden Philharmonic  Carnegie Hall
In both age and prestige, the Dresden Philharmonic ranks somewhat behind its neighboring orchestra, the Dresden Staatskapelle, an institution that traces its origins almost to the 16th century and one that is much in the international eye.
Relative obscurity, on the other hand, offers benign protection.
For what listeners on Friday night could enjoy (at least in glimpses) was a time capsule in sound, a distinctive Central European orchestra timbre that post-Iron Curtain exposure to international style will certainly weaken through assimilation.


T R Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Imasco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Perkins Family Restaurants L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TNP Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


WestAmerica Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Music Of Hate
No matter what the American luge team accomplishes in next week's Olympic Games, they will not receive as much recognition as they did for being assaulted by German neo-Nazis in December.
Yet in all the news coverage of skinheads, little attention has been paid to their music.
German authorities cite the connection between this music and violence when they add titles to "the index," a list of recordings for which distributors can be prosecuted.
According to the Ministry for Women and Youth, there are more than 50 albums and singles on the index.
The authorities have mounted a search and destroy campaign.
The most successful raid, in February 1993, brought in more than 30,000 records, tapes and compact discs.
A key target has been Rock-O-Rama, a company based in Bruhl.
It has 28 bands on its label, including Storkraft, whose lead singer is under investigation for inciting racial hatred and other crimes.
In December, five members of Tonstorung were sentenced to up to 21 months for inciting racial violence, including a 1992 attack on a Turkish wedding party after a concert in Mannheim (the sentences were later suspended).
Another band, Radikahl, whose name is a pun combining the German words for radical and bald, was charged in connection with the song "Swastika," which appears here.
These lyrics, collected by the editors of Searchlight, a London-based anti-fascist magazine, and translated by Elizabeth A. Jackson, are typical of neo-Nazi music in their calls for the ethnic purification and military revival of Germany. -- STEPHEN SILVER, staff writer, Searchlight magazine Winter in the F.R.G.
Band: Endstufe (Final Stage)  Times are tough for the German people Foreign troops still occupy our land Forty years of calamity and corruption . . .
German culture -- where is it these days?
We meet at a dump called McDonald's Lust for profits and power poisons our environment . . .
It's winter in the F.R.G.
Will there ever be a Germany again That's worth living in?
This state is ashamed of German history . . .
No matter what we say The face of the government never changes . . .
We've got as many foreigners as grains of  sand Pimps, junkies -- it's all forbidden Believe me, Christians, praying won't do any good It's winter in the F.R.G.
Will there ever be a Germany again That's worth living in?
Or else we'll be sorry Not until you make our pride your own Will you really understand Not until you make our pride your own Will you really understand.
Swastika Band: Radikahl Give Adolf Hitler, give Adolf Hitler Give Adolf Hitler the Nobel Prize Raise the red flag, raise the red flag Raise the red flag with the swastika Even as a boy, it was clear to me That this symbol was my guide And today I still feel just the same There's only one and you're it As on the German flags of old It leads me down the right roads For me, what matters hasn't changed: Race and pride and swastika!
Everywhere I go you'll see it Those who are different won't understand There's no other sign that I like so much Long may it wave for the entire world.
Fighting Dog Band: Storkraft (Destructive Force)  (Sounds of an angry dog growling and barking) Look, it's getting dark, night is falling Let's slip on the fighting dog's leash Together we'll go hunting Together we'll destroy the dark threat The angry beast firmly in hand Strange shadows on the wall He is trained and disciplined Only the disciplined can destroy Fighting dog Savage beast of German blood Fighting dog Tremble and watch out!
Bad times for the scum in this country The fighting dog has them firmly in hand Quaking with fear they stand before the wall The fighting dog is lying in wait Without mercy and without morals Hellish torment waits for them Don't try to flee, you won't escape him Your descent is written on his face Fighting dog Savage beast of German blood Fighting dog Tremble and watch out!
Mercenary Band: Storkraft  He is a mercenary and a fascist He is a murderer and a sadist He has no friends and loves only himself A human life means nothing to him He has no soul, he has no mind He has no scruples, he has been banned Mercenary, he is a mercenary!
He is a skinhead and a fascist He is bald and a racist He has no conscience or heart Hatred and violence mark his face Mercenary, he is a mercenary!
He loves war and violence And if you're his enemy he'll waste you Mercenary, he is a mercenary!


Taking the Commuter For More Than a Ride
THE woman in the green Saab whisked off a black beret, patted her hairnet and plunked on a wig, a Liza Minnelli number -- all the while cruising down the Saw Mill River Parkway at 55 miles an hour.
It was morning rush. Hardly anyone noticed.


Long May We Argue Over History
To the Editor:
In "Opinion vs. Reality in an Age of Pundits" (Critic's Notebook, Jan. 28), Michiko Kakutani complains that on campuses "the idea of objective knowledge has also come under assault from radical multiculturalists, who see history as an ideological battleground for control of a nation's memory." She worries about a "relativistic universe in which all theories -- however reprehensible or preposterous -- must be accorded respect, a universe in which truths are replaced by opinions." Ms.
Kakutani suggests that this sorry state of affairs is a recent development, as opposed to an earlier time when "truth" and "reality" were not in quotation marks.


More Medical Evacuations From Sarajevo


Reinsurance Group of America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Washington Water Power Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Jazz; Following Coltrane but Taking the Lead
In its performance of two John Coltrane suites at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday night, a quartet led by the drummer Elvin Jones wandered between success and failure.
The concert was at times a victim of its own ambition, but its ambition made it special as well.
While most tributes to Coltrane venerate the saxophonist for his improvisational ability, this one attempted to rewrite history.
What made the show, presented as part of the Jazz at Lincoln Center series, so complex was its tension between the orthodox interpretations of original material, and the unorthodox.
Mr.
Jones, who was a member of Coltrane's legendary quartet in the 1960's, was clearly airing out the suites to illustrate Coltrane's approach to composition.
He could have chosen to play "Giant Steps" with the four or five saxophonists regularly trotted out for Coltrane tributes, but he didn't.
In fact, he didn't use a saxophonist at all.
And his sidemen -- Wynton Marsalis on trumpet, Marcus Roberts on piano and Reginald Veal on bass -- could have imitated the conventions decreed by the Coltrane quartet of the early 1960's, but they didn't.


Clinton Budget Underscores New Priorities in Lean Times
His flexibility severely limited, President Clinton yesterday sent Congress a new budget that reflected somewhat different priorities from those of his Republican predecessor but that included no bold innovations.
The budget for the 1995 fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1, is the first to be prepared by a Democratic President in 13 years.
It forecasts spending of $1.5 trillion and a deficit of $176 billion, the lowest since 1989.
Most of its outlines had already been disclosed.


Aikman to Check Blurred Vision
TROY AIKMAN will not need surgery for his separated shoulder, but he plans to seek medical help because of blurred vision.
The Dallas Cowboys quarterback underwent tests during a weekend visit to Dr.
JAMES ANDREWS and discovered that his injured knee, back, elbow and shoulder are healing nicely.
But the quarterback said he has been bothered with blurred vision since he suffered a mild concussion in the N.F.C. championship game against San Francisco. (AP)


Deeper Look at Cold, Snowy Winter Reveals Balmier Future
SINCE the end of a record cold snap nearly three weeks ago, the Northeast has continued to shiver in below-average temperatures much of the time.
One big reason is a snow cover that has lingered for about six weeks in many places, including parts of metropolitan New York; without it, nighttime and early-morning temperatures that have been in the teens and single digits would probably have been some 10 degrees higher.
But if the global climate system behaves this year as it has in recent years, scientists say, April and May will bring the latest in a series of abnormally warm springs.
This would shrink the snow cover of the entire Northern Hemisphere to a historically small area, and with the cooling effects of the snow lessened, the springtime climate would warm even more.
The result: a canceling out of the cold of January and February that would, on balance, make the first half of 1994 warmer than normal.


BankWorcester Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pacific Scientific reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Hearing Opens Into Accusations of Fraud in Pennsylvania Election
A Federal judge began a hearing today on accusations of voter fraud in a State Senate race, a case the national Republican Party has called an "egregious voter fraud targeted at minority voters."
Judge Clarence C. Newcomer of Federal District Court decided to hear the case, brought by the Pennsylvania Republican Party, after state election officials and state courts rejected the Republicans' claims.


Wisconsin Public Service Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


National Health Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


In This Fiscal Crisis, New York Must Rescue Itself
"If we stay where we are," Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani declared last week as he presented his first budget plan for New York City, "we're headed for a disaster." To turn the city's economy around, the Mayor argued, nothing short of an immediate halt to the rising tax burden and a fundamental reorganization of public spending would do.
But will it work?
Experts disagree sharply over whether cutting the budget, slashing the city's work force and reducing several local taxes -- all central elements of the Mayor's proposal -- will give the city's economy a much-needed shot in the arm.
For all the disputes, however, they share at least one point: Mr.
Giuliani has little choice but to try.


Who Wins, Who Loses
President Clinton's 1995 budget makes changes largely at Government's edge.
Its cuts and additions -- a billion here, a few hundred million there -- are dwarfed by the total spending proposal of $1.5 trillion.
But the tinkering does follow themes, and some areas will fare better, or worse, than others.
Here are some examples.
Dollar figures show what the Administration seeks from Congress for each program, not what may be spent in the 1995 fiscal year.
WINNERS Technology Just about any program whose title boasts the words "computer" or "research" gains money.
Some big winners: the Commerce Department's National Institute of Standards and Technology, once known only for winding the national clock but now a grantor for private research; information "superhighway" research.
Still, the total Federal research and development budget, up 4 per cent to $72 billion for 1995, only slightly beats inflation.
Program
1994 spending
1995 spending
Increase or
in millions
in mill-prop.
decrease-per.
National Institute of
Standards and Technology
$520
$935
80%
Information highway grants
26
100
285%
Human genome project
128.7
152
18.1%
Education and Training George Bush substantially boosted Head Start funding, but Mr.
Clinton goes him several better: he would raise Head Start spending again; sharply increase Federal aid to schools in poor neighborhoods, and pour new money into retraining laid-off workers, among other initiatives.
Chapter I programs
for low-income schools
$6,912
$7,579
10%
Safe and Drug-free schools
472
660
40%
"Dislocated" workers
1,118
1,465
31%
Health Mr.
Clinton's health plan aside, the budget envisions large spending increases for a select series of preventive care and drug-rehabilitation programs.
Spending in the 1995 fiscal year for the National Institutes of Health's many units -- the National Cancer Institute, National Institute for Mental Health, and so on -- would rise a little over 7 per cent, to $11 billion.
Childhood immunization
$528
$588
68%
Ryan White Act: AIDS
579
672
16%
Childhood immunizations
755
1,040
68%
Crime-Fighting Law enforcement is basically a state and local responsibility; only 10 percent of the money spent here comes from Washington.
But with crime atop the list of public concerns in polls, the new budget mirrors political reality, and seeks big increases for more police and for prosecuting and jailing wrongdoers.
A caveat: much funding relies on passage of the crime bill now before Congress.
New police officers
(none)
1,720
N.A
Federal prisons
2,200
2,600
18%
Criminal records upgrade
(none)
100
N.A.
Public Works One area where the Clinton Administration differs from its Republican predecessors is in its support for construction projects.
Democrats believe economic growth flows directly from investments in highways and mass transportation.
But even here, the Administration is selective: for example, grants for operating expenses of mass transit systems (13 percent of which is spent in metropolitan New York) would be cut to $600 million from $800 million.
Highway construction
19,978
20,301
2%
Transit capital grants
659
1,115
69%
High-speed rail
(none)
28
N.A.
LOSERS Foreign Affairs The State Department would take it on the nose, losing a bigger share of its budget than any other Cabinet agency.
Total foreign affairs funding, which includes items like Pentagon military aid and export loans, stays stable but loses ground to inflation.
Aid to Israel ($3 billion) and Egypt ($1.8 billion) would not change.
A growth area: aid to the United Nations for troops in foreign war zones, up 33 per cent.
Program
1994 spending
1995 spending
Increase or
in millions
in mill-prop.
decrease-per.
State Department
5,300
4,900
7.5%
Refugees/migration assistance
720
683
5.1%
Weapons The Administration wants to stretch out contracts for some ships, tanks and planes and to cancel others outright.
Energy Department stockpiles of nuclear materials would be drawn down.
One weapon prospers: the National Board for the Promotion of Rifle Practice, beloved by the National Rifle Association and despised by liberals, rises $61,000 to $2.54 million.
It sells ammunition and trains youngsters to shoot.
B-2 Bomber
1,543
800
48%
F-18 Fighter
1,520
1,032
32%
Bradley Armored Vehicle
71
14
80%
Agriculture Long a treasure chest of subsidies to farm interests, the Agriculture Department is ripe for cuts in tight fiscal times, and its budget would drop next year by 5.5 per cent -- before inflation.
In trouble: foreign food aid, oilseed subsidies, the Rural Electrification Administration, the Commodity Credit Corporation (which makes loans for farm exports) and a raft of others.
Foreign food assistance
1,412
1,245
11.8%
Wool subsidies
193
133.7
30.7%
Electric, telephone loan subsidies
70
19
73%
Public Housing Funding for HUD rises a bit in the budget, by $1 billion to $26.1 billion.
But traditional public-housing monies dry up: new construction funding plummets, as does money for renovating old units.
Officials say enough money is in the pipeline to keep such programs going; some of the savings would be spent on a Republican idea, housing vouchers, for the poor and homeless.
New public housing
$ 598
$150
75%
Public housing modernization
4,000
3,300
18%
Public housing for the elderly
1,500
500
66%
MICHAEL WINES


A Holocaust Rescuer Is Herself Rescued From Siege of Sarajevo
In the darkest days of World War II, Zejniba Hartega-Susic's Muslim family hid Jews from Nazis and their Croatian allies bent on putting them to death.
On Saturday morning, the 76-year-old woman boarded a bus convoy organized by an American Jewish agency evacuating about 300 people from the city's brutal 22-month siege.


Georgetown Upsets Syracuse
Georgetown 60, Syracuse 56
Georgetown has a well-earned reputation for big-time centers.
Players like Patrick Ewing, Alonzo Mourning and Dikembe Mutumbo have graduated to careers in the National Basketball Association.


Memorex Telex N.V. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mesa Airlines Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


West One Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Big East, S.E.C. Heading to CBS?
CBS is expected to announce today or tomorrow agreements to acquire the rights to Southeastern Conference and Big East college football for five years beginning in 1996.
The S.E.C. deal was apparently sewn up last week, but the conference wanted to delay announcing it until the Big East also signed up.
Published reports have said that CBS would pay the S.E.C. $85 million and the Big East $55 million.
The S.E.C. deal reportedly also includes the rights to men's and women's basketball.


CNB Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Paragon Trade Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 26


Executive Changes
DURAKON INDUSTRIES, Lapeer, Mich., appointed Philip B. Storm senior vice president of sales and marketing.
EV ENVIRONMENTAL INC., Westport, Conn., appointed Ralph A. Armstrong senior vice president of sales and marketing.
JONES INTERNATIONAL LTD., Englewood, Colo., named Bernard J. Luskin chief executive of Jones Interactive Services Inc., a subsidiary involved in digital publishing and interactive multimedia.
KENNEDY-WILSON INC., Santa Monica, Calif., promoted Randall G. Dotemoto, its executive vice president and chief financial officer, to chief operating officer.
MCGAW INC., Irvine, Calif., appointed Norwick Goodspeed, its president, as chief executive.
RANDALL TEXTRON, Cincinnati, a division of Textron Inc., named Jane L. Warner president.
SUNGLASS HUT INTERNATIONAL INC., Miami, named Larry Peterson chief financial officer.
He previously held a similar post at Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc.


Building Chief Resigns Post, Citing 'Stress'
New York City's new Buildings Commissioner, Frank A. Luzi, abruptly resigned yesterday, two weeks after the disclosure that a Boston asbestos-removal company in which he had an interest had been indicted for violations of Federal safety regulations.
State prosecutors said the State Attorney General, in a separate inquiry, was investigating allegations that another company Mr.
Luzi headed, Inspeco Inc., misrepresented itself to customers as a licensed engineering concern when it was not authorized to do engineering work.


Avondale Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Skater Brings Israel to the Games
Shortly after he emigrated from the former Soviet Union to Israel in 1991, Misha Shmerkin visited the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem and, as is custom, wrote a list of wishes on a piece of paper and placed it in a crack between the stones.
He won't discuss seven of the wishes.
The eighth may have been the most improbable: "I want to compete in the Olympic Games."


Prospects Dim for U.S.-Japan Accord
Just days before Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa is to meet President Clinton in Washington, prospects for meaningful new trade agreements seem to have grown dimmer.
But in one potentially hopeful sign, Mr.
Hosokawa's cabinet reportedly agreed this morning on a plan to stimulate Japan's sputtering economy by increasing public works spending and reducing some taxes.
That is something the United States has been pressing for.


Q&amp;A
Moon's Orbit
Q.
Is the Moon being pulled gradually toward the Earth by gravity, a few inches a year?


THE CLINTON BUDGET: The Overview; Administration Offers Budget Priorities in Lean Times
President Clinton today sent Congress a $1.52 trillion budget that reflected the Government's fiscal constraints, combining spending cuts with modest new initiatives to promote technology, fight crime and expand educational opportunity.
Administration officials said the proposal represented a reordering of the nation's priorities.
But there is little sweeping or grand in the Administration's budget for the 1995 fiscal year, which begins on Oct. 1.
The 1994 fiscal year budget is $1.48 trillion.


CHRONICLE
It won't be politics as usual when GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS, MADELEINE KUNIN, COKIE ROBERTS, CHARLIE ROSE and J. CARTER BROWN get together at the Library of Congress in Washington on Wednesday.
They will be reading ancient and contemporary Greek poetry, along with Carlethia Willis, an adult student enrolled in a literacy program.
The poems will be taken from "Greece in Poetry," an anthology in English edited by SIMONI ZAFIROPOULOS that was recently published by Abrams.
Ms.
Zafiropoulos is a former Greek cultural attache.


Central Vermont Public Service Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Standard Commercial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
ABT BUILDING PRODUCTS CORP., Neenah.
Wis., has signed an agreement to buy the Canexel division of Canadian Pacific Forest Product Ltd., Montreal, for $14 million.
KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN CORP., , Louisville, Ky., a subsidiary of Pepsico, has received a license to build and operate KFC-owned restaurants in Tianjin, China.


John Z. Bowers Memorial
A memorial service for Dr.
John Z. Bowers, a medical educator and historian who died on Oct. 18, is set for Feb. 18 at 1 P.M. at St.
Bartholomew's Church in Manhattan at Park Avenue between 50th and 51st Streets.


BellSouth May Aid QVC Bid
The BellSouth Corporation is trying to strengthen QVC Network Inc.'s bid for Paramount Communications Inc., several people close to the negotiations said yesterday.
In the long-running battle between QVC and Viacom for control of Paramount, BellSouth has emerged as QVC's largest investor, pledging $2 billion for the deal.
A QVC victory would give BellSouth a 19 percent stake in the merged company.


Cross (A.T.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Foster Isn't Ready To Quit
Greg Foster says he was serious when he insisted a year ago that he was retiring from track and field.
Now, at age 35, he says he will definitely retire -- but not before the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta.
Last winter, early on a farewell tour, Foster won the 60-meter hurdles in the Chemical Bank Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden.
But two weeks later, he tore a hamstring and ruined the rest of his year.


Prices of Treasury Issues Lower
With traders still jittery after the Federal Reserve's sudden increase in short-term interest Friday, prices of Treasury securities slipped lower yesterday.
But prices did manage to bounce off their lows of the day, aided in part by a slide in commodity prices and, traders said, good investor demand in yesterday's three- and six-month Treasury bill auctions.
The February gold contract on the Commodity Exchange fell $7.70, to $378.90 an ounce, while the March contract for light crude on the New York Mercantile Exchange fell 38 cents, to $15.25 a barrel.


F.D.A. Warns the Dairy Industry Not to Label Milk Hormone-Free
The Food and Drug Administration warned dairy producers and distributors yesterday not to mislead consumers with labels on milk and other dairy products that improperly refer to a new genetically engineered growth hormone.
The agency said that milk produced with the man-made hormone was virtually the same as milk that is not and that any effort by manufacturers to label their dairy products as free of the hormone could be false and misleading, and illegal under Federal law.


Spreckels Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Time to Take a Look At Our Afghan War
To the Editor:
"Bitter Epilogue in Afghanistan" (editorial, Jan. 27) is on the mark.
Today's chaos in Afghanistan is directly due to the preference shown by American and Pakistani covert agencies throughout the war years of the 1980's.
The unreasonable bias of United States support given to Gulbaddin Hekmatyar and Burhanuddin Rabbani (the most anti-American fanatics in Afghanistan) has never been adequately explained.


Police Honor an Officer Who Escaped Death
Arlene Beckles walked into a crowded beauty salon in downtown Brooklyn Saturday to get her hair done and emerged a hero.
A police officer who was off duty at the time, Officer Beckles emerged from under a hair dryer to shoot and wound three robbers and to face death.


Regal-Beloit reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Western Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Books of The Times; Up to No Good in No Elapsed Time
The Fermata  By Nicholson Baker  303 pages. Random House. $21.
Who is Arno Strine?
To get a picture of Nicholson Baker's repulsive new hero, think of the worst charges of sexual harassment hurled at Clarence Thomas and Senator Bob Packwood.
Think of the charges of sexual abuse made against a Manhattan dentist who was accused of molesting women while they were unconscious under anesthesia.
Season these allegations with lots of puerile humor, combine them with the magical powers of the Invisible Man, and you have a pretty good idea of what the hero of "The Fermata" does in his spare time.


Petrolane Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 23


Thomas Nelson Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Westcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Fed Goes For Overkill
For years, economists and financial experts and the politicians who take them seriously -- have preached a simple creed.
Cut the deficit, they tell us, and interest rates will fall, raising investment, productivity and economic growth.
In 1993, a new Administration took office and acted on this wisdom.
One year later, the deficit is billions below earlier predictions and is about to fall even further in the tough new budget cuts that the Administration promises.
Yet interest rates are rising.


European Union Issues a Warning
Foreign Ministers of the European Union, meeting in Brussels, called for the immediate end of the Serbian siege of Sarajevo and said they would take "all the means necessary, including the use of air power," to get Serbian forces to lift their 22-month encirclement of Bosnia's capital.
But their statement fell far short of a French request for a deadline.
France wants the Serbian nationalist forces in Bosnia to withdraw to a distance of 18 miles from Sarajevo and hand over all their heavy weapons or face a NATO air assault.
Article, page A14.


Hilda Simms, Actress, Dies at 75; Broadway Star of 'Anna Lucasta'
Hilda Simms, an actress best known for her starring role on Broadway in "Anna Lucasta," died on Sunday in Buffalo at the home of her sister Evelyn Sharp.
She was 75 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer of the pancreas, her sister said.


Union Planters Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ingles Markets reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 25


Interstate Power Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Rust International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wisconsin Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


2 Children's Books Win Top Awards
Two books published by Houghton Mifflin -- "The Giver," by Lois Lowry, and "Grandfather's Journey," written and illustrated by Allen Say -- won the two most prestigious awards in children's publishing yesterday.
The awards, which help children's books break out of a very crowded field and generally enhance sales, are given annually by the Association for Library Services to Children, a division of the American Library Association.


Coast Savings Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Detroit Diesel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


44 Million Words Strong, Britannica to Join Internet
Encyclopedia Britannica, the publisher of the nation's oldest and most prestigious reference work, said today that it would begin offering electronic distribution of its materials to universities and some public libraries via the Internet, the world's largest computer network.
The development is one of the clearest indications that traditional publishers realize the limitations of offering only hard-bound volumes -- and are concluding that the opportunities of on-line publishing outweigh the risks.


The Met Drops Kathleen Battle, Citing 'Unprofessional Actions'
Kathleen Battle, the soprano who in recent years has been as famous for her fiery temperament as for the beauty of her voice, was dismissed yesterday from the Metropolitan Opera's production of Donizetti's "Fille du Regiment" for what the company called "unprofessional actions" during rehearsals.
Several people involved with the production said that Miss Battle had been difficult and uncooperative even after rehearsal schedules were changed to accommodate her demands, and that she had upset other members of the cast.


President Plans to Raise Drug Treatment Budget
Following through on a campaign promise, President Clinton today proposed a sharp increase in spending for drug treatment and programs to prevent drug abuse.
Despite the spending increases for prevention and treatment, most of the $13.2 billion for anti-drug programs would go toward law enforcement.


Sports of The Times; Time to Take A Legacy To Next Level
ONE of Arthur Ashe's closest friends said recently that his most difficult adjustment in the months since Arthur's death last Feb. 6 has been conditioning himself not to reach for the phone.
He explained that an important part of his friendship with Ashe involved the two of them placing spontaneous calls to each other to discuss intriguing news items.


Charges Against Squeegee Users Dismissed
A lawyer, Ronald L. Kuby, won a dismissal of charges in Manhattan Criminal Court yesterday against two clients who used squeegees on the windshields of unsuspecting motorists near City Hall.
But the dismissal was on a technicality, and Judge Denis J. Boyle did not address the constitutionality of arresting squeegee users, which has become a symbol of the Giuliani administration's efforts to impose greater order on New York City streets.
Rather, the judge found that the police had submitted insufficient evidence of the charge, disorderly conduct.


Swish Just Won't Cut It In Jordan's New Sport
Bo knows he can play baseball as well as football, but Michael Jordan doesn't know if he can play baseball as well as basketball, so yesterday he took the first official step in his quest to find out.
Jordan, who retired last October after eight magnificent seasons with the Chicago Bulls of the National Basketball Association, signed a minor league contract with the White Sox, a team, like the Bulls, which is operated by Jerry Reinsdorf.


Flightsafety International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sarajevo: The Right Response
The mortar shell that turned Sarajevo's main market into a killing field Saturday afternoon heightens pressure on NATO leaders, President Clinton included, to find a way to hasten the end of the 22-month-old Bosnia war.
But it would be perverse indeed if this latest Serbian atrocity became the occasion for Mr.
Clinton to abandon his long and principled resistance to French and British pressure to impose an unjust and unenforceable settlement on the Bosnian Government.
European governments have been playing a cynical game.
Until Serbian gunners pushed matters too far last weekend, the Europeans were perfectly willing to use the shelling of Sarajevo and other cities to pressure the Bosnian Government to accept a bad partition plan that denied them vital territory and transit routes.


SEI Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Franklin Electric Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Militants in Egypt Again Warn Foreigners to Leave
Islamic militants, in what they said was their final warning, issued two statements today calling on all foreigners to leave Egypt "immediately."
"This is our final warning," the second statement by the militant Islamic Group said, "and those who read it should take it seriously. Those who do not will suffer the consequences."


Byron De La Beckwith Is Guilty
The murder conviction of Byron De La Beckwith for the 1963 killing of the civil rights leader Medgar Evers satisfies justice in the only way available in 1994.
Mississippi is no longer burning from Klan violence.
Yet the state still suffers the effects not only of official segregation but, worse, of the state-sponsored terrorism that greeted those who worked for racial justice a generation ago.
It was Mississippi's fingerprint on the Beckwith case, even more than the print on Mr.
Beckwith's rifle, that brought the cowardly sniper at last to justice.
The Clarion-Ledger in Jackson discovered that the former State Sovereignty Commission, a publicly financed arm of government, helped Mr.
Beckwith's lawyers screen jurors whose deadlock caused a mistrial in 1964.
That prompted prosecutors to search for evidence of jury tampering, which led instead to new evidence that Mr.
Beckwith had bragged about getting away with murder.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Despite mixed reviews, Coke's quirky campaign commands an encore.
THE Coca-Cola Company, a year after shocking Madison Avenue with the most risk-taking, rule-breaking advertising ever for its flagship brand, signaled its continuing commitment to the campaign by introducing a second generation of commercials that are as unconventional as their precursors.
The campaign, with a global budget estimated at more than $600 million, has been one of the most contentious in advertising.
It has been castigated for a perceived lack of focus and brand-building characteristics, yet also praised for shaking up the tired traditions of Coca-Cola and soft-drink advertising.


Reporter's Notebook; In Perry's First 100 Hours, What Could Possibly Go Wrong?
In his first 100 hours as Defense Secretary, William J. Perry weaved his way through a field of national security land mines, escaping slightly frazzled but unbloodied.
Sworn in late last Thursday to replace Les Aspin, Mr.
Perry joined senior Administration officials at the White House the next day to tighten economic sanctions on Haiti's military government.
Then, he hopped an Air Force jet for Munich to keep a long-scheduled date at a private conference on European security issues.


INSIDE
Heart Attack Help
Federal officials urge that heart patients be given clot-busting drugs within 30 minutes of arrival at a hospital.
Science Times, page C8.


People
*
Yung Mun Sung was named to the new position of general manager at BBDO Singapore.
He was previously general manager at Johnson &amp; Johnson, Singapore.


Results Plus
N.B.A.
Hawks in an Avalanche  Stacey Augmon scored a season-high 26 points as the Atlanta Hawks shot 64 percent and had their highest-scoring game of the season in a 141-97 rout of the visiting Detroit Pistons last night.
Five other Hawks scored in double figures: Mookie Blaylock with 18; Dominique Wilkins, 17; Kevin Willis, 16; Craig Ehlo, 15; and the rookie Doug Edwards, 11.
Willis also had 11 rebounds and Augmon 10.
Atlanta never trailed after Wilkins, who made his first seven shots, broke a 2-2 tie.
The Hawks have won 8 of their last 10 games. (AP)
Pacers 104, Warriors 99: Rik Smits had season highs of 28 points and 13 rebounds and made a key basket with 14 seconds to play, lifting Indiana over Golden State in Indianapolis. (AP)
76ers 125, Hornets 117: Jeff Hornacek scored 36 points and Tim Perry had a career-high 31 -- including a club-record seven 3-point shots -- to lead the Sixers over injury-riddled Charlotte. (AP) N.H.L.
Canadiens Stymie Penguins  Kirk Muller scored one goal and set up two others as the Montreal Canadiens beat the Penguins, 4-1, in Pittsburgh last night for their fifth straight victory.
Montreal stopped a six-game streak without a victory (0-4-2) against the Penguins and snapped Pittsburgh's home unbeaten streak at 5-0-2.(AP)
Lightning 2, Maple Leafs 1: Tim Bergland and Randy Poeschek each had a goal as visiting Tampa Bay beat Toronto.
Bergland scored in the first period and Poeschek in the second to give Tampa Bay a 2-0 lead. (AP)
Flames 4, Oilers 3: Robert Reichel scored two goals, including one on a penalty shot, to lead host Calgary over struggling Edmonton.
Reichel was awarded the penalty shot after Oilers goaltender Bill Ranford threw his stick at the puck while Calgary was pressing late in the second period. (AP) TENNIS  Pierce Loses in Rush  The second-seeded Mary Pierce of France was beaten yesterday in the first round of a $150,000 women's tournament in Linz, Austria, losing by 4-6, 1-6 in just 63 minutes to Eva Martinkova of the Czech Republic. (AP)


Seagull Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


SOCCER
Diego Maradona
It is becoming more and more evident that Argentina will come to the World Cup next summer without Diego Maradona, the most gifted player in the world of soccer the last decade.
Argentine specialists in psychology and psychiatry said in Buenos Aires on Sunday that Maradona needed urgent psychiatric help because, in the words of Mauricio Abadi, the country's best-known psychiatrist, Maradona was "losing his identity and could become dangerous."
According to news reports last week, Maradona fired at journalists with an air rifle outside his sprawling country home near Buenos Aires after he was dismissed by his club, Newell's Old Boys, for repeatedly missing practice.
He is scheduled to appear in court today to answer those charges.
United States
Without a professional league to keep the players sharp every week, the World Cup team of the United States has been the most active in its preparation for next summer.
After a victory over Norway and ties against Switzerland and Russia last month, the Americans left for Hong Kong yesterday to play in a tournament this week that includes Denmark and Romania.
Coach Bora Milutinovic took 18 players to Hong Kong, where the Americans will open against Denmark on Thursday.
None of the players on the squad for the Hong Kong event play in Europe.
The Americans will return to California on Monday and leave two days later for the Joe Robbie Cup in Miami, where they will play Bolivia and Sweden in a tournament that also includes Colombia.
Belgium
Immigration authorities have approved the naturalization of Josef Weber of Croatia that will allow him to play for Belgium in the World Cup next summer.
Weber's citizenship is expected to be rubber-stamped by the Belgian authorities this week so he can play for Belgium as soon as possible.
The 29-year-old Weber, who plays for Cercle Brugge, was the leading scorer in the Belgian League last season and is the leading scorer this season.
Mexico
The Mexicans have regressed a great deal, especially defensively, since their surge to becoming one of the world's top teams at the end of last year, when they were the first team to qualify for the World Cup and captured the Gold Cup with a 4-0 triumph over the United States in the championship game.
After a poor performance in a 1-1 tie with Bulgaria in San Diego last month, the Mexicans suffered a 5-1 loss to Switzerland and were crushed, 4-1, by the Russians last Wednesday night in Oakland, Calif.
What should be of concern to the Mexicans is that Italy, Ireland and Norway, the teams in their group in the World Cup, play a style similar to those of Switzerland and Russia.
Nigeria
The Super Eagles, who have qualified for the first time for the final stages of the World Cup, suffered a setback in their preparation with the cancellation of their tour of South Africa.
The South Africans called off the tour, which was supposed to start last Saturday, when the Super Eagles could not guarantee the release from the clubs of their best players, most of whom play outside Nigeria.
Switzerland
After boycotting a meeting of the Swiss Football Association, members of the World Cup team have been offered improved bonuses for the World Cup and for qualifying for the final stages of the tournament for the first time since 1966.
The Swiss will be the first opponent for the Americans.
They will play June 18 at the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich., in the first World Cup game to be played in an indoor stadium.
ALEX YANNIS


LOCKHEED CORP. (N)
The Lockheed Corporation, one of the nation's largest military contractors, reported a 13 percent increase yesterday for its fourth-quarter earnings.
The company's earnings of $2.13 a share exceeded consensus expectations of analysts by 7 cents.
The company's sales for the quarter were up 28 percent.
Lockheed, based in Calabasas, Calif., said its backlog at the end of the year was 50 percent higher than the $19.4 billion backlog at the end of 1992, much of it a result of the purchase of the General Dynamics Corporation's Forth Worth division.


'Blue Monday' It Isn't As Dow Regains 34.90
As most of the world's stock exchanges languished yesterday, Wall Street forged ahead in a frenzy of buying, with apprehensions easing, at least for now, that last week's Federal Reserve Board decision to nudge up short-term interest rates would end the three-year bull market.
Stocks across the board benefited from yesterday's surprisingly strong rally, as fears quickly receded of a "Blue Monday," a paler version of the Black Monday of Oct. 19, 1987, when the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 508 points following a Friday fall of 108 points.


Spacelabs Medical Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Standard Register Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Not Just Another Beauty Contest
AT least one researcher, Dr.
Randy Thornhill of the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, suspects that symmetry is very important to the females of one advanced species: humans.
With his colleagues Karl Grammer and Steven Gangestad, Dr.
Thornhill is trying to apply the evolutionary principles they have developed in their work on scorpion flies and other species to people.
They have taken photographs of male and female college students, put the pictures into computers and digitalized them for precise measurements.
They then gauged the relative symmetry of the faces by putting points on key features: the outer corners of the eyes, inner corners of the eyes, the cheekbones, the outer corners of the lips, the outer edge of each nostril and the outer points of the jaw.


Fairfield Studies a New Weapon in Its Battle With Rowdy Students
For years, homeowners along the beach here have complained about the drinking and rowdy behavior of Fairfield University students who rent waterfront houses for the academic year.
Student groups and the university say they have worked hard to correct the problem, in part through education programs for the students, and they say they have had some success.


Prudential Said to Inflate Appraisals
Officials of the Prudential Insurance Company of America pressured executives and appraisers to push up the estimated values of real estate held in the company's institutional funds, thus exaggerating the funds' performance, a report by a senior Prudential executive asserts.
The report, prepared in July by Mark Jorgensen, then the manager of the Prudential real estate portfolio, was filed yesterday in Federal District Court in New Jersey in support of a lawsuit he brought against the insurance company in November.
In his suit, Mr.
Jorgensen contends that Prudential dismissed him after he pointed out potential misdeeds in the funds, the Prudential Property Investment Separate Account, or Prisa, and Prisa II.


CRSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Recommendations On Clot-Busting Drugs For Heart Victims
Federal health officials recommended today that heart attack patients receive clot-dissolving drugs within 30 minutes of arrival at an emergency room.
They issued a set of specific guidelines for emergency room personnel that would expedite the delivery of such treatment.
The aim is to reduce death and disability by administering timely injections of clot-dissolving drugs like streptokinase and tpa, which are also known as thrombolytics.
The benefit of such therapy has been proved conclusively in several trials involving tens of thousands of heart attack victims in many countries.


450 Firefighters Respond to 8-Alarm Fire; 31 Are Injured


CHRONICLE
GERMAINE GREER recently invited the homeless to move into her house with her, and who showed up last week but a newspaper reporter in disguise.
Yesterday, the feminist author, who had issued the invitation through a column she wrote in The Big Issue, a weekly newspaper for the homeless, announced that she would sue the reporter, MARTIN HENNESSEY of The Mail on Sunday, for invasion of privacy.
Mr.
Hennessey wrote a mostly flattering account of his three days in Ms.
Greer's spacious home near Cambridge that was published two days ago.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Navigating Automobiles By Computer
What do you add to a car after you've installed a CD player and a cellular telephone?
A computerized navigation system, of course.
The new product, which will be announced today by Sony Mobile Electronics and Etak Inc., is designed especially for tourists, traveling salesmen and delivery people.
It uses a network of satellites launched by the Pentagon, called the Global Positioning System, and a detailed road map, which includes street names, to display a car's location on a 5-inch color computer screen.
Push a button and little knife-and-fork symbols appear to designate the locations of nearby restaurants, with descriptions from a Fodor's travel guide.
Parks, shops, nightspots, museums and other attractions are also included.


European Stocks Plunge In Response to Fed Move
After enjoying a long run-up over the last year, share prices in Europe dropped sharply today in response to the Federal Reserve's decision last week to nudge up interest rates in the United States.
After declining sharply early in the day, stock markets in London, Frankfurt and Paris stabilized later in what analysts said was relatively light trading.
In London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange index of 100 leading shares plunged more than 93 points during the morning but recovered to close down 56.30 at 3,419.10.


Automotive Industries Holding Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Why Birds and Bees, Too, Like Good Looks
BEAUTY is only skin deep.
How sweet that old chestnut is, equally comforting to the unbeautiful, who know they have so much beyond physical appearance to offer the world, and the beautiful, who, after years of being pursued for their prettiness, really do want to be loved for their inner selves.
The only problem with the cliche, say evolutionary biologists, is that it may not be true.
In the view of a growing number of researchers who study why animals are attracted to each other, a beautiful face and figure may be alluring not for whimsical esthetic reasons, but because outward beauty is a reasonably reliable indicator of underlying quality.
These biologists have gathered evidence from studies of species as diverse as zebra finches, scorpion flies, elk and human beings that creatures appraise the overall worthiness of a potential mate by looking for at least one classic benchmark of beauty: symmetry.


Queens Sophomore Slashed By 2 Youths for Gold Chain
A sophomore at Newtown High School in Queens was stabbed and slashed yesterday in a basement stairwell by two youths who stole his gold chain, the police said.
The police believe the youths were classmates of the victim.
New York City police officers detained one suspect in the school hours after the morning attack.
The other youth, who wore a ski mask and who is believed to have done the stabbing, was still being sought, said Officer Scott Bloch, a police spokesman.


Michael Anthony Jewelers reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wilmington Trust Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


An Added Entry on Anderson's Medical Charts
While the Nets tried to resolve the Derrick Coleman situation, Kenny Anderson had to sit out today's shootaround with a sore knee.
"Everybody worked with the exception of Kenny Anderson, who banged his knee in a late play against San Antonio," said Coach Chuck Daly.


Bok Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Patrick Industries(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Finance Minister of Poland Resigns in Coalition Crisis
In the first crisis of the four-month-old coalition Government in Poland, the Prime Minister tonight accepted the resignation of the Finance Minister, the author of an austere budget favored by the international financial institutions.
The Finance Minister, Marek Borowski, a member of the party of the former Communists, the Democratic Left Alliance, was locked in a power struggle with the Prime Minister, Waldemar Pawlak, who heads the Polish Peasants Party.


One Period, Then Rangers Fold the Tent
The Rangers lost control of last night's game against the Capitals at Madison Square Garden in a span of 43 seconds in the second period.
And Brian Leetch, New York's All-Star defenseman, felt responsible for what he called "bad decisions" that led to the two pivotal Washington goals.
With the Rangers leading by 1-0, the Capitals pushed the puck past Leetch along the boards and worked it inside the Ranger blue line for the tying goal by Steve Konowalchuk at 13 minutes 27 seconds.


Mediplex Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


European Union Fails to Set Deadline to Lift the Siege
The European Union called today for "the immediate lifting of the siege of Sarajevo" and said that air power might be used to do so.
But the bloc set no deadline for Serbian forces to lift their 22-month encirclement of the Bosnian capital.
"The aim should be to bring about the immediate lifting of the siege of Sarajevo using all the means necessary, including the use of air power," the European Union foreign ministers said in a statement after meeting here.


WLR Foods Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


NAC Re Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


TIME WARNER INC. (N)
Time Warner Inc. reported yesterday its first profit after the payment of preferred dividends since Time Inc. and Warner Communications merged in 1989.
The media and entertainment company posted net income of $7 million, or 1 cent a share, in contrast to its loss of $93 million, or 25 cents a share, after payment of preferred dividends, in the period a year earlier.
Revenues for the quarter jumped 9.6 percent, to $4.12 billion.
The company attributed the performance to increased profits in its music, publishing and pay-television businesses, noting that operating profits in cable and film entertainment had declined for the quarter.


Ryan Adds Son to Cards' Staff
BUDDY RYAN , not needing a background check on his latest hire, yesterday appointed his son as an assistant coach of the Phoenix Cardinals.
REX RYAN was 1 of 10 assistants introduced by the Cardinals' new head coach and general manager.
Rex Ryan, who has no N.F.L. experience, will be the defensive-line coach.
"He'll have the same authority as any other coach on this staff, and he'll have the opportunity to get his butt chewed, same as any other coach on this staff," Buddy Ryan said.
Rex Ryan has coached at New Mexico Highlands and Morehead State.
Ryan said he was impressed with his son's ability and saw no reason to penalize him because of their relationship. (AP)


New School Offers Its Little Charges a Big Welcome


Jets' Staff Is All Wrapped Up
PETE CARROLL , the Jets' new head coach, completed selection of his staff yesterday when he named DON BREAUX , a longtime Washington Redskin aide, as the team's tight-ends coach.
Breaux replaced PAUL ALEXANDER , who had coached the tight ends during the previous two seasons.
Breaux, a quarterback in the 1960's with Denver and San Diego, had served on the University of Arkansas coaching staff with Carroll in 1977.
He coached the Redskins' running backs from 1981 through 1993.


By Design; So Toes Can Wiggle
Tired of boots and heavy tights?
You're not alone.
This is the time of year Northerners by the thousands long to wiggle their toes in warm sand.
So if you're one of the lucky ones headed for the tropics, be sure to take along some toe-baring sandals.
And leave your stockings at home.
Heels are on the rise, but there are still plenty of flat slides for the resort-into-summer season.
The newest styles are in metallic silver or gold, to set off the white and pale shades of resort clothing.


Bank United of Texas reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


PanCanadian Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tools of A Writer's Trade Fit On a Disk
A BUSINESSPERSON turns out memos and reports.
A student writes papers.
A law partner composes a letter meant to be understood by a client, rather than another lawyer, but don't count on it.
Whether the program is a major one like Microsoft Word, a niche product like Nota Bene, or a module of a catchall program like Clarisworks, a personal computer running a word processor is light-years beyond Royals and Smith-Coronas.


Stelco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bridge
A young team, emerging from the Culbertson Club, at 24 Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, has already made a notable mark on the current New York season.
Ernie Campbell of Fresh Meadows, Queens; Anne Mittman, John Ramos and Matthew Connor, all of Manhattan; Charles Whitney of Newark and Sanjiv Gupta of Roselle Park, N.J., whose average age is well under 30, have won three straight matches in the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship.
Their victims, including bunches of players with significant national and international records, were the second-seeded team headed by Michael Kamil, the 15th-seeded team led by Dorothy Truscott and the seventh-seeded team headed by David Rosenberg.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article yesterday about the Whitewater Development Company and the roles played by Bill and Hillary Clinton and James B. and Susan McDougal in its finances included a misplaced passage in some editions.
The 12 lines at the bottom of the second column should have appeared at the top of the fourth.


Shelling Gives Clinton Chance to Change
For many months now, President Clinton has temporized on the war in Bosnia, finding one reason or another to avoid American involvement.
Prudence, his backers call it.
Dithering, say his critics.
Now, in the wake of the sickening slaughter in Sarajevo's central marketplace on Saturday, there are signs that the politics of the matter may be changing.
The frightful television images of the carnage may have broken, or at least dented, the shell of American public indifference.
At the least, they have given the President as good an opportunity to act firmly in Bosnia as he is likely to get.


COMPANY NEWS: A Sale's Slip; There's Nothing Like a Typo To Draw a Rush of Shoppers
Bon Marche, a leading regional department store, received proof last week about the power of advertising after a misprint inadvertently slashed the price of a popular compact disk player by about 50 percent.
Ten days before a sale began, Bon Marche circulated a sales brochure listing a Sony five-disk carousel player at $99, instead of a planned sale price of $179.
The machine usually sells for $199.


U.S. Hockey Team Gets Official Entry Stamp
Today, they became Olympians.
Now, if the United States hockey team can grow up some more by next Sunday, when the squad opens against France, a rare smile might cross Coach Tim Taylor's lips.
He has a grand total of four players who were born before 1970.
He has three who aren't yet 21.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.S.
BACKS OFF QUICK RETALIATION  The Clinton Administration decided to concentrate on persuading NATO to launch air strikes against the Serbs if they continue to attack civilians in Sarajevo.
A1


Total of $28 Billion Is Being Requested For Secret Projects
Nearly 2 percent of the $1.5 trillion Federal budget is none of the public's business.
The estimated $28 billion for secret military and intelligence spending, known within those circles as the "black budget," is hidden in false line items and deleted passages in the Pentagon's accounts.
The figure is a secret and has been since the beginning of the cold war.


South Jersey Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Blair Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Parkinson Patients Set For First Rigorous Test Of Fetal Cell Implants
MARGARET FLEMING, who is 45, has had Parkinson's disease for 13 years.
Her medications no longer control the tremors and jerking movements caused by this progressive, degenerative neurological disease, and she is getting increasingly desperate.
On Sunday afternoon, she and several hundred other patients with the disease went to Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York to learn about enrolling in a new Federal study assessing a potential therapy using transplanted fetal tissue.


Congress's Budget Office May Deal New Blow to Clinton Plan
White House officials said today that they were bracing for another blow to President Clinton's health plan, fearing that the Congressional Budget Office would rule that its mandatory insurance premiums must be treated as part of the Federal budget.
Such a decision would cause new political problems for the plan in Congress.
But the officials and other Democrats took consolation from reports that the budget office had found the Administration's cost estimates to be reasonably accurate.
The estimates have been derided by many lawmakers, including some prominent Democrats, as far fetched.


How Much Printer Do You Need?
SOME families are quite content to do their computing without a printer.
For them, the action is all on screen, and whatever educational sofware or games the children use do not require printing.
Even some people who bring work home from their offices can rely on the office printer, carrying material back and forth on a diskette or transmitting it over telephone lines.
Yet these are the exceptions to the rule, and a vast majority of home computers have a printer attached.
Most first-time computer buyers view choosing a printer as part of installing a complete system.


8-Alarm Fire Engulfs Apartment Building, Injuring 31
A roaring fire driven to blowtorch intensity by powerful Hudson River winds engulfed the top floors of a six-story cooperative apartment building on a hilltop in upper Manhattan yesterday.
The inferno touched off two backdraft explosions and forced hard-pressed firefighters to declare a rare eight alarms.
Scores of residents were safely evacuated from the burning building at 610 West 142d Street, near Riverside Drive.
But 23 firefighters and 8 residents suffered burns or smoke inhalation, and 60 families -- about 240 people -- lost their homes and possessions to the flames and water damage.


Tesoro Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Brunswick Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mourners Fear Gunners Even at Burials
Muslims buried their dead after the sun went down tonight, a change in usual religious practice adopted here in hopes that the mourners would not also become victims.
The Serbian Orthodox, the Croatian Roman Catholics and the atheists, or cosmopolitans, as many people of mixed marriages here call themselves, were mostly buried by day.
But all the funerals were brief.
The main graveyards are on slopes exposed to the Serbian gunners in the mountains above who have fired on funerals in the 22-month siege of Sarajevo.


Review/Music; A Russian at Play Amid the Wreckage Of a Lost Past
Just over a decade ago, the composer Alfred Schnittke was little known outside the Soviet Union.
The New Grove Dictionary devoted a brief article to his work and isolated pieces appeared here and there, but the composer himself, who wrote more than 60 film scores along with his concert music, quietly taught in Moscow.
No more.
Now he is mentioned in same breath as Shostakovich, is represented by an extensive series of recordings on BIS and a new set of releases on Sony Classical, and, like some of the other composers from what was once the Soviet bloc, he is viewed as possessing an authenticity we can only hope to imitate.
During the next two weeks, he is also to become an important fixture of the New York musical scene with a series of major premieres.


Treasury Official Is Attorney Pick For New Jersey
The top law-enforcement officer in the Treasury Department, Faith Shapiro Hochberg, was recommended today to be the next United States Attorney for New Jersey.
Mrs.
Hochberg would replace Michael Chertoff, who said today that he would step down about May 1 after four years as the state's top Federal prosecutor.
One of his most sensational cases involved the successful prosecution of the former Chief Justice of New York, Sol Wachtler, on charges that Mr.
Wachtler threatened to kidnap the 14-year-old daughter of his former lover.


MDU Resources Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Taking Leave at Northwestern
Northwestern Coach RICKY BYRDSONG , who went into the stands to shake hands with fans during his team's eighth straight loss last weekend, asked for and received an indefinite leave of absence. (AP)


Micro Warehouse Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Zions Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Jorge Zontal, 50, Partner in Canadian Art Group
Jorge Zontal, a member of the Canadian art collaborative General Idea, died on Thursday at his home in Toronto.
He was 50.
The cause was AIDS, said A. A. Bronson and Feliz Partz, his partners.


Market Place; Surge in America Online: Investors Buying a Concept
Investors in America Online are buying a concept.
They are betting that the Vienna, Va., company will be a big winner in the business of computer services sent to homes -- the first huge consumer market, analysts say, in the evolution of computer and communications technology known as the information highway.
"You don't buy America Online for earnings," said Steven Eskenazi, a principal of Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons Inc.


Elliott Looks Into Ailment
Houston Rockets doctors were unable to confirm to their satisfaction that SEAN ELLIOTT has beaten a kidney infection, so they turned down a trade with Detroit, Elliott's agent said yesterday.
A trade that sent Elliott from the Pistons to the Rockets was voided Sunday when Elliott failed his physical.
ROBERT HORRY and MATT BULLARD , who were to be traded to Detroit, instead returned to Houston.
Elliott went to seek help from medical specialists, said his agent, BURT KINERK . (AP)


Mosinee Paper Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


BankAtlantic reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ohio Casualty Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Yankee Energy System Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


NovaCare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Whitman Signs Proclamation for Black History Month


Profits to Be Made on Savings and Loans
To the Editor:
"U.S. Moves to Halt S. &amp; L. Sales Amid Concern on Insiders' Profits" (front page, Feb. 1) deserves comment, clarification and correction.


Allied Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Pillowtex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


UGI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


War Crimes Without Punishment
The slaughter of 68 people at a crowded market in Sarajevo on Saturday brutally demonstrates how ineffectual Western leaders and the United Nations have been in stopping the genocide in Bosnia.
Less noticed is the discreet gutting of the one opportunity for justice -- however inadequate -- that the international community had promised to the citizens of that abused country.
The teeth are being pulled from the International War Crimes Tribunal, set up by the U.N.
Security Council with fanfare last year.
The U.N.'s War Crimes Commission, which is charged with assembling evidence, will soon be disbanded.
This is being done by the very statesmen who hailed the tribunal -- at least publicly -- as the means of insuring that however unfavorable a peace settlement would be to the Bosnians, they could at least see justice done to the perpetrators of mass rape, murder and torture.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about European responses to an attack in Bosnia referred imprecisely to the attack.
Although the Bosnian Government has blamed Serbian forces, the United Nations has been unable to determine which side fired the mortar shell that killed 68 people and wounded more than 200 in the Sarajevo market on Saturday.


Marsh Supermarkets (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Some Experimental Treatment Saves Lives
To the Editor:
"When the Dying Enroll in Studies: A Debate Over False Hopes" (news article, Jan. 29) paints a picture of human guinea pigs deceived by sinister researchers into participation in medical experimentation with more potential for harm than good.


The Post Pledges Millions For Color and Comeback
The New York Post will invest millions of dollars in new press equipment to produce a full-color newspaper, the paper's newly named publisher said yesterday.
The new publisher, Martin Singerman, said The Post's owner, Rupert Murdoch, would make a "multimillion-dollar" investment to modernize or replace presses and would move its news and business headquarters to midtown from lower Manhattan.
Mr.
Singerman also said in an interview that The Post would consider moving the printing operation out of Manhattan or, perhaps, out of the city altogether.


Quebecor Printing reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


USF&amp;G Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Lancaster Colony (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Long May We Argue Over History; Insanity Defense Has Lost Its Way
To the Editor:
The insanity defense would not be the psychiatric crapshoot David Margolick describes in the At the Bar column (Law page, Jan. 28) if American psychiatry had not persuaded the law to abandon the McNaughtan rules.
These rules grew out of the 19th-century assassination of Prime Minister Robert Peel's secretary by Daniel McNaughtan, a wood turner and Chartist, who mistook the man for Peel.
The definition of criminal insanity in these rules prevailed for a century in American law -- that the defendant did "not know the nature and quality of his act, or, if he did know it, that he did not know he was doing what was wrong."


Film Boss Rules the Stars With His Awe
Mark Canton still recalls his awe when, as a child in New York, he met movie makers like Alfred Hitchcock and Elia Kazan and David Lean.
He remembers Doris Day visiting his family's apartment in New York, and accompanying his father to the airport to welcome Leslie Caron.
"All these amazing people," Mr.
Canton said with a smile of the movie stars and film makers who were introduced to him by his father, Arthur, a movie marketing executive.


Greater N.Y. Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Government Halts Wetland Practice
The Government today effectively banned the clearing and draining of wetlands to make pine plantations for timber companies, a practice that has destroyed millions of acres of wetlands in the Southeast.
According to an environmental group's estimate, stopping this practice may protect 100,000 acres per year in the Southeast from timbering.
But an estimate by the Environmental Protection Agency holds that only 5,000 acres a year is lost in this way.


Hawkeye Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Harsco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Breed of High-Tech Nomads; Mobile Computer-Carrying Workers Transform Companies
Workers like John A. Cruz are the great hope for old corporate center cities like Hartford, and perhaps their greatest threat as well: He's been liberated from his office.
Rootless, mobile, armed with 120 megabytes in his briefcase, Mr.
Cruz -- a 32-year-old account executive at Travelers Insurance -- is one of a new breed of high-tech nomads who are changing the face and the culture of many companies.


Sonat Offshore Drilling Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Richard M. Bissell, 84, Is Dead; Helped Plan Bay of Pigs Invasion
Richard M. Bissell Jr., the senior Government official who took responsibility for the Central Intelligence Agency's failed attempt to topple the Castro Government at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba in April 1961, died today at his home in Farmington, Conn.
He was 84.
Mr. Bissell had heart problems, said his aide, Frances T. Pudlo.


Morrison Resigns Checkers Account
The Morrison Agency in Atlanta said yesterday that it had resigned the Checkers Drive-In Restaurant Inc. account after a year, stating that "the relationship has not proved mutually beneficial." As a result, the chain has named three agencies to compete for the account; billings have been estimated at $3 million, but Checkers said it planned to raise spending to a level of $6 million to $7 million.


Nine West Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Arctco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Moog Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Masland Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Legendary Giant Sloth Sought by Scientists In Amazon Rain Forest
AN American biologist and a team of scientists, technicians and Indian guides are preparing to penetrate the trackless rain forest of western Brazil in pursuit of a South American counterpart of the fabled Himalayan yeti.
The object of this quest, headed by Dr.
David C. Oren, an American ornithologist employed by the Brazilian Government, is an animal Dr.
Oren believes to be a human-size ground sloth, belonging to a family thought by paleontologists to be long extinct.


Richard M. Bissell, 84, Is Dead; Helped Plan Bay of Pigs Invasion
Richard M. Bissell Jr., the senior Government official who took responsibility for the Central Intelligence Agency's failed attempt to topple the Castro Government at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba in April 1961, died today at his home in Farmington, Conn.
He was 84.
Mr. Bissell had heart problems, said his aide, Frances T. Pudlo.


Woman and 2 Girls Found Fatally Shot Inside an Apartment
A Jersey City woman, her 4-year-old daughter and a 14-year-old girl were found shot to death yesterday in the woman's apartment, the police said.
The police declined to comment late last night on a possible motive, adding to the mystery surrounding the shooting.


Schult Homes (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


Netzarim Journal; Find the Jews of Gaza (Behind an Electrified Fence)
Life could not have been more placid today at this Israeli settlement.
Twenty children played in the mobile home that had been converted into a kindergarten.
In an adjoining trailer turned into a study hall, a dozen bearded men read from the Talmud.
Not far away, three other men worked in a hothouse, pruning overgrown tomato vines.


Eastern Utilities Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Comic's Genius Is Lost On PGA
So, here was Bill Murray, swinging a bat on the 18th green at Pebble Beach, taking a pitch from Chicago Cubs first baseman Mark Grace and driving a golf ball back, back, back into Carmel Bay.
Then he circled the green, touching them all.
This was last Saturday, at the end of the third round of the A.T.&amp;T.
Pebble Beach National Pro-Am, and the goofy scene would have made a great close to the CBS broadcast.
But except for the delighted gallery in the grandstands at golf's most famous finishing hole, no one saw the sight gag.
Murray had been consigned to the last tee time on Saturday by the PGA Tour, insuring that he would get a minimum of television exposure.
You can't blame Murray's lack of air time on Frank Chirkinian, the CBS producer.
He might not be crazy about Murray's wilder antics, either, but knows show biz when he sees it.


PSI Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Rock; A Maker of the 60's Sound Bridges Past and Present
Al Kooper turned 50 on Saturday, and he spent his birthday weekend at the Bottom Line, playing shows that summed up his long career in rock.
More than a footnote and less than a household name, Mr.
Kooper has been most widely heard as a sideman -- the keyboardist on Bob Dylan's mid-1960's masterpieces and on the Rolling Stones' "Let It Bleed" -- and he discovered and produced the Southern rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd.
But he was more visible in two fondly remembered 1960's bands, the Blues Project and the first lineup of Blood, Sweat and Tears, which were fully and partly reunited for the occasion; Blood, Sweat and Tears was billed as Child Is Father to the Man, the name of its debut album.
With both bands, Mr.
Kooper was a model of try-everything 1960's eclecticism.
The Blues Project dipped into blues, folk-rock and near-jazz; Blood, Sweat and Tears, with its horn section, accessorized 1960's soul with touches of big-band jazz and Renaissance music.
One of Mr.
Kooper's major skills is in arranging just a few horns (two trumpets, alto saxophone and trombone) to create opulent crescendos, underlining sentiments like "I Love You More Than You'll Ever Know."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.19
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.20
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.40
3.36
3.09
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.93
5.87
6.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.39
6.35
7.19
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.25
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.49
5.46
6.21
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CBS to Skate Circles Around Rival Shows
You hate to admit that the attack by a few yahoos on Nancy Kerrigan was good for figure skating's exposure, but, well, it's true.
The sport was already deemed the Winter Olympics' ratings-grabber for CBS, but the news focus on Kerrigan's comeback from the Jan. 6 attack and the inquiries swirling around Tonya Harding have made figure skating white hot.


Enough for Two, and Maybe Even Three


Clinton, Unlike Recent Predecessors, Leaves the Experts at Home
Among those traveling with President Clinton here are three Texans in the Administration who were invited by Mr.
Clinton to take a day off for a visit to their home state.
But when the President flew here Sunday, the party did not include the national security adviser, his deputy, his staff director or even anyone from the top tier of National Security Council aides.
With the White House facing a decision on Bosnia, the most senior foreign policy adviser in the Presidential party was Rose Gottemoeller, a respected but second-tier director on the National Security Council staff whose expertise lies in Russian, Ukrainian and Eurasian affairs.


Being First on the Bandwagon for Couture's Hits
No sooner did the miniskirt make a surprising comeback in Chanel's haute couture show last July than ABS USA had its 16-inch miniskirts in Bloomingdale's.
It used to take several months for a new style to reach the racks, longer still for less expensive versions to appear, but ABS can deliver in a matter of weeks.


Canadian Pacific Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


For Ivory Coast's Founder, Lavish Funeral
Two months after his death, President Felix Houphouet-Boigny of the Ivory Coast, one of the last of a generation of African leaders to guide his people from colonialism, finally received a somber state funeral today in the world's largest church, which he had built in his ancestral village.
The 7,000 guests inside the Basilica of Our Lady of Peace of Yamoussoukro, and the tens of thousands of mourners who endured withering equatorial heat in the huge esplanade outside, witnessed what it seems safe to say was the most lavish ceremony ever held to pay homage to an African leader.
A Mix of Traditions
All the panoply of Western religious liturgy mixed with traditional African customs were on display here, Mr.
Houphouet-Boigny's birthplace: the stirring music of Handel and Gounod; the undulating music and dance of ancient African rituals; a huge chorus dressed in bright batik dress singing "laagoh budji gnia," the Baoule-language words for "Lord, it is you who has made all things"; a military honor guard dressed in bright red coats and brandishing glittering swords, and hundreds of village elders, resplendent in huge multi-colored strips of kente and korhogo cloth.


Teamsters and U.P.S. Settle After Short, Scattered Strike
The teamsters' union and the United Parcel Service reached a settlement this evening after a one-day work stoppage by the union protesting a company decision to more than double the weight limit on packages.
The teamsters struck the company this morning in defiance of a court order, seriously disrupting U.P.S. service in the Northeast and some other scattered locations but failing to generate support from union members in most of the rest of the country.


THE CLINTON BUDGET: THE NEW YORK REGION
Under the budget President Clinton proposed today, the New York region would suffer deep cuts in programs, including grants that help poor people pay their home heating bills and operating subsidies for mass transit, while winning new money for Head Start, job training, AIDS care, services for the homeless and the redevelopment of Pennsylvania Station.
"It is a bad-news, good-news budget for New York," said Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn.
"What we gain on education and training and mass-transit capital funds, we lose in housing and mass-transit operating subsidies."


Jurors in Sect's Murder Trial View Photos of F.B.I. Assault
Jurors in the Branch Davidians' murder trial today saw for the first time detailed photographs of the destruction last April that Federal agents inflicted on the sect's compound near Waco when the agents began plowing into the compound with tanks, pumping in tear gas in an effort to end a 51-day standoff.
Jurors also heard details of the standoff and the tank assault from Federal marksmen who participated in the efforts by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to force the surrender of the cult's leader, David Koresh, and about 80 of his followers.


Dependent Care Plans
To the Editor:
"Putting Household Help on the Books" (Your Money, Jan. 22): An employee whose employer offers a dependent care spending account through payroll deduction must forfeit any money not used by the end of the year.
Employees are not, as you state, allowed to recoup unused funds.
Employees considering what to do about dependent care expenses would be well advised to estimate their expenses conservatively because of this use it or lose it rule.


Scherer (R.P.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Shelter Components Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


T   Medical Will Merge With 3 Small Concerns
In yet another health care consolidation, T
Medical Inc., the troubled home health care company, announced a four-way merger yesterday with Curaflex Health Services Inc. and two smaller home care companies, Health Infusion Inc. and Medisys Inc.
The new company, to be called the Coram Healthcare Corporation, would become the nation's second- largest home health care company after Caremark International.
The deal, valued at $550 million, would leave T
shareholders in control of the company with 67 percent of the stock.


Classical Music in Review
New Millennium Ensemble  Weill Recital Hall
The New Millennium Ensemble, a strong new contemporary-music group, made its New York debut on Sunday night with a program weighted toward, but not dominated by, academic composition.
The ensemble's members -- Tara Helen O'Connor (flutist), Marianne Gythfeldt (clarinetist), Sunghae Anna Lim (violinist), Joshua Gordon (cellist), Margaret Kampmeier (pianist) and John Ferrari (percussionist) -- previously played in the Composers' Ensembles at Princeton and Columbia Universities.
But the liveliness of the playing, and in particular the expressive warmth of the strings, indicated a knack for wider repertory.


When Special Pupils Win Acceptance
To the Editor:
We want to give some balance to "Special Pupils, Regular Classes, Thorny Issues" (Education page, Jan. 26), a generally critical discussion of "including" special-needs children in regular classrooms.


Michigan Drops 3 Bans, Adds 2
Three Michigan basketball players suspended for violating team rules were reinstated yesterday, but two football players were suspended while police investigate a reported convenience store theft.
RAY JACKSON , JIMMY KING and CHRIS FIELDS will play tonight in a game with Indiana.
The three missed Friday's practice and Saturday's 59-51 victory at Michigan State.
An Ann Arbor police department report says five young men stole between six and 11 12-packs of beer worth $7.19 each from a Dairy Mart on Jan. 12.
The alleged theft was discovered later on a videotape from a surveillance camera.
Also yesterday, the school's football coach, GARY MOELLER , announced the suspensions of tight end DAMON JONES and place-kicker REMY HAMILTON for violating team rules.(AP)


Thomas &amp; Betts Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


Baldor Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


INSIDE
Heart Attack Help
Federal officials urge that heart patients be given clot-busting drugs within 30 minutes of arrival at a hospital.
Science Times, page C8.


Ekco Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 2


SFFed Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


KCS Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


The Voice of the Rebels Has Mexicans in His Spell
He speaks softly through the black ski mask, clasping his hands almost shyly in his lap and making a point of the orders he takes rather than those he gives.
But Subcomandante Marcos, as he calls himself, has emerged as the arresting central figure of the peasant uprising that has shaken this country: an ironic, funny and highly articulate guerrilla commander who has obsessed the authorities and captivated Mexicans far beyond the rebels' strongholds in the southern state of Chiapas.


Sunken Soviet Sub Leaks Radioactivity in Atlantic
Russian scientists have told American experts that a Soviet submarine that sank seven years ago 500 miles east of Bermuda is broken up and leaking radioactivity from her nuclear equipment into an area of strong currents, raising the threat of environmental poisoning.
The report is the first about the state of the wreck that has come to public attention.
Under discussion is the possibility of East-West monitoring to try to learn whether radiation is moving toward fisheries or Bermuda.
Though hundreds of miles from the site, the island lies in the direction of the deep current flow.


SMOKING BAN WINS CLINTON'S SUPPORT
The Clinton Administration today backed legislation to ban smoking in taverns, hardware stores and all other buildings open to the public, saying the nation could save tens of billions of dollars each year, along with thousands of lives, with only small enforcement costs.
In addition, the last six Surgeons General of the United States, from four Republican and two Democratic Administrations, spoke in support of the measure at a House subcommittee hearing.
They echoed the theme that this simple measure could do more for the public health than any other bill in years.


Zapata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Accord Is Reported on Japanese Tax-Cut Package
The Government reportedly ended a week of turmoil this morning by agreeing on a $135 billion plan of temporary tax cuts and public works spending to revive the recession-bound economy and to satisfy one of the Clinton Administration's key demands in trade talks.
The battle over the economic plan has left the coalition Government badly divided, and today's deal, which has not yet been annnounced officially, is filled with compromises that might reduce its effectiveness.
For instance, what had been proposed as a permanent reduction in income taxes will now be a one-year, $55 billion reduction because of a continuing dispute over how the Government will make up for the loss in revenues.


Adia Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Proposal Cuts Back on Some Weapons to Spend More on Personnel
President Clinton's military budget for the 1995 fiscal year puts Pentagon spending in a holding pattern, canceling some weapons to finance better training and higher pay for military personnel.
Military spending would rise $2.8 billion in the coming fiscal year under the Clinton plan.
Taking inflation into account, that represents a decline of slightly less than 1 percent from the budget for the current fiscal year, which ends on Sept. 30.
The Administration plans a 5.9 percent cut for the 1996 fiscal year.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Carlos Quintana, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Michael Jordan, outfielder, on a minor-league contract and invited him to spring training as a non-roster player.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Tim Belcher, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Erickson, Pat Mahomes, Oscar Munoz, Dave Stevens and Kevin Tapani, pitchers; Matt Walbeck, catcher; Jeff Reboulet, Chip Hale, Denny Hocking, David McCarty, Gary Scott and Scott Stahoviak, infielders; and Pedro Munoz, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Jerry Koller, pitcher, and Mike Kelly, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Darron Cox, catcher; Jose Hernandez, infielder; and Ozzie Timmons, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
NEW YORK METS -- Suspended Bret Saberhagen, pitcher, for the first five days of the 1994 season.
Boxing  British Boxing Board of Control  BBBC -- Fined heavyweights Michael Bentt and Herbie Hide $14,800 each for trading punches at a pre-fight news conference Jan. 10.
Football  National Football League  ATLANTA FALCONS -- Named Greg Brown secondary coach and Bob Palcic offensive line coach.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Named Jacob Burney defensive line coach.
NEW YORK JETS -- Named Don Breaux tight ends coach. College
NCAA -- Announced the retirement of Ted C. Tow, associate executive director, effective Feb. 25.


John Reynolds, 61, New York Real-Estate Broker
John J. Reynolds, a New York real-estate broker for more than 40 years, died on Sunday at his home on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
He was 61.
The cause was a heart attack, said Douglas MacLaury, the executive vice president of Mr.
Reynolds's firm.
Co-Owner of Firm
Mr.
Reynolds was the president and sole owner of the Reynolds Organization, which has been a full-service commercial real-estate firm since its founding, as John Reynolds, Inc., in 1918.


Gateway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Review/Dance; Balanchine Solo on a Multitude of Emotions
George Balanchine, one of this century's masters of choreography for groups, was not generally known for his solo dances.
Nevertheless, he did create some, and one of the greatest of them was offered by the New York City Ballet on Sunday night at at the New York State Theater.
"Pavane," choreographed for the company's Ravel Festival of 1975, is a portrait of a beautiful apparition who emerges from the shadows shrouded in a long white veil and then unwraps herself to dance quietly to Ravel's "Pavane pour une Infante Defunte." The steps never glitter.
Rather, they glow with a multitude of emotional implications, and Kyra Nichols captured all of these.


Finning Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Nabors Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Speed, a Gold Medal and Much, Much More to Ponder
If all goes according to her well-laid plan, this will not be Cammy Myler's last Olympic season.
At age 25, she has one more year of Ivy League education before her, and many more luge courses to conquer.
But no matter what life throws Myler's way between now and 1998, the road to Nagano, Japan, will probably prove a great deal smoother than the bumpy path she has traveled in the last six months.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a bookkeeper accused of embezzling $136,000 from Anne Morrow Lindbergh referred incompletely in some editions to a woman who commented on the case.
She is Reeve Lindbergh Tripp, Mrs.
Lindbergh's daughter.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: William Castelli; Preaching the Gospel of Healthy Hearts
DR.
WILLIAM CASTELLI, the director of the Framingham Heart Study, was not always renowned for his bon mots and memorable quotes, which have helped make the concept of "good" and "bad" cholesterol familiar to millions of Americans and prompted them to recast their diets and exercise habits to save their hearts.
He remembers all too well his first professional lecture, when he tried to demonstrate the role of a new cholesterol-lowering drug to a group of general practitioners.
Scrawling away on a blackboard with his back to the audience, he painstakingly detailed all 26 steps in cholesterol metabolism.
But when he turned on the last step to deliver the punch line about the drug's action, he found the entire audience, including his wife, sound asleep.


No Headline
Kathleen Battle's unprofessional actions during rehearsals for the revival of 'La Fille du Regiment' were profoundly detrimental to the artistic collaboration among all the cast members, which is such an essential component of the rehearsal process." -- JOSEPH VOLPE of the Metropolitan Opera, dismissing her.  [ A1:5. ]
To my knowledge, we were working out all of the artistic problems in the rehearsals, and I don't know the reason behind this unexpected dismissal.
All I can say is I am saddened by this decision. -- KATHLEEN BATTLE.  [ C19:1. ]


Ketchum Confirms Talks on Office Sale
Ketchum Communications Inc. said yesterday that it was considering selling its Philadelphia office to the Earle Palmer Brown Companies, which already has an office in that city.
Jan Sneed, a Ketchum spokeswoman in New York, confirmed a report in Adweek of the possible sale, stating that although it "is not a done deal," it was "an alternative that we're considering." Ketchum's Philadelphia office has billings estimated at $55 million from clients including Du Pont and Pizza Hut.


Classical Music in Review
Daniel Gaisford  Cellist 92d Street Y
The 20th century has yielded a bumper crop of cello works, with entries covering the range from lush-toned Romanticism to brash, electronically modified experimentalism.
In his recital on Sunday afternoon, Daniel Gaisford walked a conservative line, exploring the cello sonatas by Barber, Prokofiev, Debussy and Rachmaninoff.


Schuler Homes (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Sierra Health Services reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Correction
Correction: My statement in the column of Jan. 7 that Hungarians were naming plazas for dead Fascists is incorrect; my apologies.


U.S. Healthcare (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; War in Three Acts
U.S. participation in air strikes against Bosnian Serb artillery and mortar positions would be Act I of American military involvement in the Bosnian civil war -- just Act I.
What are the scripts for Act II and Act III?
The new Secretary of Defense, William Perry, asked those questions publicly, but did not answer.


Dofasco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bond Rating Agency Takes Better View of State Finances
New York State's fiscal managers received a vote of confidence today from a major Wall Street credit rating agency, which changed its long-term ratings outlook on the state's general obligation bonds to positive from stable.
The revision by the rating agency, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, does not constitute an upgrading of the state's bond rating, which remains at A-, the lowest of any state.


CLINTON AIDES SEEK APPROVAL BY NATO ON BOSNIA AIR RAIDS
All but abandoning the idea of immediate retaliation for the mortar attack in Sarajevo on Saturday, President Clinton's national security advisers today recommended that he persuade NATO to conduct air strikes against the Serbs if they continue to attack civilians in the Bosnian capital, senior Administration officials said today.
The recommendation to the President was reached by his national security advisers in three hours of meetings at the White House today.


More Surgery for Magrane
Injury-prone pitcher JOE MAGRANE, who signed a three-year contract late last season with the California Angels, will undergo arthroscopic surgery on his left elbow today, the team announced last night.
Magrane missed all of the 1991 season after undergoing surgery on his elbow on March 2, 1991. (AP)


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


New Incinerator Starts Up in New Jersey


Chess
The International Chess Federation's elimination matches have produced six candidates for the next round in the process of determining a challenger for the organization's world title match in 1995.
The federation, known as FIDE, held the elimination matches in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands, from Jan. 16 to 28.
The winners were:


Southern Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 30


T. Rowe Price Assoc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Data General Review Is Narrowed
The Data General Corporation in Westboro, Mass., said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its account, estimated at $5 million to $10 million, to five agencies.
The computer company's account was previously at Lois U.S.A. in New York, which declined to participate in the review.


Budget Will Follow a Long, Winding Road
In sending Congress his budget for the 1995 fiscal year, President Clinton set in motion a process that will take most of this year.
Next, the House and Senate will take up measures called budget resolutions, prepared by their Budget Committees, which specify how much revenue will be raised during the fiscal year that begins on Oct. 1 and how much can be spent in broad classifications.
Those encompassing categories are entitlements -- the benefit programs like Social Security under which payments are automatically made to everyone who qualifies -- and discretionary programs, which include everything else the Government buys, like aircraft carriers or paper clips.


Plum Creek Timber L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Tyler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  POST TO INVEST IN NEW PRESSES
The New York Post will invest millions of dollars in new press equipment to produce a full-color newspaper, the paper's newly named publisher said.
The new publisher, Martin Singerman, also said The Post would move its news and business headquarters to midtown from lower Manhattan.
B3.
OFFICER WHO ESCAPED DEATH IS HONORED
Arlene Beckles, the police officer who emerged from under a hair dryer in a Brooklyn salon to shoot and wound three robbers and to face death, was honored for her valor.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton promoted her to detective, and Mayor Giuliani promised to officiate at her wedding on Valentine's Day.
B2.
RESCUING NEW YORK FROM ITS FISCAL CRISIS
Experts disagree sharply over whether cutting the budget, slashing the city's work force and reducing several local taxes will give the city's economy a shot in the arm.
For all the disputes, however, they share one point: Mayor Giuliani has little choice but to try.
News Analysis.
B4.
A STUDENT IS SLASHED BY 2 YOUTHS
A student at Newtown High School in Elmhurst, Queens, was slashed in a stairwell by two youths who stole his gold chain, the police said.
B4.
The husband of the legal guardian of a 4-year-old boy whose body was found at the bottom of a trash compactor in East New York, Brooklyn, pleaded guilty to second-degree murder.
B4.
The final prosecution witness in the World Trade Center bombing trial was on the stand all day, his testimony seeming to represent an effort by the Government to sum up the evidence.
B3.
The City Council Transportation Committee approved a bill that would let the city's horse-drawn carriages range farther from Central Park and would extend their hours.
B3.
REGION
CLINTON BUDGET MAKES DEEP CUTS
Under the budget proposed by President Clinton, the New York region would suffer deep cuts in programs from grants that help poor people pay their home heating bills to operating subsidies for mass transit while winning new money for Head Start, job training, AIDS care, the homeless and the redevelopment of Pennsylvania Station.
B9.
SUNY CHANCELLOR RESIGNS
D.
Bruce Johnstone, the Chancellor of the State University of New York, announced that he is stepping down because he has cancer.
B2.
A woman, her daughter and a family friend were found shot to death in the woman's apartment in Jersey City, authorities said.
B2.
New York State's fiscal managers received a vote of confidence from a major Wall Street credit rating agency, which changed its long-term ratings outlook on the state's general obligation bonds to positive from stable.
B6.
Officials in Fairfield, Conn., have proposed an ordinance that would hold landlords in the beach district liable for a range of violations by their tenants, including noise disturbances and drinking by minors.
B6.
Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B6
Chronicle B5


No Headline
Kathleen Battle's unprofessional actions during rehearsals for the revival of 'La Fille du Regiment' were profoundly detrimental to the artistic collaboration among all the cast members, which is such an essential component of the rehearsal process." -- JOSEPH VOLPE of the Metropolitan Opera, dismissing her.  [ A1:5. ]
To my knowledge, we were working out all of the artistic problems in the rehearsals, and I don't know the reason behind this unexpected dismissal.
All I can say is I am saddened by this decision. -- KATHLEEN BATTLE.  [ C19:1. ]


One Price Clothing Stores Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 1


When Push Comes to Shove, Knicks Can't Respond
The Knicks got what they deserved tonight.
They lost a 17-point, second-quarter lead.
They played an abysmal third quarter in which they were outscored by 33-12.
And once the Miami Heat sensed that the Knicks were fatigued, struggling, and about to come apart, they attacked with frenzy, like sharks at feeding time.
Frustrating and dominating the Knicks, Miami (23-22) walked away with an emotionally charged 96-85 victory at the Miami Arena.
The Knicks lost control of the game, and their emotions, in the second half.
Charles Oakley fouled out with 1 minute 38 seconds to play, committing his fourth flagrant foul of the season against Rony Seikaly.


Dr. Simon Dack, 85, the Founder And Editor of Cardiology Journal
Dr.
Simon Dack, the founder of The Journal of American Cardiology and its editor in chief for more than 30 years, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Medical Center, where he had worked most of his life.
He was 85.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about the National Association of Manufacturers' opposition to President Clinton's health care plan misstated the position taken earlier by the United States Chamber of Commerce.
While opposing the Clinton proposal, the chamber took no position on the plan put forth by Representative Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee, or on any of the other rival plans before Congress.


'Visionary' Businessman Says He Was Blindsided
It all started one day last October when a long black limousine pulled into the driveway of John Sculley's house in Greenwich, Conn.
Out stepped Peter T. Caserta, the head of an obscure Long Island high-technology company named Spectrum Information Technologies Inc.
Mr.
Caserta, who had introduced himself with a phone call, had come to describe the company's new technology for wireless computer communications and to persuade Mr.
Sculley to become Spectrum's top executive.
Mr.
Sculley, captivated by what he saw and heard, agreed to leave his job as chairman of Apple Computer Inc. and sign on with Mr.
Caserta.
Three and a half months later, he may be regretting ever letting that limo driver get his home address.


Murdoch Drops Magazine
Rupert Murdoch has withdrawn his financial support for a new magazine, Married Woman, after publication of only one issue, because not enough copies were sold, the magazine's founder and editor, Kelly Good McGee, said yesterday.
"The rights to the magazine come back to me, and I am looking for another publisher," Mrs.
McGee said.
She said that the News America Publishing Company, headed by Mr.
Murdoch, had canceled financing for the second issue on the day it was to go to the printers because the first issue had fallen short of Mr.
Murdoch's sales goals.
It had been on the newsstands since Jan. 11.


Review/Dance; Presto! Lone Woman Turns Into a Crowd of Personalities
There was only one woman onstage, yet scores of personalities danced when Roxane D'Orleans Juste presented a solo program at the Merce Cunningham Studio on Saturday night.
Ms.
D'Orleans Juste magically made each solo a whole new world.
As a woman awaiting her lover in her "Virginie," a world premiere, she looked vulnerable.
With only a few heightened gestures, she turned confident as she danced to music by a French-Canadian group called La Bottine Souriante.
But when the woman's lover never arrived, she appeared to be on the brink of madness.


Mets Are Finally Giving Saberhagen His Suspension
Closing the books on their disastrous 1993 season, the Mets announced yesterday that Bret Saberhagen would spend the first five days of the 1994 season serving a holdover suspension that had been imposed as punishment for his clubhouse bleach-spraying incident last July.
As a result, Saberhagen, who suffered a season-ending knee injury before he could serve the suspension last year, will miss four games, beginning with the opener, against the Cubs in Chicago on April 4.
He will be eligible to make his first start on April 9, against the Astros in Houston.
He will be paid during the suspension.


Hemlo Gold Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


4% Rise Sought in Science Budget
Continuing earlier priority given to research and technology, the budget proposed today by the Clinton Administration calls for more spending for research on computers and communications, environmental sciences, manufacturing sciences and diseases like AIDS and breast cancer.
The budget proposal generally spares science the deep spending cuts affecting other parts of Government and increases financing for technology that could have a future economic impact on the nation, officials said.


M.S. Carriers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Bombing Trial Witness Sums Up Evidence
The final witness for the prosecution in the World Trade Center bombing trial was on the stand all day yesterday, his testimony seeming to represent an effort by the Government to sum up the evidence regarding the explosion that ripped through five floors of the trade center on Feb. 26.
The witness, David R. Williams, who was the F.B.I.'s primary investigator of the trade center bombing, used a panoply of props -- two videotapes, many charts and photographs, even a scale model of the six underground floors of the trade center -- to give the jury an overview of the bomb, including what it was made of, how big it was, what carried it into the trade center and exactly where it was when it went off.


Council Committee Approves Bill to Ease Rules for Horse-Drawn Carriages
After two months of acrimonious debate between animal-rights advocates and horse drivers, the City Council Transportation Committee approved yesterday a new bill to regulate horse-drawn carriages that would let the 19-century-style carriages range farther from Central Park and extend their hours of operation.
Since the measure has the support of Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, the 5-to-2 vote by the committee virtually assures the measure will be approved by the full Council, probably at its meeting on Feb. 28.


Daly Is First Active Pro Coach Voted Into Hall
Maybe it's because professional basketball grinds coaches down before their time, or maybe it's because the National Basketball Association is so competitive that it's hard for a coach to stand out year after year above his peers.
Whatever the reason, while a number of active college coaches with the requisite 25 years of experience have been elected to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame over the years, no active professional coach had made it to the shrine in Springfield, Mass.
Until now.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.31
2.90
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.24
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.40
3.40
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.97
5.93
6.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.44
6.39
7.20
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.29
7.25
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.49
6.20
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Men Are Told to Reconsider How to Treat Enlarged Prostate Glands
Men with enlarged prostate glands should consider many treatments other than surgery to relieve their symptoms, including, in some cases, no treatment at all, Federal health officials said today.
New Federal guidelines for treating benign enlarged prostates say that men with mild-to-moderate symptoms may want to consider periods of doctor-monitored observation, or "watchful waiting," instead of choosing drug or surgical therapy right away.


Allied Holdings Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Food Notes
Season of the Heart
The hearts have it for the next few days.
Black Hound's lush, bittersweet chocolate truffles flavored with liqueur come in heart-shaped boxes for $5.50 (2.5 ounces) to $17.50 (8 ounces).
They can be picked up at the store, 149 First Avenue (10th Street), but should be ordered in advance by calling (800) 344-4417.
Martine's at Bloomingdale's has a charming chocolate heart decorated with a marzipan rose for $8.50.
Larger versions with milk and dark chocolate stripes are $15 to $50.
A chocolate-marzipan heart box filled with a selection of Belgian-style chocolates made fresh daily is $40.
Chocolate truffles are $1 each.
Valrhona chocolate is used by the confectioner Ortrund Carstens to make a playing-card-size queen of hearts, $2.50, at Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (at Prince Street).
And for those who wish to make their own coeur a la creme, the store has the proper white porcelain molds, $16 for the individual size, $32 for a large size serving four.


Pfizer
Pfizer Inc., the drug and hospital products giant, suggested yesterday that Wall Street's earnings projections of $4.25 a share for the 1994 fiscal year were "somewhat optimistic." That assessment, which was delivered at an analysts' meeting in New York by Pfizer's chief financial officer, Henry McKinnell, sent the stock tumbling.


Antec Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


INSIDE
Abortion Law Takes Effect
Nearly two years after the Supreme Court upheld most of its provisions, Pennsylvania's Abortion Control Act is about to take effect after Justice Souter refused a stay.
Page A14.
A U.S.
Rebuff to Japan
The Clinton Administration said that Japan's economic stimulus package is unlikely to resolve a trade imbalance, making friction likely at the coming summit meeting.
Page A3.
Through Autism's Mirror
Until death ended his 27-year career, Dan Bailey's work among New York City's autistic school children was a pioneer's journey into a neglected corner of public education.
Page B20.
Witold Lutoslawski Dies
The Polish composer, whose music is central to the modern repertory, drew freely on avant-garde techniques but prized beauty and long-lined melodies.
He was 81.
Page B8.


Eagles' Post for Wooten
JOHN WOOTEN, a former All-Pro offensive guard for the Cleveland Browns, was named yesterday as the Philadelphia Eagles' personnel director, making him one of the highest ranking black executives in the National Football League.
Wooten, a 29-year veteran of the N.F.L. as player, scout, administrator and agent, will oversee the club's pro and college scouting departments and will have final authority over player drafts.


California Cuts Early Estimate Of Quake Costs
California officials said today that the destruction caused by the Jan. 17 earthquake and its aftershocks would be far less costly than they previously estimated.
The state's estimate of total damage -- including homes, buildings and public property like highways and schools -- now ranges from $13 billion to $20 billion, said Dick Andrews, director of the Governor's Office of Emergency Services in Sacramento.
Previous state damage estimates, based on a computer model, ranged from $15 billion to $30 billion.


Dublin Journal; A Changing Ireland Finds Room for a 60's Gadfly
Not so many years ago, charges of sexual peccadillos like those that threaten politicians in Washington and London would have assured defeat for any candidate, particularly a woman, in this conservative, predominantly Roman Catholic country.
When Liz McManus ran for Parliament in 1992, she and her husband, John, a doctor, were accused -- in what she calls scurrilous campaign tactics -- of "carrying on" with other partners.
But rather than killing her candidacy, the charges boomeranged, setting off a wave of indignation that actually helped elect her from largely rural County Wicklow, south of Dublin, where traditional values are still strong.


What Studies Show
To The Living Section:
I hope that people did not get the impression from Marian Burros's Eating Well column on Jan. 12 that a well-balanced, low-fat vegetarian diet may be unhealthful, when there is no scientific evidence that this is so.


Stocks Are Stable as Dow Dips a Fraction
Wall Street stepped back a bit yesterday from Monday's aggressive purchases, with stock prices barely moving off dead center.
Still, the market was seemingly stable despite a drop in the bond market that normally would have led to a fall in stocks.
Market watchers leaned on favorite Wall Street cliches like "consolidation" and "taking a breather" to describe the market action, as investors seemed to have completed their purchase of suddenly cheaper brand-name stocks in the wake of Friday's nearly 100-point drop in the Dow and Monday's surprising 35-point rally.


Crown Heights Coalition Has Done Much to Heal Community; The Name on the Wall
To the Editor:
"On Walls, Memories of the Slain Are Kept" (front page, Jan. 28) chronicles a curious cultural trend, in which families and friends adorn ordinary brick walls with murals and epitaphs to memorialize the victims of inner city killings.
Imagine my surprise and horror when I looked at the accompanying picture only to see the words "Gavin Cato, Murdered, Aug. 19, 1991."


Long Bond Yield at 6-Month High
The yield on the 30-year bond jumped to 6.44 percent yesterday, its highest level in six months, as dealers pushed rates up at the beginning of the Treasury's $40 billion quarterly borrowing.
Yields in the government securities market often rise during the Treasury's debt auctions because traders are hoping to make the new securities cheaper so they are attractive to investors and thus sell quickly.


Review/Television; Justice At Last! The Critic As Star
Jay Sherman, 36, is a short, tubby and just about bald New York film critic bringing his stringent standards to a cable show called "Coming Attractions." More often than not, his verdict on a film is delivered in two words: "It stinks."
Jay is the lovably unlovable centerpiece of "The Critic," the new animated ABC series on Wednesdays at 8:30 P.M.
It was created by Al Jean and Mike Reiss, who, along with James L. Brooks, are also the executive producers, roles all three performed on "The Simpsons." The goofiness, as you might expect, can be inspired.


Washington Talk; Little Respect for Former Capitol Star
Not so long ago, the submission of the President's budget to Congress was one of the big news events of the year.
Big surprises were the rule: sometimes vast new programs or sometimes radical changes in the way the Government does business.
The details of the Great Society were revealed in a Lyndon B. Johnson budget.
Richard M. Nixon once proposed in a budget to combine all the Cabinet departments into four giant agencies.
Ronald Reagan explained in his first budget how he would slash taxes, build up the military and balance the budget with one hand tied behind his back.


Astros' Reliever Gambles And Wins at Arbitration
Of the five players who no longer were on baseball's salary-arbitration list yesterday because they had negotiated contracts, Tom Edens of Houston emerged with the lowest 1994 salary by far.
But the Houston relief pitcher also had the most interesting development behind his contract.
Edens pitched 49 innings last season, and had a 1-1 record with a 3.12 earned run average and no saves.
He earned $325,000 and he and the Astros argued their salary differences on Monday in Chicago before an arbitrator, Robert Creo.


A Champion's Ambition
He was the pioneer, the man most responsible for paving the way for all the talented young Russian hockey players who followed him to North America and into the National Hockey League.
That was five years ago.
Now, Vyacheslav Fetisov has visions of becoming the first member of what was the powerful Soviet hockey machine to coach in the N.H.L.
Fetisov battled with the Russian authorities for years before he was allowed to leave the Red Army team and join the Devils in the summer of 1989.
He became a symbol for the country's hockey players and Russians in general.


Shifts Made at Murdoch Unit
Rupert Murdoch, the chairman and chief executive of the News Corporation, has named Joseph Barletta, the president and chief executive of TV Guide, president of Murdoch Magazines.
Mr.
Barletta replaces Patrick J. Purcell, who is leaving the News Corporation to publish The Boston Herald, which he bought from Mr.
Murdoch last week.
Anthea Disney, editor in chief of TV Guide, has been named editorial director of Murdoch Magazines.
Both Mr.
Barletta and Ms.
Disney will retain their positions at TV Guide, a Murdoch magazine.


Marcelo Bonevardi, An Artist, 63, Dies
Marcelo Bonevardi, an Argentine-born artist who had lived in New York part time since the late 1950's, died on Feb. 1 at Hospital Privado in Cordoba, Argentina.
He was 63 and had homes in Manhattan and Cordoba.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Cecilia.


Weather Again Makes Simulcasting an Also-Ran
The blasts of winter forced New York to cancel live racing at Aqueduct both today and Wednesday, and once more disrupted the great simulcasting venture of 1994.
Twelve days of racing have now been missed at Aqueduct during the last five weeks because of the weather.
Despite the snowstorm that hammered the North, the track did stay open today for any hard-core fans determined to fight their way to the parimutuel windows to bet on the five races televised from Gulfstream Park here, where the the sun was shining at the southern end of the simulcasting alliance.
But neither simulcasting nor live racing will be attempted at Aqueduct on Wednesday.


Four-Game Ban for Propp
BRIAN PROPP of the Hartford Whalers was suspended for four games by the National Hockey League yesterday and fined $400 for slashing Montreal's VINCENT DAMPHOUSSE in a game on Feb. 2.
Propp had been assessed only a minor penalty for slashing on the play.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Duke Rallies to Edge Georgia Tech, 66-63
Marty Clark and Eric Meek came off the bench to give Duke a spark and the second-ranked Blue Devils rallied from a 12-point deficit to beat Georgia Tech, 66-63, last night in Atlanta.
The Blue Devils (17-2, 8-2 in the Atlantic Coast Conference) used a 26-6 run over an eight-minute span to take a 46-38 lead with 14:42 left.
Meek and Grant Hill each scored 8 points and Clark 7 during the burst.


Corrections
A diagram on Monday depicting an investigation of an object on the sea floor by a secret class of spy submarines misstated the depth below which submarines are crushed.
It varies among types, and the figures are secret; the depth is not approximately 1,000 feet.


Egg Cream Diaspora: Bottling of a City Nectar
WHEN, three weeks ago, this column took account of Gerry Frank, an Oregonian author of a guide to New York City, and quoted his authenticating claim that good egg creams were available at Moisha's Luncheonette at 239 Grand Street, 15 readers wrote to say that Moisha's was defunct and had been replaced by a Chinese restaurant.
"You can get great egg drop there, not egg creams," wrote one man who, like the other correspondents, revealed nostalgia for the luncheonette while lamenting the decline and increasing unavailability of egg creams.
Clearly such a response demanded contemplative reflection.
Had the passage of candy stores and soda fountains driven a distinctive nectar, a once cherished local staple, to the verge of extinction?
Was the egg cream, like stickball, like Checker cabs, a lapsing aspect of city culture?
If so, should we care?


Crown Heights Coalition Has Done Much to Heal Community
To the Editor:
"Crown Hts. Tension Persists Despite Healing Effort" (news article, Jan. 27) does a disservice to efforts to heal Brooklyn's Crown Heights community.
Minimizing the work of the Crown Heights Coalition adds fuel to those who seek to foment unrest.


CHRONICLE
The advertisements for a musical satirizing the life and death of the media financier Robert Maxwell proclaimed, "It ain't over till the fat fraudster sings." But it was a judge, not a fraudster, who brought the curtain down on the show this week before it even opened.
High Court Justice RODGER BELL issued an injunction in London on Monday barring the opening of "Maxwell: The Musical" on the grounds that it could prejudice a fraud case against two of Mr.
Maxwell's sons, Ian and Kevin Maxwell.


CHRONICLE
DONNA E. SHALALA, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and ELIZABETH HANFORD DOLE, the president of the American Red Cross, may not always see eye to eye, but they turned up together yesterday to give blood.
The occasion was the kickoff of the Red Cross blood drive among Federal employees.
The two sat side by side in the Hubert Humphrey Building in Washington and talked to each other about the need for increasing blood donations in the face of supplies that are diminishing because of bad weather, the earthquake in California and unwarranted fears of contracting disease through the donation procedure.


Schools and Pupils Look for Days to Make Up for Lost Time
Lisa D'Annucci had planned to get away from it all and spend the last week of March on the beaches of Aruba with her mother and her grandparents.
Not a bad vacation for a 13-year-old.
But that was before her Rockland County school lost eight days of instruction to snow-and-ice storms this winter.
Now Lisa will be spending the week of her spring break in the classrooms of Felix V. Festa Junior High School South, her vacation canceled by school authorities so students and teachers can catch up on all the time that they have missed.


Slam Dunks and Curve Balls
"When was the last time you saw Michael Jordan nervous?" Chicago White Sox general manager Ron Schueler asked Monday.
Amid the astonishment and occasionally churlish speculation over Mr.
Jordan's decision to play professional baseball, the question is a good one to keep in mind.
Some see the whole thing as a grab for more money by Mr.
Jordan and by the White Sox owner Jerry Reinsdorf, who now has an instant gate attraction in Nashville, where Mr.
Jordan will start learning his new trade.
Others asked why Mr.
Reinsdorf gave this man a chance over others who have paid more dues and shown more promise.


City O Groton Is a Scofflaw No Longer
This small southeastern Connecticut city is no longer in danger of losing its good name or official vehicles because of a parking ticket from New York City.
Groton's Mayor, Catherine S. Kolnaski, said she received a call on Tuesday from a secretary in Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's office, telling her that New York was dropping its effort to collect on a three-year-old ticket issued to "City O Groton."


How to Avoid Date Disaster
ED WETSCHLER couldn't believe his luck: he finally met a woman who intrigued him, and she wanted their first date to be at a sports bar.
"It was Oct. 26, 1986," Mr.
Wetschler said.
"I remember because the Jets were on a hot streak, heading towards their sixth win of the season." As they walked in, there were the Jets -- life-size and dazzlingly green on one of the largest video screens in town.
"Naturally, I couldn't take my eyes off them."
Mr.
Wetschler, who is now the executive editor of Diversion magazine, a travel magazine for doctors, recalls that his date was less than awed by his charm and savoir-faire.
Still, he persuaded her to meet him for dinner the following week.
While he was waiting for her, he realized he had no idea what she looked like.
"I did, however, remember each of Pat Leahy's field goals," he said.


Brief Encounters Inspire Gifts for the Neediest
Elizabeth Lipman of Brooklyn began to squirm during a walk with her 9-year-old daughter.
It was when they ignored a homeless woman that the little girl asked the kind of question that many adults struggle with daily as they confront an endless array of outstretched hands.


Defense Budget Curbs Would-Be Enemies
To the Editor:
In "Defense Time Bomb" (editorial, Jan. 28), your blast at the defense budget, you forget that the military establishment's main function is to deter would-be enemies.
For that, we must continue to invest in research and development, produce weapons systems and recruit and train young men and women.
And in a time when military and defense industry careers are no longer promising.


Reporter's Interviews Bring Jail and Test for Rights
A reporter for an Ohio newspaper has been in jail for 21 days, longer than any other American reporter in a decade, because she refused to testify before a grand jury about an interview she conducted with a county official.
Lisa A. Abraham, a reporter for The Tribune Chronicle of Warren, Ohio, was charged with contempt of court on Jan. 19 and placed in jail after she said the ethics of journalism prohibited her answering a prosecutor's questions about her reporting.


When a Technical Point for Some Is a Major Issue for Others
Four months ago, when the Clinton health plan was bright and shiny, the Administration would have been delighted with a report from the Congressional Budget Office that the plan would reduce health care costs and eventually cut the deficit, though not as soon as President Clinton thought.
They would have been ecstatic if Robert D. Reischauer, the budget office's director, had told the House Ways and Means Committee that he would credit the plan with "100 percent effectiveness."


Youths Are Charged in Thefts And Vandalism at 15 Schools
Four youths, all high school dropouts, have been charged with burglarizing and vandalizing 15 schools during a month-long crime spree in western Suffolk County.
In one school district, West Babylon, school officials said the youths destroyed $5,000 worth of supplies and stole $3,200 worth of equipment.


Editors' Note
A front-page summary article yesterday about President Clinton's proposed budget included a passage on canceling weapons systems or stretching out their timetables.
The heading said, "For Military, a Shell Game."


Books of The Times; Recrossing the Borders Of Spying's Old Terrain
Last Train From Berlin
By W. T. Tyler
369 pages. Henry Holt. $22.50.
The late, unlamented cold war was a favorite backdrop for authors of political thrillers, mainly because it provided an instantly recognizable fictional enemy for readers: the black hats operating out of Dzerzhinsky Square in Moscow played for keeps, and official Washington branded them as secret agents of an evil empire.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.S.
STRATEGY ON BOSNIA  The United States is proposing a two-track strategy on Bosnia: an ultimatum to Bosnian Serbs to lift the siege of Sarajevo within a week or to face air strikes, and the pursuit of new peace initiatives.
A1  DEADLINE IS SEEN ON BOSNIA  The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, building on the recent cooperation of France and the United States, appears to be ready to set a deadline for lifting the siege of Sarajevo and to use force if it is violated.
A12


ALLIED SIGNAL INC. (N)
Allied Signal Inc. reported a 29 percent increase in fourth-quarter earnings yesterday.
Earnings rose to $178 million, or $1.25 a share, from $138 million, or 98 cents a share, for the quarter a year earlier, exceeding Wall Street estimates.
Allied Signal, which makes products for the automotive, chemical and aerospace industries, also announced a 2-for-1 stock split and said that it planned to raise the quarterly dividend 16 percent, to 33.5 cents a share before the split, starting in the second quarter.


Critic's Notebook; Rimsky Who? Russia Reminds the World Of an Unloved Genius
The Kirov Opera's weeklong Rimsky-Korsakov Festival, which ended on Saturday night with the opera "The Maid of Pskov," was two things at once: an opportunity to reconsider Rimsky-Korsakov's rather musty reputation and the latest bulletin about the state of the Kirov company itself.
The short report is that Rimsky-Korsakov is looking up and the Kirov is looking better than ever.


Home Depot Buys Chain In Canada
Home Depot Inc., the retail company that made do-it-yourself home improvement chic, said yesterday that it had bought a 75 percent stake in a fledgling Canadian version of itself for $150 million.
The company's purchase of a majority of Aikenhead's Home Improvement Warehouse from the Molson Companies, which is best known for its brewing operations, took Wall Street by surprise, but analysts greeted it with approval.
It will accelerate Home Depot's expansion into Canada and eliminate a potential competitor there.


There's More to a Cork Than Romance
BECAUSE of moldy, musty smells created by bad corks, many West Coast wineries are experimenting with a new plastic resin cork.
The St.
Francis Winery in Kenwood, Calif., has become the first sizable American producer to use the new light brown stopper called the Cellukork for its entire line of premium wines.
The Cellukork was developed by the Lermer Packaging Corporation of Garwood, N.J., and Ontario, Calif.
Th


Giuliani In Queens, With a Nod To Lindsay
Keeping in mind the lesson learned a quarter-century ago by the last Republican to preside over New York City, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani traveled to Queens yesterday for a first-hand look at the city's snow-removal effort and spent much of the day managing the details of snow clearance.
In doing so, Mr.
Giuliani canceled previously scheduled events, including his State of the City message.
That speech has been rescheduled for 4 P.M. today at City Hall.


Arnold Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Code of Justice For the Military
Members of the armed forces are subject not only to the criminal laws of the states in which they may reside but also to military law, which is governed by the Uniform Code of Military Justice.
The code, enacted by Congress in 1950, established a system of military courts, known as courts-martial, to try a broad range of criminal charges.
The military courts may also try cases unique to the military, including conduct unbecoming an officer, insubordination and desertion.
Many of the rights contained in the Constitution apply to the military, but their precise application varies from the civilian courts.


Albert Green, 79, Artist Who Worked In Pottery and Paint
Albert Green, a potter and painter who developed an international reputation for his ceramics, stoneware, porcelain and canvases, died on Monday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 79 and lived in Westfield, N.J.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Hortense.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Tony Pena, catcher, on a minor-league contract.


Regrets from Injured Gant
RON GANT, the Atlanta Braves' star left fielder, says he sometimes thinks dirt-bike riding "was a stupid thing to do."
Gant, who broke his right leg in a bike accident last week, is expected to miss three months of the season.


Chronology of a Scandal That Tarnished the Navy
SEPT. 5-7, 1991: The Tailhook Association holds its 35th annual convention in Las Vegas, Nev.
At least 26 women, half of them Navy officers, are forced through a gantlet of drunken Navy and Marine officers in a hotel hallway.
OCT. 10, 1991: Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, Chief of Naval Operations, receives a report of a complaint that a female lieutenant was sexually assaulted at the convention and refers it to the Naval Investigative Service.


Book Notes
Beyond 'Call It Sleep'
It's difficult to say which is worse: writing a terrible first novel that fades into depressing obscurity, or writing one that shows such promise you spend the rest of your life trying to live up to it.
Acclaim bears down heavily on many authors; Harper Lee, for instance, never wrote another novel after "To Kill a Mockingbird."
In the case of Henry Roth, the emotional and actual distance between first novel and second grew to 60 years.
In 1934, when he was 28, he wrote the riveting "Call It Sleep," a novel about turn-of-the-century immigrant life in New York City.
Although sales were meager, in part because his publisher folded during the Depression, the book was critically admired, and it seemed Mr.
Roth was on his way to a rich literary life.


Harding's Lawyers Prepare Strategy
A lawyer representing Tonya Harding said today that the skater's legal team would decide shortly how she intends to respond to administrative charges by the United States Olympic Committee that could affect her status as a member of the American team in Norway.
Robert C. Weaver Jr., one of several lawyers working on the case, said that the Olympic committee had notified the skater late Monday afternoon that a hearing had been set for Feb. 15 in Oslo for her to respond to seven charges stemming from the Jan. 6 attack on Nancy Kerrigan.


Rising Tory Politician Found Dead Mysteriously
Prime Minister John Major's Government faced more problems today after a promising Conservative Member of Parliament was found dead mysteriously.
The death of the 45-year-old legislator, Stephen Milligan, who was well known from a career in journalism and had been regarded as a politician with a future since his election in 1992, filled the front pages of newspapers today.


Crown Heights Coalition Has Done Much to Heal Community; Working Together
To the Editor:
We read with dismay "Crown Hts. Tension Persists Despite Healing Effort" (news article, Jan. 27), which focuses on the Crown Heights Coalition.
You neglect even to mention our groups, Project CURE! and the Crown Heights Youth Collective, and our many programs, which are effective and continuing.
Our grass-roots organization has a record of bringing blacks and Hasidim together.


Possible Clue In Slaying: Missing Gear For Camping
Although the authorities have not unearthed any firm evidence that the husband of Anne Scripps Douglas, the slain newspaper heiress, is alive, there is at least one intriguing thread that keeps their investigation active: $2,000 worth of camping equipment disappeared with him.
Mrs.
Douglas, 47, was found unconscious from hammer blows to her head early New Year's Day in the bedroom of her home in Bronxville.
She died six days later.
A few hours after the beating, a 1982 BMW owned by her husband, Scott Douglas, a 38-year-old former house painter, was found idling on the Tappan Zee Bridge, the keys in the ignition and a hammer on one seat.


Searching the Soul Of French Cuisine
LAST summer, I returned to my native France with a single-minded journalistic mission.
There has been much discussion recently suggesting that French cuisine is in the doldrums, bereft of new ideas.
On this nostalgic journey I set out to determine: where is French cuisine today?
And, equally important, where is it heading?
After three months, 10,000 miles and 60 restaurants, the answers were palpable, though not simple.
In short, French cooking, from Nice to Normandy, is going through another of its periodic revolutions, only this time it is more subtle.
And it is a somewhat contradictory movement, with leading chefs taking one step forward and one step backward at the same time.
I'll try to explain.
First, a little background.


Haitian Business Leaders Pressing Army to Yield
Under mounting pressure from an international embargo on oil supplies, Haitian business leaders have begun drafting demands for the country's military leaders to step down and for the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to form a new government.
The Chamber of Commerce, one of Haiti's most conservative business groups, this week began debating a resolution calling for army leaders to make way for a political transition or face a campaign of civil disobedience.


Correction: Pear Crisp
A recipe for Pear Crisp with the Eating Well column last Wednesday described one step incompletely.
A corrected recipe appears below.
Pear Crisp  Total time: 50 to 55 minutes  4 pounds ripe full-flavored pears 1/2 cup dark brown sugar, firmly packed  1 1/2 tablespoons flour  1 teaspoon ground cinnamon  1/4 cup chopped crystalized ginger  1/2 cup raisins  2 tablespoons poire William brandy  1 cup old-fashioned rolled oats  3 tablespoons butter, melted  2 tablespoons thawed orange juice concentrate.
1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees.
2.
Peel, core and quarter the pears.
Slice each quarter into 2 or 3 pieces.
Place in large bowl.
3.
Mix all but two tablespoons of the brown sugar with the flour, cinnamon, ginger, raisins and brandy.
Add to pears and mix well.
4.
Chop oats in food processor.
Add the remaining brown sugar, butter and orange juice concentrate, and mix well.
5.
Spoon pear mixture into an 8-cup gratin dish, and sprinkle with oat mixture.
Bake in lower third of the oven for 35 to 40 minutes, until oat mixture begins to brown and pears soften.
Remove from oven and stir oat mixture into pears.
Serve warm.
Yield: 8 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 370 calories, 7 grams fat, 12 milligrams cholesterol, 55 milligrams sodium, 5 grams protein, 75 grams carbohydrate.


U.S. to Recognize Macedonia
The Clinton Administration has decided to recognize Macedonia, the small Balkan republic with a disputed name, senior Government officials said today.
Diplomatic recognition of Macedonia by the United States was planned two years ago, but strong objections by Greece and by politically influential Greek-Americans held up the action.


Aon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


I.R.S. Gives Lawyer '$500,000 Apology'
In what is almost certainly the largest payment ever by the Internal Revenue Service for harassing a taxpayer, the agency has written a $500,000 check to a prominent Miami lawyer to settle his accusations that three vindictive agency employees violated his civil rights.


Off the Menu
Fourteen Packs Up
After a run of about 10 years, the bistro Fourteen, originally called Quatorze, 240 West 14th Street, has closed.
"The construction on 14th Street devastated our business in this location, and it never rebounded," said Mark Di Giulio, an owner.
Quatorze Bis, now known simply as Quatorze, 323 East 79th Street, will remain in business.
Mr.
Di Giulio and his partner, Peter Meltzer, have registered the name Quatorze in England.
"We'd like to get a toehold in Europe," Mr.
Di Giulio said.


Anheuser-Busch Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


U.S.O.C. Will Make Harding Prove She Belongs on Team
When Tonya Harding is called before a disciplinary board on Tuesday, her spot on the Olympic team hanging in the balance, she will face a list of seven charges from the United States Olympic Committee that question her behavior in upholding the ideals of fair play and sportsmanship.
Moreover, Harding will apparently bear the burden of proof to show why she should be allowed to remain on the team.


Market Place; Franklin Resources' shares gain favor as a mutual fund play.
THERE are more ways than one to invest in mutual funds.
One is to buy the stocks of publicly traded mutual fund companies.
Several analysts are looking favorably at Franklin Resources of San Mateo, Calif., the world's largest publicly traded asset manager.
"It's a buy," said James Hanbury, an analyst for Wertheim Schroder.
"It's a well-run, well-positioned company."


Review/Theater; A Dramatic Transformation, Offstage
If ever he paints her, the burly artist informs self-effacing Biddy Andreas, he won't settle for a mere portrait.
"I would find your significant form," he says.


Report Card on U.S. Heart Health Is Dismal
ALTHOUGH millions of Americans have made a serious effort to adopt healthier living habits, the nation as a whole still falls far short of the health improvements needed to quell the epidemic of coronary heart disease, according to the latest survey.
The 1992 telephone survey, conducted among 91,428 adults for the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, found that only 18 percent of Americans over 18 were free of the major known risk factors for heart disease.
The risk factors assessed were current cigarette smoking, physical inactivity, being overweight, high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol and diabetes.
According to the new analysis, even the 18 percent figure is likely to be an overestimate of the healthiness of Americans, since many underreport their weight and smoking habits and fewer than a third know their cholesterol levels.


Canada Cuts Cigarette Taxes to Fight Smuggling
Against protests from health groups, Prime Minister Jean Chretien announced today that the Canada was slashing taxes on cigarettes to try to stamp out widespread smuggling from the United States, where taxes are currently about one-fifth as high.
A carton of cigarettes on which all taxes are paid costs upward of $44 in Canada, against as little as $15 to $20 for the contraband product.
Hundreds of millions of dollars worth of illegal cigarettes enter Canada every month, chiefly through Mohawk reservations that straddle the border with the United States in Ontario and Quebec.


Seeing a Digital Future, Printers Rush to Get Beyond Ink and Paper
Seeing a need to break from a tradition dating to Gutenberg's 15th-century Bible, the printing industry is stepping from the printed page into the digital age.
And without the resources to throw millions of dollars at ambitious "multimedia" experiments, small and midsize printers like Automated Graphic Systems Inc. of White Plains, Md., are gradually branching into digital offshoots of their paper products.
Two years ago, Automated Graphic, a graphic arts and printing company based outside Washington, bought a local franchise license for the One-Off CD Shop, a chain that specializes in converting catalogues, manuals and other information on paper into a digital form that can be stored on the silvery compact disks known as CD-ROM's.


Review/Pop; Moody Without the Blues
It's not easy to be hyperactive, brooding and whimsical all at once.
But the Barenaked Ladies do just that, balancing breezy melodies with unsentimental lyrics and delivering them with plenty of amiable shtick.
The Barenaked Ladies, a fully clothed five-man band from Canada, have packed the Bottom Line at every New York appearance, and their two shows on Monday night were sold out.
At the early show, the band offered everything from sitcom trivia to a Buddy Rich impression to a synchronized dance routine that ended with Jim Creeggan, the bassist, leaping into the arms of his brother Andy Creeggan, the keyboardist.


A '$500,000 Apology' From the I.R.S.
In what is almost certainly the largest payment ever by the Internal Revenue Service over accusations of harassing a taxpayer, the agency has written a $500,000 check to a prominent Miami lawyer to settle his accusations that three vindictive agency employees violated his civil rights.
The lawyer, Daniel N. Heller, won the settlement late last month after a struggle with the I.R.S. that began in 1975 and that resulted in, among other things, Mr.
Heller's serving four months in prison.


Bad Winter's Worst Snowstorm Disrupts Travel in the Northeast
A surprisingly furious snowstorm descended on the New York City region yesterday, closing airports, abbreviating work and school schedules and turning lunch hour into rush hour.
New York City and the immediate vicinity caught the brunt of the storm, which extended from central Pennsylvania to southern New England.
By 8 P.M., nine inches of snow had piled up at La Guardia Airport and seven inches in Central Park.
Those totals had not risen further by midnight.
The storm halted midday traffic at the region's three major airports and hastened the evening rush hour, as businesses started to close in the late morning so commuters could begin their treacherous treks home.


In Bomb Plot Trial: A Blizzard of Evidence
After more than four months of testimony, the Government rested its case yesterday against the four defendants in the World Trade Center trial.
Given the 207 witnesses the prosecution called to the stand and the 1,003 exhibits presented to the jury, it is clear what the prosecutors have attempted to do: they have produced an avalanche of circumstantial evidence with which they have tried to bury the defendants.
But the Government's avalanche has seemed uneven, crushingly thick and heavy in many places, thin in others, and weighing differently on each defendant.


GRACE (W.R.) &amp; CO. (N)
W.
R.
Grace &amp; Company reported yesterday that its operating profits rose 15 percent, to $85.2 million, in the fourth quarter, which was more than analysts had expected.
The specialty chemical and health care company, based in Boca Raton, Fla., also said its net income rose almost fourfold, to $285.2 million, from the comparable period a year ago, because of a $200 million credit.
The credit stems from Grace partly reversing a reserve for insurance after a court agreed to reopen an asbestos suit against the company.


Harding Hearing Likely to Overshadow the Games on Feb. 15
The United States Olympic Committee hearing scheduled for next Tuesday in Oslo could decide the fate of the figure skater Tonya Harding.
It could also cast a long shadow over the day's competition in Lillehammer.
Among the events scheduled for that day are the women's Super-G ski race, the free program in pairs figure skating and three hockey games, including the United States against Slovakia.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Communications Commission extended a temporary freeze on the revenue growth of cable television companies in an effort to hold down cable rates while it prepares to impose a stringent new set of permanent price regulations.  [ Page D1. ]


No Headline
"It has been 60 or 65 years that the authorities have been tricking us. They have gotten us very accustomed to the lies." FELIPE OSEGUERA, a rebellious Mexican farmer.  [ A9:1. ]


The Pop Life
Unheard Berlin
When Irving Berlin died four years ago at the age of 101, there was widespread curiosity about the extent and quality of his unpublished work, songs dropped from shows or written for projects that were never completed.
During his lifetime, Berlin published nearly 1,000 songs of every shape and variety.
Would his archives reveal any gems comparable to "White Christmas," "How Deep Is the Ocean?" or "Always"?
The world will find out next month.
On March 19 at Symphony Space (2537 Broadway, at 95th Street) as part of the theater's all-day program "Wall to Wall Berlin," between 15 and 20 unknown Berlin compositions will receive their world premieres.
The songs, to be performed by Michael Feinstein, Emily Loesser and David Staller, were selected from a notebook of 60 unpublished tunes that Berlin left behind.
Dates of their composition range from the 1930's to the late 1960's.


Allied Threat: Is It Credible?
The effectiveness of a NATO threat to bomb the Bosnian Serb forces around Sarajevo will depend almost entirely on how determined the United States is to lead the allies in carrying out the threat if the Serbs disregard it.
As NATO representatives prepared to meet in Brussels on Wednesday to discuss whether, how and when to carry out the bombing, public outrage in France, Britain and the United States over the deaths of 68 people in Sarajevo in a mortar attack last weekend made military intervention seem more likely than at any time since NATO first threatened bombing last August.


What It Was That Made Hatters Mad
To the Editor: The headline for Michael T. Kaufman's Jan. 26 About New York column, "A Hatter Who's Mad But Coping," is perhaps inadvertently insensitive to one of the lesser-known occupational injuries of the last century.


2 Found Stabbed to Death
The bodies of a man and woman were found in a Queens apartment on Monday afternoon, victims of multiple stab wounds, the police said yesterday.
They were identified as Edward Miller, 55, and Arlene Kubas, 54, both of 166-40 89th Street in Jamaica.
The police said they did not know the motive for the killings.


China's Bad Report Card
The State Department's annual review of human rights paints a grim picture of China's police state, documenting torture, forced confessions and long imprisonment for ideological "crimes." The White House must decide this spring on China's continued access to low American tariffs; the report is a reminder of how far Beijing still has to go to meet the conditions President Clinton set down in an executive order last May.
That order set only two firm conditions: that China ease restrictions on emigration and comply with its own promises to stop exporting goods made by enslaved prisoners.
It also called on Beijing to demonstrate significant progress on releasing political prisoners, ending forced abortion and sterilization, easing religious persecution, allowing medical treatment for prisoners, protecting Tibet's cultural heritage and stopping the jamming of Voice of America broadcasts.


U.S. Calls Japanese Economic Stimulus Insufficient
The Clinton Administration gave a cool reception yesterday to the Japanese Government's economic stimulus program, saying it was probably too short in duration to produce the increase in Japanese purchases of American goods needed to shrink Japan's huge trade surplus with the United States.
The downbeat American response to the Japanese tax cuts, coupled with the lack of progress in the negotiations between Japan and the Clinton Administration for opening certain Japanese markets, is making it increasingly likely that the summit meeting on Friday in Washington between President Clinton and the Japanese Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, is going to be confrontational.


Rangers Traveling by Bus
With a game in Montreal tonight and their flight canceled because of snow, the Rangers decided to take the scenic route.
They chartered a bus yesterday at Rye, N.Y., at about noon and arrived in Montreal around 8:30 last night.
"We're going fine now," Joe Kucera, the bus driver, said by cellular phone from near Albany.
"It's not snowing and the roads are good. We're buzzing right along."


Spectrum Plans to File Sculley Suit
Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., the wireless data company stunned on Monday by the resignation of John Sculley as chairman and chief executive officer, said yesterday that it planned to file a Federal lawsuit against Mr.
Sculley, claiming damages of more than $300 million.
The suit, to be filed today, will accuse Mr.
Sculley of breach of contract, breach of fiduciary duty, mismanagement and libel, Christopher P. Franco, Spectrum's vice president and general counsel, said.
"The shareholders of this company have been greatly damaged by Mr. Sculley's actions," Mr.
Franco said.


New York City Finds a State Ally
Thomas J. Sobol, New York State's Education Commissioner, said today that he would consider imposing sanctions against the state's largest scholastic sports association if it did not rescind a ban against New York City athletes in statewide championship competition.
In a letter to the New York State Public High School Athletic Association, Sobol called the ban "not an acceptable state of affairs" and said it "feeds the perception that New York City school children are second-class to school children throughout the state."


For Now, Quake Awareness Pervades the City of Denial
Three weeks after the earthquake, this is still a city where people go to bed wearing shoes and contact lenses, with flashlights on their nightstands.
Chris Sheffield, a music video producer, keeps a hard hat beside her -- for her 5-month-old baby.
Mrs.
Sheffield and her husband, Patrick, are bolting their house to its foundations, their bookcases to the floor and their computer to the table.
With aftershocks so routine that people begin conversations by asking, "Did you feel the one last night," this has become a city of insomniacs.
Patricia Temkin, a real estate agent, flew to Phoenix last weekend with her husband and their 13-year-old daughter just so they could all get some rest (They missed the aftershocks on Sunday at 5:19 A.M. and 5:22 A.M.) A lot of people say they have been going to Arizona to sleep.


Jobs Fair Finds Weather Is Not a Deterrent


Villanova Comes Back With Late Rally
They could have played this one at the Walsh Gymnasium on the Seton Hall campus and had plenty of seats to spare.
The local Y probably would have done, too.
But Seton Hall and Villanova showed up at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight anyway, along with the 1,265 people who braved the winter storm and moved through the turnstiles.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITIES INC., Chicago, completed the $10.6 million acquisition of a 393-site retirement community in Tempe, Ariz., from De Anza Group Inc.
TECH DATA CORP., Clearwater, Fla., has completed its acquisition of U.S.
Software Resource Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


A Justice Removes the Last Barrier To Pennsylvania's Limits on Abortion
Nearly two years after the Supreme Court upheld most of its provisions, Pennsylvania's Abortion Control Act is about to take effect, after Justice David H. Souter refused late on Monday to grant a stay requested by a group of Pennsylvania abortion clinics.
But it was evident from Justice Souter's six-page opinion, which he issued in his role as the Justice in charge of the Federal courts in Pennsylvania, that the Court had not spoken its last on the constitutionality of restrictions on access to abortion, either in Pennsylvania or the rest of the country.


To Some Dogs, Biting Comes Naturally
To the Editor:
In "Dog's Death Sentence Is Reduced to Exile" (front page, Jan. 29), we learn that, to the relief of some and perhaps the ambivalence of others, Taro the Akita has been saved from death by an executive order from the Governor of New Jersey.
His owners had long contended that their 10-year-old niece had provoked him to bite her face, and that, deep down, Taro was a good dog.


Judge Dismisses Tailhook Cases, Saying Admiral Tainted Inquiry
A Navy judge today dismissed three of the four remaining cases in the Tailhook scandal, stating that the Navy's top admiral misrepresented his knowledge of what occurred at a bawdy convention for aviators and tried to manipulate the investigation.
In a decision that could carry broad implications for the Navy, the judge, Capt.
William T. Vest Jr., concluded that Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, used "unlawful command influence" to "manipulate the initial investigative process" and the subsequent discipline process "in a manner designed to shield his personal involvement in Tailhook '91."


Sol E. Flick; Watch Executive, 78
Sol E. Flick, a New York business executive who spent 50 years with companies that made watches, died on Saturday at his home in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
He was 78.
The cause of death was cancer, said his son, Dr. Jonathan A. Flick.


Review/Theater; Hiding From a Plague Very Much Like AIDS
Although AIDS is never mentioned by name in Steven Dietz's two-character play, "Lonely Planet," the plague and its mounting death toll casts a pall over this apocalyptic comedy.
All the action is set in a symbolic map store situated "on the oldest street in an American City." Surrounded by globes and maps, the store's owner, Jody (Mark Shannon), is hiding out from the plague.
Each day he is visited by his best friend, Carl (Denis O'Hare), a jack-of-all-trades who announces that he is terminally bored and who pesters Jody to leave the store long enough to be tested for the virus.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 4
Jan. 28
Feb. 5
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
6.7
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
232.0
234.7
235.0
Distillate stocks
116.8
121.0
126.2
Crude imports, daily
7.2
5.9
6.6
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.0
1.9
Crude stocks
335.6
330.6
332.1
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
88.5
87.5
84.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Lost at Fifth Avenue and 77th Street, a vivacious young woman in a spiffy red jeep with Virginia plates asks me directions to Madison and 72d.
Easy, I say.
Just turn left here on Fifth Avenue, go down to 72d Street, turn left again, Madison will be the first cross street.
As I stroll away, I hear her recapping my instructions as she peers down Fifth Avenue: "Now, let's see, I turn left on this road. . . ." SYLVIA LeBLANC
. . .
Dear Diary:
Just as my friend Mary and I stepped out of the Museum of Modern Art, a woman dragging a wagon loaded with possessions passed by exclaiming, "That's the President's son over there on the phone."
When we reached the corner, sure enough there was John F. Kennedy Jr. in a dark suit leaning against the interior of a phone booth, the receiver cupped in his hand and pressing against his mouth.
As I began plotting a way to approach the prince, the prince slammed down the receiver of what was apparently a broken machine and dashed diagonally across the intersection to another set of phones.
"Follow him!" I charged, and we crossed the street.
Mary reached the corner first; she slid into the booth next to Prince John-John, put the receiver to her ear (a foil, of course), turned around and faced him.
"Hi John," she said. He smiled.
"We're sure you were in a hurry to get across the street," she said, "but do you realize you jaywalked?" (Oh, that Mary!) She glanced mockingly at her wristwatch.
"It's the height of rush hour," she added.
"Shh." The prince put a finger to his lips. "Don't tell anyone," he said.
"Of course not," she said.
We wouldn't think of it. DEBRA ZEIFMAN
. . .
Spotted by Seymour Gillman of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., at the Columbus Circle subway station: panhandler with cup in hand and a sign reading: AT MY AGE I SHOULD BE ENJOYING LIFE .
PLEASE HELP .
. . .
VALENTINE'S DAY  When I was 12
I bought hazel-eyed Holly
a doily-covered box of candy
that would clearly win her heart.
Alas, instead she plucked at
the lacy bow with only ennui
and annoyance and snapped
my hopeful sixth-grade soul.
Defeated and denied I got
high on Nehi and penny pretzel rods
and gave up girls (until the next week)
and forgot Valentine's Day (until the next year).
But last month at our high school reunion
Holly asked me to dance and holding her
in a distant dip of memories I recalled
the bittersweetness of being 12 and in love. ROGER GRANET
. . .
Dear Diary:
O.K., so maybe shopping for snow boots in January was hopelessly optimistic.
But my old boots have started leaking and I live in the suburbs where the snow actually sticks around and doesn't turn to gray slush right away.
I was unprepared, however, for the cockiness of a saleswoman in Bloomingdale's.
Me: Do you have any waterproof snow boots?
She, somewhat haughtily: What size are you?
Me: Seven and a half.
She: Oh, please. Not a chance.
Me: You have nothing in a seven and a half?
She, with a vague wave toward a woman trying to put on a pair of rubber shoes: Just those.
And they're going fast.
Me: No. Those won't be much help in the snow.
She: They'll do fine.
Me: Not in four inches of snow. The snow would come right in the top.
She, disbelieving: When are you ever in four inches of snow!
Me, wondering why I'm continuing this conversation: Every morning when I retrieve my paper from my front lawn!
She: So why don't you shovel?
Me: Shovel my front lawn?
She: You could get a ticket for not shoveling!
I still don't have new snow boots. LISA BAIN


U.S. SAID TO PLAN BOSNIA ULTIMATUM URGING AIR STRIKES
The United States will propose that NATO give the Bosnian Serbs a week to lift the siege of Sarajevo or face air strikes by allied planes on their artillery positions in the mountains surrounding the city, senior American and European officials said today.
Pursuing a two-track strategy, drafted in response to the deadly attack on Sarajevo's main marketplace on Saturday, the Clinton Administration also wants to link the ultimatum to peace initiatives, the officials said.
Mr.
Clinton approved the package of military and diplomatic proposals on Monday night.


Stiglitz, Idea Man Among the Economic Advisers
When Joseph Stiglitz was invited to join the President's Council of Economic Advisers, many wondered whether the ivory-tower theorist from Stanford University could possibly navigate the currents of real world policy-making.
The council's role, played mostly behind the scenes, is to inject as much economic rationality into Administration proposals as politics allow.
Mr.
Stiglitz, 51, had written hundreds of papers on the economics of information, public finance and economic development, won the prestigious John Bates Clark medal in 1979 and was widely expected to collect a Nobel someday.
He was also the quintessential absent-minded professor, who has dashed into class and lectured on the wrong subject, and often turned up with his tie or shirt collar seriously askew.
Repairing Markets
In fact, as the council's chairwoman, Laura D'Andrea Tyson, must have recognized when she chose Professor Stiglitz, he and Washington circa 1993 were made for each other.
He has spent his professional life focused on the idea that markets are imperfect and need to be repaired.
"What ends up in the Government's portfolio are the things where the market is having problems," Mr.
Stiglitz said, "Government can make a major difference for the good if you structure policies appropriately."


RUSSIA A BARRIER TO NATO AIR STRIKE
As the United States and its Western allies seek to shape a joint response to Saturday's deadly mortar attack in Sarajevo, they are being forced to maneuver around an irate Russia trying to stop them from sending NATO warplanes against Bosnia's Serbs, with whom it feels linked by ethnic and religious bonds.
This means any plan the allies adopt must conform with existing Security Council resolutions since they dare not ask the Council for new authority for fear of running into a Russian veto.


NATO Near Consensus On Sarajevo Ultimatum
Building on an unusually strong partnership between the United States and France in recent days, NATO appears ready to establish a deadline for the lifting of the Serbian siege of Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia, and to use force if the deadline is violated.
"A consensus is emerging that the time has run out on inaction," a senior NATO diplomat said.
"The West and its institutions have a responsibility now to demonstrate that enough is enough."


In America; The Hate Game
It's such a lame game, so ugly and transparent, so tiresome after all these years, but nevertheless it persists.
And there are always new suckers to buy into it.
Half a century ago Gov.
Theodore Bilbo of Mississippi would spew forth prodigious amounts of racist garbage at white supremacist rallies in which African-Americans and Jews were routinely trashed as coons and kikes -- blights on the otherwise lovely landscape of lily-white America.


Weak Economy Lifts Jobless Above 4 Million in Germany
German unemployment exceeded four million in January, the Government said today, as lingering economic weakness, industrial restructuring and bad weather pushed the level to one last seen at the end of the Weimar Republic.
The number of unemployed was 4.03 million in January, up from 3.69 million in December, the Federal Labor Office said.
The Government does not issue an all-German unemployment rate, but economists outside the Government put it above 10 percent.


Calling Mr. Lautenberg
Senator John Breaux of Louisiana was angered last month when ABC's "Prime Time Live" filmed him and five other lawmakers enjoying an all-expenses-paid holiday at a fancy Florida resort, courtesy of U.S.
Tobacco and the other corporate sponsors of an annual sporting event called the Corporate Charity Classic.
"You should be ashamed of yourself," he told the reporter Chris Wallace.


Public &amp; Private; The Cost Of Free Speech
Can't beat the mail in this line of work: 20 pounds of documents in a class action suit, a list of questions from kids about violent lyrics in rap music, holy cards, invective, insults (sometimes all three from the same person), the occasional rebuttal in free verse, the heartfelt stories.
But even amidst the plaintive, the curious and the bizarre, the newsletter of the Living Truth Ministries in Austin, Tex., stands out.


ZULU KING WANTS DOMAIN RESTORED
In what some of his followers describe as a stunning display of independence, the King of the Zulus has demanded that the South African Government cede him an entire province of 8 million people to rule as a sovereign monarchy.
According to Zulu and Government officials, King Goodwill Zwelithini has told President F. W. de Klerk that he rejected South Africa's new Constitution, would not abide by the results of the country's first free elections in April, and intended to secede with all territory the British conquered from his forebears.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about New York State's general obligation bonds referred incompletely to the state's bond rating in some copies.
Standard &amp; Poor's lowered New York's rating in 1990 to A from AA-.
In 1992, it was dropped to A-, where it remains, the lowest rating of any state.


AT THE TAVERN WITH: Christopher Plummer and Jason Robards; They Go Not Gentle
"I GUESS we've been friends for 35 years or more," said Jason Robards.
He was sipping black coffee from a very large mug in a very old saloon.
"Oh, longer," said Christopher Plummer, splashing a bit of Poland Spring from the bottle before him into a tumbler.


Prudential Pressed to Buy Back Investments
California regulators are seeking to compel Prudential Securities to repurchase soured limited partnerships it sold to a large number of investors in the state as part of a settlement of fraud charges, regulators and executives said yesterday.
The proposal, which is among the harshest terms sought by any state regulator in settling the partnership scandal, would involve only customers for whom the partnerships were inappropriate investments.


For National G.O.P., a Mayor as a Poster Boy; Schundler, an Unabashed Conservative, Wants to Use Image to Help Jersey City
A new Republican Party flier features photographs of Ronald Reagan, Bob Dole, Margaret Thatcher and Bret Schundler.
Bret Schundler?
"I looked at it and just started laughing," said Mr.
Schundler, whose claim to fame is that he was elected Mayor of Jersey City last year.


U.S. Hockey Tries to Live Down Rumor
The United States Olympic hockey team likes to think of itself as a collection of fresh new faces, playing a swift-motion game that disdains rough play.
But don't tell that to some of the Europeans.
"The Swedes think we're like the N.H.L.," said Peter Ciavaglia of Harvard, who played in Sweden's top league until last week.
A spot was kept on the American team for him, though.


Agnes de Mille Is Memorialized With Her Words and Her Work
Agnes de Mille's groundbreaking contributions to American dance were honored yesterday in "Agnes de Mille: Dancer," a memorial celebration at the St.
James Theater that was attended by many of her colleagues in theater and ballet.
It was an appropriate location, for it was there that "Oklahoma!" opened on March 31, 1943.
Miss de Mille's choreography for that Rodgers and Hammerstein musical was unusual for the way it made dancing an integral part of the action rather than a mere diversion.
"Oklahoma!" influenced Broadway choreography for several decades.


A Song and a Dance Welcome the New Year


City Radio Gives a Host's Job to Sliwa
The city-owned radio station, WNYC, has decided to hire one of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's most colorful supporters, Curtis Sliwa, founder of the Guardian Angels, as host of a daily talk program, provoking a protest from its staff.
The move upends a settled afternoon schedule, moving two National Public Radio programs to nighttime slots.
But station executives said the move to hire Mr.
Sliwa, whose talk radio program on WABC-AM was canceled several weeks ago, was intended to strengthen finances by increasing listener contributions.


McCall Urges Moderation in Nonprofit Salaries
State Comptroller H. Carl McCall released an audit today showing top executives at 96 state-financed, nonprofit mental health organizations with salaries that he called "potentially excessive."
The audit shows that the 96 executives make more money than the Mental Health Commissioner, who is paid $102,335 a year.
Six of those executives in New York City earn more than $200,000, the audit says.


Sports of The Times; Sizing Up Outfielder Jordan
WHAT is the difference between Michael Jordan and Eddie Gaedel, besides 2 feet 11 inches?
Or what is the difference between Michael Jordan and Minnie Minoso, besides more than 40 years in age?
And, not the least bit less important, what is the difference between Michael Jordan and Lenny Dykstra, or Pete Rose, besides 1,110 career hits for Dykstra and a major league high of 4,256 hits for Rose?
According to Bud Selig, there's an awful lot of difference between Jordan -- the quintessential National Basketball Association All-Star and would-be major league right fielder -- and the above mentioned.
And for a variety of reasons that have everything to do with the integrity of the game, Selig must make sure that remains so.


No Daugherty for the Cavaliers But No Triumph for the Nets
Before his Nets played here tonight, Coach Chuck Daly was all smiles as he discussed his selection for the Basketball Hall of Fame.
But after his team lost to the Cleveland Cavaliers, the grin had vanished.
"We had at least a shot," Daly said after the Nets' 112-104 loss to the Cavaliers, only the Nets' fourth defeat in their last 12 games.


LARGE TAX BURDEN IS SEEN FOR YOUNG
Deep in the four-volume Federal budget President Clinton released on Monday is a detailed analysis of some bad news that Government officials don't usually draw attention to: if present trends continue, today's toddlers are likely to pay in taxes half of what they earn in their entire lives, and children yet unborn will probably have it even worse.
The idea that the Federal Government is shifting wealth between generations had been discussed for years before becoming a prominent political issue during the 1992 Presidential campaign, when Ross Perot warned that by allowing persistent budget deficits, Americans were effectively spending their children's inheritance.


Whitaker Books Cardona
Five months after scoring what just about everybody but two of the judges thought was a decisive victory in San Antonio over the previously indomitable Julio Cesar Chavez, Pernell (Sweetpea) Whitaker said yesterday that he was putting his World Boxing Council welterweight title on the line once again, this time in a hometown setting in Norfolk, Va.
His opponent in the April 19 bout, a mandatory W.B.C. challenge, will be Santos Cardona, a little-known native of Puerto Rico who was being touted yesterday as a big, strong brawler who could give Whitaker enough trouble to justify a big gate and even bigger HBO television audience.
Cardona, who has a 29-3 record with 19 knockouts, earned the challenge with impressive victories over Kevin Pompey and Livingstone Bramble, a two-time champion.


Raymond Scott, 85, a Composer For Cartoons and the Stage, Dies
Raymond Scott, a jazz composer, pianist, band leader and inventor whose music found its way into dozens of Warner Brothers cartoons, died yesterday in the Country Villa Sheraton Nursing Home in North Hills, Calif.
He was 85 and lived in Van Nuys, Calif.
The cause was pneumonia, said Irwin Chusid, the director of the Raymond Scott Archives in Hoboken, N.J.


Mets Sign Ordonez, A Defector From Cuba
Reynaldo (Rey) Ordonez, considered one of the brightest in a stream of Cuban prospects to defect to the United States in recent years, signed a minor league contract with the Mets yesterday.
And by doing so he immediately put a new twist with international flavoring on the Mets' still unresolved shortstop situation.
The 22-year-old Ordonez, a 5-foot-10-inch, 170-pounder, was assigned to Port St.
Lucie of the Class A Florida State League.
But when asked when he could make it up to the majors, Ordonez said through an interpreter, "this year."


100 Years Later, Dreyfus Affair Still Festers
On the centenary of the arrest of Capt.
Alfred Dreyfus on charges of treason, the Dreyfus Affair resurfaced today when France's Defense Minister dismissed the head of the army's history section for publishing a study that cast doubt on the Jewish officer's innocence.
Government officials said the Defense Minister, Francois Leotard, was furious when he read the three-page study, which described the deep divisions in French society created by the Dreyfus Affair but merely concluded that "Dreyfus's innocence is the thesis now generally accepted by historians."


Puerto Rico's Cuisine
To The Living Section:
I commend Elaine Louie for her substantial cover piece on Puerto Rican cuisine ("From One Island, a Savory Blend of Three Cultures," Jan. 12).


QVC Dangles the Prospect Of a New Bid for Paramount
The fat lady has laryngitis.
Some traders and executives concluded that yesterday when Barry Diller, the chairman of QVC Network Inc., said his company was considering increasing its bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
That means the seemingly interminable battle between QVC and Viacom Inc. for Paramount might not end on Feb. 14, when both bids expire.
In a series of meetings yesterday with institutional shareholders, traders and analysts, Mr.
Diller yesterday asked shareholders not to tender their shares to Viacom, whose current bid is stronger than QVC's and endorsed by the Paramount board.


A Gray Day
To The Living Section:
What a thrill it was back in 1987 to see a gray-haired female anchor on network television.
Yes, Virginia, there is a life with gray hair.
You can still be pretty, trim, and even turn a few heads.


Talbott Recants Criticism of Israel
Facing severe criticism for some of his writings about Israel, Strobe Talbott, the former Time magazine writer who has been nominated as Deputy Secretary of State, spent much of his confirmation hearing today backpedaling from -- and even outright renouncing -- statements he made years ago about Israel.
After several members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee criticized him for writing in 1981 that Israel was "an outright liability to American security interests," he seemed eager to repudiate that statement.


Before Hardiest Witnesses, Islanders Triumph Handily
Islanders 3, Sabres 1
Playing before only 2,966 fans, the smallest home crowd in franchise history, the Islanders beat the Buffalo Sabres, 3-1, at Nassau Coliseum last night.


Fire Leaves 30 Homeless
About 30 people were left homeless last night when a two-alarm fire burned through several floors of a six-story residential building in Harlem, the Fire Department said.
Fire officials classified the fire as suspicious.
Steve Hoch, a department spokesman, said 155 firefighters using 32 trucks and ladders responded to the fire at 240 East 119th Street after the first alarm sounded at 7:40 P.M.
He said the fire damaged at least four floors before it was brought under control.
Mr.
Hoch said 18 people, including three police officers, received minor injuries and one firefighter suffered burns to his ears.
The American Red Cross said it was attempting to find emergency housing for the victims last night.


2 Bills to Bolster School Methods Clear the Senate
The Senate today passed two bills that the Clinton Administration hopes will create a better-educated work force to face increasing global competition: one would stress educational achievement, and the other would link schools to businesses.
Relatively little money has been budgeted for either measure.
Both are rather vague.
And both rely heavily on the ingenuity and commitment of individual states and school districts to work.
In fact, some people have criticized them as empty promises to reach unattainable goals.


Change in Czech Recital
Emily Golden is to replace the mezzo-soprano Susanne Mentzer in a joint recital of Czech songs with the tenor Neil Rosenshein and the pianist Rudolf Firkusny on Feb. 20 at 2 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.


Advances in Cataract Surgery Bring Far Quicker Recovery
Leon Kaczmarek went home just hours after having a cataract removed one Friday last month.
A soft bandage covered the eye where an artificial lens had been implanted, but he had no stitches and needed no painkillers.
By Sunday he was outside his New Jersey house chipping ice off the front walk.
A few years ago, the operation to remove the cataract, a clouding in the eye's natural lens, would have left Mr.
Kaczmarek puttering carefully around his house for three weeks, wary of jarring his stitches, unable to return to work until his eye healed.
But recent advances in surgical techniques are shortening the recovery period to mere days.


Review/Music; A Pianist's Insight on Elaboration
Probably the thing that makes Robert Taub's recitals so absorbing is that he puts together his programming with a composer's ear for structure and thematic metamorphosis.
The program that the pianist played on Monday evening at the Walter Reade Theater was about elaboration, both as a propulsive device within a musical work and as a force in musical history.
Mr.
Taub made his case with a diverse group of works: a Bach Partita, a Milton Babbitt work for piano and electronic sounds and some Scriabin and Brahms.
He hopped around chronologically, but his insightful performances clarified the logic of his choices and juxtapositions.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Porsche's new tack is to try turning a thing of imperious beauty into something warm and fuzzy.
SEEKING to reverse one of the worst sales slumps in the automotive industry, Porsche Cars North America Inc. will introduce a campaign this weekend from its new agency that integrates playful humor and warm emotion with its traditional performance-oriented messages.
Commercials featuring smiling, laughing Porsche employees?
Print advertisements with whimsical copy?
A crash-test spot focusing on -- gasp! -- safety?
That sound you heard was the shattering of a long-stolid Teutonic facade.


SOUTH KOREA TRIES TO SOOTHE NORTH
Fearing that the invective from North Korea has become increasingly ominous, South Korea's President, Kim Young Sam, convened the country's national security council today and then issued a series of conciliatory messages, saying "dialogue will be maintained as long as possible" over the inspection of the North's nuclear sites.
Mr.
Kim's meeting came just before South Korea's Foreign Minister, Han Sung Joo, headed to Washington in an effort to come up with a new strategy to persuade the North to relent on inspections before the International Atomic Energy Agency's board of governors meets in Vienna on Feb. 21.
Unless North Korea has permitted a thorough inspection by that time, the agency is expected to refer the issue to the United Nations Security Council for the imposition of sanctions.


CHRONICLE
The marriage of the Washington Redskins owner and real estate multimillionaire JACK KENT COOKE and MARLENE RAMALLO CHALMERS has ended, if it ever legally existed.
Mr.
Cooke declared the three-and-a-half-year union null and void yesterday, The Associated Press reported, because, he said, Ms.
Chalmers's divorce from her former husband had been "falsely obtained" in the Dominican Republic in 1986.


'Roseanne' and ABC Clash Over a Kiss
ABC is engaged in another feud with Roseanne and Tom Arnold, this time over a kiss.
The March 1 episode of "Roseanne" was to feature a kiss, exchanged in a gay bar, between Mrs.
Arnold's character and a character played by Mariel Hemingway.
According to Mr.
Arnold, however, ABC will not allow the episode to be broadcast as is because it violates network standards.


In School; A Lifetime's Worth of Lessons From One Stubborn But Patient Teacher of Austistic Children
For 27 years, until his death two weeks ago, Dan Bailey worked in the New York City public schools teaching autistic children.
If you asked him why, he'd smile and say, "Not for the money."
Mr.
Bailey started at the city's first public school for the autistic.
Because it was all new then, he had no choice but to pioneer the courses that would make it possible for the autistic and retarded to live outside of institutions: travel training, job coaching, sex education.


Corrections
The Metro Matters column on Dec. 27, analyzing voting patterns in the New York City mayoral election, referred incorrectly to the shift between 1989 and 1993 in support for David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Mr.
Dinkins won by about 47,000 votes in 1989 and Mr.
Giuliani won by about 50,000 votes in 1993; thus the net shift was about 48,500 votes, not 97,000.
A reader's letter dated Dec. 28, pointing out the error, went astray, delaying this correction.


Witold Lutoslawski, 81, Is Dead; Modern, Yet Melodic, Composer
Witold Lutoslawski, an innovative Polish composer whose orchestral and chamber works had a direct and immediate appeal that made them centerpieces of the modern repertory, died on Monday in Warsaw.
He was 81.
He died after a brief illness, said Susan Feder, a vice president at G. Schirmer, which distributes Mr.
Lutoslawski's music in the United States.


Defendant in Bomb Plot Released on Bail
One of the 15 defendants charged in connection with a wide-ranging terrorist plot that included planning to bomb several targets in New York City was released on bail yesterday, the defendant's lawyer said.
The defendant, Mohammed Abouhalima, 29, who had been held without bail since his arrest in August, was released from the Federal jail in lower Manhattan after a court proceeding, the details of which have been sealed.


Accounts
*
Tefal, Paris, a maker of small home appliances, has consolidated its estimated $25 million international account at Lintas Worldwide, which already handles the company's account in five countries, including Germany and the United States.
The account, previously divided among various local agencies, will be managed from Lintas Paris.


Stop Slouching Toward the Vietnam War's End
To the Editor:
There is something disheartening and humiliating about the way the United States is sidling into normal relations with Vietnam (front page, Feb. 4).
This is not the way a strong and confident republic behaves.


4 Drown as Haitians Land at 2 Beaches in Florida
About 75 Haitian refugees, apparently fleeing a campaign against them in the Bahamas, landed on beaches in two South Florida counties early today, but at least four other Haitians drowned as they tried to make their way to shore, the authorities said.
United States Border Patrol officials said the bodies of two adults and two boys about 5 years old were found before dawn after washing up at Jensen Beach, about 30 miles north of Palm Beach.
Lloyd Lofland, a supervisor of the Border Patrol's local anti-smuggling unit, said 23 other Haitians who had been on the same boat as those who drowned were turned over to the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


More Is the Pity at the Pentagon
With all the talk about budget cuts, the Pentagon is actually scheduled to get more money next year.
The Clinton Administration is seeking $264 billion in defense spending authority for 1995, up $2.8 billion from 1994.
Advocates of higher defense spending explain away the rise as reflecting a military pay increase voted by Congress.
But the sadder truth is that the Administration refused to reduce Pentagon programs enough, despite the end of the cold war.
By preparing to wage two regional wars simultaneously, the Administration is still setting force requirements too high.
That will put upward pressure on the budget for many years to come.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PROSECUTION RESTS IN TRADE CENTER TRIAL
After more than four months of testimony, which produced an avalanche of circumstantial evidence, the Government rested its case against the four defendants in the World Trade Center bombing trial.
A1.


Israeli Rightists Now in Opposition to One Another
With Israel at a turning point in its relations with the Arabs, the country's political opposition has failed to find a clear voice to counter Government policies that it says will lead to cataclysm.
Instead, to the consternation of supporters looking for decisive leadership at a critical moment, right-wing opposition parties are riven by personal rivalries, naked ambitions and nasty name-calling.
The feuding became so serious in one important party, Tsomet, that it split in two this week, with talk of a breakaway faction possibly joining the very governing coalition it has denounced.


Stocks Up in Europe After British Rate Cut
Britain shaved its base lending rate by a quarter of a point today to its lowest level in 22 years, giving a boost of confidence to investors and signaling that rates in Europe would continue to move down even as they tick up in the United States.
Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke said he was reducing the base rate to 5.25 percent from 5.5 percent because Britain's modest economic recovery had so far created no significant inflationary pressures.
Inflation in December was 1.9 percent, and the Government and the Bank of England have set a goal of keeping it below 4 percent.
Rebound in Stocks
"Inflation has been lower than expected," Mr.
Clarke said.
"Looking ahead, inflationary pressures appear subdued."


Agents Say Sect Members Started Deadly Fire
Two agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation testified today that members of the Branch Davidian sect set the fire that swept through the religious group's compound last April.
The origins of the fire dominated testimony today and Monday in the trial of 11 Branch Davidians accused of killing four agents during a raid by the Federal Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Bureau on Feb. 28.


NEC, Faltering, to Get New President
Tadahiro Sekimoto, who presided over the NEC Corporation as it grew into one of the world's most successful electronics companies, and then as it fell into trouble, announced today that he would step down in June.
The new president will be Hisashi Kaneko, the executive vice president in charge of international operations.
Dr.
Kaneko headed NEC's American operations until last August and is viewed as a protege of Dr.
Sekimoto's.


Yankees Are Shut Out As Olson Picks Braves
If Gregg Olson returns to form as a superb closer, if he overcomes a troubling right elbow injury and performs splendidly for the Atlanta Braves this season, the Yankees will remember the frigid day in February when he auditioned for them at Yankee Stadium.
And they will wince.
The Yankees' chance to make Olson a possible cure for their bullpen woes vanished yesterday when the Braves proved more appealing and signed the right-hander to a one-year, incentive-laden contract that could be worth as much as $3.5 million.


Congress Asserts Health Proposals Understate Costs
The Congressional Budget Office said today that President Clinton's health care proposal would slow the growth of national health spending, but at the same time its report gave ammunition to critics who have called the plan too big and too reliant on Government.
Robert D. Reischauer, director of the Congressional Budget Office, said the Administration had underestimated the premiums needed to pay for the President's plan, and the size of the subsidies to businesses needing help to pay for their workers' coverage.


'Awakened' Peasant Farmers Overrunning Mexican Towns
With its neatly kept plaza, well-stocked shops and brightly painted homes, this market town in the southern state of Chiapas seems remarkably distant from the peasant uprising that has torn through the highlands and the rain forest not far away.
"Until yesterday, Teopisca was the calmest town in the state," the Mayor, Hector Alvarez Gordillo, said today.


Bridge
In world championships over the last decade, most of the women's team titles have been won by the United States and Britain.
The British have the top player in the world rankings, Sandra Landy, and three more in the top seven.
Mrs.
Landy had a rude shock in the 1993 final of the British Women's Team Championship.
Her team led by 26 imps with eight deals remaining, but the lead was down to 8 with one deal left.
In one room the South cards shown in the diagram were held by a 17-year-old schoolgirl, Abbey Walker of Lancaster, England, playing with Su Burn.
She overcalled the one-heart opening with one spade, and persevered with four spades, removing her partner's double of four hearts.
That contract would probably have failed by a trick.


A Fascination for Spinning and Leaping Bodies
Jack Mitchell ventured into dance photography in the 1950's through his friendship with Ted Shawn, whose work with Ruth St.
Denis and their Denishawn company helped modern dance take root in the United States.
Today, Mr.
Mitchell is one of the best-known American dance photographers, an innovator who found dramatic new ways to capture bodies in motion.
His love for those leaping, spinning bodies may be seen in "Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater: Jack Mitchell Photographs," published late last year to celebrate the 35th anniversary of one of Mr.
Mitchell's favorite dance companies.


It's Better Late Than Never: Oakley Joins All-Star Cast
Charles Oakley gladly changed his plans for the weekend.
For the first time in his nine-year career, Oakley was named to play in the National Basketball Association All-Star Game.
Commissioner David Stern today named the Knicks' power forward to replace Alonzo Mourning, the Charlotte Hornets' center, on the Eastern Conference team for the game Sunday in Minneapolis.
Mourning has a torn left calf muscle and will be sidelined for five games.


Ayer and Riney End Plans to Merge
After months of negotiations, Ayer Inc. in New York and Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco unexpectedly said yesterday that they had called off plans to merge.
A joint statement said the two agencies had made a "mutual decision" to abandon discussions of a merger, which began in October.
Hal Riney, chairman and chief executive at Riney, said that some differences had arisen which he called "technical in nature as opposed to philosophical."


Fish That Like Marinade as Much as the Sea
MARINATING a thin fillet of a fish like sole, flounder or scrod is not a long-term proposition.
The fish absorbs much of the marinade's flavor in a few minutes.
So even for meals that have to be on the table in less than half an hour, seasoning fish with a simple, strong marinade is worth the minute or two it takes to put one together.
But the most delicious and interesting part of this dinner is not the fish but the broccoli mashed potatoes.
Because of the broccoli, the mashed potatoes have a wonderful green color, and because of the sauteed onions, no one can get enough of the dish.


Personal Health; Depression in the elderly: old notions hinder help.
DEPRESSION is a popular disorder these days.
Although it may not be more common than in the past, today more people are willing to admit to themselves that they are depressed, to talk openly about the problem and to seek treatment.
The exception is among the elderly.
People over 60, who are more likely to suffer from depression than any other age group, including teen-agers, are the least likely to recognize or acknowledge that they are depressed.
Dr.
Martiece Carson, a neuropsychiatrist at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center in Oklahoma City, explained: "It's a cultural thing, a sign of their times. The elderly tend to consider depression to be a symptom of weakness, of laziness, not a medical illness."


Wine Talk
STAGS LEAP.
Stag's Leap.
Stags' Leap.


Ex-Giants Join Parcells
BILL PARCELLS reached into his past yesterday as the coach worked to build a future for the New England Patriots.
Parcells, the former head coach of the Giants, announced that he was hiring MIKE POPE, who was his tight-ends coach on the Giants, to be the coach of the Patriots' running backs.
Pope will replace DAVID ATKINS, who left the Patriots Monday to join BUDDY RYAN, who has been named head coach of the Phoenix Cardinals.


Philadelphia Adopts Tough Truant Policy, With Handcuffs, Too
In an effort to cut its truancy and crime rates, Philadelphia is about to begin one of the toughest truancy programs in the nation.
Starting next week, the police will pick up, search and handcuff truants before taking them to truancy centers.
While school officials are not comfortable with the use of handcuffs and other punitive aspects of the program, they say something has to be done.


A.B.A.'s Delegates Rebuff Law School On Denied Approval
By voice vote, the American Bar Association's House of Delegates today rebuffed the appeal of a Massachusetts law school that had been denied accreditation by the association's legal education arm.
The vote, which followed a two-hour debate at the delegates' winter meeting here, left the spurned institution, the Massachusetts School of Law, in Andover, still pursuing two avenues of attack against the bar association's accreditation process.


Harlem Man Found Dead After Beating
An 89-year-old man was found yesterday badly beaten and apparently strangled in his ransacked Harlem apartment, the police said.
The victim, who was identified as James Reid, lived alone at 36 West 138th Street, where his body was discovered by building maintenance workers who found his apartment door open.


A Living Language
To The Living Section:
I think Francis Ford Coppola will be happy to hear that his Latin label has not gone unnoticed.
Five of my Latin students brought me the clipping from Food Notes (Jan. 26).
I encourage them to make Latin connections to the world around us and they were very excited with this one.
I am pleased because the Rubicon wine and its Latin "caveat" prove that Latin is still alive and well.
RHODA SCHALL
Latin teacher
The Village Community School
New York


Capitals Cash In on Tight Checking
Early in Monday night's Ranger game against the Washington Capitals, while players skated up and down the ice of Madison Square Garden, the playing surface and seating areas were suddenly illuminated by the flashing glow of moving spotlights, the kind usually used to celebrate a goal by the home team.
It was a rare technical malfunction in a building that prides itself on its usually slick presentation.
And it was a foreshadowing of later problems resulting in a 4-1 Ranger defeat, a rare loss for a team that usually wins on its own stage.


Cable Price Freeze Is Extended
The Federal Communications Commission extended a temporary freeze on the revenue growth of cable television companies today, in an effort to hold down rates while it prepares to impose a strong new set of permanent price regulations later this month.
Operators of cable systems quickly announced plans to fight the freeze in court, arguing that they were being punished while the Government continued to revise its rules.


Low-Fat Advice
To The Living Section:
I am deeply troubled by the shrill complaints of physicians who object to Dr.
Dean Ornish's advice of 10 percent calories from fat for the majority of Americans (Eating Well, Jan. 12).


Messinger in Budget Clash With Giuliani
In any year, the process of shaping New York City's budget can prompt disagreements.
But this year, with a new Republican Mayor bent on deep cuts in spending and jobs, even the tiniest procedural details can provoke political confrontations.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan exchanged pointed accusations yesterday after Mr.
Giuliani declined to send representatives of the city's agencies to a hearing on the Mayor's preliminary budget plan at the Borough President's office.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Harvard
Crimson teams have played well on many grand occasions but none have done better than Captain Sean McCann's squad on Monday night in the first round of the 42d Beanpot tournament at Boston Garden.


Redmen Must Win, And Do
If a game can be characterized as an absolute must victory in what has been a tremendously disappointing season, last night's effort by St.
John's against Miami filled the bill.
The Redmen were at home playing the only Big East team with a worse record, a team that had dropped all 24 of its road games since joining the conference.
Under such pressure, the Redmen delivered, achieving a 78-63 victory before a sparse crowd estimated at 1,000 at Alumni Hall.


Council Joins 2-State Fight Over Ellis I.
Seeking to inject New York City into a looming debate over the future of Ellis Island, a City Council committee unanimously voted yesterday to make the famous entry point for immigrants a city historic landmark, virtually assuring that the entire Council will pass the measure today.
Although the Federal Government has final say over what happens on the island, the Council's expected action today will throw the city into the middle of a complicated legal battle between New York State and New Jersey over which state has jurisdiction over much of the island.
The case is now pending before the United States Supreme Court.


2 Pentagon Leaders Oppose Amendment To Balance Budget
The Pentagon's two senior officials today took an unvarnished stance against the latest plan for a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry and Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told Congress that the amendment would probably force large and immediate cuts in the discretionary portion of the Federal budget, about half of which goes toward Pentagon programs.


George Sauer; Former Official Of Jets Was 83
George H. Sauer, a former college football coach who served as general manager of the New York Titans and later as the first director of player personnel for their successor, the New York Jets, died on Saturday at the Veterans Affairs Hospital in Waco, Tex.
He was 83.
His son, George Jr., a former Jets receiver, said his father died of Alzheimer's disease.


Review/Opera; A Not-So-Ordinary Summer by the Adriatic Sea
By now the critical consensus on Benjamin Britten's "Death in Venice" is that it is something of a masterpiece, a remarkable translation of Thomas Mann's allusive, ironic tale into operatic form.
Britten turns the story of the German writer Aschenbach's erotic obsession with a 14-year-old boy in cholera-infested Venice into a chamber opera for full-size orchestra.
It was one of Britten's last works, and he was painfully ill as he completed it in 1973.
It has a spare, autumnal quality, with hints of exoticism; Britten spices his distinctive tonal language with passages based on Balinese gamelan music.
So interest was high on Monday night when the opera returned to the Metropolitan Opera stage for the first time since the Met presented nine performances of the original British production in 1974.
This 1992 production is owned by the Royal Opera at Covent Garden, which gave its premiere in 1992, and has been created by almost the same team that originally worked with the composer.
That in itself lent a real sense of occasion to the evening.


Jury Award in Dismissal of Coach
A jury awarded $1.35 million Tuesday to JIM HUFFMAN, the dismissed women's coach at Cal State-Fullerton.
Huffman maintained that school officials dismissed him in 1992 in retaliation for taking them to court over their attempt to drop the women's team from the school's athletic program.
On March 17, 1992, the team was saved by a preliminary injunction sought by the coach and the team members, but Huffman was discharged six days later.
The team later was permanently reinstated under terms of a settlement. (AP)


Golf; Couples and a City Made for Each Other
In the city of stars and assorted wannabes, Fred Couples has a huge and vocal following.
They love him here.
This could have something to do with the fact he has won the Los Angeles Open at Riviera Country Club twice, but more likely it has to do with Couples's demeanor.
Face it: Fred is cool, L.A. cool.
He strolls the fairways with icy aplomb.
He strikes the golf ball with effortless power.
And as he returns to the PGA Tour from an overseas excursion to Dubai and Thailand, in his first United States appearance since finishing second at the Mercedes Championships at La Costa last month, he is certain to draw the biggest galleries when the $1 million tournament begins on Thursday.


Texaco Settles With Louisiana, Vowing More Investment
Texaco said yesterday that it would settle a longstanding lawsuit with Louisiana by including an unusual promise to invest $152 million in the state's battered energy industry, a move expected to produce about 1,000 jobs.
"It's going to create some new jobs," Lauren C. Scott, an economist for Louisiana State University, said.
"That's what they really need down here. It's a good deal for the state."


Bill on Testing of Newborns for H.I.V. Is Opposed
A state panel has rejected a controversial proposal that state health officials identify newborns who test positive for H.I.V. and tell their mothers.
Instead the panel recommended that doctors be required to provide H.I.V. counseling to all pregnant women and new mothers and encourage them to test for the virus on their own.
In a report to be presented to the state AIDS Advisory Council at its meeting this month, the panel challenged a state Assembly bill introduced by Nettie Mayersohn, Democrat of Queens that would require that mothers be told the results of H.I.V. tests that the state Health Department now performs anonymously on all newborns.
The tests are conducted in New York and other states to help health officials track the epidemic, but the identity of the babies is not known to the testers.


Clinton Outlines U.S. Interest in Bosnia Air Strikes
Declaring the United States ready to take part in NATO air strikes in Bosnia, President Clinton said tonight that he had concluded that "our nation has clear interests at stake in this conflict."
Mr.
Clinton said the most compelling reason for American participation in the retaliatory strikes threatened by NATO today was the importance of preventing a wider war in Europe.
But he said there would also be other justifications for military action, about which many Americans remain wary, according to some opinion polls.


ELECTRONIC ARTS PLANS TO ACQUIRE BRODERBUND
Electronic Arts, an interactive entertainment software publisher based in San Mateo, Calif., said yesterday that it would acquire Broderbund Software Inc. in a stock swap valued at about $400 million.
The acquisition of Broderbund, based in Novato, Calif., will speed the planned move by Electronic Arts into home entertainment and educational software, and pair Broderbund, a developer of educational and personal productivity software with a larger partner.


Artists and Parents
To The Home Section:
I was so pleased to see Andrea Higbie's article, "The New Art Appreciation, Parental Division: Hang It" (Jan. 6).
I have been an elementary school art teacher for nearly 20 years and know that children create beautiful and exciting artwork.


Tyson to Get Court Hearing in June
A hearing has been set for MIKE TYSON's lawyers to argue that prosecutors knew that his accuser planned to sue the boxer and make money from the rape case.
The State Court of Appeals ruled in December that Tyson is entitled to a hearing to determine whether prosecutors withheld information at trial that might have resulted in a different verdict.
Judge PATRICIA J. GIFFORD of Marion Superior Court set a hearing on the issue for June 13.
Tyson's attorneys will get a chance to call prosecutors and ask if they knew that Tyson's accuser and her lawyers planned to file a civil lawsuit against the boxer.
If the judge rules that prosecutors withheld the information from the defense, then Gifford will have to decide whether that would have made a difference to the jury. (AP)


Expect No Bold Predictions From Moe in the Downhill
Tommy Moe was only 13 when Bill Johnson stormed down the course on Mount Belasnica near Sarajevo to become the first and only American man to win the Olympic downhill.
Moe remembers the race.
He also remembers what the cocksure Johnson said before it started: "Everyone else can fight for second place."
"That was awesome," said Moe, shaking his head and grinning underneath his new goatee.


Quake Bill Spurs Long Deficit Debate
The Senate had every intention today of approving $9.7 billion in new deficit spending for the Pentagon and victims of recent earthquakes and floods, but instead it found itself snared in a nasty debate over whether cutting the deficit might be wiser than raising it again.
The lawmakers argued for about seven hours.
In the end, it was no contest: the cuts were shelved, in a lopsided 65-to-31 vote.


Corrections
A chronology of the Navy's Tailhook cases yesterday misidentified the writer in some copies.
She is Monica Borkowski.


WMX Technologies
WMX Technologies reported a decline in fourth-quarter earnings yesterday, surprising Wall Street.
The waste-management company blamed special charges and lingering effects of the recession.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company cut WMX from its recommended list.


Rhodes Takes Over 49er Defense
The San Francisco 49ers, one of the poorest National Football League teams defensively last season, named RAY RHODES as the team's new defensive coordinator yesterday.
Rhodes replaces BILL McPHERSON, who was appointed assistant head coach.
Rhodes was defensive coordinator for Green Bay the past two years and guided the Packers to second in overall defense in 1993. (AP)


Clinton to Order Pollution Policy Cleared of Bias
The Clinton Administration is about to order all Federal agencies to insure that their programs do not unfairly inflict environmental harm on the poor and members of minorities, officials said today.
An executive order to be signed within days by President Clinton would require every agency to come up with a comprehensive strategy to redress and prevent such inequities, which until recently were rarely considered in setting Federal policies.


Cable Group Opposes Pactel Data Proposal
In a petition filed today with the Federal Communications Commission, a California cable television trade group opposed plans by the Pacific Telesis Group to build a $16 billion high-speed video and data superhighway, saying the construction would be unfairly subsidized by telephone customers paying higher phone bills.
Pacific Telesis officials denied that the network, which is expected to carry voice and an array of services including video, would be financed by telephone customers.
But analysts said legal challenges, such as the one filed by the California Cable Television Association, were not surprising.


Gung-Ho Telemarkers Endure Pain, Elegantly
Move over, Alpine skiers.
Not only must you make way for the snowboarders, you also have to watch out for the "telly" skiers.
Telemark skiing's ex-hippy generation of 20 years ago has passed its mantle on to a crowd of young, gung-ho adventurers who are as eager to tackle a groomed slope as waist-high powder in the backcountry.
"There are snowboarders, and there are telemarkers," said 26-year-old John Hamblett.
"Snowboarding is a little more painful than telemarking, not that telemarking isn't painful, but when you catch your edge on a snowboard, you don't have time to blink your eye before your head slams down."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.13
3.24
2.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.23
3.24
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.37
3.40
3.10
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.92
5.97
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.41
6.44
7.25
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.29
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.52
6.20
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NATO's Risky Step
Bosnian Serb forces are taking the latest NATO bombing ultimatum seriously, and Americans should too.
The Clinton Administration needs to assert more effective U.S. leadership within NATO than it has until now on the Bosnian issue; otherwise this emotionally satisfying riposte to last Saturday afternoon's carnage in Sarajevo could lead to costly and frustrating NATO ground involvement.
It could also perversely encourage coercion of the Bosnian Government to accept an unjust European peace formula.


Madelin T. Gilpatric, Cancer Group Founder
Madelin Thayer Gilpatric, a volunteer for almost five decades for several nonprofit organizations in New York City and California, died last Thursday at New York Hospital.
She was in her 80's.
The cause of death was a cerebral hemorrhage, according to her family.


Rates Slip After 10-Year Note Auction
Interest rates ended a four-day advance and turned modestly lower on good investor demand at yesterday's 10-year note auction.
The small rally helped to ease market concern temporarily about inflation and the possibility of another jump in short-term interest rates by the Federal Reserve.
The price of the 30-year bond was up 14/32 , to 9728/32 , as the yield, which moves in the opposite direction, fell to 6.41 percent, from 6.44 percent on Tuesday.


Antimicrobial Drugs Endorsed for Ulcers In a Major U.S. Shift
Setting a new standard of care for millions of people with stomach ulcers, a panel of medical experts said today that antimicrobial agents, including antibiotics, should be added to the conventional treatments for the common ailment.
The recommendation reflects evidence from studies in the last few years that ulcers are caused by infection with a bacterium, Helicobacterium pylori.
The aim of antimicrobial therapy is to knock out the bacteria permanently and prevent recurrences.


World Religious Leaders Meet on Ethnic Strife
Religious leaders representing Jews, Muslims and Christians met today to pursue an end to ethnic strife from the Balkans to Central Asia "through the strength of spiritual might."
But the clerics' deliberations, intended in part to distance religious faith from the fierce nationalisms fueling ethnic strife, collided with precisely the same sensitivities and distinctions that have turned much of the former Soviet empire into a tinderbox.


Newsstand Owner Is Killed In Robbery Near Penn Station
Two men robbed a busy midtown newsstand late yesterday morning and killed its owner, leaving his body crumpled on a chair against boxes of candy and gum as pedestrians ran from the corner, the police said.
Friends and relatives of the newsstand owner, Pravin Shah, said that Mr.
Shah had practiced herbal medicine in India and began working in a newsstand because he could not afford training to become a doctor in the United States.
He had sworn he would quit the business after being robbed at knife-point twice in the last two years, one friend said.


Bloomberg Plans Television News Service
When Michael Bloomberg's next expansion of his financial news empire goes on television -- it's scheduled to make its debut on May 1 -- the size of its audience will be difficult to judge.
Mr.
Bloomberg said yesterday that his Bloomberg Financial Markets service would create a 13-hour-a-day, 7-day-a-week television news service called Bloomberg Direct that will be transmitted on DirecTV, a satellite-to-home broadcasting service that will go on the air in April, offering home viewers an alternative to local cable systems.


A Shy, Frail Creator Of the Wildest Music
If you knew little of Alfred Schnittke or his music, you might say he is trendy, hip, in fashion.
It is an understandable assumption, given the current spate of Schnittke performances: the world premiere of his Symphony No. 7 tonight by the New York Philharmonic, the American premieres last week of his Piano Sonata No. 2 by Boris Berman and his Symphony No. 6 by the National Symphony Orchestra, and a forthcoming performance of his "Faust Cantata" by the American Symphony Orchestra.
Other recent works are being rushed to recordings.
Not since Britten has a living composer been given this kind of attention.
But the man who sat patiently through an interview at the Watergate Hotel in Washington on Saturday morning has nothing to do with the world of trends.
Soft-spoken, shy and physically frail from two recent strokes, this Russian-born composer is incapable of self-promotion.
Unlike many composers before him, he does not conduct, and he has written perplexingly little for his own instrument, the piano.
He has gained recognition only through the substance of his music, with its anarchic conjuration of musical history and its underlying eloquence.


Bronx Board Ordered to Reverse an Ouster
Flexing his powers fully for the first time since he assumed them last fall, New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday ordered a Bronx school board with a legacy of corruption and educational failure to reverse its recent decision to oust a reform-minded superintendent.
Arguing that he has a responsibility to protect recent classroom gains and prevent further educational turmoil, Mr.
Cortines ordered Community School Board 9, which governs 35 schools in the west central Bronx, to renew the contract of the district superintendent, Felton Johnson, who has put into effect extensive educational reforms that Mr.
Cortines said are only now beginning to pay off.


Ignace Strasfogel, 84, Pianist and Conductor
Ignace Strasfogel, a pianist, composer and conductor, died on Sunday at the Jewish Home and Hospital for Aged.
He was 84 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications of Alzheimer's disease, said his son Ian.


Flash! Harding Dons Skates a Foot at a Time
They clustered in a pack on one end of Tonya Harding's hometown ice rink.
They loitered outside the county grand jury room.
They followed Harding's pickup truck, then surrounded it when it was parked.
They jammed the district attorney's phone lines.
They are the news media: ranging from local and national newspapers to network news programs and such tabloid TV pit bulls as "Inside Edition," "Hard Copy," and "A Current Affair."


Lawrence Memorial
A memorial tribute to Seymour Lawrence, an independent book publisher, is to be held on Monday at 1 P.M. at the Harvard Club, 27 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
Among those scheduled to speak are the writers Thomas McGuane, Tim O'Brien, Kurt Vonnegut, Susan Minot and Jayne Anne Phillips.
Mr.
Lawrence, who was affiliated with Houghton Mifflin, died on Jan. 4 at the age of 67.
The tribute is open to the public.


Coach Who Lost Leg in Luge Accident Returns
The German luge coach, Josef Lenz, who lost his left leg below the knee in a collision with a sled ridden by an American, Bethany Calcaterra-McMahon, has resumed his duties and is living in the Olympic village here.
Lenz, 59 years old, was sweeping a luge track in Winterberg, Germany, on Dec. 17 when the accident occurred.
Deaf in one ear, he failed to hear the announcement that Calcaterra-McMahon had left the starting gate, then slipped trying to leap out of the way.


Editors' Note
An article on Friday reported reactions to a decision by New York State's Environmental Commissioner, Thomas C. Jorling, to resign and take a job with International Paper.
The article said that some environmentalists -- whom it did not identify -- questioned whether he had shown favoritism in recent years toward the paper industry, which he is now joining.
In fairness, the article should have identified the environmentalists raising doubts about Mr.
Jorling.
They were Judi Enck, senior environmental associate for the New York Public Interest Research Group, and Resa Dimino, a policy analyst for the Environmental Action Foundation.


CHRONICLE
In Paris, the fight against AIDS is about to get a new kind of boost, courtesy of the fashion house of Yves Saint Laurent.
On Valentine's Day, the concern will distribute 200,000 condoms in an effort to promote safe sex, and in the process, Saint Laurent's men's-wear line.
For the campaign, which has a budget of about $355,000, post office workers will deliver the condoms and an advertisement titled "Yves Saint Laurent Dresses Men" to mail boxes in Parisian neighborhoods that have concentrations of young people; the company will also distribute condoms at universities and record stores, said PIERRE LEVY, director of licensing, who had the idea for the project.
In addition, sales of a poster will help two AIDS organizations.


Freni and Ghiaurov Cancel
Sunday's concert by Mirella Freni and Nicolai Ghiaurov with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's at Avery Fisher Hall has been canceled because Miss Freni is ill and there has been a death in Mr.
Ghiaurov's family.
Refunds or an exchange of tickets for other Great Performers events may be had at the box office or by mail: Avery Fisher Hall Box Office, 10 Lincoln Center Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10023.
Information: (212) 875-5030.


Envoy in Nicaragua Says U.S. Won't Meddle
In sharp contrast to Washington's justification for its policy toward Nicaragua in the 1980's, the United States Ambassador here says he has been instructed to encourage the development of genuine democracy by allowing the country's political institutions to mature without meddling from Washington.
This policy shift was first announced in October in Washington by Alexander W. Watson, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, who attributed the political chaos in Nicaragua to political leaders' looking to Washington to resolve their problems.
But the Ambassador, John F. Maisto, appears to have gone further by acknowledging that United States influence in the past helped weaken Nicaragua's political system by supporting undemocratic governments as long as they were friendly to Washington's interests.


Beatles' Guru Offers Nirvana to Mozambique
Since war-battered Mozambique began to look like a land of promise, it has become Africa's newest destination for prospectors of all sorts.
Only one, though, has promised heaven on earth.
He is the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, guru of transcendental meditation, former spiritual adviser to the Beatles, and -- according to the prospectus for his "Heaven on Earth Development Project in Mozambique" -- the would-be proprietor of a spiritual and ecological Utopia.


Bosnian Muslims Must End Suicidal Gamble
To the Editor:
In "Deaths From Natural Causes" (Op-Ed, Feb. 2), Zlatko Dizdarevic evidently wants to get foreigners to kill more Serbs and Croats.
The little old women at Serb gravesides in the Sarajevo suburb of Grbavica will hope he fails.
The civilians of Sarajevo cannot "die together," because they are on different sides of the front lines.
On neither side are they yet condemned to die, as Mr.
Dizdarevic would have us believe.
Their predicament is the choice not of the outside world -- the West did not dismantle multiethnic Yugoslavia -- but of the Bosnian Government.
The moral convention that President Ali Izetbegovic's Government is entitled to reject anything less than total victory is killing not only good sense but also Serbs, Croats and Muslims, who should today be at peace on the terms that were negotiated at Geneva, but rejected by the rump Parliament of the former Bosnia and Herzegovina. (Many deputies have joined the "other sides," which have the right, Muslim negotiators now concede, to exist as separate states.)


Review/Dance; Seeing a Road Clearly And Where It Has Led
It has been five years since the Lucinda Childs Dance Company performed in New York, a period taken up with European commissions and engagements.
Those years have made their mark on Ms.
Childs's choreography, to judge by the new works the company presented on Tuesday night at the start of a weeklong 20th-anniversary season at the Joyce Theater.
As if to offer a measure of her work, Ms.
Childs opened this first of two programs with "Dance No. 1," a 1979 signature piece performed to music by Philip Glass.
One of the purest and most lucid of minimalist dances, the work sends seven men and women dressed in white fatigues traveling light and fast directly across the stage.


IMPROVED TRAINING SOUGHT FOR PILOTS
The Federal Aviation Administrator said yesterday that his agency wanted to increase safety training and standards for commuter airline pilots to the levels required of pilots for major airlines.
The Administrator, David R. Hinson, told the House aviation subcommittee that his agency was preparing rules requiring the single higher standard for all airline pilots.


Clinton's Inertia Worries Progressives
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 27 Political Memo on the cold shoulder liberals are getting from Clinton Democrats conveys the depth of progressive misgivings about President Clinton, but not the content.
Few liberals quibble with the importance of overhauling national policy concerning health care, crime and welfare.
The question is: Do the Clinton proposals come close to addressing the real problems?
The Congressional Budget Office has shown that the only way to provide health care to the 37 million uninsured Americans and save money is through a single-payer, Canadian-style system.
The biggest source of inefficiency is the private insurance industry, which consumes $1 of every $4 in health care (in Canada, Government administration costs only $1 of every $10).


Gifts for the Snowbound
Islander fans who could not make it to Tuesday night's game against the Buffalo Sabres are getting a break, and those who did brave the snowstorm to reach the Nassau Coliseum are getting an even better one.
The team has announced that stubs or unused tickets from the game can be exchanged for tickets to one of three home games: against Quebec on Feb. 27, St.
Louis on March 1 or Tampa Bay on March 22.
Fans should put their stubs or unused tickets from the Sabres game into an envelope along with a note indicating their name and which of the three games they prefer and mail it to New York Islanders, Ticket Exchange, Nassau Coliseum, Uniondale, N.Y. 11553.
Replacement tickets will be available at Window 2 an hour before game time.


Police to Reprimand 2 Over Mosque Report
A 911 operator and a New York City police dispatcher will receive mild punishments for mishandling the armed robbery call that led to a Jan. 9 melee between the police and worshipers at a Harlem mosque, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday.
Mr.
Bratton's statements to reporters at police headquarters were the first indication that the Police Department has formally concluded what officials have said all along: The dispatcher who sent officers to respond to the call erred in not telling them that the mosque was a "sensitive location," which should not have been entered without a supervisor present.
The operator did not try to take required information from the person who made the robbery call, including the caller's phone number, Mr.
Bratton said.
The call turned out to be bogus.


Weicker Urges an End to Personal Property Tax
In his final State of the State message, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. proposed a plan today to phase out the widely disliked local tax on motor vehicles and business equipment, including computers, known as the personal property tax.
Connecticut is one of 25 states with such a tax, and Mr.
Weicker's budget office said its elimination during the next 10 years would eventually save businesses and individuals more than $700 million a year.


ISRAEL-P.L.O. DEAL SOLVES KEY ISSUES IN SELF-RULE PLAN
Yasir Arafat and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel initialed an agreement tonight that removed many of the obstacles that have delayed putting into effect the accord to give the Palestinians limited self-rule.
Mr.
Peres said the agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, which crowned weeks of intensive negotiations between the two sides, covered the main issues between them.
The two sides have been trying for months to work out the details of an agreement reached last September that provides for Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.


AETNA LIFE AND CASUALTY CO. (N)
Aetna Life and Casualty reported a fourth-quarter loss of $1.13 billion yesterday and a loss for all of 1993 as a result of special charges and reorganization plans it announced last month.
Aetna earned $610 million in profits from its insurance businesses after $1.3 billion of special charges were excluded, a mediocre performance for a company with $7 billion in shareholders capital attribution.
Those charges were related to discontinuing fully guaranteed large-case pension products, the costs of eliminating about 4,000 jobs in a previously announced restructuring and a $259 million addition to workers' compensation reserves.


Despite Violence, Colombia Surges
Protected by high tariff walls as steep as its mountainous terrain, and inward-looking in its leadership, Colombia was once described by a former Colombian president as "the American Tibet."
But since 1990, like so much of Latin America, free-market policies and a lowering of trade barriers have produced solid growth, surging imports and swelling foreign investment.
Today, business people predict that Colombia in the mid-1990's will increasingly look like the Southeast Asian "tigers" of Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore.


Sports of The Times; There Are No Chinooks In Norway
THE giant dump truck was loaded to the brim with a ton or two of snow.
Just out of curiosity, I asked the driver where he was about to deliver the snow.
Being the only person in Norway who does not speak English, he giggled and pointed in the general direction of a pine forest that was itself covered in snow.
Fine.
But what about the next truckload?
And the one after that?
The driver did not have an answer.
They've got an awful lot of snow in Norway.
More snow than they've had in the last 42 years, when they started measuring it, more than in ancient memory, maybe more than ever.


At Home With Alice Hoffman; A Writer Set Free by Magic
"GO away."
If Alice Hoffman's house could talk, that is what it would say.


'Schindler' Nominated for 12 Oscars
To the surprise of absolutely no one, "Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's Holocaust drama, dominated the 66th annual Academy Award nominations, announced here early today.
The film received 12 nominations, including best picture, best actor (Liam Neeson), best supporting actor (Ralph Fiennes) and best director (Mr. Spielberg).
The two runners-up, with eight nominations each, were Jane Campion's drama "The Piano" and James Ivory's "Remains of the Day."


Calhoun, Connecticut Coach, Is Toast of the State
It took his absence from two games because of pneumonia to establish the degree of celebrity Jim Calhoun has attained in his adopted state of Connecticut.
The flamboyant coach had become a familiar courtside figure in the seven seasons he directed the University of Connecticut Huskies, the collar open, the tie askew, the arms waving and the voice with the Boston accent bellowing at players and officials alike.


Economic Scene; Vietnam may be too poor to justify a big business incursion.
IT'S Coke vs.
Pepsi and United Airlines vs.
Northwest in the post-embargo battle to win the hearts and wallets of the Vietnamese.
These and dozens of other American name brands are sure to be welcomed, both because Vietnam is aching to end its psychological isolation and because American businesses are positioned to sell what the country wants most.
But there is a real question of whether Vietnam can grow fast enough to justify an aggressive marketing effort.
While David Dollar, an economist at the World Bank, is "cautiously optimistic" that Vietnam will soon break out of the pack of the world's poorest countries, the obstacles are formidable.


Gant Will Not Face Sexual Charge
A Victoria County grand jury in Texas yesterday declined to bring sexual assault charges against Atlanta Braves left fielder RON GANT and his cousin.
The grand jury heard testimony and deliberated for four days, then refused to return indictments against Gant and STEVEN GASKIN, 28.
Gant, who is from Victoria, and Gaskin were accused of having sex with two underage teen-age girls on Christmas Eve. (AP)


NATO GIVES SERBS A 10-DAY DEADLINE TO WITHDRAW GUNS
Moving to end the siege of Sarajevo, NATO today set a 10-day deadline for Bosnian Serb forces to withdraw the heavy weaponry and mortars they have used to encircle the Bosnian capital for the past 22 months, or face air strikes.
A strongly worded statement issued after a sometimes contentious 14-hour meeting at NATO headquarters here said the Serbs must withdraw their artillery and mortars to a distance of 20 kilometers, or about 12.4 miles, from the center of the Bosnian capital by 1 A.M. local time on Feb. 21.


Suns' Johnson Fined for Flagrant Foul
KEVIN JOHNSON, the Phoenix Suns' All-Star guard, was fined $7,500 by the league yesterday for a flagrant foul against STEVE KERR of the Chicago Bulls Sunday. (AP)


A Whimsical, Artful Touch To Recycling
LOUIS KREVLIN, a craftsman in Staatsburg, N.Y., makes consoles, beds and tables from old bits of wood and all kinds of architectural remnants.
His is a sophisticated, artful kind of recycling, in which the whole is truly greater than the parts.
Each piece is, of course, one of a kind, and the selection of his wares at Wolfman Gold &amp; Good Company expresses his whimsical imagination.
The furniture matches nicely with the SoHo store's up-country esthetic, defined by rough-hewed benches and galvanized washtubs.


Clinton Health Plan: Testimony Reveals the Government's Hand
Though President Clinton dismissed its conclusions as "a policy wonk deal," the Congressional Budget Office has put its finger on something the Administration was loath to acknowledge: Mr.
Clinton's health plan depends heavily on the power of the Government to compel behavior that would not otherwise occur in the private market.
Such an exercise of Federal power may be good or bad, but it should be recognized for what it is, said Robert D. Reischauer, director of the budget office, who has testified before two Congressional committees this week.


To Sarajevans, Shells Came From the Hills, but the Serbs Deny It
A week before Saturday's deadly mortar attack on a crowded market here, a similar shell struck 18 Nikole Tesle Street, taking off part of the roof and a top corner of the old building on a narrow, street just behind the market.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMSOUTH BANCORPORATION, Birmingham, Ala., said regulators had approved its acquisition of the seven-office Citizens National Corp. of Naples, Fla., for $48.8 million in stock.


GARDEN Q. &amp; A.
Balancing Fertilizers
Q.
Can you tell me what is meant by the term "balanced fertilizer"? -- Dolores Rodriguez, Washington.


POLES HOLD MARCH OVER NEW BUDGET
About 30,000 workers, one of the largest protest demonstrations since the fall of Communism, marched through sleet and snow here today against the new Government's austerity budget.
The march, organized by the Solidarity labor union, drew protesters from all over Poland and was the first major demonstration against the new Government.
Demonstrators called on the Government to keep its campaign promises to increase wages and spend more on welfare.


Maradona Is Determined to Play in Cup
DIEGO MARADONA says he will play for Argentina in this summer's World Cup in the United States despite his recent injuries and battles with journalists.
"I have all my batteries ready to play in the World Cup," Maradona, 33, said.
"I'm going to play." Maradona, accused of shooting an air rifle at journalists outside his summer home last week, admitted for the first time that he was involved.
"I shot with a rifle at one," Maradona told La Voz del Pueblo, a newspaper in Tres Arroyos. (AP)


Brocco Is Late Getting Out of Gate
This must be the season for delayed debuts on the road to the Kentucky Derby: first Dehere, the juvenile champion of last year, and now Brocco, the horse that outran him in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile.
Brocco was supposed to make his first start of 1994 in the San Rafael Stakes at Santa Anita on March 6.
But his trainer, Randy Winick, reports that the colt's training has been delayed by rain and by some tightness after early workouts last month.
He still could make the San Rafael, but a more likely target now is the San Felipe Stakes two weeks later.


In Record Turnaround, Ford Had $2.5 Billion Profit in 1993
Underscoring the domestic automotive industry's recovery, the Ford Motor Company today reported the biggest year-to-year financial turnaround in its history, posting a profit of $2.5 billion for 1993.
The rebound, driven by Ford's growing auto sales in the United States and record profits from financial services, represented more than a $3 billion swing from the 1992 loss of $502 million, excluding one-time gains and charges.
Revenue grew 8.4 percent in 1993, to $108.5 billion.


How to Tell the Joules From Ergs and Dynes
To the Editor:
"Time Doesn't Count" (letter, Jan. 30) corrects a graphic accompanying your Jan. 18 California earthquake coverage, which explained the Richter earthquake magnitude scale.
The letter states that you incorrectly explained the energy unit you used, the erg, and offers a correction.
I must point out that the correction was also incorrect.
The erg is an energy unit no longer commonly used.
It is the amount of energy needed to move a force of one dyne over a distance of one centimeter, not a mass of one gram over a distance of one centimeter as the letter suggests.
Force and mass are definitely not the same thing.
Perhaps the writer confused the definition of a dyne, which is the amount of force required to accelerate a mass of one gram by one centimeter per second per second (cm/s  ), with the definition of an erg.


Events: A Harlem Tour And a Show of Tulips
Harlem History  Harlem Your Way!
Tours Unlimited, 129 West 130th Street; (212) 690-1687.
A walking tour of central Harlem will be held on Saturday from 1:30 to 5 P.M. as part of a celebration of Black History Month.
It will include the Apollo Theater, Striver's Row, and visits to the gift shop at the Studio Museum in Harlem and the Abyssinian Baptist Church.
Participants will also see the exhibition "African Zion: The Sacred Art of Ethiopia," on display through March 29 at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.


Appeals Court Rules Against Car Makers On Emission Issue
A Federal appeals court, ruling against the auto manufacturers, said yesterday that New York State could enforce California's low-emission vehicle program here, including a requirement for electric cars.
The court said, though, that the state would have to wait until the 1996 model year to begin, a year later than the state wanted.
The ruling overturned a Federal District Court decision last year that found against the state on several points, including the electric vehicle requirement, which California plans to start in the 1998 model year.


Two G.M. Units Show Strong Earnings Gains
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation reported a 14 percent gain in fourth-quarter earnings today, citing a resurgence in revenues from business not related to its parent company, the General Motors Corporation.
Another subsidiary of General Motors, the GM Hughes Electronics Corporation, reported a 20 percent increase in earnings.
But the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, the financial services unit, posted a 28.6 percent decline in earnings.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration will propose a broad, 10-year plan to force the Pentagon and other Federal agencies to cede control of a big block of the nation's airwaves and make them available for new commercial technologies.  [ Page D1. ]
The Internal Revenue Service made a compromise offer to settle billions of dollars in disputed tax deductions from the corporate takeover wave of the 1980's.  [ D1. ]


For a Police Force That Lives Where It Works
To the Editor:
"Community Policing, Bratton Style" (editorial, Jan. 31) omits one ingredient vitally important to long-term police effectiveness in New York City: a residency requirement.
A large percentage of the city's police officers live in suburban communities.
Their off-duty interests have nothing to do with New York.
They are concerned with the safety of the streets where their families spend their time and the caliber of education in their children's suburban schools.
They are naturally far more interested in the quality of life where they live than where they work.


Networks Rush to Adapt Kerrigan-Harding Story
Last year, it was said that after they all got great ratings by showing made-for-television movies on the same topic in the same week, the networks could never do better -- or was it sink lower? -- than Amy and Joey.
That, of course, was before they met Tonya and Nancy.
Already at least three made-for-television movies are in the works on the still-unfolding epic popularly known as Skategate.
Of the four broadcast networks, only CBS, which will broadcast the Nancy Kerrigan vs.
Tonya Harding show live from Lillehammer, Norway, has declined to enter the bidding.


Bosnian Muslims Must End Suicidal Gamble; The Joint Declaration
To the Editor:
In the wake of the joint declaration in Geneva between Presidents Franjo Tudjman of Croatia and Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia, some foreign journalists have jumped to the conclusion that such an agreement amounts to the creation of some sort of alliance against the Bosnian Muslims.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The joint declaration is a small but important step in the possible normalization of relations between Serbia and Croatia.
This breakthrough paves the way, we hope, for mutual recognition of internationally recognized borders.


Rona Is Allowed to Return as Agent
A former adversary of the baseball players union has won the right -- for the second time -- to represent players as an agent.
Judge William P. McCooe of New York State Supreme Court upheld Monday an arbitrator's decision ordering the Players Association to certify Barry Rona as an agent.
Eugene Orza, the association's associate general counsel, said he immediately notified Rona that "pending whatever further action we might take, he is eligible for certification."


Senator Says U.S. Let Iraq Get Lethal Viruses
A Democratic Senator accused the Commerce Department today of approving the export of lethal viruses to Iraq during the Reagan Administration, and said these viruses may have been used to make biological weapons that may have infected American soldiers during the Persian Gulf war.
Shipments of genetically weakened viruses have long been rumored, but the Senator, Donald Riegle of Michigan, said full-strength viruses had been shipped and could have been used in the creation of Iraq's biological weapons industry.
The Defense Department concluded after the war that Iraq had developed and stockpiled such weapons but found no evidence that they had ever been used.


Yankees Strengthen Rotation With Mulholland
After months of inactivity and frustration in their quest for another quality starting pitcher, the Yankees finally erased some of the lingering doubts about their rotation yesterday by acquiring Terry Mulholland from Philadelphia for reliever Bobby Munoz and two Class AA players.
Excluding the economics, it was a splendid deal for the Yankees because they made their rotation much more formidable by adding the left-handed Mulholland and because they did not sacrifice their prized Class AAA pitching prospects.


Chinese Skater In Search of Medal
With America's Olympic figure skaters in turmoil over the attack on Nancy Kerrigan, Chinese figure skaters have expressed curiosity and regret.
But there was no letup at the Chinese sports pavilion recently where 17-year-old Chen Lu leaped into her 20th triple jump at an afternoon practice session.
Chen is one of China's youngest female sports stars.
National champion at 12, she is the first Chinese figure skater to place in international competition and is China's best hope to take its first medal in figure skating at the Winter Olympics that begin Saturday in Norway.


Drought and Fighting Imperil 2 Million in Sudan
More than two million Sudanese are at risk as a severe drought and new fighting in the southern part of the country threaten the worst famine in the Sudan since 1988, when about 280,000 people died, relief officials here say.
In most of the southeast, the harvest has failed and food stocks have already been exhausted.
Western diplomats and relief officials say the Government in Khartoum has been massing its troops in southern towns in preparation for a large-scale "dry season" offensive against the guerrillas.


Giuliani Agrees to Avert Cuts For Arts With Donation Plan
A week after proposing budget cuts for the arts in New York City, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced an agreement yesterday in which the city would restore the cuts and provide even more money -- but only after the city's cultural institutions raised matching contributions from private sources.
The goals of the new plan, announced by the Mayor and leaders of some of the city's most prestigious arts institutions, are to increase overall financing for the arts, which Mr.
Giuliani hopes will help the city's economy, and to encourage arts groups to raise more private money and become less dependent on city subsidies.


A New York shop is seeking to become a powerhouse, thanks to its French parent.
BLOOM FCA INC., an agency that has strived mightily to raise its profile in New York, is now turning over that challenging task to its new parent.
Publicis Group, which acquired Bloom FCA in October, when it bought Groupe FCA, a large French agency company, is merging Bloom FCA's New York office with its own.
The merger, planned for mid-March, will create Publicis/Bloom, with billings of $155 million from a roster of blue-chip clients.


Alexander Cores; Violinist, 93
Alexander Cores, a violinist who founded the Dorian String Quartet, died on Saturday at his home in New York City.
He was 93.
The cause was heart failure, said Emil Chudnovsky, a friend.


For Davis and Mets, Nowhere to Go but Up
The Mets, a team starving for delicious ironies, may have finally found one: a player who wants to forget what he calls the nightmares of the past by coming to, not leaving, the Mets.
That player is Glenn Davis, who was signed to a minor league contract yesterday and who will try to win the Mets' first-base job in spring training.


Top Editor Resigns From The Village Voice
The editor in chief of The Village Voice, Jonathan Larsen, announced his resignation yesterday after nearly five years presiding over the New York weekly newspaper's often tumultuous newsroom.
At a staff meeting yesterday morning at the paper's offices, Mr.
Larsen said that "after several weeks of anguished deliberation," he had told David Schneiderman, the paper's president and publisher, that he would leave The Voice "as soon as an appropriate replacement can be found."


Clinton to Use Drug Plan to Fight Crime
President Clinton brought his Vice President and half his Cabinet to a county jail here this morning to give weight to his plan to combat crime by, among other things, adding hundreds of millions of dollars to the Federal budget for drug treatment.
To an audience that included several dozen inmates clad in orange jumpsuits, Mr.
Clinton described the plan he announced today as both "tough and smart." It is a centerpiece of a $13.2 billion anti-drug strategy put forward by the President, who said his choice of setting reflected his view that neither crime nor drug abuse could be solved unless they were tackled together.


Magazine Due Test by Hearst
After months of rumors, the Hearst Corporation confirmed yesterday that it would begin testing an American edition of Marie Claire, the French magazine for women, in August.
The publication will be a joint venture between Hearst and the magazine's French publisher, Marie Claire Album.


U.S. Seeks To Expand Airwaves
The Clinton Administration will propose a broad, 10-year plan on Thursday to force the Pentagon and other Federal agencies to cede control of a big block of the nation's airwaves and make them available for new commercial technologies.
If adopted, the plan could ultimately force a wide range of military activities, from some long-range air defense radar systems to ground-based communication links, to move to different radio-frequency bands.
Civilian programs like atmospheric monitoring would also be affected.


Youth Is Held In Death From Bowling Ball
A teen-ager enrolled in a residential program for young people with emotional problems was charged today with dropping a 16-pound bowling ball off an overpass here that crashed through the windshield of a car below, killing a baby girl in the back seat.
The suspect, Calvin J. Settle, 18, was arrested early this morning on a homicide charge.
He was accused of pushing the black Brunswick ball over a concrete barrier near the Holland Tunnel on Sunday night.
The attack turned a routine ride home for a Brooklyn family into a violent ordeal of shattered glass and sudden death.


Giuliani Broadens Attack on Mismanagement and Waste
Offering his Republican vision of leaner city government, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday delivered his first State of the City address, vowing a vigorous assault on bureaucracy, strong support of the police and a supply-side view of stimulating the city's economy.
In a speech in the City Council chamber of City Hall, Mr.
Giuliani also made his most forceful attack yet on the bureaucracy of the city's educational system and pledged to appoint a fiscal monitor for education to audit the flow of money through the school system.


City Opera Announces Its 1994-95 Schedule
The New York City Opera's 1994-95 season will offer one shared premiere, five new productions and 11 older ones.
The season, announced yesterday, will be divided into fall and spring segments, ending an experiment with summer seasons that began in 1982.
The new work is "Harvey Milk," by Stewart Wallace, based on the life and violent death of the San Francisco politician and gay-rights advocate.
The work is a shared production with the Houston Grand Opera and the San Francisco Opera Association.
It comes to New York on April 4.


CHRONICLE
It takes more than a serious snowstorm to keep serious partygoers from their appointed rounds.
When GEORGE PLIMPTON picked up his mother, PAULINE PLIMPTON, 93, and his wife, SARAH, to go to a benefit for the Glimmerglass Opera on Tuesday evening, he was expecting "that it would be a disaster," he said yesterday.
"I didn't think anyone would be there, but I should have known better," he added.
"New Yorkers always get there, and it turned out to be an extraordinary, fantastic evening."


Psychiatrists' Manual Shifts Stance On Religious and Spiritual Problems
In a change intended to encourage mental health professionals to view a patient's religious experience more seriously, the next edition of the standard guide for psychiatric diagnoses includes a new entry entitled "Religious or Spiritual Problem."
By recognizing religious problems as a category of concern distinct from any mental disorder, the revision reflects psychiatry's steady movement away from an earlier tendency to treat religion as a delusion or as evidence of immaturity, escapism or neurosis.


Ice on Great Lakes Is Most Widespread in Decades


Deng Shown at New Year Festival
Looking in ever frailer health, Deng Xiaoping, China's 89-year-old paramount leader, appeared on national television tonight at a celebration marking the Lunar New Year in Shanghai.
Since 1988, Mr.
Deng has appeared in public during the annual New Year festival, but persistant reports that Mr.
Deng's health is declining more rapidly put special emphasis on this year's appearance.


Books of The Times; Trying to Invent a Drug And Not Just Find It
The Billion-Dollar Molecule One Company's Quest for the Perfect Drug By Barry Werth Illustrated. 445 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
Most life-saving drugs have been discovered by figuratively sifting through samples of dirt from all over the globe, or screening, as the process is called.
As Barry Werth reports in his razzle-dazzle new saga of science, "The Billion-Dollar Molecule: One Company's Quest for the Perfect Drug," one experimental drug called FK-506 was found in a dirt sample from a mountainside in Japan.


No Time to Put Down the Down Coat
To the Editor:
"Frigid Fashion" (editorial Feb. 1), on what New Yorkers are wearing this winter, states, "The era of the purple down coat is over at last."
Don't put down downs.
I own a down coat that is in its fifth year and looks as good as new.
It is light, attractive, and I have to wear only one layer beneath it because it is so deliciously warm.


INSIDE
U.S. Seeks Military Airwaves
The White House will propose a broad plan to force the Pentagon and other Federal agencies to cede control of a big block of the airwaves, making them available for new commercial technologies.
Page D1.
Arrest in Bowling-Ball Death
A teen-ager enrolled in a program for people with emotional problems was charged with dropping from an overpass a 16-pound bowling ball that crashed through the windshield of a car, killing a baby girl.
Page B1.  'Schindler' Leads
"Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's Holocaust drama, received 12 nominations for Academy Awards.
"The Piano," by Jane Campion, and James Ivory's "Remains of the Day" each received eight.
Page C13.
Upper East Side Zoning Shift
The City Council passed a sweeping zoning change for the Upper East Side of Manhattan, prohibiting construction of the tall needle-shaped apartment towers in open plazas that have vexed local groups.
Page B3.


The Knicks' Bench Doesn't Disappoint This Time Around
It wasn't exactly a day at the beach, but it sure was nice for the Knicks' leg-weary starters to be able to stretch out in the fourth quarter tonight and watch the bench carry the team to victory instead of squandering a big lead late in the game, as the backups had done in two previous road losses in Atlanta and in Miami.
After rolling up an 11-point first-quarter lead, then an 18-point halftime lead, the Knicks (34-13) blew past the 76ers (20-27) in the fourth quarter on the way to a 114-79 victory at the Spectrum.
Chalk this one up to the Knicks' second unit, which was trying to kill the image that when they hit the floor they can't score.


Green Sets His Sights On .500 For Mets
Dallas Green emerged from a winter's hibernation yesterday by declaring his faith in his team's ability to defy cynics and better last year's woeful 103-loss season.
But Green, one of the blunter managers in baseball, also refused to give any credence to the belief that the Mets were totally cured of the ills that led to one disaster of the season.
How could he, since the manager will be greeted in spring training by a team still riddled with questions?
Like who's on first, and at shortstop, and behind the plate and batting leadoff?


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Flames Beat Oilers  Robert Reichel scored two goals as the visiting Calgary Flames beat the Edmonton Oilers, 6-1, last night for their fourth straight victory.
Reichel has 14 goals in his last 12 games, and 27 goals this season.
The Flames built a 5-0 lead in the first two periods, scoring three straight power-play goals.
The Flames' captain, Joe Nieuwendyk, who also had two assists, scored on a power play 30 seconds into the second period for a 3-0 lead.
Theoren Fleury tipped in a pass from Nieuwendyk at 16 minutes 19 seconds on a power play and Reichel scored a minute later. (AP) Stars 4, Jets 2: Mike Modano scored the go-ahead goal at 6:02 of the third period as Dallas beat Winnipeg, extending the Jets' winless streak to 11 games.
Modano's 32d goal of the season gave the Stars a 2-1 lead and sent them to their fifth victory in six games.
Winnipeg is 0-9-2 in its last 11 games.
Russ Courtnall scored for the Stars 1:19 later, threading through the Winnipeg defense. (AP)


It's 'You Must Remember This' for New Hall of Famers
You don't get into the Basketball Hall of Fame if you were born yesterday, so it was hardly surprising that when four of this year's five new inductees gathered in New York yesterday the talk turned to the old days.
Carol Blazejowski recalled being the only girl among the boys on New Jersey playground courts before she became the Blaze, a sharpshooter who set collegiate scoring records for Montclair State.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a confirmation hearing at which senators questioned Strobe Talbott, the nominee for Deputy Secretary of State, reported one of his answers incompletely.
After a senator criticized him for writing in 1981 that American Jews had power beyond their numbers, Mr.
Talbott said that he meant no slight to Jews, and that what he wrote was "simply a statement of fact" that was intended "to underscore the strength, the passion that the American Jewish community quite rightly brings" to relations with Israel.


Market Place; Japan Acts to Cut Banks' Mountain of Bad Loans
Buried in the $140 billion economic stimulus program Japan announced Tuesday was a little-noticed initiative for whittling down the mountain of bad loans under which Japanese banks have been struggling.
It is a tax write-off that could also lift some bank stocks and make the country's strong banks stronger and its weak banks weaker.
The heart of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's plan was a jolt of one-time income-tax reductions combined with big increases in public works spending.
But the Finance Ministry, which had hammered out the details, inserted the bad debt program at the end.
It will have a negligible short-term impact on the recession, but in the long-term it could provide sizable benefits.


Stocks Advance in Heavy Trading
The stock market posted convincing gains yesterday in heavy trading, as investors bid up stocks across the board and the Dow Jones industrial average appeared, at least for now, headed again for the millennium mark of 4,000.
"What today's action is saying is, 'Bull markets bend, but they don't break,' " said Alfred E. Goldman, director of market analysis at A. G. Edwards &amp; Sons in St.
Louis.


Love Me, Love My Dog Pin
THERE are some cows, horses and chickens, but the main theme in a collection of English pins being offered in Janet Mavec's Madison Avenue antique jewelry shop is dogs.
The inch-and-a-half enamel-on-silver pins, which were made in the 1920's and 30's by Kenart, an English company in business in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, depict 35 breeds.


Virus Might Be Contained
Two of the three horses quarantined because of a viral outbreak last week at Aqueduct Race Track have been returned to the barn of their trainer, Mark Reid, and the chief veterinarian at New York's tracks expressed guarded optimism that the outbreak had been contained.
"We're not even sure yet what strain of virus we're dealing with," Dr.
Theodore Hill, the veterinarian, said yesterday.
"It takes time and more samples to get precise results from the testing lab. I'm in touch every day with people at the Gluck Center for Equine Research at the University of Kentucky. I'm hoping that we worked fast enough and were able to isolate the affected horses. It's been one week now with no new cases of fever reported."


Report Issued in Helicopter Crash
Inadequate regulation by United States and Canadian transportation agencies contributed to the fatal collision of two helicopters over Niagara Falls in 1992, a final report by Canadian officials says.
The report, issued on Tuesday, said the pilots of the sightseeing helicopters did not see each other in time to avoid the crash.
The report said the Canadian transportation agency, Transport Canada, and the Federal Aviation Administration in the United States knew that the helicopter operators routinely followed overlapping flight patterns.
The report added that neither agency was aware that the vertical separation between helicopters at the overlap points was as shallow as 200 feet.


Journal; The Paramount McGuffin
On Valentine's Day, the most costly and least erotic love triangle in Hollywood history may at last come to its merciful end.
For now, that's the deadline by which Paramount's stockholders must decide which suitor, Viacom or QVC, will have the honor of paying $10 billion for the surrender of their shares.
Once this deal is consummated, no matter who wins, the American public will have good reason to rejoice.
No longer will we have to read about the mirthless tycoons who propelled this bidding war, from Sumner Redstone (the unpretentious multibillionaire of Newton, Mass.) to John Malone ("the Darth Vader of cable") to H. Wayne Huizenga (a founding father, God bless him, of waste management).
It's probably too much to hope that the word synergy will take a brief vacation as well.


Jarmila Novotna Is Dead at 86; Soprano of Aristocratic Bearing
Jarmila Novotna, a Czech-born lyric soprano who sang major roles at the Metropolitan Opera from 1940 to 1956, died on Wednesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 86.
She died of natural causes, said her daughter, Jarmila Packard.


CBS INC. (N)
CBS Inc. reported yesterday that its net income rose 39 percent in the fourth quarter, to $46.4 million, or $2.77 a share.
Revenues were $1.04 billion, up 8 percent from the corresponding period a year earlier.
Some analysts were disappointed because the quarterly comparisons were not as strong as they had been for previous quarters of 1993.
But Jeffrey Logsdon, who follows CBS for the Seidler Companies, said that on an operating basis, the gains were healthy and were similar to those in other quarters.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Marcelo Bonevardi, an artist, misstated the city in which some of his survivors live.
All except his son live in Cordoba, Argentina; the son, Gustavo, lives in New York City.


Michigan Players Plead No Contest
Three Michigan players caught on videotape stealing beer from a convenience store last month pleaded no contest yesterday to retail fraud and will perform community service.
A Michigan football player, wide receiver DAMON JONES, accused of trying to steal beer from the same store a week later, stood mute on the same charge before District Judge TIMOTHY CONNORS in Ann Arbor.
Jones is already on probation for a previous felony charge.
JIMMY KING and RAY JACKSON, both starters, and CHRIS FIELDS, a reserve, will have the charges purged from their records in six months if they perform 72 hours of community service and pay $200 in court fees, said their lawyer, PAUL GALLAGHER.
An assistant manager suspicious about possible thefts, looked at surveillance tapes and saw the three basketball players stealing five to seven cases of beer on Jan. 12, the police said. (AP)


Accounts
*
PACC Health Plans, Clackamas, Ore., to AKA Inc.
Advertising &amp; Sass, Portland, Ore., to handle its account, previously at the Coates Agency, Portland.
Billings were not disclosed.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15 ISRAEL AND P.L.O.
INITIAL PACT  Yasir Arafat and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres of Israel initialed an accord that resolves security disputes and other issues that have delayed an Israeli troop withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and West Bank town of Jericho.
A1  NATO GIVES SERBS A DEADLINE  NATO set a 10-day deadline for Bosnian Serbs to withdraw the heavy weaponry and mortars they have used in the 22-month siege of Sarajevo.
Any guns that remain within 12.5 miles of the capital could face air strikes, the alliance warned.
A1  President Clinton said the U.S. was ready if needed for air strikes.
A14  Serbs pledged to hand over artillery to the U.N., but doubts persist.
A14  Trying to pinpoint the source of a shell that killed 68 in Sarajevo.
A14  IMPASSE LOOMS ON JAPAN'S TRADE  From the first time they met seven months ago, Bill Clinton and Morihiro Hosokawa agreed that their countries needed a radically new way to deal with each other.
But just before he flies off for his first trip to Washington, Prime Minister Hosokawa has admitted that talks on constructing a new trade relationship seem to have gotten nowhere.
A1  FAMINE FEARED IN SUDAN  A severe drought and new fighting in the southern part of the country threaten the worst famine in Sudan since 1988, relief officials say.
More than two million Sudanese are thought to be at risk.
A3  U.S.
RETHINKS ITS IMAGE IN BERLIN  The new American Ambassador has jolted Berliners by suggesting that the United States may not build its embassy on its former site next to the Brandenburg Gate.
A6  DID U.S.
EXPORT VIRUSES TO IRAQ?
A Democratic Senator accused the Commerce Department of approving the export of lethal viruses to Iraq during the Reagan Administration.
He said the viruses may have been used to make biological weapons that may have infected American troops during the gulf war.
A9 National A16-21, D20-21 SPREADING HARM OF POLLUTION  The Clinton Administration plans to order all Federal agencies to insure that their programs do not unfairly inflict environmental harm on poor and minority communities.
A1  FROM WELFARE TO $13 AN HOUR  A pilot project called Step Up is transforming the lives of hundreds of public housing residents in Chicago by training them in construction jobs and paying them wages beyond their dreams.
A1  CHANGING TREATMENT FOR ULCERS  Setting a new standard of care for millions of people with stomach ulcers, a panel of medical experts said that antimicrobial agents, including antibiotics, should be added to conventional treatments.
A1  PSYCHIATRISTS REASSESS RELIGION  The next edition of the standard guide for psychiatric diagnoses includes a new entry that is intended to encourage mental health professionals to view patients' religious experience more seriously.
A16  REVEALING GOVERNMENT'S HAND  News analysis: The Congressional Budget Office has put its finger on something President Clinton has been loath to acknowledge: Mr.
Clinton's health plan depends on the power of Government to force people to act in new ways.
D20  CLINTON IN JAIL TO MAKE POINT  President Clinton went to a Maryland jail to introduce an anti-crime plan that includes millions of dollars for drug treatment.
D20  DIVIDED OVER ADMIRAL KELSO  Top Navy officials were stunned and divided over a naval judge's ruling that Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d misrepresented his activities at a bawdy convention of naval aviators in 1991 and had tried to manipulate the subsequent investigation.
A21  MAKING COMMUTER AIRLINES SAFER  The Federal Aviation Administrator is moving to increase safety training and standards for commuter airline pilots to the levels required of pilots for major airlines.
A19  TEAMSTERS SINGED BY STRIKE  The one-day strike by the teamsters union against United Parcel Service highlights both the union's internal schisms and the financial pressures it faces.
A16  An earthquake-relief bill became mired in the Senate.
D20 Metro Digest B1 A REVERSAL ON ARTS MONEY  A week after proposing budget cuts for the arts, Mayor Giuliani announced an agreement to restore the cuts and provide even more money to cultural institutions -- but only after they raised matching contributions privately.
A1  Business Digest D1  Home Section C1-12  Arts/Entertainment C13-22  12 Oscar nominations for "Schindler's List." C13  Schnittke talks about his music.
C13  Theater: Albee triple bill.
C13  Music: City Opera announces 1994-95 season.C16  Dance: Lucinda Childs.
C18  Television: Networks scramble to dramatize skaters' stories.
C20  Sports B11-19  DELAY SOUGHT IN HARDING HEARING  Tonya Harding's lawyers went to court seeking to delay a hearing scheduled by the United States Olympic Committee for Tuesday to review the figure skater's eligibility for the Olympics.
A1  Baseball: Yanks acquire Mulholland.
B11  Mets sign Glenn Davis.
B11  Olympics: Skater races short track to success.
B11  Obituaries B10  Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials  NATO's risky step.
Propagandizing a health report.
The milk brouhaha.
Letters  William Safire: Ten days -- or else.
Frank Rich: The Paramount McGuffin.
Gar Alperovitz: How cities make money.
Suzanne White: Top dog.
Bridge C20 Chronicle B9 Crossword C19


Harding Begins Legal Moves To Keep Spot on Skate Team
Tonya Harding's lawyers went to court today seeking to delay a hearing scheduled by the United States Olympic Committee for next Tuesday in Norway to review her eligibility for the Winter Olympics.
Robert C. Weaver Jr., who is representing Miss Harding in the investigation of the assault on Nancy Kerrigan, asked for a temporary restraining order from a circuit court in Clackamas County.
He said the delay was needed to give the 23-year-old figure skater more time to prepare her defense.


Propagandizing a Health Report
The opponents of President Clinton's health care bill think they have struck political gold in an analysis of the bill just released by the Congressional Budget Office.
The report says the Clinton plan would increase the deficit over the next six years, contrary to the President's estimates.
The C.B.O. also says the plan should be treated as a Federal program.
This is the last thing Mr.
Clinton needed to hear.
The health care debate has devolved into struggle between people who think that government must reshape the system and people who think that only a little tinkering is needed.
Now comes the C.B.O. report, which the House minority whip, Newt Gingrich, and other critics are brandishing as proof that the Clinton plan amounts to a Federal takeover of health care and a mammoth tax hike to boot.


NATO's Risky Step
Bosnian Serb forces are taking the latest NATO bombing ultimatum seriously, and Americans should too.
The Clinton Administration needs to assert more effective U.S. leadership within NATO than it has until now on the Bosnian issue; otherwise this emotionally satisfying riposte to last Saturday afternoon's carnage in Sarajevo could lead to costly and frustrating NATO ground involvement.
It could also perversely encourage coercion of the Bosnian Government to accept an unjust European peace formula.


David Way, a Printer And Musicologist, 75
David Jacques Way, a fine-arts printer who became a musicologist and the owner of D. Jacques Way &amp; Zuckermann Harpsichords, died on Friday in Stonington, Conn.
He was 75.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Katherine.


Zoning Changes Reduce Size of East Side Projects
The New York City Council overwhelmingly passed a sweeping zoning change for the Upper East Side of Manhattan yesterday, prohibiting future construction of the tall needle-shaped apartment towers arising from open plazas that have long vexed local community groups.
Coming after eight years of study and debate, the new rules will force developers in the area -- bordered mainly by Third Avenue, the East River and 59th and 96th Streets -- to design shorter and squatter buildings of about 36 stories along the avenues.
The previous zoning rules encouraged the building of skinny, 55-story towers.
Zoning rules for side streets remain unchanged.


Moving On the Fast Track
Cathy Turner is on top of the world, at least that part of the world above Times Square, where a 30-by-50-foot billboard has captured her sleek racing form in short-track speed skating, an engaging sport with the jostling of roller derby and the crashing of a demolition derby.
Having won a gold medal at 500 meters in the 1992 Winter Olympics, Turner is back to defend her title.
It's a wonder she can find the time.
Her life is swirling as fast as one of her races.


Depression in the Elderly
To The Home Section:
I'm deeply troubled and also angry at many health care professionals' knee-jerk response to older people's unhappiness -- which is to immediately prescribe anti-depressant medication with little attention paid to the life circumstances that may cause depression and sadness.
The Parent &amp; Child columnist, Lawrence Kutner, follows this unfortunate pattern in his advice to a daughter concerned with her 72-year-old mother's loss of interest "in things she used to enjoy," forgetfulness, not sleeping well and complaints about a "new ache or pain" (Jan. 6).
A diminishing of physical health does take a toll of emotional well-being, especially when there is accompanying pain and discomfort.
Mobility is often reduced along with vision and hearing.
Memory may become less reliable.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THERE is sometimes no easy response to children who look up to someone who is not their parent and say: "You can't tell me what to do!" Although there are times when adults feel they should discipline other people's children, the guidelines are less clear than they are in dealing with their own children.
Safety issues, like playing with fire or not wearing a seat belt in a car, demand an adult's intervention, no matter the relationship with the child.
But matters of politeness or other standards of behavior can pose a problem.
Those issues grow even more complex if the adult is a new stepparent or new foster parent -- a time when the entire family is coming to terms with emerging relationships.


Pistons' Elliott Says He Will Sit Out
SEAN ELLIOTT, the Detroit Pistons forward whose kidney ailment scuttled a trade to the Houston Rockets, said yesterday that he would take an indefinite leave of absence to clear up the medical problem.
In Detroit, MATT DOBEK, a Pistons spokesman, said team officials weren't advised that Elliott had planned to take a leave.
Elliott's status was uncertain, with discussions between his representatives and team officials planned, he said.
At a news conference, Elliott said he wasn't planning to play again until the problem was firmly diagnosed and treated. (AP)


Weather Theories to Dig Out With; Northeast's Severe Winter Is Not Unusual, but That Doesn't Mean the World Is Safe
As lunch-hour pedestrians high-stepped over snow banks and cabs schussed through slushy Times Square, Brenda Milliner, the resident preacher of doom in the doorway of the vacant Nathan's Famous delicatessen, had altered her monologue to address the question plaguing the populace: Why does bad weather happen to good people?
"The earthquake, the fires and the mudslides in such a short period," Ms.
Milliner said.
"The flooding in the Midwest, this terrible weather we're having -- I believe God is fed up with the sins of America. I've been in New York for 17 years. This is the coldest, wettest winter. God is fed up."


New U.S. Deadline on Suing S.&amp; L.'s
The Senate voted unanimously tonight to approve an amendment giving the Federal Government almost two more years to take civil actions against failed savings and loans.
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, said the measure was intended to extend a Feb. 28 deadline for lawsuits against Madison Guaranty, the savings and loan at the center of a failed Arkansas real estate venture in which President and Mrs.
Clinton were investors.


Clinton-Aristide Ties Worsen Amid New Dispute
Relations between the Clinton Administration and Haiti's ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, have taken a turn for the worse as he chided Washington for turning back Haitian refugees and the Administration criticized him for dragging his feet in naming a new Prime Minister.
In a statement Tuesday night, after the bodies of four drowned Haitian refugees were found in Florida earlier in the day, Father Aristide said it was wrong for the United States to set up a "floating Berlin wall" that forces Haitian refugees to return home.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  AGREEMENT TO AVERT BUDGET CUTS FOR ARTS A week after proposing budget cuts for the arts, Mayor Giuliani announced an agreement in which the city would restore the cuts and provide even more money -- but only after the city's cultural institutions raised matching contributions from private sources.
A1.
GIULIANI BROADENS ATTACK ON WASTE In his first State of City address, Mayor Giuliani promised a vigorous assault on bureaucracy and strong support for the police and offered a supply-side view of stimulating the economy.
B3.


Drug Makers Say Change In Drugs Shouldn't Hurt
Growing support among medical experts for treating ulcers with antimicrobial drugs may eventually erode the $7 billion annual worldwide sales of five widely used ulcer treatments, but their manufacturers said yesterday that their business might not be affected for years.
Some doctors in Europe are already using antimicrobial drugs to treat ulcers in combination with other ulcer treatments, as a panel at the National Institutes of Health recommended yesterday.
But the drug companies said they expected that most American doctors would move slowly.


John Herling Dies; Newsletter Founder And Writer Was 88
John Herling, an author and newsletter publisher who chronicled the rise of organized labor, died on Thursday in a nursing home in Wheaton, Md.
He was 88.
He had Parkinson's disease and died of pneumonia, said his brother, Albert.


An Expose of the Flower Trade's Secrets
"A GOOD mix" is what Tom Pritchard called the party last week at Pure Madderlake, the SoHo flower and furnishings emporium he owns with Billy Jarecki.
He should know.
The store is the right mix of flowers and weather-beaten antiques, and the party, which celebrated the publication of "Madderlake's Trade Secrets" (Clarkson Potter, $40 in hardcover, $27.50 in paperback), included all the right people -- "nurseries, almost-farmer types, all the downtown types, publishing biggies and clients like Mark and Duane Hampton," Mr.
Pritchard said.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section yesterday about the reopening of Miss Grimble, a cafe and takeout shop at 312 Columbus Avenue, misstated the surname of the original owner.
She is Sylvia Balzer Hirsch, not Hirschfeld.


Yale Law Dean Is Nominated To 2d Circuit Appeals Court
Reaching out to his alma mater for a renowned legal scholar, President Clinton today nominated Guido Calabresi, dean of the Yale Law School, to be a Federal judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, a showcase court that hears cases from New York, Connecticut and Vermont and produces some of the country's most important decisions.
Mr.
Clinton's choice had been rumored for several months, and both of Connecticut's Democratic United States Senators, Christopher J. Dodd and Joseph I. Lieberman, issued statements enthusiastically supporting it tonight.
If confirmed by the Senate, Mr.
Calabresi would replace Judge Thomas Meskill, who took senior status on the court, which is based in New York, last year.


Anderson Spurs Nets To Victory Over Cavs
Maybe it was a gift for Coach Chuck Daly one day after he was elected to the Basketball Hall of Fame.
Maybe it was proof of why he was elected in the first place.
Whatever it was, the New Jersey Nets avenged an 8-point loss in Cleveland on Tuesday night by breezing to a 106-95 victory over the Cavaliers in the Meadowlands tonight.
Kenny Anderson, one of New Jersey's two starters this Sunday in the All-Star Game, took care of the offense with a game-high 24 points and 6 assists in 38 minutes.


New Appreciation For the 'Uglies'
IN the two years since Barbara Hauben Ross, a New York interior designer, married David Belin, a lawyer in Des Moines, she has been commuting to the Midwest every other weekend.
That's where Ms.
Ross became interested in what she described as the "uglies": the pottery, mostly vases, from the five-and-dime store of decades ago.
Traveling around Iowa, she stopped at junk stores and flea markets to buy the fancifully shaped American art pottery, especially pieces marked Red Wing, a company that was started in 1878 and closed in 1967.
Ms.
Ross has pieces from the different Red Wing periods, including the older mottled green and tan flowerpots and vases as well as dozens of the pastel trays, bowls, ashtrays and vases that were produced when the company expanded its pottery lines in the 1920's and 1930's.


What Better Place to Hide From the Weather Than in It


No Headline
To my knowledge, there has never been a President of the United States who has visited a confinement facility.
There have been some who have come rather close. - SAM SEXTON, whose jail was the scene of President Clinton's speech on crime and drugs.  [ D20:4. ]


Bertram Clarke, 83, Art-Book Designer And Typographer
Bertram L. Clarke, a prominent designer of art books and typography, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83.
He died from complications of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, known as Lou Gehrig's disease, said Steven J. Abramson, a friend.


U.S. Hockey Team Is Getting Ready for the Real Thing
This was how the United States hockey team hoped to march into Lillehammer's ice rinks: playing a smart game, getting the hot goalie, outplaying the strong Swedes to bolster confidence.
And they got their wish tonight as they ended their 61-game exhibition schedule with a 2-2 tie against Sweden.
If the game had lasted 60 minutes and half a second, the Americans would have won.
Ted Drury's goal barely lost out to the buzzer.


Colombia's Leader Defends Presence of G.I.'s
President Cesar Gaviria today accused Colombia's highest administrative court of being politically motivated in asking the Congress to investigate him for allowing the presence of 150 United States Army engineers in the country.
The court, called the Council of State, contended that Mr.
Gaviria was violating Colombia's Constitution by permitting armed foreign troops to enter the country without prior congressional approval.
The ruling added fuel to a three-month public outcry led by the press and politicians who charge that the presence of the United States troops in Juanchaco Bay in southwest Colombia is illegal and that American labor is being used at the expense of unemployed Colombians.


Review/Theater; 3 Albee One-Acters About People Boxed In
The standard critical take on Edward Albee these days is that the playwright has declined progressively since the mid-1960's and "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?".
With each successive play, he is said to have become more abstruse and less immediate, more purely literary and less overtly theatrical.
"Sand," an evening of three of the playwright's one-act works, may not restore a full shine to his reputation.
But it does offer provocative evidence that in many ways he hasn't changed, that he continues to be haunted by the same concerns, and that the literariness for which he is now condemned has always been a significant part of his writing.


In France, Too, Levitt Was Housing Pioneer
To the Editor:
Your Jan. 29 obituary article on the community builder William J. Levitt states that he embarked on overseas projects after the sale of Levitt &amp; Sons to I.T.T. in 1968.
Not so.
Mr.
Levitt's first international operation was in France.
Land for the 650-unit Residences du Chateau was purchased in 1964, 20 miles southwest of Paris.
Exhibit houses were opened Oct. 23, 1965.
In five weeks every single-family home, town house and apartment in the self-contained community was under contract.


Review/Television; All About Outercourse And Other 90's Know-How
If you have not yet been introduced to the joys of outercourse, tonight's the night.
As a sex therapist explains on "Talking Sex: Making Love in the 90's," outercourse, which covers all manner of romantic engagement except penetration, is the in thing among what one of tonight's talkative love makers calls the AIDS generation.
The hourlong program consists of women and men, blacks and whites, homosexuals and heterosexuals yakking away in groups and in couples about their sexual predilections.
They are mostly attractive and seem to be party animals.
Perhaps they were selected as role models for sexually active youngsters.
But what would such an audience be doing at home watching HBO?


CHRONICLE
GERRI WELLS and BRIGITTE WEIL met on the barricades of ACT UP, the AIDS protest group, four years ago, and soon became a couple.
Last week they had a daughter, ERIN SIMONE WEIL-WELLS, described by Ms.
Weil as "7 pounds, 14 ounces, 20 inches long and healthy and beautiful."
She represents something of a milestone for the two women and their colleagues.
"This is the second generation of ACT UP," said Ms.
Wells, 39, a building contractor, who gave birth to the child, conceived by artificial insemination through an anonymous donor.
Ms.
Weil, 28, owns a wholesale bakery.


F.B.I. Agent Tells Jury About Tanks in Sect Raid
The commander of F.B.I. tank operations during the Government's 51-day standoff with the Branch Davidians testified today that his mission on the morning that fire engulfed the sect's compound was to block access to a buried bus where F.B.I. officials thought members of the sect might seek refuge.
The official, R. J. Craig, a nine-year veteran of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, commanded crews on three combat engineering vehicles, which were used initially to punch holes in the compound's walls and then pump in tear gas in an effort to end the standoff.
Four other F.B.I. teams were simultaneously shooting an estimated 300 gas canisters through the compound's windows from Bradley tanks. 'Gas the Hallways'
"My assignment at first was to gas the hallways to prevent people from going down the hallways into the bus," Mr.
Craig said.


Administration to Delay Proposals to Aid Labor
After promising to come up by mid-year with proposals to deal with some of the nation's thorniest labor issues -- including whether to strengthen unions, and how to regulate workers' councils -- the Clinton Administration has decided to wait until November, probably after the Congressional election.
The postponement is a setback for labor leaders who had hoped that the Administration would move forcefully to reverse labor's weakening position at the bargaining table.
Seeking early action on this front, the President appointed a blue-ribbon commission last May to make policy recommendations in one year.


Schism and Suit After a Teamster Strike
The aftershocks from Monday's one-day strike by the teamsters union against the United Parcel Service highlight both the schisms and the financial pressures being faced by the nation's second-largest union.
Two days after the majority of U.P.S.'s union employees declined to defy a court order and join the strike, the union leadership is facing both criticism from members and a lawsuit.
The suit, which will seek more than $50 million in damages, was filed by the company today over a walkout whose benefits, if any, appear unclear.


Banks Consider Offer to Buy Trump's Plaza Hotel
Donald J. Trump may have held his wedding at the Plaza Hotel just in time.
Citibank, which leads a bank group that owns 49 percent of Mr.
Trump's prized Fifth Avenue showpiece, is considering at least one offer to buy the hotel, according to a banker familiar with the transaction.
And it believes it has the right to force Mr.
Trump sell his 51 percent.


I.R.S. Offers a Compromise on Takeovers
Seeking to resolve billions of dollars in disputed tax deductions from the corporate takeover frenzy of the 1980's, the Internal Revenue Service today offered companies a "middle ground" that it hoped would induce them to settle, paying additional taxes.
It said that the offer would be in force for a limited time and that companies would not be required to adopt it.
The compromise would allow companies to deduct for tax purposes some of the money they paid in acquiring assets like customer lists and good will, which the courts have determined are intangible assets.
Congress had urged the agency to settle these cases after subsequent changes in the law, made last year.


Serbs Agree to Give Up Sarajevo Guns
Under threat of NATO air strikes, Bosnian Serb forces agreed today to hand over their artillery in the mountains ringing this besieged city to United Nations peacekeeping troops.
The agreement, part of a cease-fire supposed to begin at noon on Thursday, was mediated by Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the new United Nations commander in Bosnia, in a meeting at Sarajevo airport this afternoon with leaders of both the Muslim-led Bosnian Government forces and the Bosnian Serb militias.


Why Would U.S. Shun Kaiser's Old Haunt?
When city planners here envision the Berlin of the future, one of their most vivid images is of the stately American Embassy that would be rebuilt on its former site next to the Brandenburg Gate.
Germans and Americans alike expect the building to be an anchor of the new Berlin and a symbol of the United States' determination to remain a major force in Europe.
It will be perhaps the most important embassy building the United States will construct in this decade, and the site at Pariser Platz, adjacent not only to the Brandenburg Gate but also to the Reichstag, the once and future home of the German Parliament, is arguably the most desirable in Berlin.


Lusaka Journal; From the Shadows, a Founder Views Africa Sadly
Patriarch, redeemer and autocrat, Kenneth David Kaunda gently rocks back and forth in the dappled morning sunlight.
His face is no longer on Zambia's money, his portrait has been removed from every office and he has no control over the military.
But in his slightly frayed blue safari suit and ascot, clutching his trademark linen handkerchief in his left hand and peppering his speech with biblical quotations, Mr.
Kaunda is still very much a statesman whose legacy is stamped on southern Africa.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Johnson, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
National League
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Agreed to terms with Charlie Hayes, third baseman, on a one-year contract.


China and Crystal Accounts Combined
Waterford Wedgwood U.S.A.
Inc. of Wall, N.J., said yesterday that it had consolidated the creative and media portions of its china and crystal accounts at Altschiller Reitzfeld of New York, which has handled the company's Waterford crystal account for nearly two years.
Combined billings were estimated at $5 million.


Raymond Hare, 92, State Dept. Official, Envoy and Arabist
Raymond A. Hare, an Arabist in the State Department who rose through the ranks of the Foreign Service to serve as Ambassador to four countries in the Middle and Near East and as an Assistant Secretary of State, died yesterday at his home in Washington.
He was 92.
He died of pneumonia, his son, Paul, said.


NAVY TRIAL POSES TOUGH QUESTIONS
At the highest levels of the United States Navy, stunned officials today asked this question: Is the Navy's top admiral a cunning liar or a victim of misguided military justice?
Admirals and senior civilian Navy officials expressed surprise and puzzlement at a Navy judge's ruling on Tuesday that Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, had misrepresented his activities at a bawdy convention of naval aviators in 1991 and had tried to manipulate the subsequent investigation.


A Winter Day Under a Heavy Blanket
With memories of Tuesday's endless homeward commute fresh in their minds, tens of thousands of weary workers in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut stayed home yesterday or tried to take mass transit.
Traffic was reported light everywhere as the remains of the storm were being scraped from major highways.
In the Kenny Luncheonette on Main Street in Hackensack, N.J., Nalin Patia checked the small amount of coffee and cigarettes he had sold by 10 A.M. and decided that he had some smart customers -- even if they weren't helping his business.


Seeking Signs of Life in a Full Mailbox
G.
K.
CHESTERTON described the mailbox as "a sanctuary of human words-- the place to which friends and lovers commit their messages, confident that when they have done so they are secret, except to future biographers -- not to be touched by any hands, not even by time."
Not my mailbox.


Foote, Cone Given Levi's in Canada
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding of San Francisco has been awarded its first assignment from Levi Strauss &amp; Company outside the United States.
The agency was named to handle the estimated $5 million account of Levi Strauss &amp; Company (Canada) Inc. of Markham, Ontario, which has been at Harrod &amp; Mirlin of Toronto for the last six years.
Foote, Cone was awarded the Canadian portion of the account without a review.
The United States portion has billings estimated at $125 million.
During the last year, the primary campaign that Levi Strauss has been running in Canada was Foote, Cone's work for Levi's Loose jeans.


Taste of Middle-Class Pay for Welfare Mothers
At 4:30 in the morning, when no one is up but the drug dealers, Charlene Franklin is pulling herself out of bed.
In the darkness of her South Side housing project, she puts on her grimy brogans and yellow hard hat, kisses her six sleeping children goodbye and braves bullets and envy to earn a paycheck beyond a welfare mother's wildest dreams.
For $13.52 an hour, Mrs.
Franklin paints, plumbs, plasters, scrapes, scrubs, sweeps, hangs doors and lays tile to make abandoned public housing units, stripped by vandals and gang members, habitable again.
It is the first real job she has ever had.
Power of a Consumer
She works with a team of other former welfare recipients in a pilot project, Step Up, which uses Federal housing rehabilitation money to train poor residents in construction jobs.


The Milk Brouhaha
A genetically engineered drug that boosts milk production in cows entered commercial use last week amid rumblings of consumer concern.
A coalition of groups opposed to the hormone staged symbolic dumpings of milk in several cities.
And several grocery chains said they would not stock milk from cows treated with the hormone, not because they were concerned about its safety but because they were worried their customers would shun it.
Those anxious about safety need to know that an unusually large array of government and medical authorities have endorsed the safety and nutrition of milk produced by cows treated with the hormone, known as bovine somatotropin, or BST.
Indeed, they find it indistinguishable by any known analytic test from milk made by cows not treated with the hormone.


'Schindler' Nominated for 12 Oscars
To the surprise of absolutely no one, "Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's Holocaust drama, dominated the 66th annual Academy Award nominations, announced here early today.
The film received 12 nominations, including best picture, best actor (Liam Neeson), best supporting actor (Ralph Fiennes) and best director (Mr. Spielberg).
The two runners-up, with eight nominations each, were Jane Campion's drama "The Piano" and James Ivory's "Remains of the Day."


Need Room to Grow On? Try the Neighbors
IT'S 6 P.M., and Alexandra Levite and her sister, Danielle, are preparing for their daily commute home.
Leaving behind their piano, puppet theater, bicycles and cardboard playhouse, and already in their Little Mermaid nightgowns, the sisters, ages 6 and 3, board the 6:05 local for their elevator journey from their 14th-floor playroom to the 9th floor for supper and bed.
Six years after moving into a post-World War II building on the Upper East Side, Dr.
Howard Levite, a cardiologist, and Juliana Mocher Levite, a stockbroker, had become frustrated by their lack of space and decided to buy a one-bedroom apartment in the same building for their daughters and for use as a guest suite.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the prosecution's case in the World Trade Center bombing trial misidentified a defendant at one point.
It was Ahmad A. Ajaj, not Mohammad A. Salameh, who was arrested when he entered the country on Sept. 1, 1992, carrying four passports under different names.


Seau of Chargers Gets $16.3 Million
Linebacker JUNIOR SEAU, the leading tackler for the San Diego Chargers for the past three seasons, has agreed to a contract that makes him the National Football League's second highest-paid defensive player at what sources say is $16.3 million over four years.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Chiquita Brands International, Cincinnati, is selling $175 million of senior notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 9.125 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated B1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BB- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Japanese Chief, Due in the U.S., Faces 'Impasse'
From the first time they met seven months ago, a new American President and Japan's most prominent reformer, Bill Clinton and Morihiro Hosokawa agreed that their countries needed a radically new way to deal with each other.
Neither Washington nor Tokyo could afford to continue the bickering, stonewalling and threats of retaliation, they said, that have gradually poisoned the trade relations between the two countries for a decade.
Aides of both men kept talking enthusiastically about their special bond, two young Southern governors, both with a mandate for reform and a common outlook on the world.
This time, everyone said, things would be different.
Everything at 'an Impasse'
But just a day before Prime Minister Hosokawa flies off for his first trip to Washington -- the White House, Capitol Hill and Georgetown University in 36 hours -- very few are talking that way anymore.
After three weeks of lurching from one crisis to another that threatened to oust him from office, Mr.
Hosokawa admitted to Japanese reporters today that the negotiations over carrying out a broad new "framework" for trade relations between the two countries had gotten nowhere.


The Piggy Bank in the Real World
Kids and cash have always constituted one of the more liquid economies.
Children, after all, can get and spend with the best of them.
"I have something, then I have nothing," said Rasheda Edness, a 17-year-old Bedford-Stuyvesant victim of the consumer culture.
"Except when I've got something stupid. I had $20 the other day. Then I had a $20 hat."


Bridge
When a bridge book appears with the chief character named Alan, blessed with brains, money, and outstanding physical attributes, this department must pay attention.
His nickname is the Shadow, and unfortunately he is a fictional Canadian.
The book is "Shadow in the Bridge World" by Mike Dorn Wiss, and it is available for $14.95 ($16.18 in New York State) from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York, N.Y. 10025.
The writing and the deals are lively, giving an entertaining picture of the tournament world.


Essay; Ten Days -- or Else
Whenever the West pretended to be ready to bomb the Serbian artillery shelling Sarajevo, the Serbs would pretend to agree to stop the slaughter.
Then we didn't bomb and they didn't stop.
This time had better be different.
Public opinion is finally beginning to put political heat on feckless leaders.


Desjardins Slap Shot In Overtime Is Clincer
For 45 minutes after the game tonight, the Ranger bus spewed fumes into the chilly air while the players waited aboard it to head to the airport for a charter flight back to New York.
Inside the Forum, behind a brown door in a narrow corridor, Mike Keenan, their coach, released a little steam to Wally Harris, the National Hockey League's assistant director of officiating.


Moves by Hynes Benefit His Backers in Brooklyn; District Attorney Avoids Conflicts of Interest, So Private Lawyers Prosecute Cases
District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn, saying he is trying to avoid conflicts of interest, removes his office from prosecutions far more often than any other prosecutor in the city.
The process, in which cases are turned over to a small group of private lawyers, may have created another conflict: many of the Brooklyn lawyers who prosecute the cases are also contributors to Mr.
Hynes's campaigns.
Mr.
Hynes has asked the court to hire special prosecutors 43 times during the last three years, almost triple the 15 requests made by the Bronx District Attorney, and more than 10 times the 4 by Queens.
The Manhattan District Attorney has sought no such relief in the last three years.


CHRONICLE
The Rev.
WILLIAM F. SCHULZ, a minister and former president of the Unitarian Universalist Association, has been named executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A., the human rights organization.
He will direct the operations of Amnesty's 400,000-member American branch starting on March 1.
He succeeds JOHN G. HEALEY, who has resigned after 12 years to start the Action Center for Human Rights, in Washington.


Rangers' Rapscallion or Aleksei the Incorrigible?
Back in December, when the National Hockey League suspended Aleksei Kovalev for five games, the league's senior vice president, Brian Burke, issued an unusually blunt and personal statement about the Rangers' talented and controversial second-year player from Russia.
"He'd better make an adjustment in how he plays or he is going to be inactive a great deal in the future," Burke said, after suspending Kovalev for injuring Dale Hunter's knee by tripping the Washington player with his skate.
"It was sneaky. It was senseless. Kovalev is not a novice in the justice system in the National Hockey League." A Marked Man
Since then, Kovalev says he feels like a marked man, watched extra closely by referees.
Because he was ejected for spearing Montreal's Patrice Brisebois Wednesday night, Kovalev has been automatically suspended again, this time for two games, and won't be in uniform Friday night when the Rangers play host to the Quebec Nordiques or Saturday night when they visit the Senators in Ottawa.


The Ostrich Caucus
It is an awkward question House Democrats would prefer not to discuss: Who will become chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee if the current Federal investigation of Representative Dan Rostenkowski leads to an indictment?
Under House Democratic Caucus rules, Mr.
Rostenkowski would be required to step aside while his case is adjudicated, and the second-ranking Democrat, 73-year-old Sam Gibbons of Florida, would automatically become the acting chairman.
This undemocratic process ill serves the public.
Speaking candidly, few members would say Mr.
Gibbons is the best, or even a very strong, choice to head this most powerful of House committees.
Though he has expertise on trade issues, and might prove the doubters wrong, many question whether he has the patience and political skills needed to build consensus on complicated and controversial social and fiscal issues like health care.
Clearly, seniority should not be the sole selection criterion.


On Stage, and Off
A struggling 'Cyrano' wishes upon a new, more widely known star Ballet Theater to set those red shoes dancing again. 'Cyrano' Goes On Despite Big Losses
Just at the moment you thought they'd be closing the show, the producers of "Cyrano: The Musical" instead announced that beginning March 8, Robert Guillaume would be taking over the title role from Bill van Dijk.
How come?


House Votes to Restore Independent Counsel Law
The House voted overwhelmingly today to put the independent counsel law, first enacted in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal, back on the statute books.
The legislation, , which Republicans voted against re-enacting in 1992, would provide for independent prosecutors to be appointed by a panel of Federal judges in cases involving high-ranking Administration officials.


Devils Skate Figure Eights Around the Baffled Canucks
The Devils were first to the puck from the outset against the Vancouver Canucks tonight.
They won most of the battles in the corners and in all three zones.
They rarely yielded second chances in front of their goal and they played with a lot of intensity at the other end.
At times, they were even lucky.
Besides scoring the first five goals of the game in the first two periods at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Devils were also beneficiaries of a couple of goals off Vancouver skates, and that was simply too much for the Canucks in New Jersey's 7-3 triumph.


Review/Design; Stylish Persuaders For Modern Times
LIKE the recent "Frontline" documentary on diamonds, the new show at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum tackles the subject of consumer manipulation.
The "Frontline" program recounted how the South African diamond cartel conspired with advertisers to maintain high prices by creating the illusion that diamonds were rare.
"Packaging the New," which opened this week at the Cooper-Hewitt, traces the history of an esthetic cartel -- industrial design -- and the mythology devised by designers to enlarge the market for furnishings, appliances and other household goods.
Focusing on the work of six noted American designers, the show traces a 50-year period beginning in the mid-1920's, when industrial design became an organized profession, and culminating in the mid-1970's, when the oil crisis and environmental degradation prompted widespread disillusion with the industrial juggernaut.
Donald Deskey, Russel Wright, Norman Bel Geddes, Raymond Loewy, Walter Dorwin Teague and Henry Dreyfuss: those were the cream of the industrial-design profession.
They set a machine-age stamp on everything from cocktail shakers to detergent boxes, airplanes to prefabricated housing, fabrics to World's Fair previews of an utterly transformed world.


Prohibition, for Drugs as for Alcohol, Only Fails
To the Editor:
" 'Three Strikes' -- Two Views" (Op-Ed, Jan. 29), a dialogue between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mimi Silbert, president of the Delancey Street Foundation, represents the extremes of punishment and rehabilitation in the crime debate, which has now been given additional prominence by President Clinton's State of the Union Message to Congress.


Art in Review
Daniel Oates 303 Gallery 89 Greene Street SoHo Through March 12
Daniel Oates's sculpture is a labor of love, and an ode to working-class heroes and heroines.
Over the last two years, this young English artist, who was educated in the ancient art of woodcarving and now lives in New York City, has created an irresistible cast of what he calls "Happy Workers": small, cartoonlike figures of cleaning women, laborers and postmen.
Toylike yet oddly dignified, and made by hand with awesome skill, they possess the purity and beauty of religious art.
Their mission seems to be to bridge the familiar high-low distinction by a new route: complete sincerity.


Times Co. Reports Loss in Quarter Despite Operating Gain
The New York Times Company reported improved operating earnings for the fourth quarter and all of 1993 yesterday but said a reduction in the value of its forest products operations and the expected cost of a planned staff reduction at The New York Times newspaper resulted in a net loss for the quarter.
The company reported a fourth-quarter loss of $24.1 million, or 23 cents a share, compared with a loss of $3.7 million, or 5 cents a share, in the final quarter of 1992.


London Shop Hired By Coca-Cola Unit
Coca-Cola Great Britain and Ireland has followed in the footsteps of its American parent by hiring a shop not affiliated with its longtime agency company, the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Bob Bertini, a spokesman for the Coca-Cola Company in Atlanta, confirmed reports in British advertising trade publications yesterday that Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London had been hired to handle unspecified special projects.


New Amex Chairman
The American Stock Exchange named Richard F. Syron, president of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank, as its new chairman yesterday.
Mr.
Syron's appointment as the exchange's 16th chairman, effective April 1, concludes an eight-month search to replace James R. Jones, who joined the Clinton Administration as ambassador to Mexico.
Mr.
Syron, 50, has been the president of the Boston Fed since January 1989.


Egypt Loses Ground, to Muslim Militants and Fear
An Egyptian campaign to pay large rewards for information leading to the capture of Islamic militants and to arm civilian supporters in southern Egypt appears to be faltering under a wave of assassinations and attacks that are slowly eroding the Government's authority.
The killing of suspected Government collaborators, and about 100 police officers in the last year, has silenced many who oppose the drive by the Muslim militants to create an Islamic state in Egypt.
And it has left the Government without the crucial links needed to ferret out armed Islamic guerrillas who increasingly appear on the streets of small villages to extort money and supplies and carry out attacks.


Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Has Lymphoma
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis has non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a treatable form of cancer of the lymphatic system, and has been undergoing chemotherapy for about a month without interrupting her personal routines or duties as a book editor, a family spokeswoman said yesterday.
"She is undergoing a course of treatment and there is every expectation that it will be successful," the spokeswoman, Nancy Tuckerman, said in an interview.
"There is an excellent prognosis. You can never be absolutely sure, but the doctors are very, very optimistic."


Jazz's Wright Released From Hospital
LUTHER WRIGHT, released from the hospital after being treated for manic depression, is not expected to rejoin the Utah Jazz for at least two weeks.
The rookie forward was released from the Western Institute of Neuropsychiatry in Salt Lake City on Wednesday, more than two weeks after he was cited for disorderly conduct on Jan. 24 when the police found him shouting and banging garbage cans at a local rest stop.
In a prepared statement, Wright's agent, SAL DiFAZIO, said the former Seton Hall player would continue to receive treatment as an outpatient for an indefinite period.
"I fully expect him to continue to improve and to return to the Jazz in the next two or three weeks," DiFazio said.


Cup May Have Women's Team
It is likely that there will be an all-women's team in the 1995 America's Cup defense races, according to Bill Koch, the wealthy yachtsman whose America
team successfully defended the cup in 1992.
"We would like to break the tradition that has resulted in almost entirely a male-dominated sport in the 142 years since the first race," Koch said in a statement today.
Individual women have raced on cup boats in the past but never as a group and seldom in anything beyond the trial race stages.


Lawyers' Fee Curb Sought For Prudential Settlement
California's chief securities regulator asked a Federal judge yesterday to grant only a fraction of the fees that might otherwise be paid to lawyers in the largest class action stemming from Prudential Securities' limited partnership scandal.
In a letter, the regulator, Gary S. Mendoza, said the class action lawyers did not deserve fees based on the $120 million settlement approved last month by Federal District Judge Marcel Livaudais Jr., because they played a small role in negotiating the deal.
The settlement involves the largest series of partnerships sold by Prudential, known as the Prudential- Bache Energy Income partnerships.


A.T.&amp; T. Cutting Up to 15,000 Jobs to Trim Costs
With long-distance telephone companies battling to capture customers and cut costs, the American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it would cut as many as 15,000 jobs, or 15 percent of the work force, in its core long-distance business during the next two years.
Though A.T.&amp; T. had been expected to embark on a series of layoffs, the cuts were bigger than many analysts had predicted.
The move comes as the nation's biggest long-distance carrier continues to lose market share to MCI and Sprint, and the industry exploits new technologies to cut costs.


Police Shootout Hurts 3 in Brooklyn
Three men were wounded yesterday when an attempt by undercover law-enforcement officers to catch them illegally selling guns turned into a shootout near the campus of Brooklyn College, the police said.
The incident occurred at 7:30 P.M. in a municipal lot at Avenue H and Nostrand Avenue in Flatbush.
New York City police officers and agents of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms were trying to buy guns from three men in a municipal lot at Avenue H, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a Police Department spokeswoman.


Funds Asked for Data On Managers' Trading
Over the last few days, the Securities and Exchange Commission has sent requests to 30 mutual-fund companies for detailed information about all the trading their fund managers did in their own accounts in 1993.
Barry Barbash, director of the S.E.C.'s investment company division, said that while none of the 30 funds was chosen because of known regulatory problems, he could not release their names because "This is treated as a regulatory and enforcement matter."


BellSouth May Not Buy More of QVC
Investors in Paramount Communications Inc. who had hoped for some fireworks before the Feb. 14 deadline for all shares to be tendered may be disappointed.
Although the BellSouth Corporation, the largest investor in QVC Network Inc., has been looking into ways to help increase QVC's bid, it is unlikely to do so before it and a rival bid by Viacom Inc. expire on Monday, according to people close to the negotiations.
A BellSouth spokesman refused to comment.
BellSouth has considered buying QVC stock in the open market to support the value of the stock, but some executives following the deal believe that doing so might be viewed as changing the QVC bid.
That could be in violation of the agreement between Viacom, QVC and the Paramount board, which required that final bids be made by Feb. 1.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
HOSPITAL PROJECT IS CALLED A FAILURE
Charging a decade of mismanagement, the new chairman of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation said that his agency had "completely screwed up" the planned reconstruction of Kings County Hospital.
A1.
WAY IS CLEARED FOR A NEW SUBWAY LINK
The Federal Government cleared the way for a new subway link between Manhattan and Queens lines that would allow thousands more trips a day across the East River.
A1.
BOMB MANUALS ARE FOCUS IN BLAST TRIAL
The lawyer for one defendant in the World Trade Center bombing trial showed the jury how easy it is in this country to obtain booklets and videotapes on bombs and bomb making.
B2.
MEMO ON WELFARE IS PLAYED DOWN
Mayor Giuliani sought to distance himself from a memorandum written by one of his senior deputies that suggested that welfare recipients should clean up highways and parks as a condition of receiving benefits.
B3.
SCHOOL DISTRICTS ASSAILED ON SPENDING
A City Council panel accused local school districts of excessive spending on meals, conferences and travel for school board members.
B3.
JACQUELINE ONASSIS TREATED FOR CANCER
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis has been undergoing chemotherapy for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a treatable form of cancer of the lymphatic system, a family spokeswoman said.
B3.
Seventy-five families were evacuated from an Bronx apartment building after it began shaking and large cracks appeared in a wall.
B2.
Tenants in five low-income Manhattan apartment buildings are suing the New York Housing Authority, demanding that the agency provide them with adequate heat and hot water.
B5.
A former spokesman for the Nation of Islam who was rebuked by the group's leader, Minister Louis Farrakhan, insisted that he remained in Mr.
Farrakhan's good graces.
B4.
REGION
COURT UPHOLDS MURDER CHARGE
Upholding a major exception to New York State's double jeopardy law, the state's highest court ruled that a person who has pleaded guilty to attempted murder may be charged with murder if the victim later dies.
B6.
NOBODY SHOOTS A LAME DUCK
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut said he would roar through his last year in office like "something coming out of 'Jurassic Park.' " But he has already been rendered something of a dinosaur in the minds of many lawmakers.
B4.
Frank G. Zarb, a prominent businessman, became the sixth Republican to consider and then reject a 1994 gubernatorial race.
B4.
Taro, New Jersey's celebrated death-row dog, walked out of the Bergen County Jail Annex, alive but banished forever from the state.
B4.
American Telephone and Telegraph Company said it would cut as many as 15,000 jobs, including thousands in and near its headquarters in Basking Ridge, N.J.
D1.
Holiday Schedules B2


Only One Standout Goes Home a Winner
Donyell Marshall and Bill Curley were superb, Marshall in victory and Curley in defeat, when Connecticut beat Boston College on Wednesday night in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The final score was 94-91 after two periods of overtime, and the Huskies had beaten the Eagles for a 13th consecutive time.


Business Digest
Companies
A.T.&amp; T. plans to cut as many as 15,000 jobs, or 15 percent of the work force, in its core long-distance business over the next two years.
The cutbacks were larger than expected and they come as A.T.&amp; T., the biggest long-distance carrier, continues to lose market share to MCI and Sprint.  [ Page D1. ]
G.M. earned $2.47 billion for 1993, and its North American operations posted their first profitable quarter since 1989.  [ D1. ]
The S.E.C. has sent requests to 30 mutual-fund companies for detailed information about all the trading their fund managers did in their own accounts in 1993.  [ D2. ]
Calvin Klein ruffled the $1.1 billion fur industry, announcing that he would no longer produce furs.  [ D2. ]
California's chief securities regulator asked a Federal judge to grant only a fraction of the fees that might otherwise be paid to lawyers in a class action stemming from Prudential Securities' limited partnership scandal.  [ D2. ]
Electronic Arts' planned acquisition of Broderbund Software reflects an industry trend likely to influence the balance of power in the emerging interactive television business.  [ D3. ]
BellSouth is unlikely to help increase QVC's bid for Paramount before the Feb. 14 deadline for rival bids by QVC and Viacom.  [ D3. ]
A prominent money manager will leave Gabelli Growth Fund because she does not want to move to the suburbs.  [ D3. ]
The New York Times Company reported improved operating profits, but said one-time charges led to a quarterly loss.  [ D15. ] The Economy
Earnings are falling for college-educated men in their late 40's and early 50's -- normally the prime earning years -- for the first time since World War II.  [ D1. ]
Computer security experts now believe the recent rash of break-ins on the Internet was an organized effort to crack the security of the world's busiest computer systems.  [ D1. ]
Lawyers for the families of 21 Texas school children killed in a bus accident received at least a third of the $122 million settlement.
But high legal payments may be a thing of the past given a new attack by a diverse group of legal scholars.  [ A1. ] Markets
Investors were disappointed by some corporate earnings, especially those of G.M., and stock prices declined.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 36.58 points, to 3,895.34.  [ D4. ]
Interest rates rose after the Treasury's auction of 30-year bonds amid concerns that today's producer price report will show a jump in inflation.  [ D12. ]
Cotton prices shot up ahead of a closely watched Government report that showed more American cotton will likely be exported this season.  [ D11. ]
The dollar finished mixed against other major currencies as investors awaited the outcome of U.S.-Japanese trade talks.  [ D11. ] International
American officials said there was little progress on U.S.-Japanese trade talks as they worked to reach an agreement on opening Japanese markets.  [ A8. ] Today's Columns
Analysts are cautioning investors in California savings and loan associations to prepare for a strong aftershock of their own after the Northridge earthquake.
Market Place.  [ D4. ]
Procter &amp; Gamble is continuing to pare its broad brand offerings after decades of proliferation, combining its Top Job liquid cleaner with a more popular counterpart, Mr.
Clean.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D15. ]


Centrust Case Guilty Plea
The former chairman of Centrust Bank, David Paul, pleaded guilty today to 29 criminal charges, ending a legal battle with the Government after Centrust, a savings and loan association, failed.
Prosecutors said the one-time millionaire secretly pilfered $24 million from Centrust and hid the institution's financial woes from regulators with sweetheart bond deals.


Guggenheim Museum To Keep Its Name
To the Editor:
The misunderstanding about the LeFrak name on the exterior of the Guggenheim Museum (including Eleanore Pettersen's Feb. 3 letter) demands further explanation:


Review/Photography; Images of the American South's Religious Fervor
The passionate, almost ecstatic rites of evangelical Christianity, particularly as practiced in the rural American South, have long exerted a powerful hold on the imaginations of photographers.
"Devotion, Faith and Fervor," a fascinating show now at 292 Gallery in SoHo, demonstrates just how broad that appeal has been, including as it does works from the 1930's to the present by more than 20 photographers.
A host of photographic luminaries, from Walker Evans and Clarence John Laughlin to Margaret Bourke-White and Robert Frank, are represented in the show.
While many of the photographers, including Constantine Manos and Leonard Freed, are known primarily for their journalistic work, others, like Ralph Eugene Meatyard, are better known in the art world.
Also included, with a 1939 photograph, is the writer Eudora Welty.


A Downhill Dramatists and Ski Racers Will Both Love
Like New Yorkers and Parisians, downhillers are a tough audience.
Mere speed won't impress them.
Nor will a big jump or a series of tight turns.
Only a well-plotted, devilishly difficult course that incorporates all these elements will get their nod of approval.


Windfall Fees In Injury Cases Under Assault
On Sept. 21, 1989, a soft-drink delivery truck slammed into a school bus in Alton, Tex., killing 21 children and injuring dozens of others.
Insurers for the bottling company and the bus manufacturer settled the claims of the victims' families quickly, for an estimated $122 million.
Notwithstanding that early resolution of a case that was never really in doubt, the families' lawyers received at least a third of the settlement in contingency fees.
By the calculation of Prof.
Lester Brickman of Benjamin Cardozo Law School, that sum was equal to at least $25,000 an hour to each plaintiff lawyer involved in the case, in exchange for what amounted to nothing more than routine legal services.


After the Disaster, Rescuers, The Red Cross and T-Shirts
At 5 A.M. on Jan. 17, 29 minutes after the earthquake, Art Pine's telephone rang in San Francisco.
It was his partner, Dave Parscal.
"He said, 'Art, earthquake,' " Mr.
Pine recalled.
"I said, 'O.K., where?' He said, 'Los Angeles.' I said, 'How big?' He said, 'It's major.' I said, 'Let's do it.' "


Accounts
*
Bose Corp., Framingham, Mass., to Orsatti &amp; Parrish, Boston, to handle direct marketing and advertising, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Centerbank, Waterbury, Conn., to Cronin &amp; Co., Glastonbury, Conn., to handle the bank's account, previously in-house, as well as to handle advertising and public relations for a subsidiary, Centerbank Mortgage Co.
Combined billings were estimated at $2 million. *
New York's Finest Chocolate Co., Yonkers, to the Ad Store, New York, as the first agency to handle advertising for its Nutty New Yorker candy bar brand.
Billings were not disclosed.


Federal Transit Aid Is Intended to Ease Crowded Subways
With a pledge of $329 million, the Federal Government today cleared the way for a new subway link that would ease crowding on some of the city's busiest lines, connecting Manhattan and Queens.
The Federal money, to be matched by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's own borrowing, would finance construction of a 1,500-foot connection from the eastern terminus of the B and Q lines at the 21st Street-Queensbridge station in Astoria to a new stop to be built near the Queens Plaza station of the E,F,G and R lines, which run along Queens Boulevard in Long Island City.


Art in Review
Jim Hodges CRG Art Incorporated 16 East 71st Street Manhattan Through Feb. 26
Jim Hodges's wistful gallery debut reflects the current fascination with an ephemeral, implicitly mournful art, and also with artwork that is extended and seemingly encyclopedic.
The centerpiece is "A Diary of Flowers," made up of 565 drawings of flowers, perhaps nature's frailest creations, each executed on one of society's most prevalent throwaways, the paper napkin, and simply pinned to the wall.
Subject, material and mode of presentation are well suited to one another.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Mopping up a poor performer, Procter &amp; Gamble merges Top Job into its Mr. Clean brand.
THE Procter &amp; Gamble Company, continuing to pare its broad brand offerings after decades of proliferation, is combining its Top Job liquid cleaner with a more popular counterpart, Mr.
Clean.
Like other recent efforts by P.&amp; G. to cull laggard brands, the Top Job-Mr.
Clean merger is being handled discreetly.
At the end of the month, P.&amp; G., the household products giant, will begin shipping bottles of Top Job that carry labels bearing the new name, Mr.
Clean Top Job.
To accentuate the change, the bald, earring-bedecked Mr.
Clean character will be added, too.


Populist Challenge in California Race
Picking up where Ross Perot and Edmund G. Brown Jr. left off in the 1992 Presidential campaign, Tom Hayden is running for governor of California on what he calls a crusade against the influence of special interests in politics.
Mr.
Hayden, whose political career started in the protests against the Vietnam War in the 1960's, said he was not in the race to win.
But his announcement on Wednesday stunned politicians in this state capital and could significantly shift the dynamics of what is shaping up to be a hard-fought race in a big state.


U.S. Dropping Its Efforts to Patent Thousands of Genetic Fragments
The Federal Government has abandoned its efforts to patent thousands of genetic fragments isolated three years ago in a rapid-fire and fiercely disputed approach to the discovery of new genes.
Dr.
Harold Varmus, director of the National Institutes of Health, said his agency would not attempt to fight the Patent and Trademark Office's rejection of an application filed in February 1992, requesting patent protection for 2,421 genetic sequences, snippets of DNA isolated largely from human brain cells through a technique developed by Dr.
J.
Craig Venter, director of the Institute for Genomic Research.


Art in Review
August Sander Sander Gallery 19 East 76th Street Manhattan Through Feb. 19
The usual story about August Sander, the great portrait photographer who died in 1964, is that after he published the first volume of his projected catalogue of the German people in 1929, the Nazis seized the books and forced him to turn from portraiture to landscapes.
This is true as far as it goes, but Sander had been doing landscapes as early as 1906, and he made the photographs shown here between 1922 and 1934 in the mountains near Cologne, where he lived.


Lincoln's Birthday
Lincoln's Birthday will be observed today.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES New York City government offices closed.
Federal and state offices open.
POST OFFICE Normal delivery and office hours.
BANKS Normal.
PARKING Alternate-side street cleaning regulations suspended.
SANITATIONNormal, but delayed by snow.
SCHOOLS Open.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Normal.  NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Normal.
BANKS Option to close.
SCHOOLS Option to close.
TRANSPORTATION Normal.  CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Normal.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Option to close.
TRANSPORTATION Normal.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  U.S.
BACKS BOSNIAN PARTITION  Senior officials said the Clinton Administration was telling its European allies that it will press the Bosnian Government to accept a peace plan that partitions Bosnia along ethnic lines, senior American and European officials said.
A1  SHOOTING MARS SARAJEVO TRUCE  Hours after United Nations troops took up positions around Sarajevo to monitor a truce, shooting and explosions were heard in the battered Bosnian capital.
A1


Tar Heels Fight Off Maryland's Challenge
North Carolina 95, Maryland 89
Derrick Phelps scored 9 of his 21 points in the final 2 minutes 12 seconds last night as No. 1 North Carolina held off a furious second-half rally by Maryland for a 95-89 victory in Chapel Hill, N.C.
The triumph gave the Tar Heels 20 victories for the 24th straight season and moved Carolina (20-3, 8-2 in the Atlantic Coast Conference) back into a first-place tie with No. 2 Duke.
It also gave Dean Smith 27 20-victory seasons in his 33 years as coach.


Books of The Times; Revisiting Vietnam on Fantasy's Odd Battlefields
Warrior Dreams Paramilitary Culture in Post-Vietnam America By James William Gibson 357 pages.
Hill &amp; Wang. $23.
With the involvement (and withdrawal) of American forces in Vietnam, the old ideals of movie machismo underwent a violent sea change.
The old gunslinger ballads gave way to bloodier and more morally ambiguous sagas (movies like"Shane" were replaced by movies like "The Wild Bunch"), and then in the mid-1970's, the genre of the western itself seemed ready to fade away and die.
Meanwhile, however, a new brand of movie hero began to make his way to the screen: Clint Eastwood's Dirty Harry, a renegade cop willing to break all the rules; Charles Bronson's one-man vigilante team in "Death Wish" (and "Death Wish 2," "3" and "4") and, of course, Sylvester Stallone's pumped-up ex-Green Beret, John Rambo.


Environmental Justice
It should come as no surprise that Washington is only now beginning to see that racial justice is essential to good environmental policy.
The environmental movement is run by whites preoccupied with conservation rather than racial issues.
Today's basic laws on clean air and water are only a quarter-century old.
And for 12 of those years, when Ronald Reagan and George Bush occupied the White House, neither the environment nor racial justice ranked high on the official agenda.
President Clinton is thus to be commended for offering a measure of atonement in the form of an executive order, due in a day or so, asking all Federal agencies to insure that their programs do not inflict disproportionate environmental harm on the poor or on minorities.


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Lindros Pulls One Out in Overtime  Eric Lindros scored 50 seconds into overtime, erasing a Philadelphia mistake late in the third period as the slumping Flyers beat the Florida Panthers, 4-3, last night in Philadelphia.
Lindros poked in a rebound of Garry Galley's shot under Florida goaltender Mark Fitzpatrick for his 28th goal. (AP)
Capitals 4, Blues 3: Defenseman Al Iafrate scored twice and Rick Tabaracci made 32 saves as Washington won in St.
Louis.
It was the Capitals' third straight victory, improving their record to 6-2-0 since Jim Schoenfeld was named coach on Jan. 27. (AP)
Sabres 3, Bruins 3: Buffalo's Grant Fuhr stopped 44 shots as the Sabres tied the Bruins in Boston in a sloppy game that featured a missed penalty shot and 54 penalty minutes in the first period. (AP)
Lightning 6, Senators 2: Chris Gratton scored twice as Tampa Bay won in Ottawa for its sixth straight victory over its expansion colleague.
Gratton's line dominated all night as Tampa Bay outshot the Senators, 36-18. (AP)
SOCCER &gt;U.S.
Loses to Denmark on Penalty Kicks  The European champion, Denmark, beat the United States, 4-2, on penalty kicks after a scoreless tie yesterday in the opening round of the Carlsberg Cup in Hong Kong.
The United States next plays Romania, which is in its World Cup group, on Sunday. (AP)
HORSE RACING Senor Cielo Wins as Aqueduct Resumes  Senor Cielo, coupled in the wagering with Stately Wager, raced to a 4 1/2-length front-running victory in the $36,000 Well Selected Purse as racing resumed at Aqueduct yesterday after two days of postponements because of snow.
The winner, ridden by Robbie Davis and carrying 115 pounds, covered six furlongs over a fast track in 1:122/5 . (AP)
TENNIS  Courier Extended in St.
Jude's Tourney  The top-seeded Jim Courier dropped a set before beating unseeded Kenneth Carlsen, 7-5, 5-7, 6-3, in his opening match at the Kroger-St.
Jude International tournament in Memphis. (AP)
Haitian Upsets Stich: The unseeded Ronald Agenor of Haiti stunned top-seeded Michael Stich, 6-2, 6-7 (3-7), 6-3, yesterday in the first major upset of the Muratti Time indoor tournament in Milan, Italy. (AP)


400 Try Not to Dodge Draft
The National Football League's combine workouts began today, another security blanket for coaches and team personnel officials who try each year to find willing and able new bodies to improve their teams.
Actually, it may be the world's largest meat market, displaying perhaps 400 college seniors and a half-dozen or so draft-eligible juniors behind the closed doors of the Hoosier Dome.
There will be no contact drills.
Individual teams have scouted most of the players and may study them further after the workouts.
Still, how the players impress or fail to impress the combine audience may affect their fortunes in the N.F.L.'s annual draft April 24-25.
And how they do in the combine may affect team priorities in trying to sign other teams' unrestricted free agents, which teams can do starting next Friday.


Corrections
A chart on Tuesday listing programs that would gain or lose money under President Clinton's 1995 budget proposal misstated the amount by which fees for Smokey Bear and Woodsy Owl, characters licensed by the Agriculture Department, would rise.
They will rise by $11,000, to a total of $127,000 if the budget proposal is enacted -- not by $9 million, to a total of $127 million.


Auditors Find Many Problems in Day Care Centers
Federal investigators say they have found widespread problems with day care centers, raising doubts about whether states can adequately protect the safety and health of many poor children who will need such care under welfare reform proposals.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, found that states were cutting the budgets and enforcement personnel of state agencies that license and inspect day care centers even as the demand for such care surges.


Ohio Reporter Ends Jail Stay
Lisa A. Abraham, an Ohio newspaper reporter who was jailed for refusing to testify before a grand jury, was released yesterday.
Ms.
Abraham, 30, a reporter for The Tribune Chronicle of Warren, Ohio, served 22 days in jail.
A special county prosecutor had tried to compel her to testify about an interview she conducted with a county official who has been indicted.
Susan J. Svihlik, executive editor of The Tribune Chronicle, said the judge in the case ordered Ms.
Abraham's release after the prosecutor acknowledged that the grand jury was unlikely to conduct a new inquiry this week.
The grand jury's term expires on Monday.


Reviews/Film; In the Tire Tracks Of Another Sultry Pair
Not everyone can tumble out of a garbage truck and still look glamorously tousled.
After "The Getaway," you'd have to put Kim Basinger and Alec Baldwin at the top of that list.
Their appeal as a couple of gorgeous outlaws is the main reason to see this sleek, entertaining remake of Sam Peckinpah's 1972 action film, the one that brought Steve McQueen and Ali MacGraw together in real life.
Ms.
Basinger and Mr.
Baldwin, who have been an old married couple for five months now, have the wit and unabashed vanity to give this update a cynical 90's flavor, and to make this movie their own.
Directed by Roger Donaldson ("No Way Out"), it is a tale of trust, double crosses and car chases, not necessarily in that order.
Mr.
Baldwin plays Doc McCoy, an expert safecracker who is let down by his colleagues and ends up in a dank Mexican jail. (Is there any other kind in the movies?)


On My Mind; Bill Clinton's War
The responsibility is President Clinton's.
It is his job now to prevent the NATO ultimatum to the Serbs from becoming the excuse for inflicting more suffering and spreading the war beyond Bosnia.
If he does not live up to the job, the combined power of the West, its standards of political and religious conduct and all its pronouncements about humanitarianism will have added up to nothing but a recipe for more tragedy.


Funds Asked for Data On Managers' Trading
Over the last few days, the Securities and Exchange Commission has sent requests to 30 mutual-fund companies for detailed information about all the trading their fund managers did in their own accounts in 1993.
Barry Barbash, director of the S.E.C.'s investment company division, said that while none of the 30 funds was chosen because of known regulatory problems, he could not release their names because "This is treated as a regulatory and enforcement matter."


No Headline


Senate Votes a Quake Relief Measure
The Senate tonight approved spending $10 billion, mostly for Los Angeles earthquake victims and military operations abroad, but only after California's agitated lawmakers -- and a looming snowstorm -- induced the senators to end a two-day feud over whether to cut other spending to pay for it.
After a string of attacks on parts of the bill that do not deal with disasters -- highway grants, World Bank contributions, military spending and obscure Federal programs -- the Senate voted 85 to 10 to add the measure's costs to the Federal deficit, as had been proposed in the first place.


Looking Between Boycott Lines
The poster boys for higher, ever-higher, education go on display this weekend, jammin', slammin', signifyin', selling overpriced shoes and sweetened drinks.
But most significantly, the All-Stars of the National Basketball Association will be role modeling for yet another generation of high school and college gladiators.
Which makes tomorrow a fitting choice for Black Saturday, for the Black Coaches Association to make good its threat to boycott a schedule of college basketball games.


Another Winter Sport: Soothing I.O.C. Egos
After a week of selling social democracy to the International Olympic Committee and its president, the Norwegians settled today for exercising another one of their national talents: brokering peace.
Not everybody apologized, mind you.
But with only two days left until the opening ceremonies, the Lillehammer Olympic Organizing Committee clearly had every intention of avoiding any further ruffling of high-ranking feathers.


Heavy Snows Bring Out the Heavy Equipment


Playa Giron Journal; At the Bay of Pigs, Tourists Storm the Beaches
Not far from the simple wood-frame home of Antinogenes Alvarez, one of this town's few remaining veterans of Cuba's defeat of the American-mounted Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, a fading billboard announces, "Welcome to the Site of the First Defeat of Imperialism in the Western Hemisphere."
"We only had a few arms, maybe 17 or 18 rifles," said the gravelly voiced 54-year-old veteran, who was dressed in an undershirt, olive-green fatigues and polished combat boots.
"The mercenaries thought they had cleared the area by bombarding the shore before they landed, but we took cover and picked as many of them off as we could until the army came."


Bill and Boris: Telephone Tag
Talk about mixed signals.
White House officials struggled today to explain why President Clinton, a fan of technology and all the shortcuts it offers, was unable to reach President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia by telephone at his dacha outside Moscow for two days running.


School Districts Assailed on Travel Expenses
A New York City Council panel yesterday accused local school districts of excessive spending on meals, conferences and out-of-town travel for school board members in such vacation resorts as Las Vegas, Honolulu and St.
Thomas.
In some cases, the report said, the meals and trips came while money for classes was being cut.
But officials of the central Board of Education and the president of one board that was criticized disputed some findings in the report, which was released yesterday by the Council's Finance Committee.
They said the Council had misinterpreted budget records.


Marseilles President Ordered to Step Down
BERNARD TAPIE was charged yesterday in Valenciennes, France, with complicity in a corruption case involving Olympique Marseilles.
He was ordered to step down as team president by April 20.
Judge BERNARD BEFFY also charged Tapie with witness tampering in the bribery scandal, which caused European soccer authorities to ban the team from defending its European Cup title.
Beffy placed Tapie under judicial surveillance, forbid him to contact people involved in the case and ordered him to pay a $43,000 bond. (AP)


Lawyers, Lawyers Everywhere
Lawyers are such easy targets, as cartoonists for The New Yorker magazine have long understood.
Now there is even a whole collection, "The New Yorker Book of Lawyer Cartoons" (Alfred A. Knopf), much of which plays with the theme of the lawyer as life's ubiquitous accouterment: A concert pianist approaches his piano, followed by his attorney.
A businessman refuses to order lunch until his two lawyers review the menu.
And a monarch and a crowd of men in suits are identified as "King Arthur and the Lawyers of the Round Table."
Several of the cartoons present lawyers as a species of their own.
In one, a group of younger attorneys cavort like dolphins in the water, surrounding a yacht, as a man on board notes, "The ones just out of law school are especially frolicsome." And lawyers lie on their bellies, slithering in a swamp, in a cartoon called "Uncle Bernie's Litigator Farm." Then there's the one in which a group marches down the street, connected by plastic rings, a vision of an "attorney six-pack."


London Shop Hired By Coca-Cola Unit
Coca-Cola Great Britain and Ireland has followed in the footsteps of its American parent by hiring a shop not affiliated with its longtime agency company, the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Bob Bertini, a spokesman for the Coca-Cola Company in Atlanta, confirmed reports in British advertising trade publications yesterday that Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London had been hired to handle unspecified special projects.


Bombing Trial Defense Begins Its Case
The World Trade Center bombing trial began hearing witnesses for the defense yesterday with the lawyer for one defendant, Ahmad M. Ajaj, showing the jury how easy it is to obtain booklets and videotapes on bombs and bomb making in this country.
Mr.
Ajaj's lawyer, Austin Campriello, brought a private investigator, William D. Natlo, to the stand and asked him to describe to the jury how he had ordered five booklets, for a total of $86.80, from a Paladin Press catalogue inserted into a copy of Soldier of Fortune magazine.
Mr.
Natlo said he bought the Soldier of Fortune magazine in a Westchester County Barnes and Noble bookstore.


U.S. Says Visit by Japanese Leader Could Turn Into Confrontation
As American and Japanese negotiators worked to try to reach agreement on opening Japanese markets, American officials said today that there was little progress and only a last-minute concession from Japan could prevent the meeting Friday between President Clinton and Prime Minster Morihiro Hosokawa from turning into a confrontation.
The gloomy mood sent the dollar down against the yen, as market speculators anticipated trade sanctions between the world's two richest economies.


Review/Art; A Golden Age New to America
NO jokes, please.
An exhibition called "The Golden Age of Danish Painting" may sound like the one about a cookbook called "Great English Cuisine." But Americans who revere "Your Show of Shows" as a treasure from the Golden Age of Television are in no position to laugh.
Copenhagen in the first half of the 19th century was not Athens under Pericles.
But Ozzie and Harriet aren't exactly Kierkegaard and Hans Christian Andersen.
Kierkegaard and Andersen are familiar names, at least.
Only a handful of Americans have ever heard of the artists who lived in Denmark at the same time and painted what is in the show opening on Sunday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art: artists like Christoffer Wilhelm Eckersberg, Christian Albrecht Jensen, Wilhelm Bendz and Johann Thomas Lundbye.
The exception may be Christen Kobke.
For good reason, Danes sometimes speak of the period as the Age of Kobke and his works are rightly the centerpiece of this exhibition of more than 100 paintings by 17 artists.
Still, outside Denmark even Kobke is no Sid Caesar.


Art in Review
Bruce Nauman Leo Castelli Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Feb. 19
The link between chance and accident is a close one, or so Bruce Nauman seems to suggest in "Falls, Pratfalls and Sleights of Hand," his latest video installation.
Three video projectors cast wall-sized close-ups of hands doing card tricks, making a ball appear and disappear, and twisting a balloon into a poodle; others show a man slipping on a banana peel, and a woman in a folding chair that turns upside down, sending her flying.


At the Park Lane Hotel, A Quest for a Queen
"HAVE you seen Leona yet?" I ask the couple in the elevator.
"No," the woman says brightly, adjusting her mink.
"But that is something to look forward to."


Sprewell's 41 Points Sting Knicks
The Knicks probably wished Latrell Sprewell had left for the All-Star Game a day early.
Dominating the game with a career-high 41 points, Sprewell led the Golden State Warriors (27-20) to a 113-105 victory last night at Madison Square Garden.


Art, Money and the Mayor
Even when New York City is at its bitterest and bleakest, there is one claim New Yorkers can go on making.
We have more museums, more galleries, more dance groups and more concerts than any other city in the United States.
Furthermore, art -- which naysayers love to describe as elitist -- is for this city a cash cow.
As a Port Authority study attested last year, New York's extraordinary cultural concentration means jobs, lots of them, for New Yorkers, and tax revenues for the city and state.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani appears to realize this, which is why he has made a grab for the very attractive offer dangled by leaders in the city's art world.
We will pony up $10 million in private contributions, they said, if you will restore the $4.2 million you want to cut from the arts budget -- and add $5 million more.
The deal is contingent on the state also contributing an additional $5 million.


Home Video
A new CD-ROM disk expands the idea of interactivity, with one man's recollections of a concentration camp and World War II.
Interacting With History
To many people, the much-ballyhooed term "interactivity" suggests little more than rallying the reflexes to play video games.


Germany Relents on Expulsion Of 100,000 Croatian Refugees
Germany has lifted a blanket expulsion order that would have sent 100,000 refugees from the war in the Balkans back to Croatia by the end of April, officials said today.
According to an agreement reached between the interior ministries of the 16 German states and the federal Government in Bonn, only refugees from Croatian territory deemed by the authorities here to be "pacified" will have to go back this year, between May and October.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AKZO N.V.
INC., Arnhem, the Netherlands, said its merger withNobel Industrier A.B. would become effective on Feb. 25.
The new company will be called Akzo Nobel N.V.
FIRSTAR CORP., Milwaukee, agreed to buy the 23-office First Southeast Banking Corporation of Lake Geneva, Wis., for about $55 million in stock.
FOSTER WHEELER ENERGY CORP., Clinton, N.J., has been awarded a contract worth about $185 million for two 300-megawatt anthracite coal-fired steam generators from the China National Technical Import and Export Corp. and the Hubei Electric Power Industry Bureau of China.


Art in Review
John Currin Andrea Rosen Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Feb. 26
John Currin's paintings of women over the last few years -- one series based on photos from high school yearbooks, the other of middle-aged nudes with the faces of television personalities -- have made some people nervous.
After two generations of feminist consciousness-raising, here was work that seemed to have little more on its mind than setting up its subjects for laughs.


Justice, Morris, Milligan and Other Signings of Spring
Randy Milligan became a rare loser yesterday, but David Justice and Jack Morris emerged big winners as baseball's signing season continued its torrid pace.
Milligan, whom Montreal acquired from Cleveland on Dec. 13, lost his arbitration case to the Expos and became only the ninth player to get a pay cut among the 364 players whose salaries have been determined by arbitrators.


Fund Chief Quits Rather Than Move
Rye, N.Y., is a perfectly nice place, Elizabeth Bramwell said, but she'll take Manhattan.
Ms.
Bramwell, a well-known money manager whose photo has adorned advertisements for Gabelli Growth Fund for years, announced yesterday that she was leaving Mario Gabelli's Gabelli Funds Group and striking out on her own.
Her main reason: she does not want to work in Rye, where Mr.
Gabelli is consolidating his offices.


An 11-Year-Old at Large With $1 Million in Cash
Poor Preston Waters, the 11-year-old protagonist of "Blank Check," finds himself in a tight financial squeeze.
His father has no idea how much it costs nowadays for a boy to have fun.
When Preston visits an amusement park with his friends, his father gives him only $2 to spend, while his pals have 10 times that.
In the film's most wistful scene, Preston rides alone on a boring old merry-go-round while his friends take more exciting and expensive spins on a nearby roller coaster.
Preston's fortunes magically change through a sequence of events that could only happen in a children's fantasy movie.
A fleeing crook who accidentally runs over Preston's bicycle hastily writes him a check on which he forgets to fill in the amount.
Preston has his computer type in a million dollars.
When he goes to cash the check, the corrupt bank president, who is in cahoots with the crook, assumes Preston is a courier and stuffs his backpack with a million dollars in cash.


The Next Act in Bosnia
The apparent willingness of the United States and its closest allies to use air strikes in Bosnia is long overdue.
But the strategic purpose of air strikes is at least as important an issue as whether they take place at all.
It will be a travesty if the Western allies, having finally taken action in Bosnia, end the siege of Sarajevo in order to force Bosnian concessions in the deadlocked Geneva negotiations.
Reports yesterday that Washington would take an active role in the talks are ominous.


Farr Tires Of Waiting And Joins Indians
Another hesitation, another loss.
That was the Yankee scenario that unfolded yesterday regarding Steve Farr, who became the second relief pitcher in three days to spurn the Yankees and go elsewhere.
After waiting several days for the Yankees to make him an offer, Farr signed a minor league deal with the Cleveland Indians.
On Tuesday, the Yankees missed out on another free-agent reliever, Gregg Olson, because they waited three days before making the former Baltimore closer an offer after he had auditioned for them at Yankee Stadium.
Olson signed with the Atlanta Braves.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the severity of this winter's weather misstated the date of the coldest temperature recorded in New York City; a reading of minus 15 was recorded on Feb. 9, 1934, not Feb. 9, 1936.
The article also misidentified a diner in New Jersey where a patron, Marshall Robert, talked about the snow.
It was the Princetonian Diner in West Windsor, not the Colonial in Lawrenceville.


Match of Wits Over Jurors For a Senator
On one side of the courtroom: United States Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas, listening raptly and smiling occasionally as jury selection in her ethics trial entered its fourth day today.
Senator Hutchison, a Republican, confers frequently with her lawyers and her jury-selection consultant, Robert B. Hirschhorn, a nationally known expert whose services have been used by the defense in the rape trial of William Kennedy Smith and the trial of Wanda Webb Holloway, a Texas mother accused of plotting to kill the mother of one of her daughter's cheerleading rivals.


Claims Fall For Jobless
The number of Americans filing new claims for state jobless benefits fell last week by 47,000, to 366,000, almost erasing the large jump after the California earthquake, the Government said today.
The sharp drop in first-time claims for the week that ended last Saturday was the largest in more than five months, the Labor Department said.


Clinton Wilding Smith, Dancer and Choreographer, 40
Clinton Wilding Smith, a dancer and choreographer, died last Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 40.
The cause was AIDS, said Marc Janover, his companion.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE ILLUSION," Classic Stage Company, 136 East 13th Street, Greenwich Village.
An adaptation of Pierre Corneille's 1636 comedy about a lawyer who uses a sorcerer to locate his estranged son.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $27.
Information: (212) 677-4210.
Closing Next Weekend
"AS YOU LIKE IT," St.
Clement's Church, 423 West 46th Street, Clinton.
Shakespeare's comedy, directed by Mark Rylance.
Through Feb. 19.
Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
"MIKE KELLEY," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Through Feb. 20.
Hours: Friday through Sunday and Wednesday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursdays, 1 to 8 P.M.
Suggested contribution: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.
"GLOBAL FACE OF AIDS: PHOTOGRAPHS OF WOMEN," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
A photography exhibition by Ann Meredith.
Through Feb. 20.
Hours: Wednesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.


Players and Payers
The President and First Lady have achieved remarkable consensus on a truly revolutionary principle: all Americans must be entitled to adequate medical services without regard to ability to pay or risk of ill health.
Now it's up to Congress to embody that principle in law, a historic opportunity comparable to the enactments of Social Security in 1935 and Medicare in 1965.
Unfortunately, excessive solicitude for existing institutions and interests, and the difficulties of reconciling them with the Clintons' fundamental principles, have made their proposal a bureaucratic and legalistic morass.


Farrakhan Aide Refuses to Apologize for Remarks
A week after being suspended as a top aide to Minister Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam leader, for inflammatory remarks against Jews, Khalid Abdul Muhammad told an enthusiastic university crowd here tonight that he remained loyal to Mr.
Farrakhan.
Mr.
Muhammad made no apologies for his November speech at Kean College in New Jersey, in which he called Jews the "bloodsuckers of the black nation." Instead, he portrayed himself as the victim of forces trying to divide blacks.


S.M. Wolff, 63, Disease Expert, Dies in Boston
Dr.
Sheldon M. Wolff, an authority on infectious diseases who championed the cause of increased Federal research support for AIDS, died on Wednesday at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
Dr.
Wolff, who lived in Wellesley, Mass., was 63.
The cause was complications from a renal malignancy, said his wife, Lila.


WNYC Belongs to New Yorkers, Not to Mayor
To the Editor:
In 1979, having lived in Chicago, Boston, Washington and Providence, R.I., I moved to New York City to stay.
Two weeks later, an old friend from Lyme, Conn., sent a note of condolences for my "incarceration" in New York.
I responded by explaining that in New York there were three radio stations where one could still listen to classical music, one of which was free of the insult of commercials, supported by its listeners.
Lyme could not boast that; I returned my condolences to my friend for being exiled to the suburbs.


Businessman Rejects Race For Governor
Frank G. Zarb, a prominent businessman who had been urged to run for governor by Republican leaders, today became the sixth Republican to consider and then reject a 1994 gubernatorial race, leaving party leaders without direction in their search for a consensus candidate.
Top party officials, including Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and the State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, had appealed to the 58-year-old Mr.
Zarb to run.
He was viewed in Republican circles as a fresh face who could make a businessman's case against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, much like Lewis Lehrman, who almost defeated Mr.
Cuomo in 1982.


New York Hospitals Chief Calls Brooklyn Plan a Giant Failure
Charging a decade of mismanagement and incompetence, the new chairman of New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday that his agency had "completely screwed up" the planned billion-dollar reconstruction of Kings County Hospital, the city's largest public medical center.
In 1984 the agency embarked on what was then a $550 million project to build a new 1.4 million-square-foot public hospital for the largely impoverished neighborhood in central Brooklyn.
"Ten years later," said Luis A. Miranda Jr., chairman of the corporation's board, "after having spent $119 million to date, we have only an administrative building, a food service building, a couple of holes in the ground, a few parking lots and some pictures of past mayors with hard hats claiming they have fulfilled a promise."


George Wallace Rues and Relishes the Past
His thoughts, he says, are more on the next world than this one, but as he lies beneath a brooding cloud of smoke from his Garcia y Vega cigars, George Corley Wallace is still hoping for redemption before death as well as after it.
"They all talking like me," he gasped, pushing out his words in short hoarse breaths.
"Nixon. Reagan. Clinton. Welfare reform. Crime. Big government. Taxes on the middle class. They all saying now what I was saying then."


Art in Review
Doug Prince Witkin Gallery 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Feb. 26
A deep strain of Surrealism runs through Doug Prince's photographs.
As this survey of works from 1973 to 1993 makes clear, most of Mr.
Prince's pictures feature more or less surprising juxtapositions of images, often created by sandwiching pictures together.


U.S. Cotton Prices Increase As Export Rise Is Expected
Cotton prices shot up yesterday ahead of a closely watched Government report that showed more United States cotton would likely be exported this season to make up for shrinking crops overseas.
March cotton jumped 0.68 cent, to 77.04 cents a pound at the New York Cotton Exchange, only slightly below its two-and-a-half-year high of 77.34 cents set Feb. 1.


This Skier Really Makes the Rounds
Before he could ski in the Olympics for small but proud Estonia, Connor O'Brien thought he would at least have to see the place.
He jetted into Tallin, the capital of that Baltic nation, just before he was scheduled to arrive here at the Winter Games earlier this week.


No Headline
"In years later, after having spent $119 million to date, we have only an administrative building, a food service building, a couple of holes in the ground, a few parking lots and some pictures of past mayors with hard hats claiming they have fulfilled a promise." LUIS A. MIRANDA JR., New York hospitals chief, on reconstruction of Kings County Hospital.  [ A1:1. ]


Assiduously Mastering the Art of Snowplowing
In New York City they mostly plow snow with garbage trucks, but in this sprawling Westchester township they treat snow better than that.
New York City's streets are level for the most part and a garbage truck barreling along with a plow hitched to its prow can do a fairly good job shunting snow off to an avenue's side.
In this expanse of Westchester with its steep hills and cul-de-sacs, a garbage truck becomes as graceless as a hippopotamus.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $165 million of debt securities in two parts.
The first part consists of $50 million of notes due in 1996 at 100 to yield 4.81 percent through Dean Witter Reynolds.
The issue is callable beginning November.
The second part consists of $115 million of notes due in 1999 at 100 to yield 5.52 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The issue is callable in one year.
Common *
Cameron Ashley Inc., Dallas, plans to sell two million common shares in an initial public offering.
Robinson-Humphrey is the lead underwriter.
*
Overhead DoorInc.
Orange, Conn., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for the initial public offering of approximately 7.7 million common shares.
Morgan Stanley is the lead underwriter.
*
Zenith Electronics Corp., Glenview, Ill., filed with the S.E.C. for the sale of 2.06 million common shares.
Kidder, Peabody is the lead underwriter.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: Bosnia Talks Show No Gain As Serbs Assail Deadline; Russia Backing Serbs
Russia was maneuvering to undercut NATO's deadline to the Serbian forces besieging Sarajevo today, even though it finds itself virtually without allies on the Security Council and has little chance of success.
Here and in Moscow, President Boris N. Yeltsin's Government called for an urgent meeting of the Security Council to discuss ways of demilitarizing the Bosnian capital and placing it under United Nations administration instead of going along with NATO's demand that the Serbs withdraw their heavy artillery from around the city or face air strikes.


Surgeon Group Backs Canada-Style Health Care
The American College of Surgeons today endorsed a health care system in which the role of private insurance companies would be eliminated and the Government would pay for health care.
The group, which presented its views in a Congressional hearing today, is the first large organization of doctors to support such a single-payer system, the kind of system used in Canada.


Jaguars Warned on Contact With Coach
The National Football League has warned the Jacksonville Jaguars that the team could be violating league rules if it tries to make direct contact with Coach JIMMY JOHNSON of the Dallas Cowboys.
JOE BROWNE, the N.F.L.'s chief spokesman, said yesterday that the league sent a letter to the Jaguars last week after hearing reports linking the team to Johnson.
"It clarified the Johnson contract situation," Browne said.
"It was a reminder that they need Jerry Jones's permission to talk with Jimmy."


Review/Film; Hiding Mother in the Cellar In a Trunk of Fresh Cement
It's hard to imagine that a film about burying your mum in the basement and sleeping with your sister could turn out to be as flat as "The Cement Garden." Andrew Birkin's version of Ian McEwan's dark coming-of-age novel treats its subject with such earnest matter-of-factness that the most unsettling elements turn dull.
Even a handful of exquisitely delicate and difficult performances can't save the movie, which opens today at the Angelika Film Center.
The screen version is a less explicit version of Mr.
McEwan's story about a 15-year-old named Jack (Andrew Robertson) and his claustrophobic family.
Jack's father dies at the start of the tale, leaving him with his sickly mother (Sinead Cusack) and three siblings.


Review/Music; Band, Classical, Seeks Audience. Casual. Fun.
Concertgoers who are used to traditional orchestral performances may find the Queens Symphony Orchestra's appearance at the Colden Center on Sunday afternoon a little quirky.
The conductor, Arthur Fagen, and the musicians and soloists will wear blue jeans rather than concert attire, and during the performance of Copland's "Rodeo," children who are curious about how instruments work will be invited to circle the orchestra to get a closer look at the proceedings.
There will be a Mendelssohn Violin Concerto with an 18-year-old soloist, Jessica Guideri, the winner of the orchestra's concerto competition.
Roberto Sierra, a Puerto Rican composer who is now the composer in residence at the Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra, will be represented by his "Joyous Overture." And Kaity Tong, the Channel 11 news anchor, is to narrate Britten's "Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra."


Corrections
An article in some editions of the Metro Section yesterday, about a group of banks considering an offer to buy the Plaza Hotel, misidentified the bankruptcy proceeding in which the banks acquired their 49 percent interest.
The hotel's debts were restructured in a prepackaged bankruptcy in 1992; Donald J. Trump, the hotel's owner, was not involved in a personal bankruptcy.


Stock Selling Sends Dow Down 36.58
For weeks, investors focused on the prospects for robust corporate earnings and bid up the market.
But yesterday the nation's largest company, General Motors, reported earnings that were not quite strong enough to suit Wall Street and the high-strung market took a tumble.
"It shows how trigger-happy we've become," said Tracy G. Herrick, chief investment strategist for Jefferies &amp; Company, after the Dow Jones indistrial average fell more than 36 points.


Macy Asks Court for Time
As expected, R. H. Macy &amp; Company has asked the United States Bankruptcy Court to extend its exclusive right to file a plan of reorganization until Sept. 15.
A spokesman cautioned later, however, that there was no way of predicting for sure that a plan would be completed by then.


U.S. Officials Wearying of Harding Fight
With the Winter Games opening on Saturday, some senior United States Olympic Committee officials are saying it may be less damaging to the Olympics to allow Tonya Harding to skate rather than to continue deliberating her status as a member of the United States team.
That attitude has gained significant momentum this week as a result of a request by the Olympic committee that Harding appear at a hearing Tuesday in Oslo to answer charges that question her conduct surrounding the assault last month of Nancy Kerrigan.
Harding has denied any involvement in the plot to harm her rival but has admitted she delayed telling authorities after she learned who was involved.


Bud Wilkinson, 77, Who Guided Oklahoma Championship Teams
Bud Wilkinson, the football coach whose University of Oklahoma teams won three national championships in the 1950's and a record 47 consecutive games during a five-season span, died on Wednesday at his home in St.
Louis.
He was 77.
Mr.
Wilkinson died of congestive heart failure after recent surgery to repair a heart defect.
He had suffered a series of strokes; the last one, in November, destroyed much of his vision.


Abroad at Home; A Fragile Hope
The NATO ultimatum to Serbian forces around Sarajevo could be, at long last, a first step toward ending the bloodiest aggression in Europe in 50 years.
Or it could be an empty gesture by politicians trying only to escape embarrassment.
On the encouraging side, the allies seem to be serious about using air strikes if the Serbian aggressors resume shelling civilians in Sarajevo or fail to move their heavy weapons back 12 miles in the next 10 days.
Previous NATO threats have been jokes, and quickly seen as such by the Serbs.


Yount, Brewer Who Made Milwaukee Famous, Decides to Retire
Robin Yount, who began his major league career at the age of 18, decided yesterday to end that quiet but glamorous career after 20 seasons -- all with Milwaukee.
His retirement, which the Brewers will announce officially today, comes on the heels of the retirement of George Brett, leaving Dave Winfield as the only active player in the elite 3,000-hit circle.
The Brewers scheduled a news conference for this morning, saying that their team leader would announce his retirement at that time.
The statement ended months of waiting in Milwaukee for the decision of the 38-year-old shortstop turned center fielder.


The Sentence Is Church, And Defendant Approves
Saying he is distressed that "people have gotten away from the Lord," a senior Federal judge here has ordered a woman and her four children to attend church services each Sunday for a year as part of a probation agreement in a drug case against her.
And she doesn't mind at all.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.15
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.23
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.40
3.37
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.92
5.92
6.36
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.43
6.41
7.15
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.25
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.52
6.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


London Shop Hired By Coca-Cola Unit
Coca-Cola Great Britain and Ireland has followed in the footsteps of its American parent by hiring a shop not affiliated with its longtime agency company, the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Bob Bertini, a spokesman for the Coca-Cola Company in Atlanta, confirmed reports in British advertising trade publications yesterday that Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London had been hired to handle unspecified special projects.


Path Is Cleared for Toronto to Rejoin N.B.A.
The National Basketball Association is returning to Canada after a half-century.
The Ontario Government and the N.B.A. announced today an agreement clearing the way for Toronto to become the league's 28th team in the 1995-96 season, and Vancouver is taking steps that could make it No. 29.
Toronto was in the N.B.A. in the 1940's but dropped out because of flagging fan support.
The city is bigger and richer today and is already going great guns with baseball and hockey.


De Beers Assisted U.S. in World War II
To the Editor:
Readers of your Feb. 1 review of Frontline's "Diamond Empire" on public television should be aware of at least some of the facts.


Robert Schoenfein, Advertising Executive, 56
Robert Schoenfein, executive vice president of Grey Advertising, died on Tuesday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 56.
His family said the cause was chronic lymphocytic leukemia.


Ethics on Ice
To the Editor:
"Let Her Skate" (editorial, Jan. 30) suggests that if Tonya Harding skates in the Olympics, earns a medal and is later found guilty, she could be stripped of her honor by the Olympic authorities.
But how would you make up to the other competitors their permanently lost chance to win at the Olympics and receive the medal and the accolades?
Even if the medal were awarded to the runner-up, she would be denied the true moment of victory.
Your solution would be fair only to Ms.
Harding, not the others.
KIVE WEINSTEIN  Metuchen, N.J., Jan. 30, 1994


Some Investors In the Know
Although Electronic Arts and Broderbund Software waited until the market closed on Wednesday to announce their merger, some investors apparently knew about the deal ahead of time.
During Wednesday's Nasdaq trading, Broderbund's stock rose steadily all day, closing at $41.25, up $3.75, on unusually heavy volume of one million shares.


U.S. TERMED READY TO PRESS BOSNIANS TO ACCEPT DIVISION
After refusing for a year to take part in negotiations on the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Clinton Administration has switched signals, telling its European allies that it will press the Bosnian Government to accept a peace plan that partitions the country along ethnic lines, senior American and European officials said today.
In another shift, the United States indicated a willingness to lift sanctions against Serbia on a step-by-step basis.
The sanctions would be eased "in response to cooperation at the bargaining table," a senior Administration official said.
"That's the carrot if they make peace."


Surprise Storm Turns Much of South Into Sheet of Ice
An unexpectedly severe storm coated much of the South with ice yesterday, paralyzing entire cities, cutting off electric power to more than 800,000 people and turning roads into dangerous obstacle courses from Texas to the Carolinas.
Officials warned that as many as 500,000 people could be without power for days.
On the heels of the storm, warm air brought drenching rains to some areas and the threat of flooding that could compound the misery left by the ice.


Cortines Says Board Payroll Was Misstated
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that the New York City Board of Education had routinely understated the number of managers in its central offices, and that the headquarters staff was nearly double the 3,500 listed by the board in the past.
Mr.
Cortines, who has been battling with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani over the Mayor's demands that he trim the board's bureaucracy, said that he provided the new figures as a way of building trust with parents, teachers and City Hall, so that ultimately more money would be spent on classrooms.


White Rightists Vow To Boycott and Defy South African Vote
After months of flirting with compromise, white separatists vowed today to defy South Africa's first free elections, resisting majority rule with civil disobedience and, as one leader put it, "a little bit of violence."
The decision by a right-wing alliance called the Afrikaner Volksfront, or People's Front, was a signal many South Africans fear could set off an escalating campaign of sabotage and terrorism.


Review/Film; A Mystery of Adolescence, Circa 1974
From Elton John singing "Bennie and the Jets," to mood rings, to Richard Nixon declaring, "The President has nothing to hide," Howard Zieff's film "My Girl 2" is awash in 1970's nostalgia.
It is a measure of this family comedy's reflective good mood that even the embattled President's televised grimace seems more forlorn than forbidding.
"My Girl 2" is the appealingly sentimental sequel to one of the bigger hits of the 1991 holiday season.
That movie followed the growing pains of Vada Sultenfuss (Anna Chlumsky), a smart, attractive Pennsylvania schoolgirl whose best friend (Macaulay Culkin) dies from bee stings in a freak accident.


Sports of The Times; The Games, The Splendor, The Horror
FROM the mountain site of the Olympic Stadium, where the curved stands and the colorful flags are in order for the opening ceremony of the 1994 Winter Games tomorrow, one can gaze out on the town below.
On a cold, clear afternoon the scene is resplendent in Nordic beauty, in serenity, in peace.
Everything is cloaked in the white of snow: all the houses, the shops, the cars and buses, and the people -- the people in their parkas, boots and funny snow hats going about their daily tasks.


A.T.&amp; T. to Cut Jobs
A.T.&amp; T. plans to eliminate as many as 15,000 jobs, or 15 percent of the work force in its core long-distance business, over the next two years.
The cutbacks were larger than expected and they come as A.T.&amp; T., the biggest long-distance carrier, continues to lose market share to MCI and Sprint in an industry that is exploiting new technologies to reduce costs and capture customers.
Business Day, page D1.


Market Place; Investors in California S. &amp; L.'s May Face Their Own Aftershock
ANALYSTS are cautioning that investors in California savings and loan associations need to prepare for a strong aftershock of their own after the Northridge earthquake.
The problem for the S.&amp; L.'s, however, is not damaged homes but a damaged economy.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Senator's assertion that the United States exported potentially lethal biological materials to Iraq misidentified the organisms involved.
They were four kinds of bacteria and a fungus, not viruses.


Electronic Arts' Move Reflects Industry Trend
Electronic Arts' planned acquisition of Broderbund Software in a $400 million stock swap, announced late Wednesday, reflects an industry trend likely to influence the balance of power in the emerging interactive television business.
Indeed, if the merger succeeds, analysts and industry executives said today that the two companies might be able to forge one of the dominant production companies of the new digital age.


Putting Force Behind Talk
NATO's threat to use air strikes to stop the "strangulation" of Sarajevo has stood since August.
But with its ultimatum on Wednesday, which gave Serbian forces 10 days to withdraw their heavy weapons from around the Bosnian capital or face NATO bombing, all members of the alliance now seem ready, for the first time, to make good on the threat if the Serbs disregard it.
"NATO has finally made a credible threat to use bombs to stop the violence in Sarajevo," one German official in Chancellor Helmut Kohl's office said.
The remark spoke volumes about the earlier policy and about the shift that has taken place on both sides of the Atlantic about the need for United States involvement.


Commission Meets on Costs of U.S. Benefits


A Building With Cracks Is Evacuated
Seventy-five families were evacuated from a five-story brick apartment building in the Bronx last night after it suddenly began shaking and large cracks appeared in the rear wall, the authorities said.
Firefighters responded to calls from residents that the building was moving, said Robert Broderick, a spokesman for the Fire Department.
He said the firefighters found many cracks in the rear wall, some so large that they could see through them into apartments from the outside.
He said the rear wall was so severely bowed that it was pulling away from the first and second floors of the building, on the Grand Concourse at 165th Street.


Marchant: A Name to Watch on No-Name Hockey Team
Todd Marchant's rise from the nervous, wide-eyed 19-year-old who joined the United States hockey team last summer to its top point-producer, at once indicates his own capacity for change and the Americans' lack of a top gun.
Now, Marchant thinks of himself -- and welcomes the attention -- as the player his teammates look to.


Zimmerman Adds 3 Mitsubishi Groups
Zimmerman &amp; Partners Advertising in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said yesterday that it had been awarded the accounts of three additional Mitsubishi dealers associations, bringing the total it handles to eight, with combined billings estimated at $20.2 million.
Jordan Zimmerman, the chairman and president of Zimmerman, said his agency had been awarded the accounts of dealer groups in San Francisco, metropolitan Washington and North and South Carolina.
The agency already handles dealer groups in markets including Dade and Broward counties in Florida and the New York-New Jersey area.
The assignments follow a decision by Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America to allow its local dealer groups to select their own agencies.


New England in Shock After 3 Police Slayings
Thousands of white-gloved police officers, their badges wrapped in black ribbons, lined the slush-covered street outside the Charles Street A.M.E.
Church here today and paid their respects to Berisford Wayne Anderson, the third New England policeman to be shot and killed in the last week.
The series of deaths began Feb. 1 when Chief Robert J. Mortell, who headed the five-member Paxton police force in central Massachusetts, was shot dead as he chased three suspected burglars through the woods.
Two days later, Patrolman Steven M. Shaw was shot by a robbery suspect in Providence, R.I., becoming that city's first officer to be killed in the line of duty in 65 years.


Zimmerman Adds 3 Mitsubishi Groups
Zimmerman &amp; Partners Advertising in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said yesterday that it had been awarded the accounts of three additional Mitsubishi dealers associations, bringing the total it handles to eight, with combined billings estimated at $20.2 million.
Jordan Zimmerman, the chairman and president of Zimmerman, said his agency had been awarded the accounts of dealer groups in San Francisco, metropolitan Washington and North and South Carolina.
The agency already handles dealer groups in markets including Dade and Broward counties in Florida and the New York-New Jersey area.
The assignments follow a decision by Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America to allow its local dealer groups to select their own agencies.


Corrections
A headline on Wednesday about Pennsylvania's law limiting abortions mischaracterized the action by Justice David H. Souter that allowed the law to take effect.
He refused a request to issue a stay.
He did not himself remove any existing barrier to the law.


Nobody Shoots A Lame Duck
Four months ago Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. said he would roar through his last year in office like "something coming out of Jurassic Park." Preconceptions about lame ducks would be shattered, he said, in the same way that he had earlier demolished notions about the ineffectiveness of third-party governors.
But from the opening smack of the gavel in the General Assembly on Wednesday, it was clear that the Governor has already been rendered something of a dinosaur in the minds of many lawmakers.


Solo Sailor Plans to Use Plante's Coyote
DAVID SCULLY, a solo sailor from Chicago who now lives in France, announced yesterday that he plans to sail the boat Coyote in the next BOC challenge, which begins in September.
The 36-year-old Scully revealed his plans at a BOC press conference at Sail Expo in Atlantic City.
Coyote is the 60-foot sailboat that capsized in October 1992 on its trans-Atlantic voyage from New York to France.
Its skipper, Mike Plante, was lost at sea in the incident.
The boat was recovered two months later from the Atlantic Ocean.
"Obviously, I was quite moved," said RODGER MARTIN, Coyote's designer, about Scully's plans.


Review/Theater; La Guardia Administration In a Dramatic Comeback
One of the happy lessons to be learned from the stirring concert revival of "Fiorello!" at City Center is that a vintage Broadway show can have almost as much vitality when presented in digest form as when it is given a full-dress stage production.
The 1959 Jerry Bock-Sheldon Harnick musical, which had the first of four concert performances on Wednesday evening, is a ripe candidate for such a revival, especially right now.
The show follows the early political career of Fiorello H. La Guardia, one of New York City's most popular mayors, who was elected in 1933 to succeed the corrupt administration of James J. Walker.
La Guardia, who is played by Jerry Zaks, with an appropriately jutting chin, was renowned for his peppery style and cocky attitude.


Florida Opens New Front in Fight on Immigrant Policy
Arguing that the Federal Government should bear the costs of illegal immigration, the State of Florida has begun denying foster care to immigrant children who are in the state illegally.
Since the Mariel boatlift of 1980, Florida, recently joined by California, Texas and New York, has been fighting with the Government over the cost of welfare, education, health care, housing and prison for immigrants.
Estimating that Florida spends at least $739 million a year on such services to immigrants and political refugees, Gov.
Lawton Chiles announced in late December that he was suing the Government to recoup those costs and reduce the flow of illegal immigrants.


Zimmerman Adds 3 Mitsubishi Groups
Zimmerman &amp; Partners Advertising in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said yesterday that it had been awarded the accounts of three additional Mitsubishi dealers associations, bringing the total it handles to eight, with combined billings estimated at $20.2 million.
Jordan Zimmerman, the chairman and president of Zimmerman, said his agency had been awarded the accounts of dealer groups in San Francisco, metropolitan Washington and North and South Carolina.
The agency already handles dealer groups in markets including Dade and Broward counties in Florida and the New York-New Jersey area.
The assignments follow a decision by Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America to allow its local dealer groups to select their own agencies.


Sounds Around Town
Sharp and Swinging
Ralph Moore, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440 or 473-9700.
Mr.
Moore, a smooth tenor saxophonist who has a way with understatement, is backed by a band that includes Renee Rosnes on piano, Larry Grenadier on bass and Billy Drummond on drums.
It is much of the band that recently backed J. J. Johnson, and the musicians know how to balance sharp arrangements with swinging improvisations.
Ms.
Rosnes is becoming a more imposing soloist every time out.
The drummer Al Foster will show up tomorrow night.
Shows tonight through tomorrow night are at 10, midnightand 2 A.M.
There is a $15 cover and an $8 minimum.
Complicated Sound
Steve Coleman, Zanzibar, 73 Eighth Avenue, near 13th Street, West Village, (212) 924-9755.
Now that the M-Base collective has pretty much left the jazz public's consciousness, it's time for a re-evaluation of Mr.
Coleman.
He's a strikingly original improviser who has figured out how to complicate the basic grooves of funk and soul.
It's instrumental pop music, but it sure isn't Kenny G. Nor is it James Moody.
It's fascinating, vital music, and Mr.
Coleman is coming off his best album yet ("Tao of Mad Fat," on Novus).
Shows tonight and tomorrow at 10 and midnight and on Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
There is a $12 cover tonight and tomorrow and a $10 cover on Sunday and a $10 minimum for all shows.
Concert of Love
"Concierto del Amor," Madison Square Garden, (212) 925-4885.
It's a love fest, a heap of salseros there to sing about love and other things for Valentine's Day.
Jerry Rivera, Gilberto Santa Rosa, Frankie Ruiz, Johnny Rivera and Ray Ruiz will get together and pour out their emotions, tell the audience to dance, and supply the burning salsa.
The show is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $45, $40, $35 and $25.


Diner's Journal
A Secret Gets Out
"I always send out-of-town visitors here," the woman next to me was saying to her friend.
They were sitting in the basement of the Japanese department store Takashimaya.
"I think it is one of the best-kept secrets in the city." She poured tea out of an elegant pot and stirred it with a stick of rock sugar.


Top Hunter of Nazis Will Direct a Group Lobbying for Israel
Neal M. Sher, director of the Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations, today was named executive director of the American Israeli Public Affairs Committee, the leading pro-Israel lobbying group.
Mr.
Sher has worked at the Office of Special Investigations since it was set up in 1979 and has been its director since 1983.
As the Government's top Nazi hunter for the last decade, Mr.
Sher deported 36 suspected war criminals and was involved in the investigations of hundreds of others.


CHRONICLE
The "Late Show With DAVID LETTERMAN" on CBS television, which recently featured Vice President Al Gore, has landed an even bigger White House attraction: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON.
"I've been told that she's got a great sense of humor," said Daniel Kellison, the producer who booked her.
"That's part of the reason that we've been pursuing her even more aggressively than her husband. Or at least, as aggressively."


Clinton Meets Florida State Players
President CLINTON played host to the Florida State football team yesterday at the White House.
"You believed in yourselves and stayed together as a team and you got the job done," Clinton told the Seminoles in the East Room, while saluting their 12-1 season record and top national ranking. (AP)


Sounds Around Town
Trio at the Tavern
Benny Green Trio, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 67th Street, (212) 873-4111.
After more than a year as the pianist in Ray Brown's trio, Benny Green has arrived in New York with his own trio, which he has been leading on a nationwide tour that began in San Diego on Jan. 6.
Through his close association with Mr.
Brown, who was Oscar Peterson's bassist in the 1950's, Mr.
Green has gained a heightened appreciation of Mr.
Peterson's work as a pianist; and, at Mr.
Brown's insistence, he has been finding his own pianistic voice.
Mr.
Green has also been simplifying the arrangements for bass and drums to give his bassist, Ed Howard, and drummer, Kenny Washington, more breathing room.
The trio plays tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11, and on Sunday at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.
The music charge is $17.50 tonight and tomorrow, $12.50 on Sunday.
There is no minimum.


Panthers Develop Roots That Reach New York
When National Hockey League general managers met in Florida earlier this week, one of their major complaints was the increased use of holding and other interference tactics used by mediocre teams to nullify the greater speed and skill of more talented teams.
The host state of this meeting was appropriate because the Miami-based Florida Panthers have been accused of using this clutch-and-grab style to maximum effect in their inaugural season.


Male, Educated and Falling Behind
For the first time since World War II, college-educated men in their late 40's and early 50's -- normally the prime earning years -- are suffering a steep decline in wages, finally getting caught in the downward mobility that has hit most other groups of male workers.
This is the generation that finished four years of college in the prosperous 1960's and entered corporate jobs confident of steady promotions and rising incomes into their mid-50's.
Instead, those promotions and rising incomes have stopped.
Much anecdotal evidence has documented this setback, particularly stories of middle-aged men forced out of managerial jobs and into lower-paid work, or unemployment.
But only now is the extent of the damage to incomes showing up in Government data.


Coleman Will Stick To All-Star Business
This should be a happy time for Willis Reed.
Four of the players he has drafted in his five seasons as general manager of the Nets are on their way to the National Basketball Association All-Star weekend in Minneapolis.
But one of them, Derrick Coleman, is still unsigned.
And there's the rub.
"I'd rather not say where the negotiations are now, because I've put my foot in my mouth many times on this deal," Reed said after New Jersey's 106-95 victory over Cleveland in the Meadowlands on Wednesday night brought the Nets record to 22-24 at the All-Star break.
"I thought we had a deal at one time, so we're still trying to get him signed."


INSIDE
Division on Harding Case
With the Tonya Harding case becoming a distraction, some Olympic officials think it may be less damaging to allow her to skate than to continue to review her status.
Page B9.
Cancer Researcher Dies
Dr.
Howard M. Temin, who won a Nobel Prize for work in molecular biology that later led to the discovery of the AIDS virus, died at 59.
Page B7.
Term-Limit Law Rejected
A Federal judge in Seattle threw out a voter-approved Washington State law that would have limited terms for members of Congress.
Page A20.


Givenchy Wins Damages in Suit
A California court has ordered C &amp; C Beauty Sales Inc., a Miami-based importer, to pay Parfums Givenchy Inc. about $112,000 in damages for copyright infringement caused when it sold Givenchy's Amarige perfume without the company's permission.
Last year, Parfums Givenchy, the United States arm of the French fragrance and cosmetics company, pioneered the use of copyright law to protect brand-name luxury products from distribution in discount stores and other unauthorized outlets, a practice called diversion.
It copyrighted the opulent box in which Amarige is packaged and began suing distributors and retailers for, in effect, selling the box without Givenchy's permission.


For Municipal Tenants, a Struggle to Stay Warm
Through one of the harshest winters in years, Carmen Robles and her family have taken only the barest comfort that they live in a New York City-owned apartment.
When they wake in the morning, ice often covers part of their living room wall, and the radiators are cold to the touch.
The temperature in the family's apartment has dropped as low as the 20's, and Mrs.
Robles said she has had to keep her children home from school several times when they were just too cold to get out of bed.


F.D.I.C. Choice Is Endorsed
The Senate Banking Committee endorsed the nomination today of Ricki R. Tigert, a Washington banking lawyer, to lead the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the agency that insures deposits at banks and savings and loan associations.
The vote was 16 to 1.
Senator Lauch Faircloth, a Republican from North Carolina, cast the only dissenting vote.
He said that because the F.D.I.C. would be involved in the investigation of the Whitewater real estate venture in Arkansas, he viewed it as a conflict of interest for Ms.
Tigert, a close friend of President Clinton, to lead the agency.


Israel-P.L.O. Agreement Provides Shared Duties at Border Crossings
The new security agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization calls for shared responsibility at border crossings into the occupied territories, with each side having its own station, police force, flag and right to stop and search suspicious travelers.
But a text of the accord made public by Israel today makes it clear that the Israelis will be the senior partner.
They will have the final say on who may enter the territories when self-rule gets going there, starting in Jericho and the Gaza Strip.


Operas About Animals
The American Chamber Opera Company is to present "A Cat-Bird Suite," a pair of chamber operas about animals, tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the Lillie Devereaux Blake School, Madison Avenue at 81st Street.
The first opera, "A Water Bird Talk," by Dominick Argento, features Allan Roberts, baritone, as a harried lecturer trying to speak on the habits of waterfowl but instead lapsing into an account of his disastrous marriage.
The second is the New York premiere of "Tobermory," the first of a trilogy by Jorge Martin, the company's musical director, based on short stories by Saki.
"Tobermory" is about the havoc wrought on a country-house party by the arrival of a talking cat.
Both operas are to be conducted by Douglas Anderson and are to be repeated next weekend.
Tickets are $15; $10 for students and seniors.
Information: (212) 781-0857.


Art in Review
Dorothea Rockburne Andre Emmerich Gallery 41 East 57th Street Manhattan Through Feb. 26
Less is more for Dorothea Rockburne.
When she reduces her materials to next to nothing, her art loses much of its belabored brittleness and starts to breathe a bit.
As with her last exhibition, Ms.
Rockburne is once more working directly on the wall, her preferred surface during her days as an early 1970's Conceptual artist.
Her new large-scale abstractions have luminous colors and long, looping whiplash lines, which extend edge to edge and frequently around corners.
The show's title, "Painting From Nature," is full of cosmic import, and in fact it seems that Ms.
Rockburne wants her walls to evaporate altogether, revealing an otherworldly light and space beyond this mortal coil.


Adam Kaufman, 91, A Retired Economist With United Nations
Adam Kaufman, a Polish emigre and retired economist who was with the United Nations and the National Bureau of Economic Research, died on Wednesday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 91.
The cause of death was heart failure, said his son, Michael T. Kaufman.


TRUCE IN SARAJEVO BEGINS SMOOTHLY
A United Nations-brokered cease-fire began smoothly on Thursday, but the unusual quiet it brought to this battered, besieged city was punctured by a burst of artillery and machine-gun fire late Thursday night.
Intense shooting, including three loud explosions that sounded like artillery shells as well as sustained bursts of heavy machine-gun fire, began at 11:30 P.M. and lasted about 10 minutes.
Scattered explosions continued past midnight.
Reporters in the Holiday Inn, in the city center, could see mortar shells exploding close to the Parliament building nearby.


London Shop Hired By Coca-Cola Unit
Coca-Cola Great Britain and Ireland has followed in the footsteps of its American parent by hiring a shop not affiliated with its longtime agency company, the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Bob Bertini, a spokesman for the Coca-Cola Company in Atlanta, confirmed reports in British advertising trade publications yesterday that Bartle Bogle Hegarty in London had been hired to handle unspecified special projects.


Olympic Torch Bearer Suffers Major Flameout
The opening ceremonies of the Winter Olympics will feature reindeer, folk dancers, a children's choir and, unfortunately for Ole Gunnar Fidjestol, a second-string ski jumper.
Fidjestol, 32, crashed during practice today, suffering a mild concussion and a strained shoulder that will keep him from soaring through the air with the Olympic torch in hand on Saturday.


Russian Allegations Against Latvia Upheld
To the Editor:
William Safire reacts incredulously in "Kozyrev and Talbott" (column, Jan. 27) to allegations by Andrei Kozyrev, the Russian Foreign Minister, of discrimination against retired Soviet military personnel in Latvia.
While the Russian Government has often leveled patently untrue charges like "ethnic cleansing" and "apartheid" against Estonia and Latvia, in this case Mr.
Kozyrev is correct.


G.M. Posts $2.47 Billion Profit for '93
With demand for cars and trucks growing as its own costs shrink, the General Motors Corporation today reported profits of $2.47 billion for 1993.
The company's reviving North American operations posted their first profitable quarter since 1989.
For the three months that ended in December, G.M. said it earned $1.18 billion, or $1.28 a share of common stock.
In the quarter a year earlier, G.M. had a $651.8 million net loss.
For the quarter, sales totaled $37.27 billion, up from $35.55 billion in 1992.


Dr. H.M. Temin, 59, Cancer Research Laureate, Die
Dr.
Howard M. Temin, a cancer researcher who won the Nobel Prize for his role in discovering an enzyme that overturned a central tenet of molecular biology, died of lung cancer Wednesday at his home in Madison, Wis.
He was 59.
The enzyme, reverse transcriptase, later played a crucial role in identifying the AIDS virus.
It also became the underpinning of much of the biotechnology industry and was crucial to the genetic engineering that has produced drugs like human insulin and tpa, a clot-dissolving agent that stops heart attacks in progress.


Capital Holding
Recently investors have been hungrily pouncing on earnings, so the Capital Holding Corporation, a consumer-loan company based in Louisville, Ky., was careful to release its earnings after the market closed on Wednesday.
The financial results, while a gain, disappointed Wall Street and the consequences yesterday were predictable.
The stock price fell and several securities firms downgraded their assessments of the company.


Pippen and Kerr Lead Chicago Past Milwaukee
Bulls 97, Bucks 80
Scottie Pippen scored 23 points and Steve Kerr had 15, including 10 in the fourth quarter, as the visiting Chicago Bulls beat the Milwaukee Bucks, 97-80, last night.
Todd Day scored a season-high 26 points for the Bucks in his second straight start since coming off the bench for 33 consecutive games.


Hughes Medical Institute Chooses 44 More Researchers to Support
The Howard Hughes Medical Institute today announced a major expansion by selecting 44 new biomedical researchers to sponsor, paying for their laboratories and staffs.
The 44 researchers who will receive the appointments join 225 who are already getting support from the institute, one of the nation's largest private supporters of biomedical research.





A Weekend Of This Thing Called Love
Valentine's Day is Monday, but the celebrations start today and continue through this weekend.
Here is a sampling of events in New York City.
Today  "LITERARY LOVERS OF GREENWICH VILLAGE," a walking tour that explores the romances of neighborhood writers.
Sponsored by Greenwich Village Literary Tours.
Meet at the arch in Washington Square at 1 P.M.; also tomorrow and Sunday, same time.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 924-0239.
"HOW MUCH DO I LOVE THEE? LET ME SING AND DANCE THE WAYS," Chicago City Limits, Jan Hus Playhouse, 351 East 74th Street, Manhattan.
The comedy improvisational group will create musical valentines based on the love lives of audience members. 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Also tomorrow at 8 and 10:30 P.M. and Monday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets, $15 today and tomorrow; $10 on Monday.
Information: (212) 772-8707.
Tomorrow  "VALENTINE-MAKING WORKSHOP," New York Botanical Garden, Southern Parkway and 200th Street, the Bronx.
A four-hour family workshop, beginning 11 A.M.
Free with garden admission which is $3; $2 for students, children and the elderly.
Also Sunday, same time.
Information: (718) 817-8705.
Sunday "WHAT IS THIS THING CALLED LOVE?" Davis Hall, City College of New York, West 135th Street and Convent Avenue, Hamilton Heights.
A program of poetry readings and music, part of the New Faces/New Voices/New Visions series. 3 P.M.
Admission: $16.
Information: (212) 650-7100.
"AN ODE TO ST. VALENTINE," the Old Merchant's House, 29 East Fourth Street, East Village.
Love poetry set to music and performed by Ed Romanoff and Andrea Weber, guitarists and singers. 2 P.M.
Admission: $6.
Information: (212) 777-1089.
Monday "VALENTINE'S DAY READING," St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village.
Poems about love read by more than 50 poets, performers and musicians.
Sponsored by the Poetry Project. 7 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
"WEDDINGS ATOP THE EMPIRE STATE BUILDING," 34th Street and Fifth Avenue.
A wedding chapel will be constructed on the 80th floor, with a justice of the peace waiting to marry couples who come ready with their New York State marriage licenses.
Sponsored by the 34th Street Partnership. 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Appointments suggested: (212) 736-3100.
"LOVE AND HARD TIMES," Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
A 1930's literary collage featuring works by writers like John Steinbeck, Pearl S. Buck and Dashiell Hammett read by Estelle Parsons, Jonathan Hadary, Vinie Burrows and Ivy Austin. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10 and $15.
Information: (212) 840-2824.


Who Is Running Our Korea Policy?
The Clinton Administration insists it will never subcontract its foreign policy to any international institution.
Yet it is doing just that in its nuclear diplomacy with North Korea.
It is letting the International Atomic Energy Agency decide how to carry out a deal Washington reached with Pyongyang.
By changing the terms of that deal, the I.A.E.A. could embroil the U.S. in a dangerous confrontation on the Korean Peninsula.
The I.A.E.A. is supposed to be negotiating detailed arrangements for inspections at all North Korea's declared nuclear sites.
These inspections are designed to insure that nuclear safeguards are in place.
More thorough regular inspections, which could impede the diversion of nuclear material to bomb-making, would not resume until the U.S. holds a new round of high-level talks with the North.
Inspections of suspected nuclear waste sites to determine whether such diversion has already occurred have yet to be negotiated.


For Children
Taking your children to workshops is a shrewd way to get through winter days.
Children can be creative and parents can sit back or dive in, too.
Drop-in classes are often inexpensive and the participants take something home.
Most institutions -- from the Children's Museum of Manhattan to the New York Transit Museum -- offer weekend workshops.
Here is a sampling (plus an outdoor alternative).
Papermaking Arts Connection 120 West 46th Street Manhattan (212) 302-7433 Recommended ages: 5 and up Tomorrow
Papermaking is to this generation of children what tie-dying was to an earlier one.
It's being made everywhere by everyone, whether from kits or in workshops.
"There's a big surge for it in education," said Helen Hiebert, who leads this workshop with Ken Polinskie.
Both are from the Dieu Donne Papermill's Hands Outreach Program, a 17-year-old nonprofit group that sponsors papermaking workshops and sells handmade paper through its studio in SoHo.
"Recycling is a big part of it," Ms.
Hiebert added.
In a current project at Public School 234 in TriBeCa, students are growing plants like flax to use in papermaking.


Bosnia Talks Show No Gain As Serbs Assail Deadline
Peace talks among the three warring factions in Bosnia resumed here today but made no progress as leaders of the Bosnian Serbs expressed indignation at NATO's decision to set a deadline for the withdrawal of their artillery ringing Sarajevo.
"Threats by the Western alliance have always had a negative effect, and they did again today," said the Bosnian Serbs' leader, Radovan Karadzic.
"Until this threat was made, the Muslims seemed ready to agree to a separate peace for Sarajevo. Now they are hoping for armed intervention, for Western armed intervention, so they say they will agree to nothing less than an overall settlement."


Taro Leaves Death Row, Jail, And New Jersey Soil, for Good
Taro, New Jersey's celebrated death-row dog, walked out of the Bergen County Jail Annex here this afternoon, alive -- and banished forever from the state.
The 110-pound Akita wagged its tail vigorously but exhibited no other signs or sounds of glee as a sheriff's guard escorted it by leash out a rear exit and into a waiting sedan belonging to the K-9 corps of the County Sheriff, Jack Terhune.
As a throng of reporters recorded the event, Taro was driven to a new home and new owners in Westchester County.


Prohibition, for Drugs as for Alcohol, Only Fails; Market Forces at Work
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, declaring that community policing has failed to control drug trafficking in New York City, plans to redirect police efforts from preventive community involvement to drug arrests.
These actions are premature and unwarranted.
Recent trends suggest that the extent of drug problems is unrelated to the intensity of drug enforcement.
Felony drug arrests reached their highest levels in 1989 (49,579) and declined 18 percent (to 40,654) by 1992.


For a Struggling Purtzer It's Swing Time Again
Among touring golf professionals, being called a great ball striker is high praise, and it is a compliment that Tom Purtzer has heard throughout his career.
Two years ago in a poll of PGA players published in The New York Times, Purtzer was voted the player with the best swing in golf.
Then, like an opera singer waking up without a voice, Purtzer suddenly lost the sweet swing.
He was working out on an exercise machine, twisted the wrong way and injured his back.
To avoid pain while swinging, he changed his motion.
The tiny, almost imperceptible flaw that crept into his swing changed one of the finest, purest ball strikers in golf into a confused and uncertain man who often had no idea where the ball was going when he stepped up to hit a shot. 'Like Watching a Pro-Am'
"I was hitting shots I had never hit before," said Purtzer, 42 years old, who today shot a round of 64, seven under par, two shots better than Chip Beck and Jesper Parnevik and three better than a group that included Fred Couples, Corey Pavin, Jay Delsing, Nolan Henke and David Frost in the first round of the Nissan Los Angeles Open.
"In laymen's terms, it was like watching a pro-am."


Court Upholds Murder Charge if Death Follows a Lesser Plea
Upholding a major exception to New York State's double jeopardy law, the state's highest court ruled today that a person who has pleaded guilty to attempted murder may be charged with murder if the victim later dies.
The 5-to-0 decision by the State Court of Appeals clarifies what has become known as the "delayed death" exception.
The law normally prevents multiple prosecutions for a single offense, a situation known as double jeopardy.
Though such cases are rare, the exception was considered important to prosecutors who must press ahead with cases involving assault or attempted murder even as the life of the victim hangs in the balance.


Review/City Ballet; Re-energizing an Evergreen
Guest stars are rare at the New York City Ballet.
The company prefers to let its own dancers shine, rather than serve as a background for glamorous visitors.
Occasionally, however, the City Ballet does bring in someone from another company, and when star and ballet seem made for each other the results can be electrifying.
Such a memorable performance took place on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater, when Darcey Bussell, a young ballerina from the Royal Ballet in London, appeared in George Balanchine's "Agon." Ms.
Bussell's command of the Balanchine style was evident last spring when she made a guest appearance in an excerpt from "Agon" at the final gala of the City Ballet's Balanchine Celebration.
She proved thoroughly at home in the complete ballet.


House Also Backs Extension Of S.&amp; L. Lawsuit Deadline
Following the Senate's lead, the House today backed a two-year extension for the Government to pursue civil charges against failed savings and loans, including the institution involved in the Whitewater case.
On Wednesday night the Senate voted unanimously to approve an amendment giving the Federal Government until Dec. 31, 1995, to take civil actions against failed savings and loans.


CHRONICLE
It would not be overstatement to say that CHITA RIVERA has had a banner year:
She won the Tony Award as best actress in a musical for her role in "Kiss of the Spider Woman," and received the Drama Desk Award, the Drama League of New York Award, the Fred Astaire Award for Achievement in Dance and the National Hispanic Academy of Media Arts and Sciences Award, among others.


TV Weekend; Taking Pay-Per-View To a Moral Extreme
The year is 1999.
Tycom Entertainment, a pay-per-view network, is desperately looking for something viewers haven't seen before.
Movies no longer work; sports is dying.
Jessica, a top executive, comes up with the solution: televise the execution in the electric chair of a convicted criminal.
"Witness to the Execution," on NBC this Sunday, has already reaped publicity with allegations of unnecessary violence from Senator Kent Conrad, Democrat of North Dakota, who, typically, hadn't even seen the movie.
It is not violent.
It is about the television industry, its excesses and its potentially disastrous effects on the future.
Unfortunately, "Witness to the Execution" is also exasperatingly muddled.


Inside Art
Not-So-New From Saatchi
When at first Charles Saatchi didn't succeed, he might have taken the hint.
But once is not enough for the London-based advertising magnate: he keeps trying, again and again.
For three years, ever since his agency, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, began reporting serious financial losses, Mr.
Saatchi has been among Sotheby's biggest consignors.


Restaurants
Any sane person would have given up after the asparagus-raisin sorbet.
Not me.


With Inquiry Into Toys for Tots, Marines Regroup
The Marine Corps Reserve's Toys for Tots Foundation had all the right ingredients: a worthy cause, a board packed with beribboned Marines, a direct-mail campaign with a message that tugged at the heartstrings.
"I wish you could be there to see the miracle happen when the sadness of these children turns instantly to joy," one letter pleaded, by way of asking for a check.
But these days the foundation is under scrutiny from many quarters for the way it conducted itself, from the actual fund raising to the way the money was spent.
Of $9.7 million collected through direct mail between September 1992 and December 1993, none went to purchase toys, although some toys were bought with corporate donations, said Lieut.
Gen.
Matthew T. Cooper, a retired Marine commander who was appointed president and chief executive of the foundation last fall.
"It all went to pay the expenses of direct mail," he said.
Holes in the Bookkeeping
In April the chairman and president, Jerry L. King, was dismissed after board members discovered he had been convicted of tax evasion and other crimes, all unrelated to his foundation work.
An audit after he left found glaring holes in bookkeeping procedures, like a $1 million purchase order sent to Hong Kong in 1993 that was undocumented.


Corrections
A picture from Agence France-Presse yesterday with an article about the threat of drought in the Sudan was transmitted in mirror image and appeared that way in some copies.
The lettering on the man's shirt in the foreground should have said "staff."


Mayor Plays Down Memo Linking Welfare to Work
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani sought yesterday to distance himself from a memorandum written by one of his senior deputies that suggested that New York City's welfare recipients be required to put on green uniforms and clean up highways and parks as a condition of receiving benefits.
Although the Mayor broadly endorsed the idea of requiring some people on public assistance to work, he said that the memo, written by Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson last December but made public only yesterday, simply expressed an idea and did not reflect a clearly formed policy of the administration.


Zimmerman Adds 3 Mitsubishi Groups
Zimmerman &amp; Partners Advertising in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., said yesterday that it had been awarded the accounts of three additional Mitsubishi dealers associations, bringing the total it handles to eight, with combined billings estimated at $20.2 million.
Jordan Zimmerman, the chairman and president of Zimmerman, said his agency had been awarded the accounts of dealer groups in San Francisco, metropolitan Washington and North and South Carolina.
The agency already handles dealer groups in markets including Dade and Broward counties in Florida and the New York-New Jersey area.
The assignments follow a decision by Mitsubishi Motor Sales of America to allow its local dealer groups to select their own agencies.


At the Bar; Of Tonya, Jeff and the price demanded for a lawyer's finger-pointing.
They have come by mail and by fax, from lawyers and nonlawyers, on complaint forms and all manner of personal stationery.
And under Oregon's unique system of lawyer discipline, which allows the public to view all complaints brought against members of the state's bar rather than permitting them to be secreted away, they are all open for inspection.
Nearly two weeks have passed since Ronald H. Hoevet, the Portland lawyer representing Jeff Gillooly in the Tonya Harding affair, had his 15 minutes of fame.
To Larry King, Ted Koppel and much of the civilized world, Mr.
Hoevet opined that Miss Harding had helped plan the attack on Nancy Kerrigan, that criminal charges against her were "inevitable" and that it would be "unconscionable" and "a tragedy" if she were allowed to compete in the Olympics.


Populist Challenge in California Race
Picking up where Ross Perot and Edmund G. Brown Jr. left off in the 1992 Presidential campaign, Tom Hayden is running for governor of California on what he calls a crusade against the influence of special interests in politics.
Mr.
Hayden, whose political career started in the protests against the Vietnam War in the 1960's, said he was not in the race to win.
But his announcement on Wednesday stunned politicians in this state capital and could significantly shift the dynamics of what is shaping up to be a hard-fought race in a big state.


Credit Markets; Inflation Worries Help Lift Rates
Interest rates rose yesterday after the Treasury's auction of 30-year bonds, as traders became increasingly concerned that today's producer price report would show a significant jump in inflation.
Analysts at MMS International are forecasting a five-tenths of 1 percent increase in the Producer Price Index for January, its largest monthly jump since last April.
Excluding food and energy, MMS expects a jump of three-tenths of 1 percent.
The analysts expect a rise of more than 1 percent in passenger car prices and unfavorable seasonal factors to contibute to the jump in the index.


Federal Judge Strikes Down Law Limiting the Terms of Lawmakers
Dealing a major blow to the growing movement to limit the terms of elected officials, a Federal judge in Seattle yesterday threw out a voter-approved Washington State law that restricts terms for members of Congress.
The ruling, by Judge William L. Dwyer of Federal District Court in Seattle, cast doubt over the fate of similar measures adopted by 14 other states over the last four years.


Tabloid TV Chronicles: How Cheap Is Talk?
Maybe there's not enough hard copy in my heart.
But would I pay a six-figure sum to hear Tonya Harding not talk about the Nancy Kerrigan assault case?
No, I don't think so.
I've rummaged through the six-page transcript of the "Inside Edition" two-part Harding interview, which starts today at 1 P.M. on WNYW-TV/Channel 5, and concludes Monday at 1. (Nearly everywhere else in the country, it began last night.) I just don't get it.
Not a word of the assault on Kerrigan is discussed, presumably because Harding's lawyers would not permit such legal talk.


An 11-Year-Old at Large With $1 Million in Cash
Poor Preston Waters, the 11-year-old protagonist of "Blank Check," finds himself in a tight financial squeeze.
His father has no idea how much it costs nowadays for a boy to have fun.
When Preston visits an amusement park with his friends, his father gives him only $2 to spend, while his pals have 10 times that.
In the film's most wistful scene, Preston rides alone on a boring old merry-go-round while his friends take more exciting and expensive spins on a nearby roller coaster.
Preston's fortunes magically change through a sequence of events that could only happen in a children's fantasy movie.
A fleeing crook who accidentally runs over Preston's bicycle hastily writes him a check on which he forgets to fill in the amount.
Preston has his computer type in a million dollars.
When he goes to cash the check, the corrupt bank president, who is in cahoots with the crook, assumes Preston is a courier and stuffs his backpack with a million dollars in cash.


Nintendo's Focus
In a surprise announcement, Nintendo, the Japanese video game maker, said today that it would avoid the CD-ROM market and instead base its next generation of video games on solid-state computer cartridges.
Other manufacturers, such as 3DO, Sony and Sega, are designing systems that play CD-ROM disks -- computer compact disks with read only memory that can store more than 500 million characters of information, but are handicapped because data retrieval is slower than with existing solid-state cartridges.


Calvin Klein Will Stop Making Furs
Calvin Klein ruffled the $1.1 billion fur industry yesterday, announcing that he would no longer produce furs.
Citing "my own reflections on the humane treatment of animals" and "the fact that the fur segment of our business simply did not fit with our corporate philosophy any longer," Mr.
Klein ended 17 years of licensing agreements.
His most recent, with Alixandre Furs, expired in January, and he said his decision was reached in November.


Computer Security Experts See Pattern in Internet Break-Ins
Computer security experts say they now believe that a recent rash of break-ins on the global Internet web of computer networks was an organized effort to crack the security of the world's busiest computer systems.
But they remain baffled by the motives of the unknown intruders, who stole tens of thousands of passwords.
"It had all the trappings of an orchestrated effort," L. Dain Gary, manager of the Computer Emergency Response Team center, said yesterday.
Assault on Gateways
Mr.
Gary, whose group sent a warning last week to all network administrators on the Internet, said the break-ins apparently began sporadically last summer on isolated computers.
But recently, the assault intensified, turning to computers that were strategic gateways to the Internet.
One such computer was operated by Panix of New York City, a major Internet service provider.
Panix reported that 300 other computers were compromised as a result of the security breach in the Panix computer.


New Subways Overdo Facilities for Disabled
To the Editor:
While I welcome the New York City Transit Authority's efforts to overhaul the subway system (news article, Jan. 31), I am deeply troubled by the dearth of seats on the new trains.
The Transit Authority, as you make clear, is aware of these problems, but must eliminate seats as part of a law requiring better facilities for handicapped riders and their wheelchairs.
But why not do so only in cars containing a conductor and motorman?


Will This Mayor Care About Carriage Horses?
To the Editor:
David N. Dinkins, in one of his final decisions as Mayor of New York City, vetoed an ill-conceived City Council-passed bill that would have weakened the law that protected the city's carriage horses throughout his administration.
A sunset provision voided that protection on Jan. 1.
The purpose of the sunset provision was to mandate a humane and pragmatic review of the effects of the expiring law on the horses and the public.
Both the public and the horses were well served.
During the law's existence fewer carriage horse accidents occurred, even though significantly more carriage horse drivers were employed.
Obstructions related to carriage horse traffic were reduced, a fact gratefully noted by business community representatives and city traffic and health department officials, who protested in public hearings the weaker provisions of the proposed bill, which the full Council nonetheless passed.


Public &amp; Private; Diagnosis: Undue Influence
Asthma, the flu, diabetes, stab wounds, gonorrhea, depression, bulimia, fever, sore throat, syphilis, nosebleeds, yeast infections, iron deficiencies, stomach upsets -- New York's school-based clinics deal with them all.
With doctors and nurse practitioners, counselors and psychologists, this is not the nurse's office of years gone by.
When a sophomore sitting in the clinic at Martin Luther King Jr.
High School was asked who her family physician was, she pointed at Dr.
Scott McColvin, the staff doctor, and said, "Him, I guess."


Conservation Agency Chief Is Named
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today nominated J. Langdon Marsh, the second-ranking official in the State Environmental Conservation Department, to replace the department's Commissioner, Thomas C. Jorling, who is resigning next month to join a paper company.
The choice of Mr.
Marsh was applauded by environmental groups, whose leaders described him as an accessible administrator and able spokesman for the agency and its policies over the last decade.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Ivan Lins  Singer Blue Note 131 West Third Street Greenwich Village Through tomorrow
The best Brazilian songwriters know how to devise tunes that warm the heart.
They use short, folkish phrases and subtly strategic harmonies to give songs a sense of tenderness and rising optimism; the turns seem both surprising and inevitable.
Such craftsmanship calls for musical expertise and something beyond technique: remembering that the best songs are made to touch listeners, not to impress.
Ivan Lins is one of those songwriters.
Mr.
Lins, a major star in Brazil who has lately recorded in English, takes after Milton Nascimento both in musical specifics -- a baritone voice that rises to a yearning falsetto, a gift for ballads and a broad palette of local Brazilian rhythms -- and in the general benevolence that radiates from his songs.
Like Mr.
Nascimento, he concentrates on the music; for two decades, he has worked primarily with the lyricist Victor Martins.


Experiment Lacked Informed Consent; Pioneering Studies
To the Editor:
As the senior author of the 1954 article in the Journal of Nutrition to which Norman Fine refers in "Radiation Experiment Met Ethical Tests" (letter, Jan. 31), I am grateful for his detailed exposition of the medical and ethical standards prevailing 40 years ago, when my colleagues and I did the studies.
These were among the first studies in humans tracing the fate of calcium in the body, how much is absorbed, how much excreted and how much is directed to bone.
This information is crucial to help determine how much calcium should be eaten to develop healthy bones and minimize the effects of osteoporosis.
More recently, it has been possible to extend this work, especially in children, with the aid of nonradioactive tracers, but tracers, whether radioactive or stable, are essential to understand how calcium and other minerals are handled by the body.


Fritz John, a Master Mathematician, Dies at 83
Dr.
Fritz John, who charted new paths in mathematics as a leading expert on partial differential equations, died on Thursday at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 83.
The cause was heart failure, said Susan Wheeler, a spokeswoman for New York University, where Dr.
John was professor emeritus at the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences.


Bridge
One of England's leading bridge personalities, Barry Rigal, has made a mark in the last five years as player, writer, and commentator at international championships.
His first book is "Improve Your Bridge Judgment," available from Barclay Bridge Supplies, (800) 274-2221, for $12.95 including mailing, and will be of value to all players out of the beginner stage.
The reader is shown one hand, and invited to make the required decisions in bidding and play.
On the diagramed deal the South hand is offered, and the author makes a good case for a response of one no-trump rather than one heart, which would be the choice of most American experts.
After a reverse of two diamonds, the two-spade bid shows maximum values for the earlier one no-trump bid and some strength in spades.
At this point it is strength rather than length that is significant.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: In Charge; For Commissioner Emily Lloyd, It's Not Just a Storm, It's the Enemy
In the control room of the New York City Sanitation Department near City Hall yesterday afternoon, Emily Lloyd seemed every bit a military commander.
She checked the weather reports from three different services, examined the deployment of plows in each borough and exchanged greetings with even low-level employees on a first-name basis.
She agreed with a top lieutenant that it was the correct decision to return 55 trucks borrowed from the Transportation Department to plowing duty after temporarily deploying them for hauling away snow.
Another aide brought up the touchy question of garbage pickup, which had not occurred since Monday but will soon be a pressing concern.
She conferred briefly with each of the five staff members monitoring radio broadcasts in each borough on the Sanitation Department radio band.


As AIDS Charities Grow, Demands Increase, Too
As his companion lay dying from AIDS, Royal S. Marks, a prosperous New York art dealer, became painfully aware that he faced the same fate.
His doctors remember how he railed about the country's inadequate response to the AIDS crisis and how he vowed to use his wealth to fight the disease.
He died in 1987, leaving an art collection that was sold at auction for $10 million.
The money was used to set up the Royal S. Marks Fund, which recently distributed its first round of grants, totaling $1 million, for AIDS education and research.


Exits Pose Danger in Emerging Markets
Even Americans who have never left their hometowns are investing in "emerging markets," Wall Street's new name for what used to be called "less developed countries." As these nations' stock markets soared last year, Americans poured more than $9 billion into mutual funds that invest in them.
And in the mutual fund business, every company wants to run a fund that invests in these often quirky little stock markets.
According to Lipper Analytical Services, the number of emerging-markets equity funds has grown to 40, from just 22 a year ago.
And more are in the offing.


Winter Olympics; Get Ready for Hard Checking and a Bit of 'Basking'
The new world of Olympic hockey will begin opening-round play Saturday with a country that didn't exist two years ago, a Russian team instead of a Unified Team and arenas designed to make fans think they are basking in sunlight.
From an emotional and political perspective, the showpiece of the opening-day will match top-seeded Russia against Norway, the host country, which is seeded next to last.
The United States, which didn't put together its team until last August, will begin its upwardly mobile run on Sunday against France.
That game will be televised live in the United States by CBS, starting at 2 P.M. in New York.


William Conrad, 'Fatman' Star And 'Fugitive' Voice, Dies at 73
William Conrad, star of the television series "Jake and the Fatman," "Cannon" and other shows, died of a heart attack on Friday at the Medical Center of North Hollywood.
He was 73.
A hospital spokeswoman, Tricia Spellman, said that Mr.
Conrad had become ill at home and died soon after being taken to the hospital.


Fight Over Evidence Results in Acquittal Of Senator in Texas
Just minutes after being sworn in today, jurors acquitted United States Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison on all charges of misusing her state office when she was State Treasurer.
The jury acted under a judge's order after prosecutors abruptly refused to present their case against her, saying they feared the judge would not allow them to offer crucial portions of their evidence.
The stunning turn of events came after the prosecutors and defense lawyers jousted over the admissibility of dozens of cartons of documents and computer tapes seized from Mrs.
Hutchison's office at the State Treasury in June, five days after she won a special election to replace Lloyd M. Bentsen in the Senate.


Clinton and Japan Chief Say Trade Talks Fail; U.S. Threatens Action
With Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa standing beside him, President Clinton declared trade talks with Japan a failure today, and Administration officials threatened to take aggressive steps to break Japanese barriers to American goods that have created political and economic problems for both countries.
After meeting at the White House with Mr.
Hosokawa in what had been billed by both sides as a crucial session for the two leaders, Mr.
Clinton offered a pessimistic assessment of the chances that the trade imbalance between the two countries, which neared $60 billion in Japan's favor last year, would be eased anytime soon.


Richard Karasik, Executive, 62
Richard Karasik, president and chief operating officer of Weeks Office Products in Long Island City, Queens, died on Wednesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 62.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said Carol Pickett, a friend of the family.


Russian-Language FM Is Window on 2 Worlds
Their voices crackle over the airwaves, some timid and creaky with age, others brazenly curious.
For WMNB-FM, each day brings a flood of calls from Russian immigrants who want the inside scoop on this place called Amerika.
"Where is the cheapest place in New York to go dancing?"


Carrying the Torch Can Be a Real Downer
For Ole Gunnar Fidjestol, this was going to be the last serious jump of his career.
At age 33, the onetime world champion Norwegian ski flier planned to retire.
He was scheduled to carry the Olympic torch into the Lysgardsbakken ski jumping arena for the opening ceremonies here Saturday, and he thought he would go out in a blaze of glory, or at least in a blaze.
As it turned out, unfortunately, Fidjestol became just a cinder in history.
Instead of winding up in the arena, head and torch held high, he wound up in the Lillehammer County Hospital, after taking a spill in practice on Thursday, losing consciousness and suffering a mild concussion and a sprained neck.
Hill Gets 'Faster'
"This was not my worst fall," said Fidjestol, "but it was my most embarrassing. There was a lot of focus on it."


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Clinton declared U.S.-Japanese trade talks a failure and threatened to take aggressive steps to break Japanese barriers to American goods that have created economic and political turmoil for both countries.  [ Page 1. ]  Now that President Clinton has broken off trade talks with Japan, the question is what actions will he take now, and will they be more effective than further negotiations.
News Analysis.  [ 4. ]
Le Monde has fallen into disarray after the resignation of the prestigious French newspaper's managing editor.  [ 39. ]  The Economy
The White House is pressing for legislation to force telephone and cable television companies to install software so that law enforcement agencies can eavesdrop on phone calls and computer transmissions.  [ 1. ]
Producer prices rose 0.2 percent in January, the Labor Department found, providing the first reading on inflation since the Federal Reserve's move last week to raise interest rates.  [ 37. ]
The never-ending freezing weather and the waves of rain, sleet and snow are hampering output, productivity and sales in businesses from construction to airlines to retail stores.
Economists are saying that if this continues, the wealth lost as a result of the severe winter could exceed losses from the California earthquake.  [ 37. ]  Companies
Rogers Communications unveiled a $2.25 billion offer to acquire Maclean Hunter, in a merger of two Canadian communications giants.  [ 37. ]
Ely Callaway hopes golfers love his new Big Bertha irons as they love his woods.
Callaway Golf stock has more than tripled since the company went public in 1992, and keeps rising, and success with the irons will show the company is more than just a one-hit wonder.  [ 37. ]
Merck said it would increase its research and development spending 12 percent this year, despite testimony by its chairman that the Clinton Administration's health care bill might force it to cut some research.  [ 39. ]
National Convenience Stores and Circle K will swap some stores to focus on crucial market areas following trips through bankruptcy proceedings for both chains.  [ 39. ]
Donate to charity anytime, day or night.
Michigan National Bank's 300 automated teller machines now allow users to donate to charity when they get cash or deposit a paycheck.  [ 39. ]  Markets
Wall Street posted mixed results in dispirited trading as a powerful snowstorm numbed stock market activity, despite a Government report of low inflation  [ 38. ]
The Treasury market swung sharply as mixed signals on inflation set off sharp price swings, with longer-term Treasury issues ending moderately higher.  [ 46. ]
The dollar fell against the Japanese yen after President Clinton and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa failed to reach an agreement on reducing the growing trade imbalance between the United States and Japan.
Gold prices also fell.  [ 48. ]
Copper prices fell for the sixth time in seven days, amid signs that demand will not be as strong as previously expected.  [ 48. ] Your Money
Emerging markets mutual funds are getting more popular all the time, but when things turn bad, they may be hard to leave.  [ 35. ]
Investors may be tempted by municipal bonds, despite the risks of a rate rise caused by the improving economy.
But there are ways to protect against rising interest rates.  [ 35. ]
Car financing has just become more complicated, but the new wrinkle, leasing slightly used cars, may be the most economical way to go.  [ 36. ]


Louis Kaufman, Violinist, 88
Louis Kaufman, a violinist who made the first complete domestic recording of Vivaldi's "Four Seasons," died on Wednesday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 88.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his wife, Annette, a pianist who was also his accompanist.


Religion Notes
22 Minutes With God
Concerned that people were moving into the area and not coming to church, a New Jersey minister has devised an idea for the busy and detached: express worship.
"You give us 22 minutes and we'll show you the Kingdom of God," said the minister, the Rev.
John D. Kleist of First Lutheran Church in Stewartsville, N.J.


Commissioner's Powers Are Diluted by Owners
Baseball's club owners issued their long-debated and awaited report on the restructuring of the commissioner's authority yesterday.
They said they had enhanced the commissioner's position, but details of the report indicate otherwise.
Most significantly, the owners diluted the commissioner's powers under the "best interests of baseball" clause.
They also gave the commissioner authority over labor relations that the owners supposedly gave him 10 years ago but didn't really want him to have.
At the same time, though, in a seemingly contradictory step, they removed his best-interests powers in labor matters.


Review/Theater; Ancient Jewish Solutions For Modern Women's Ills
The central characters in "A Body of Water," Jenna Zark's play now at the Circle Repertory Company, sometimes sound like the beleaguered, stressed-out heroines of television commercials for headache pills and soothing bath oils.
A pregnant mother of five, tripping over her children's toys, yells, "No one helps me in this house!" The young owner of a beauty shop complains of her husband and her mother: "They all want a piece of me, and I always give in. This is my time."
For her, "my time" means a visit to a mikvah, the ritual baths where Orthodox Jewish women must purify themselves for sexual relations after menstruation.
For in "A Body of Water," remedies for tensions common to contemporary women are not found in a drug store or group therapy (though they might as well be), but in different aspects of primal Jewish practices.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: U.S. Finally Gets Involved; After Threat to Serbs, Will It Push Muslims?
he new symbolism of the Balkan peace talks was evident today, with the American special envoy, Charles Redman, standing side by side with the Bosnian Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic, and declaring to the television cameras that the United States now intended to help the Bosnian Muslims get what they were demanding.
Mr.
Redman, long a shadowy figure here in his role as envoy to peace talks the United States did not believe in, said firmly: "We want to help the Bosnian Government to come to substantive settlement. We want to reinvigorate the negotiations and produce the kinds of results the Bosnians have been looking for."


&gt;Halfway, Knicks Just 3d Fiddle In East
When the Knicks return to action Tuesday, they will return to an Eastern Conference race that has become extremely competitive.
New York (34-14) has fallen to third in the East at the All-Star break, a half-game behind both the Atlanta Hawks and the Chicago Bulls.
Certainly, the Knicks' record is impressive, especially when their injuries are considered.
But the job done by both the Bulls (34-13) and the Hawks (34-13) has been even more startling.


Clinton's Japan Card?; As Trade Deficit Talks Lead Nowhere Tokyo Awaits President's Next Move
Strip away the overheated bluster around the United States-Japan summit meeting and it comes down to this: For eight months the Clinton Administration has insisted that it was different from its predecessors, that it was not going to take it anymore.
Japan would finally have to open its markets.
The Japanese listened politely.
They nodded their heads.
And today they called what they think is President Clinton's bluff.
The question now is: What does Mr.
Clinton really have in his hand?


CHRONICLE
The remarks made on Thursday night at the 78th birthday of FLO KENNEDY, the lawyer who has been in the forefront of the civil rights and feminist movements for more than 30 years, were far more reverent in tone than the outspokenness and spicy language that are her hallmarks.
Justice EMILY JANE GOODMAN of New York State Supreme Court told Ms.
Kennedy, "You have had a profound influence on my life." KATE MILLETT, the author of "Sexual Politics," said, "We think of her in the feminist movement as the mother of us all." And ANDREW W. COOPER, the publisher of The City Sun, the black weekly Brooklyn newspaper, said, "She fears no man or woman, and that is a lesson in itself."


New Focus on Drugs; President's Strategy Reflects Concern About Crime and Changing Priorities
For months, a handful of Administration officials had been urging President Clinton to place his personal stamp on the drug issue with a splashy White House ceremony.
But there always seemed to be something else more pressing.
On Wednesday, Mr.
Clinton leaped into the drug issue with both feet.
With Vice President Al Gore and half a dozen Cabinet members in tow, he trooped out to a Maryland prison that boasts a model drug treatment program to announce a 1995 national drug strategy that will cost more than $13 billion.


Neil Bonnett, 47, a Race Driver, Is Killed During a Practice Run
Four years after he suffered a devastating concussion in one crash and a year after an abortive comeback was sidetracked by another, stock-car driver Neil Bonnett was killed while attempting one more comeback yesterday.
He died of multiple head injuries after his car spun out of control and slammed into a retaining wall during a practice run for the Daytona 500 at the Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach, Fla.
He was 47.
According to witnesses, Bonnett lost control of his Chevrolet on the track's high-banked fourth turn, swerving onto the track apron and then up the steep bank before crashing into the wall nearly head on.


Russian-Language Radio Station Tries to Explain 'Amerika'


Year's First Price Data Show Little Inflation
The Government today offered its first reading on inflation since the Federal Reserve's move last week to raise interest rates, and the data looked good to many economists.
Prices received by American producers for finished goods rose two-tenths of 1 percent in January, the Labor Department found, as jumps for gasoline, cars and tobacco were mostly offset by declines for food and heating oil.


CHRONICLE
IAN SCHRAGER, the hotelier whose name zoomed into public consciousness in the 1970's when he owned Studio 54 with Steve Rubell and who has developed hotels like the Royalton and the Paramount, is about to leap into two new ventures: marriage and fatherhood.
Nancy Assuncao, his publicity agent, said yesterday that Mr.
Schrager and RITA NARONA, a former dancer with the New York City Ballet and a partner in the 10th Street Lounge, a fashionable bar in the East Village, plan to "elope" on Monday.
No details were divulged.


Review/City Ballet; Shifting Expectations, To Strains of Schubert
Surprise is not a virtue unto itself.
But unpredictability is what makes "A Schubert Sonata," Richard Tanner's new work for the New York City Ballet, so pungent and dazzling.
The premiere, the second and last in the company's season, was part of an evening that crackled with excitement at the New York State Theater on Thursday night.
In addition to George Balanchine's one-act version of "Swan Lake," the program featured the Balanchine-Bizet "Symphony in C," in which Darcey Bussell was seen for the first time.


Harolyn Blackwell Marches Off Calmly To Join 'Le Regiment'
"To be honest," Harolyn Blackwell calmly explained after a long day of rehearsals and costume fittings at the Metropolitan Opera, "I had been spending all my time at the house anyway, because it's the final week before the production opens, so the situation has not really meant changing my schedule."
The "situation" is Ms.
Blackwell's sudden elevation from understudy to star in the production of Donizetti's "Fille du Regiment" that opens at the Met on Monday.
She was scheduled to take over the title role from Kathleen Battle on Feb. 26 in any case, but the pink slip that the Met's management sent to the combative Miss Battle early this week turned out to be an early Valentine for Ms.
Blackwell, who was asked to sing all seven performances, including the broadcast on Feb. 19.


NEWS SUMMARY
International -5 JAPAN TRADE TALKS FAIL  President Clinton met with the Prime Minister of Japan and then declared the trade talks a failure.
In Manhattan, a delivery man had ice in his eyebrows and terror in his eyes.  1  Obituaries 9-10  Dr.
Ms.
Reno and the jail glut.
He stands tall in Willimantic.
Mr.
Weprin's contribution.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Diagnosis -- undue influence.
Edmund Leites: Who's an American?
Ask Lincoln.
Joan Braunagel McShane: Paper profits.
Kathy Magee: Yes, I can.
Mike Jones: Critical thinkers.
Vicki Matthews-Burwell: Drinking it all in.
Bridge 17 Chronicle 20 Crossword 17


Q&amp;A
Q. Inheriting an I.R.A.
When inheriting an I.R.A. from someone other than a spouse, over what period does one have to report the deferred income?
Do the same rules apply to proceeds from a Keogh account?
CHARLES JOSEPHSON, Great Neck,
A.
The reporting requirements depend upon whether the individual retirement account participant had begun distributions.
If death occurs after distributions begin, the heir must take distributions at least as rapidly as the participant would have.
"If the participant died before the required starting date -- and the plan does not designate required default amounts -- the beneficiary can choose to either take the distributions at his own life expectancy or at a greater rate over the next five years, when the last payment must be made," said Edward Mendlowitz, a New York certified public accountant.
"Keogh accounts are treated the same as I.R.A.'s." Q. Trust Fund for Minor
How can I set up a trust fund for a retarded minor that permits him to receive principal and income for personal needs but that does not disqualify him for Government aid and subsidies for medical treatment?EMANUEL GRUSS, Manhattan
A.
The answer depends on both Federal and state law.
If the trust is established with the minor's funds, Federal law prohibits him from receiving Medicaid benefits.
But this type of trust will not rule out Government aid if the person is under 65 and the money remaining in the trust at its termination is used to reimburse the state for medical assistance.
In New York, there is "a safe harbor for a third party who transfers his own funds in trust to provide for the supplemental needs of an individual who is receiving, or will apply for, governmental assistance," said William R. Dunlop, a partner of the New York law firm of Jackson &amp; Nash.
"Other states may provide similar protection either by statute or judicial decision." Q. Cash Flow and Companies
What do brokers mean when they talk about cash flow?ROANNE HINCKLEY, Astoria, Queens
A.
Cash flow is a method used by many investors to assess the financial health and viability of a company.
It suggests whether the concern can generate enough cash to meet its obligations when due and is particularly important for gauging the value of certain businesses, like real estate and financial services.
To get the cash flow of a corporation, start with its net income and add noncash items like depreciation and amortization.
You should also add the proceeds from any loans or from the issuance of any stock.
Then subtract items like purchases of machinery or equipment, redemptions of bonds or acquisitions of other companies.
"The net effect is to determine the total amount of cash receipts and cash expenditures and to see the amount of cash left over at the end of the year," said Harry J. Shlinger, a partner of Weber Lipshie &amp; Company, an accounting firm based in New York City.


Saul Ben Schiff, Shoe Executive, 96
Saul Ben Schiff, once a leading executive in the shoe industry, died last Saturday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 96.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Barbara Passloff of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Devils Are Hitting a Stride That Appears Hard to Beat
No one denied the lethargy of the Vancouver Canucks against the Devils on Thursday night.
But judging from the way the Devils are playing right now, the outcome would most likely have been the same no matter how vigorous the Canucks were.
In fact, the Devils may very well be playing their best hockey of the season as they enter a game this afternoon against the Bruins at Boston Garden.


Yanks' Trade Pleases Cuomo
To Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York, the Yankees' trade for pitcher Terry Mulholland was worth dropping a note yesterday to the team's owner, George Steinbrenner.
Cuomo called the former Phillie "just what we need to go the distance this time -- with the new playoff schedule, probably right through October."
He added: "I look forward to seeing how Mulholland deals with a Rickey Henderson-occupied first base." Mulholland has one of the best pickoff moves in the game.


The Navy Decides Not to Appeal Dismissals of Last Tailhook Cases
The Navy moved to close the books on the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal today, deciding not to appeal the dismissal of the last three cases arising from the incident.
That means no one will ever be tried for harassing women at a bawdy aviators convention in 1991, despite the Navy's acknowledgement that lewd behavior took place.
At the same time, the Navy's highest-ranking officer, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, angrily denounced the finding of a military judge who, in dismissing the last cases on Tuesday, said the admiral had lied about the affair and had tainted the Navy's investigation.


Equity-Income Group: Vulnerable to Rates
The last three years have been particularly strong for the 68-plus equity-income funds, which invest in a combination of bonds and high-yielding equities.
Their bond holdings have benefited from declining interest rates.
And in equities, the funds usually own financial stocks, utilities and high-yielding industrial companies that are sensitive to economic conditions, all categories that have been market favorites in the period.
Besides some capital appreciation, these funds produce a nice yield, averaging 3.03 percent in December.


Clinton and Yeltsin Appear to Be Moving Closer Together on Bosnia
Sharp tensions between Russia and the United States over NATO's threat of air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs seemed to ease today after a bizarrely delayed telephone conversation between President Clinton and President Boris N. Yeltsin.
After failing for two days to make telephone contact, a lapse that seemed mysterious in these days of satellite communications, the two men spoke for about 30 minutes.
Each side blamed the other for the delay.


Winter Olympics; No T-Shirt, No Soviets, Lots of Tents: Let the Games Begin
The last T-shirt has been auctioned.
The digital clock in the town square is approaching zero, and the most fanatical of the cross-country fans have pitched their tents in the waist-deep snow high above Lake Mjosa.
Lillehammer, the incurably quaint community full of kick sleds and apple-cheeked children, has already given the world the cheese slicer.
But for the next 16 days, it is set to give much more.


Rising Interest Rates Could Hit Adjustable Mortgages Soon
Among the first consumers to feel the impact of rising interest rates will be homeowners with adjustable-rate mortgages.
For them, higher payments are at least six weeks away and probably longer, according to housing economists and interest rate analysts.
Keith T. Gumbinger, an analyst at HSH Associates, an interest rate research firm in Butler, N.J., said the vast majority -- more than 90 percent -- of adjustable mortgages have rates that change annually on their anniversary date.


METRO DIGEST
THE ENDLESS WINTER: STOMPED ON BY A FOOT OF SNOW The harshest blizzard of a relentless winter attacked the New York region with a foot or more of new snow that crippled transportation, business and education, redesigned city and suburban landscapes and deepened the sense of siege for millions trapped in a dazzling but difficult season.
Page 1.
THE GRIP OF THE STORM  Because of the snow, the miracle of birth had to unfold on a couch in Teaneck, N.J.
Because of the snow, a 90-year-old, one-legged man in Port Chester, N.Y., couldn't get a hot meal.
But in Manhattan, a delivery man with ice in his eyebrows and terror in his eyes made a suicidal run on an out-of-control bicycle for a $7 order of moo-shu pork.
Page 1.


Experiment Lacked Informed Consent
To the Editor:
Re "Radiation Experiment Met Ethical Tests" by Norman Fine (letter, Jan. 31), on the experimental use of radioactive calcium on human subjects in experiments done some 40 years ago: The author misses, deliberately or not, the main point.
The main point concerning humans as guinea pigs is informed consent.
Even though the procedure used was relatively harmless, as the author asserts, and I agree with him, the subjects were young institutionalized boys of "inadequate intelligence." The paper thanks them for having "volunteered for the experiments," a meaningless phrase, considering their lack of comprehension.


U.S. Seeks Wiretap Software for Law Enforcement
The White House is pressing for legislation to force telephone and cable television companies to install computer software on their networks that would enable law enforcement agencies to eavesdrop on phone calls and computer transmissions, Clinton Administration officials said today.
The move, intended to preserve the law enforcement agencies' ability to conduct court-authorized wiretaps, is intended to overcome the difficulty of intercepting telephone conversations and other electronic transmissions in the on-off pulses of digital computer code, which is being used increasingly for everyday communications.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CASCADES INC., Kingsey Falls, Quebec, a paper products manufacturer, agreed to buy the remaining 50 percent stake that it did not own in Industries Cascades Inc. from closely held Wyant &amp; Co.
The terms were not disclosed GALVESTON-HOUSTON CO., Houston, plans to spin off to shareholders its Bettis Corp. unit, a maker of valve controls.
Under the plan, shareholders will receive one share of Bettis for every two shares of Galveston-Houston held.
LEXMARK INTERNATIONAL INC., Greenwich, Conn., a maker of printers and typewriters, has postponed the initial public offering planned for this year for at least a year.
UNITED HEALTHCARE CORP., Minnetonka, Minn., announced a 2-for-1 stock split.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Eleanor McEvoy  Tramps
Lust is no sin in the songs of Eleanor McEvoy, the Irish songwriter who performed at Tramps on Tuesday night.
Sweetly and gently, without begging or manipulation, her songs often tell lovers and potential lovers, "Don't be shy"; she offers comfort and pleasure, expecting the same.
In one song, she revels in the sound of a sleeping bed-mate's breathing; in another, she hopes for the best from a secretive lover who "sets my thoughts astray." Now and then, a song recognized the risk of heartbreak, but not for long: "I know that I'll survive," Ms.
McEvoy sang, along with eager fans in the audience, in "Only a Woman's Heart."


Dodging a Trade Battle
In the end, they were two men hemmed in by politics.
President Clinton, leader of a Japan-bashing Administration, could not accept Japan's formulaic promises to open its markets.
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, barely holding onto office, could not appear to cave in to American demands to measure American imports.
So they walked away without signing a hollow trade agreement that invited ridicule.
In a way, it was refreshing to hear them announce -- not in these words, of course -- that they had gone for a political survival pact rather than a trade agreement.
The two leaders reassured the public that the trade rift would not compromise the otherwise strong and friendly relationship between the two allies.
The moment, both leaders agreed, called for reflection, not recrimination.


CHRONICLE
From a hole in the wall comes a work of art.
The cast of "New York Rock," a rock opera by YOKO ONO, was in rehearsal last week at a loft she owns in SoHo when WALTER ONEIL, a singer and dancer, crashed into a wall, leaving a three-foot hole .
What to do?
PHILLIP OESTERMAN, the director of the opera, which is to open on March 3, had an inspiration.
"I said, 'That looks like a Yoko piece of art,' " he said yesterday.
"So we made a frame, put the frame around it, had everyone sign it, and we presented it to her with a card on Sunday. She cried." NADINE BROZAN


Basques Concerned By Spanish Brutality
To the Editor:
"Basque Peace Hopes Rise as the Separatists Wane" (news article, Jan. 28) implies that self-determination is not a Basque priority and that Spain's policy on the Basque conflict is inherently reasonable.
True, a demand for peace and an end to violence is growing in sectors of Basque society.
But demands to end violence are not directed only to the armed nationalist organization E.T.A. in light of allegations of police and security force torture and ill treatment of people in custody, imprisoned E.T.A. members and others.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Lou Donaldson  Saxophonist Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue, at 11th Street Greenwich Village Through tomorrow
The jazz audience has little tolerance for musicians who desert their muse in public.
One prominent example is the fate of the alto saxophonist Lou Donaldson, who turned his back on more adventurous jazz in the early 1960's.
He continues to make recordings that, as he puts it, bought him a house: music deep in the popular blues tradition.
But he has suffered at the hands of critics.
Mr.
Donaldson, who is as fine a be-bop saxophonist as exists, is rarely considered a master.
He is performing with a group that includes Lonnie Smith on organ, Peter Bernstein on guitar and Ben Riley on drums.
In two performances last week (on Feb. 1 and 3) Mr.
Donaldson made the be-bop language pliable, delivering a small sampling of Charlie Parker's innovations with a soft tone and lyricism.
Like Parker, he rarely took more than a few choruses, but a lot happened within those few choruses.


Review/Music; Masur Introduces Schnittke Seventh
At the close of Alfred Schnittke's Seventh Symphony, which received its world premiere performance by Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic on Thursday night in Avery Fisher Hall, there is a disarming, soulful waltz.
It comes after 20 minutes of eccentric passagework, its limpid line seeming to condense out of the sometimes bewildering mists.
It is tantalizing, sung by instruments not associated with light-footed dance: the tuba, the contrabassoon and the bass.
The effect of this waltz, at once unsettling and uncanny, is typical of Mr.
Schnittke's music, which is being honored in New York with a series of major performances.
The Philharmonic's program will be repeated tonight and on Tuesday.
Last weekend, the National Symphony Orchestra gave the New York premiere of his Sixth Symphony, and next weekend the American Symphony Orchestra will present the American premiere of the "Faust Cantata."


'Loophole' Seen in School Payroll Cuts
As a manager of data analysis at the New York City Board of Education during the 1980's, Raymond Domanico discovered there were three ways to hire new workers: put them on the payroll, give them consulting contracts or have them to sign up with a temporary agency.
Mr.
Domanico, now executive director of the Public Education Association, an advocacy group, said that in the peculiar logic of the bureaucracy it sometimes made sense to pay a fee of as much as 17 percent to a temporary agency to hire someone he had already interviewed.


Shattering the Silence of Autism; New Communication Method Is Hailed as a Miracle and Derided as a Dangerous Sham
On a routine school day three autumns ago, Mark and Laura Storch were suddenly summoned from their teaching jobs to Family Court here and told that their 14-year-old daughter, Jenny, would be taken away from them immediately.
Jenny, they were told, had accused her father of repeated sexual attacks and her mother of ignoring the abuse.
But what was almost as shocking was that Jenny had made any accusation at all.
Jenny is autistic, classified as severely retarded and cannot speak, expressing basic needs through primitive sign language.


1993 Winners Honored
The top winning canine performers of 1993 were honored last night at the Hill's Science Diet Winners' Circle awards dinner at the New York Hilton.
In the competition, a yearlong tally of dogs' individual performances are compiled.
Heading the list was the sensational German Shepherd Ch.
Altana's Mystique, owned by JANE FIRESTONE of Southern Pines, N.C., and handled by JIM MOSES.
The 6-year-old bitch was best in show 116 times during the year and defeated 169,900 dogs, a record since the competition began seven years ago.
Her owner received $5,000 for Mystique's achievements, and her breeder, MAUREEN CHARLTON, got $1,500.


Callaway Is Seeking Lead Role In Golfing
When Ely Callaway, the owner of Callaway Golf, took his company public in 1992, he hit the business equivalent of a 600-yard drive.
Fueled by soaring sales of the revolutionary golf club that Mr.
Callaway invented, the stock has more than tripled since then, jumping by almost 6 percent just this week.
Now Mr.
Callaway, 73, has another brainstorm, which may relieve the investors who doubted that the company could sustain its growth based solely on one big product.


Wretched Weather Takes Toll on Economy
The seemingly endless freezing weather and the waves of rain, sleet and snow are hampering output, productivity and sales in businesses from construction to airlines to retail stores.
Economists are saying that if current weather patterns continue, the wealth lost as a result of the severe winter could exceed the economic losses from the California earthquake.


Transactions
BASEBALL  American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Mike Devereaux, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Announced the retirement of Robin Yount, outfielder.
Agreed to terms with Kevin Seitzer, infielder, on a two-year contract.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Kevin King and Craig Clayton, pitchers; Brian Turang, infielder; and Eric Christopherson, catcher, on one-year contracts.
National League FLORIDA MARLINS -- Agreed to terms with Kurt Miller, pitcher; Bob Natal, catcher; Ramon Martinez, infielder; and Carl Evereet and Nigel Wilson, outfielders, on one-year contracts.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Bob MacDonald, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Agreed to terms with Larry Walker, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Agreed to terms with Wally Whitehurst, Robbie Beckett and Donnie Elliott, pitchers.
BASKETBALL  National Basketball Association LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Signed Reggie Jordan, guard, to a contract for the remainder of the season.
PHOENIX SUNS -- Signed Elliott Perry, guard, to a contract for the remainder of the season.
FOOTBALL  National Football League LOS ANGELES RAIDERS -- Announced the retirement of Joe Scannella, offensive backfield coach.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Named Rick Donohue assistant director of player personnel.
HOCKEY  National Hockey League PITTSBURGH PENGUINS -- Signed Kevin Stevens, left wing, to a multiyear contract extension.
COLLEGE  SALISBURY ST. -- Announced that Dean Burroughs, tennis coach, will retire after the 1994 season.
WALSH -- Announced that it will add a varsity football program in 1995 and that Jim Dennison, athletic director, will coach the team.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about aid to illegal immigrants affected by the Los Angeles earthquake misstated the party affiliation of Laura Chick, a City Council member from the San Fernando Valley.
She is a Democrat.


Woman Says Clinton Made Advance in '91
An Arkansas woman said today that President Clinton made a sexual advance to her in a hotel room during a conference in 1991, when he was Governor of Arkansas.
The White House denied the accusation and said Mr.
Clinton did not recall meeting the woman, Paula Jones.
Ms.
Jones appeared here today at a news conference arranged by two Arkansas state troopers, Roger Perry and Larry Patterson, who have made their own accusations about Mr.
Clinton's private life, and Cliff Jackson, a former Oxford classmate of Mr.
Clinton who has spent much of the last two years trying to turn up and publicize embarrassing information about the President's past.


Long-Run Gretzky Show Dazzles First-Year Ducks
Kings 5, Ducks 3
Wayne Gretzky had two goals and three assists and Jari Kurri scored twice as the Los Angeles Kings beat the Mighty Ducks, 4-3, last night in Anaheim.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Jan. 24 about the sale of the Graham Savings Bank of Graham, N.C., to the CCB Financial Corporation misstated the annual salary and director's fees of Andy C. Motsinger, chairman of Graham.
They now total $147,000, not the $182,000 listed in the bank's latest prospectus.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Commuting; Weary L.I.R.R. Riders Tested Again
With snow falling on tracks more quickly than it could be cleared, the Long Island Rail Road was paralyzed for much of yesterday.
Unable to use its electric trains and relying on older diesel engines, the railroad was overwhelmed by thousands of people who fled work early only to be trapped in New York City, and by thousands more who could not get into the city to go to work.
In Manhattan, hotel rooms quickly filled, and irritable commuters faced the prospect of a snowbound weekend.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Around the Country; Winter Reigns Tyrannical From Texas to Massachusetts
The winter storm that paralyzed much of the Deep South bulled its way up through the Border and Mid-Atlantic States and into New England yesterday, turning much of the eastern half of the country into a glistening but treacherous winter wasteland.
From Texas to Massachusetts, the storm left Interstate highways and city streets impassable.
It forced airports to sharply curtail or cease operations.
It shut down schools, businesses and offices by the thousands, including the offices of the Federal Government in Washington.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about plans for a new subway link between Manhattan and Queens misstated an element.
The plan calls for linking the East 63d Street river tunnel to the Queens Boulevard lines via a new connector tunnel and track switch near the Queens Plaza station.
It does not call for building a new subway stop.


Hosokawa's Report, a la Clinton
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa borrowed a Clinton technique today and took his case to more than 100 students at Georgetown University.
It was a highly unusual performance for a Japanese Prime Minister, far from the carefully scripted appearances his predecessors have made here.
But Mr.
Hosokawa has proved many times in the last six months that he views his job as being more that of a president proselytizing for change than a prime minister taking a cautious approach.


Out of a Gust of Wind, Pavin Emerges to Lead
Playing what he called "probably the best round of golf I've ever played," Corey Pavin ignored biting cold and gusting wind and stormed across Riviera Country Club today with a 64 that gave him the lead after two rounds of the Nissan Los Angeles Open.
With equal parts great ball striking and superb putting, Pavin shot more than 10 strokes lower than the average score of the field (74.55).
Given the weather -- temperatures in the 50's, winds gusting to 25 miles an hour -- and the bumpiness of the newly renovated greens, Pavin's round was one of the more remarkable in golf this season.
He had nine 3's on his scorecard when only nine players in the field of 145 could break par.


CBS Gets Football, College Variety
CBS re-entered college football yesterday with a five-year agreement worth about $100 million for Southeastern Conference games starting in 1996.
The deal constitutes the first defection from the College Football Association package with ABC since Notre Dame bolted to NBC for a $38 million contract after the 1990 season.


Umberto's, of Clams and Bullets Fame, Is Paroled
In Little Italy, Umberto's Clam House is known for its ambiance of butcher-block tables and zesty dishes of calamari, scungilli and mussels.
It is also notorious as the setting for the final and fatal gun battle of one mobster, Joseph (Crazy Joey) Gallo and as the hangout of a another, Matthew (Matty the Horse) Ianniello, a former Mafia kingpin now in prison.
But after seven years of tight supervision by the Federal Government, the daily management and control of the restaurant soon will be largely returned to Mr.
Ianniello's brother, Robert, according to lawyers and officials who are negotiating a court agreement.


Classical Music in Review
Tallis Scholars St.
Mary the Virgin Church  With the 400th anniversary of Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina's death just passed, we may hope to hear more of his music than usual in coming months, but we can hardly hope to hear it sung better than it was on Thursday evening by the Tallis Scholars.
A superb English chorus of 10, directed by Peter Philips, the Scholars came fresh from performing this program on the actual death date, Feb. 2, in the Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome, where Palestrina was trained and worked. (That concert was filmed for television and video release.)
For a compositional nonstarter who has picked over the bones of Palestrina's counterpoint in a futile attempt to animate melody as well as tame dissonance, every re-encounter with the music in the flesh is a revelation.
When the lines emerge as clearly as they did in these superbly balanced performances, they are seen to enjoy a rich independent life, and yet the whole moves forward with a taut, seemingly inevitable flow.


Mecklenburg Released
Linebacker KARL MECKLENBURG has become an unrestricted free agent after the Denver Broncos told him they would not pick up the option on his contract.
His agent, TONY AGNONE, said Thursday that Denver's general manager, JOHN BEAKE, told him that the Broncos do not want to pay the veteran Pro Bowl player $1.4 million in 1994.
Agnone said he would begin soliciting offers Friday but said Mecklenburg wanted to finish his career in Denver. (AP)


Mr. Weprin's Contribution
When Saul Weprin became Speaker of the New York State Assembly three years ago, he said his goal was, simply, to do the best job he could.
Mr.
Weprin acted on that promise.
An old-fashioned Democrat who came up through the ranks, he rose to his powerful position late in his career.
Mr.
Weprin was a warm, avuncular politician from Queens who loved Albany and had mastered its political intricacies.
His most immediate contribution was to restore calm in the Legislature after the Federal fraud conviction -- later overturned -- of his predecessor, Mel Miller.


Stubborn Guest Makes the Common Special
Because of the snow, so much snow, the miracle of birth had to unfold on a couch in Teaneck, N.J.
Because of the snow, a 90-year-old, one-legged man in Port Chester, N.Y., couldn't get a hot meal.
But in Manhattan, a delivery man with ice in his eyebrows and terror in his eyes made a suicidal-type run on an out-of-control bicycle with a $7 order of moo-shu pork.


Municipals Beckon, But Beware Rate Rise
FOR bond investors who are at sea over the improving economy, municipals may be an inviting port of call.
But, like all who may be affected by rising interest rates, buyers of tax-exempts should consider ways to batten down the hatches.
Last August, the Clinton tax increases made municipals much more lucrative.
Last year's low interest rates also produced a record $290 billion in new municipals, making them relatively cheap.
Indeed, long-term municipals are now earning 83 percent of what comparable, federally taxable Treasuries earn.


After 20 Seasons, Yount Calls It Quits
ROBIN YOUNT officially retired from baseball yesterday with 20 seasons of memories, three All-Star appearances, two Most Valuable Player awards and only one regret -- that he never brought the Milwaukee Brewers a championship.
"Other than having the championship ring and a trophy, I really don't think I've missed anything," Yount said at a news conference in front of his locker at Milwaukee County Stadium.
Yount reached the major leagues as a baby-faced 18-year-old shortstop in 1974 and led the Brewers to the World Series in 1982, where they lost to the St.
Louis Cardinals in seven games.
When a shoulder injury relegated him to the outfield in 1985, Yount became only the third player to win m.v.p. awards at two positions, shortstop in 1982 and center field in 1989.
The Hall of Famers STAN MUSIAL and Hank Greenberg were the others.


Rostenkowski Reimburses U.S. for Office Purchases
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the powerful House leader under investigation for possible misuse of Congressional funds, has reimbursed the Government $82,000 for office supplies purchased by his office at public expense, lawyers following the case said today.
The payments came after Federal prosecutors had subpoenaed Mr.
Rostenkowski's office supply records in connection with a three-year criminal inquiry that turned a harsh, lingering spotlight on Mr.
Rostenkowski, the 66-year-old Chicago Democrat who is chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.


Results Plus
TENNIS Korda Beats Ivanisevic  In a minor upset, sixth-seeded Petr Korda defeated No. 3 Goran Ivanisevic, 6-4, 4-6, 6-2, yesterday to reach the semifinals of the Muratti Time tournament in Milan, Italy.
Sergi Bruguera, seeded second, ripped No. 8 Karel Novacek, 6-1, 6-0.
No. 5 Boris Becker, the defending champion who is seeking to reach the top 10 again, defeated No. 4 Cedric Pioline, 6-3, 4-6, 6-2.
In another quarterfinal, unseeded Ronald Agenor defeated Wally Masur, 4-6, 6-2, 6-4.
Agenor, ranked No. 52, knocked out top-seeded Michael Stich earlier in the tournament. (AP)
Maleeva-Fragniere Wins: Top-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere, who is planning to retire after the tournament, defeated Yonke Kamio, 6-1, 6-1, to reach the semifinals of the Asian Women's Open in Amagasaki, Japan. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Hofstra Is Beaten  Monty Williams scored 27 points and Notre Dame opened the second half with a 14-4 run on its way to a 76-63 victory over Hofstra last night at South Bend, Ind.
Williams scored 10 points in the opening 7 minutes 16 seconds of the second half as Notre Dame (9-14) took a 42-36 lead.
Hofstra (3-17) pulled within 3, 49-46, with 8:53 remaining on James Shaffer's two free throws.
But Carl Cozen hit a 3-pointer and Ryan Hoover hit a basket and two free throws as Notre Dame took a 56-46 lead with 7:47 to play.
Hofstra did not get closer than 9 points.
Williams, who entered the game averaging 23.2 points, had 16 of his game-high total in the second half.
Lamarr Justice chipped in with 13. (AP) Penn 79, Brown 59: Jerome Allen scored 21 points for Penn as the Quakers beat Brown in Providence, R.I.
Penn (16-2 over all, 6-0 Ivy League) led by as much as 34 midway through the second half.
The Bears fell to 8-11, 2-5. (AP) Penn State Women Lose: No. 11 Purdue took a 13-point halftime lead and held on for a 57-54 victory over top-ranked Penn State, sending the Nittany Lions to their first loss this season and pulling the Boilermakers into a tie for the Big Ten lead.
Penn State (18-1, 9-1) had been the last undefeated Division I women's basketball team.
Stacey Lovelace and Jennifer Jacoby scored 8 points each in the first half for Purdue (18-3, 9-1), which opened a 36-23 lead.
Penn State opened the second half with a 12-0 run, capped by Missy Masley's layup with 15:22 to play, to pull within 36-35.
Purdue's Jannon Roland scored on a layup 15 seconds later, but Penn State stayed within 6 points the rest of the way. (AP)
TRACK AND FIELD  Surin Wins the 60  Bruny Surin of Canada, the world indoor champion at 60 meters, beat Leroy Burrell and Andre Cason to win his specialty yesterday in the Cagigal memorial meet in Madrid.
Surin was timed in 6.50 seconds, Burrell was second in 6.53, and Cason, holder of the indoor mark of 6.41, was third in 6.58.
In the women's 60, Yirina Privalova of Russia won in 6.97, just off the world mark of 6.92 she set last year in Madrid.
Beverly McDonald of Jamaica was second 7.24.
Greg Foster, the 35-year-old world-indoor record holder in the 60-meter hurdles, won his race in 7.58, edging Mark McKoy of Canada in 7.60. (AP) No Record for Bubka: Sergei Bubka won the pole vault at the Yomiuri Chitose international indoor track and field meet yesterday in Osaka, Japan, with a vault of 19 feet 2 1/4 inches.
He failed, though, in three attempts to break his record of 20-2 1/4.
The Ukrainian vaulter has set three indoor world records at this meet in previous years.
Tim Bright of the United States finished second at 18-0 1/2.
Gail Devers, the Olympic 100-meter gold medalist, won the 60-meter dash in 7.04 seconds, beating a fellow American, Gwen Torrence.
Michelle Freeman of Jamaica won the 60-meter hurdles in 7.98 seconds.
Zhang Yu of China was second in 8.06 seconds and Jackie Joyner-Kersee, the heptathlon specialist, was third, also in 8.06. (AP)


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Stranded Travelers; Making the Most of Unscheduled Stop in Maine
The Norwegian choir singers came for New Orleans gospel, but all they heard today were flight delay announcements with a Down East accent as winter weather diverted flights from around the world to the small airport here.
For the second time in a week, Bangor International Airport has provided refuge as snow closed Kennedy International Airport, Newark International Airport and other major airports on the East Coast.
The storm passed south of Bangor, which had sunny skies and daytime temperatures in the teens.


Saul Weprin Is Dead at 66; Sought Assembly Harmony
Saul Weprin, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly since 1991 and a political fixture in Queens and Albany for more than three decades, died yesterday at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in Queens.
He was 66.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said Michael Moran, an Assembly spokesman.
A Democrat from Fresh Meadows, Queens, Mr.
Weprin had been in failing health since November, when he underwent pancreatic surgery.
His recovery was proceeding slowly when he suffered a debilitating stroke on Jan. 18.


Agassi's New Persona: The Comeback Kid
While the player who makes women's tennis colorful and quotable, Martina Navratilova, was busy here starting the United States leg of her farewell tour, the Las Vegan who brought technicolor to the men's game, Andre Agassi, announced today that he was ready to stage his latest comeback.
Agassi, whose ranking has dropped to No. 31 after a five-month injury timeout that included minor surgery on his right wrist, is practicing in Boca Raton, Fla., in preparation for defending his Scottsdale title in Arizona on Feb. 21.
Agassi played just 13 tour events last year, and his finale was a first-round loss at the United States Open.


In Pursuit of Warmth In a City Transformed
With the snow stinging his face like a blizzard of glass shards, the chilled New Yorker set out yesterday morning in search of warmth, or at least comfort.
East Harlem seemed like a good bet.
After all, generations of Caribbean transplants had managed one way or another to reach some accommodation with the elements.


Sports of The Times; Transition From East To West
KNICK fans took their best shots at Chris Webber on Thursday night.
At intermittent intervals during the Knicks' game against Golden State, fans hollered "Call Timeout, Chris," reminding the Warriors' rookie forward of the blunder he committed last April during the national collegiate championship game.


Winter Olympics: NOTEBOOK; I.O.C. Looks to Atlanta, and a New Georgia Flag
Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, sent a message today that he would love to see the controversy over the Georgia state flag ended well before the 1996 Summer Games in Atlanta.
The current flag, which contains the old Confederate insignia, was recently the object of demonstrations during the Super Bowl.
"My answer is that the Americans know best," Samaranch said during his traditional pre-Games press conference.
"They can decide. But they must realize that the results of these Atlanta Games are very important not only for the city but for the state and the government. We need help from them."


U.S. and Allies Send More Planes for Possible Strikes in Bosnia
British and French aircraft carriers headed for the Adriatic today, and the United States prepared to send more fighter bombers to bases in Italy as NATO formally began the countdown on its demand that Bosnia's Serbs lift their siege of Sarajevo within 10 days, military officials said.
A Pentagon spokesman said eight American F-15E strike aircraft would fly to Aviano and two AC-130 helicopter gunships and two EC-130 flying command centers to Brindisi from bases in Britain this weekend, joining about 100 NATO planes in Italy.


Winter Olympics; Last Dance for Largely Amateur U.S. Team May Be About to Begin
For 20 years, Tim Taylor and his sidekick, John Cunniff, have talked about what they would do if they could run a United States Olympic hockey team.
And today, after six months of grooming their young players and just 48 hours away from their first Olympic game, they faced the possibility that this squad could be the last of its kind.
That's because some players and owners from the National Hockey League, along with some Olympic officials, want the N.H.L. to suspend play during the 1998 Games in Nagano, Japan, and supply the dominant talent for a half-dozen countries, including Canada and the United States.
Most N.H.L. teams now are unwilling to permit their top players to miss games and play on their national teams.


INSIDE
Rostenkowski Pays
His office practices in question, Representative Dan Rostenkowski has moved to defuse criticism by repaying the Government $82,000.
Page 6.
France Presses Bosnia
The Foreign Minister of France put pressure on Bosnia for a negotiated peace as the Serbs handed over a few weapons to peacekeepers.
Page 5.
Kings County: Whose Fault?
An executive of the company overseeing the rebuilding plan at Kings County Hospital blamed New York's hospital agency for troubles there.
Page 21.
Little Sign of Inflation
Producer prices rose 0.2 percent in January, the Government said in a report indicating that inflation remains in check.
Page 37.
Assembly Chief Weprin Dies
Saul Weprin, the New York State Assembly Speaker who was a political fixture in Queens and Albany for decades, was 66.
Page 10.


Fresno State Passer Has the Right Stuff
Trent Dilfer, the Fresno State quarterback, seems certain to be a top-five choice in the National Football League draft, perhaps even the first pick.
Listen to this scouting report:
"He's a big, strong kid who throws the ball well. His strength is the intangibles. He's a leader who will do anything it takes to win and learn the game. He spends hours in the film room. At the beginning of the year, he was up to 1 A.M. Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays watching film. He worked so hard that he didn't get enough sleep."


Options on Japan
The United States has talked tough on trade during eight months of negotiations, but Japan has called its bluff and has yielded virtually nothing.
The question now is whether President Clinton has an ace in the hole to change Tokyo's position.


Samuel O. Miller, 63, Social Work Teacher
Samuel O. Miller, a professor at Columbia University's School of Social Work and an author of recent studies on AIDS, died Feb. 5 at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 63.
The cause was liver disease, the university said.


PERES QUESTIONS SETTLEMENT 'LOGIC'
After having negotiated hard with Palestinian leaders on security arrangements for Israeli settlers in the Gaza Strip, Foreign Minister Shimon Peres questioned today whether a small, isolated settlement in Gaza should even exist.
Mr.
Peres reaffirmed the Government's position that none of the roughly 140 settlements in Gaza and the West Bank would be abandoned while Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization continue to negotiate details of Palestinian self-rule and a companion Israeli troop withdrawal.


Bronx Tenants to Return to Shaky Building
Most of the 75 families who were evacuated on Thursday night from a five-story apartment building in the Bronx after the walls began shaking and cracking will be allowed to move back home, the New York City Building Department decided yesterday.
The department allowed about 60 families to return after its engineers determined that the structure was only partly damaged, the authorities said.
The building lies on the Grand Concourse at 165th Street in the High Bridge section, about six blocks northeast of Yankee Stadium.


Robben Island Journal; Mandela Revisits a Hotbed of Revolt
This lump of limestone in the shark-infested ocean six miles off Cape Town has been, over the centuries, a leper colony, an insane asylum, a naval fortress and, as it remains, a prison.
To the black leaders who expect to be the next government, though, the cellblocks of Robben Island are the dormitories of South Africa's most illustrious university.
And today was alumni day.


Editor Quits at Le Monde
Le Monde, France's most prestigious daily newspaper, was thrown into disarray today after the abrupt resignation of its managing editor, Jacques Lesourne, who was just three years into a five-year contract.
Mr.
Lesourne, who was an economist, author and business consultant before taking the job at Le Monde, was the first nonjournalist to lead the afternoon newspaper, which was established in 1944.
He said his authority had been undermined by maneuvers linked to his succession, which he felt that had left him ill equipped to carry out a new austerity program approved earlier this week.


How an Ulster Vote Could Settle Irish Future; Taken for a Ride
To the Editor:
In "The Lion Whines About Mr. Adams" (editorial, Feb. 5), you refer to British reactions to the visit to New York of Gerry Adams.
New Yorkers recently have had their own experience of terrorism at the World Trade Center.
People in Britain and Northern Ireland experience Irish Republican Army terrorism on a weekly basis in their daily lives.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the spectacle of Mr.
Adams talking about "peace" in New York while refusing to call for an end to I.R.A. bombings and killings produces an indignant reaction in Britain.


How an Ulster Vote Could Settle Irish Future; Dublin and Protestants
To the Editor:
Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader, will not call a halt to Irish Republican Army violence until he sees "the British Government actually persuading" the Protestant majority in Northern Ireland that Dublin will grant it minority rights in a united Ireland (news article, Feb. 3).
The Irish are no longer helpless serfs who must leave management of Irish affairs to their English lords.
Only Dublin can persuade the North of what Dublin intends to do.


Manager Says New York Let Hospital Fail
The top executive of the company managing the billion-dollar project to rebuild Kings County Hospital said the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation -- and not his company -- was responsible for the project's troubles, and he presented a detailed list of what he called the city's mismanagement and delays.
The complaints came a day after Luis A. Miranda Jr., chairman of the Health and Hospitals Corporation, issued a scathing critique of the decadelong effort to rebuild the city's largest public medical center.


Classical Music in Review
L'Opera Francais de New York Alice Tully Hall
As unstaged opera in concert form becomes an increasingly reputable medium, L'Opera Francais de New York continues to gain in reputation as one of its purveyors.
A strong cast, a passable chorus and a solid orchestra, very well conducted by Yves Abel, brought Donizetti's Paris opera, "La Favorite," to a large audience on Thursday night.
Obscured behind faulty editions including a particularly corrupt Italian version, this operatic intersection of church, state and private passion argued strongly in its own behalf.
As Fernand challenges his king in Act III, there is a quintet sung by the contending parties worthy of Donizetti's finest ensemble writing.
Two singers promised much for the future.
One was Robynne Redmon as Leonor.
Her mezzo-soprano is seamless, powerful and ardent.
As King Alphonse, Gordon Hawkins added true heat to an already warm atmosphere.
His baritone sound is dark and recessed rather than brilliant, but Mr.
Hawkins works admirably at his French diction and projects a fine amalgam of menace, dignity and humanity.


Classical Music in Review
Philadelphia Orchestra Carnegie Hall
In the Philadelphia Orchestra's all-Wagner concert on Tuesday night -- Act I of "Die Walkure" and the Overture and first three scenes of Act II of "Tannhauser" -- the acclaimed young soprano Deborah Voigt showed herself an accomplished lyric-dramatic Wagnerian, singing with tremendous vocal assurance and a painstaking attention to the text.
Hers is not the loudest voice -- now and then the brass crunched in and silenced her -- but it is strikingly full and warm.
What she seems to lack at this point is breadth of vocal characterization; her Sieglinde sounded much the same as her Elisabeth.


Merck Says It Will Add 12% to Research Budget
Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would spend 12 percent more on research and development this year.
It said so only days after its chairman, in Congressional testimony, said drug price restraints in the Clinton Administration health care bill could force it to cut some research projects.
Merck, which acquired Medco Containment Services Inc. last year for $6 billion, giving it a big stake in the managed drug care business, told analysts in a five-hour report on its business strategy that it had increased the number of people covered by its managed care drug programs by 19 percent, to 38 million.


He Stands Tall in Willimantic
At the 1917 Congress of Soviets, Leon Trotsky bade the Mensheviks good riddance with a resounding putdown: "Go to the place where you belong from now on -- the dustbin of history." Little could he have imagined that his most celebrated Bolshevik colleague would wind up in a New England scrap heap.
Bernard and Nathan Schilberg run a scrap metal business in the eastern Connecticut town of Willimantic.
They call it the Schilberg Integrated Metals Corporation.
Others might call it a junkyard, but no matter.
The Schilbergs began buying scrap from remnant states of the former Soviet Union two years ago.
There was nothing remarkable about that until last summer, when they found a 12-foot brass statue buried in a shipment they acquired for about 50 cents a pound.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a dispute between the New York City Schools Chancellor, Ramon C. Cortines, and a Bronx school board over a local superintendent misstated the origin of a literary allusion in a comment from a former chancellor, Frank Macchiarola.
His remark -- "If the law says that Ray Cortines can't do justice to the children in that district, then the law is an ass" -- paraphrased a passage from Dickens's "Oliver Twist," not from Shakespeare.


French Aide Visits Bosnia; Both Sides Yield Some Arms
Both the Bosnian Serbs and the Muslim-led Government troops handed over a small number of heavy weapons to United Nations forces today, and France's Foreign Minister paid a hastily arranged visit to Sarajevo to press the Bosnian Government leaders toward a peace settlement.
A cease-fire that took effect here on Thursday, considered critical to the momentum for peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, seemed generally to be holding as the French minister, Alain Juppe, arrived.
Only a few outbursts of gunfire were reported during the day.


Dow Slides a Fraction As Trading Ends Early
Despite a Government report of low inflation, Wall Street posted mixed results in dispirited trading yesterday, as a powerful snowstorm numbed stock market activity.
Many traders remained at home, and others were eager to leave early so they would not be stranded in Manhattan.
After some hesitation, officials closed the major stock exchanges 90 minutes early.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a memorandum on welfare written by John S. Dyson, a Deputy Mayor of New York City, rendered a comment about Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan incorrectly.
Mr.
Dyson wrote that the Senator was "very supportive" of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani; he did not write that the Senator had supported Mr.
Giuliani's election.


South Korean Cautious on Sanctions
The South Korean Foreign Minister said today that it appeared unlikely that North Korea would agreed to nuclear inspections soon.
But he added that he would be wary about responding with swift economic sanctions as some American officials have suggested.
The Foreign Minister, Han Sung Joo, who is in Washington to discuss the North Korean nuclear issue with Government officials, said sanctions against Pyongyang should not be pursued until there was no chance of progress in negotiations.


Hospital Fights Parents' Wish to Keep Life Support for a 'Brain Dead' Child
A Sarasota hospital that has been caring for a brain-dead teen-ager since early last month is seeking permission from the courts to disconnect her life-support system, despite opposition from the girl's parents.
The parents, Frederick and Sharon Hamilton, say the action is premature and want doctors at Sarasota Memorial Hospital to release their 13-year-old daughter, Teresa, to their custody.


Winter Olympics; Harding Hearing Delayed, Her Status Unresolved
The United States Olympic Committee today agreed to delay for three days a hearing scheduled for Tuesday in Oslo to determine whether Tonya Harding should be allowed to compete in the Winter Olympics.
The decision was announced after a two-hour hearing here in which lawyers for the 23-year-old skater asked for a court order to delay the hearing to give Harding more time to prepare her defense.


To Vietnamese in America, the Homeland Beckons
As the last groups of bewildered refugees from the Vietnam War arrive here with their identity tags and bundles of belongings, plane loads of their successful countrymen are heading back with dollars in their pockets to visit relatives or open businesses.
Nineteen years after the fall of Saigon, with the Vietnamese population in the United States approaching one million, the flood of refugees is drawing to a close.


Navratilova Exits Early At Chicago of All Places
Martina Navratilova received an unwanted reminder tonight of why she has declared this year her last in competitive singles play.
She was forced to take early retirement from the quarterfinals of the Virginia Slims of Chicago, an event she had captured a record 12 times, by 18-year-old Magdalena Maleeva.
"If this tournament is any indication, I'll be crying after every match I play," said the 37-year-old Navratilova, who was too distraught after her 6-4, 6-3 loss to participate in a bittersweet ceremony to honor her longevity here.


Making a Gift that Pays for Life
When Mary and Leonard Cordes, owners of nursing homes in Florida, began planning their retirement in 1987, they sought ways to guarantee a solid income while lowering taxes.
As dedicated Zionists, they also placed a high priority on continued support for the American Friends of Hebrew University, "giving back to the community as I had done throughout my life," Mr.
Cordes said.
An accountant, he decided a charitable remainder trust could be beneficial to all.
He and his wife created such a trust for their donation to the university and will receive income from the trust throughout their lives.
When they die, all proceeds will go to the university.


Avery Comes Up Big
STEVE AVERY, the youngest member of the Atlanta Braves' vaunted starting pitching quartet, vaulted closer to the salary stratosphere of his elders yesterday with a victory in arbitration.
Two other players, MIKE FETTERS of Milwaukee and ALAN MILLS of Baltimore, lost their cases.
Avery, who was 18-6 with a 2.94 earned run average last year, had his salary increased from $560,000 to $2.8 million in a decision by the arbitrator, HOWARD BLOCK.
The Braves had argued for $2.1 million.


Elliott Set to Play
Detroit Pistons forward SEAN ELLIOTT apparently will be cleared to practice and is likely to be suited up Tuesday night for a home game against Washington.
An independent examination by doctors at the University of Arizona's University Medical Center, including a kidney specialist, determined "that there is no medical reason or justification to prevent Sean Elliott from playing professional basketball," said BURT KINERK, the player's agent and a Tucson attorney.
Kinerk said the exam "allows Sean to play and assures us that playing basketball will not be detrimental to him."
Elliott returned to Tucson this week after the Houston Rockets canceled a trade for him that would have sent Robert Horry and Matt Bullard to Detroit along with two second-round draft picks. (AP)


Douglas Morse Howell, 87, Artist and Papermaker
Douglas Morse Howell, an artist and educator often credited with reviving the craft of making paper by hand, died on Sunday at Hackettstown Hospital in Hackettstown, N.J.
He was 87.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Electronic Donating; Giving to Charity Using Teller Machines
Now, the cash machine accepts donations.
Last month, the users of Michigan National Bank's 300 automated teller machines found a new menu item on the screens: information on charities.


Review/Music; Pianist's Technical Appetite
Preceded by a handful of new Deutsche Grammophon recordings and a somewhat distant reputation acquired in concerts here a decade ago, Andrei Gavrilov made a troubled re-entry into New York's musical life on Wednesday night.
Mr.
Gavrilov's performance at Carnegie Hall could be divided into two unequal parts.
The larger of them featured Ravel's "Gaspard de la Nuit," the Prokofiev Eighth Sonata and a pianist's gargantuan technical appetite for devouring both.
The rest of the evening was shorter, far freer of virtuoso problems and not very satisfactory.


Snowstorm Even Claims a Game on Ice
With weather not fit for bettor or beast, the snowblowers had Aqueduct to themselves yesterday as the season's latest and biggest snowstorm forced the latest shutdown of the beleaguered track.
Cancellations have become a winter routine at Aqueduct, which has managed to field a full racing card on only 21 of the year's first 34 scheduled racing days, but yesterday's storm, which also forced cancellation of harness racing at the Yonkers, Meadowlands and Garden State tracks, was such a monster that the effects were felt far beyond the open-air race courses.


New York City Lands New Cable Network
A new cable television network owned by Fox Inc. has leased office, studio and retail space in a building in the Madison Square area of Manhattan, providing a boost to New York City's depressed commercial real-estate market.
The sales, development and public relations offices for the cable network, fX, and its production center will move in early May into the 21-story tower at 212 Fifth Avenue, at 26th Street and Fifth Avenue and across from Madison Square Park, Anne M. Sweeney, chairman and chief executive of the network, said yesterday.


Outside Shot Kills Woman In Her S.I. House
A shot fired in a quiet Staten Island neighborhood pierced the wall of a house and killed an 82-year-old woman yesterday.
The police were at a loss for a motive and said the woman might have been hit by a stray bullet.
The victim, Frances Sciame, was struck once in the leg and apparently bled to death.
She was found yesterday afternoon, lying in the hallway of her home at 225 Adelaide Avenue in the Oakwood section.


Ms. Reno and the Jail Glut
More than one-fifth of the 90,000 Federal prison inmates are low-level drug offenders with no current or prior violence or previous prison time on their criminal records.
The Federal prison population has tripled in a decade, and will swell an additional 50 percent by the year 2000, with high- and low-level drug offenders rocketing from 18 percent to 60 percent of all inmates.
These are some of the findings of a Justice Department study completed last summer but not released until last week.
The study, commissioned with fanfare by Attorney General Janet Reno, avoids drawing conclusions, but seems to bear out Ms.
Reno's concern that severe mandatory minimum sentencing laws are having a perverse effect by forcing judges to clog the jails with nonviolent criminals who don't need to be there.


Classical Music in Review
'Le Nozze di Figaro'  Metropolitan Opera
Two new cast members in Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" at the Met on Wednesday evening lent reasonable dignity to a dowdy production sorely in need of it.
Renee Fleming took over the role of the Countess, in which she made her Met debut three years ago, and Marie McLaughlin sang Susanna.
Susan Quittmeyer, who was to have played Cherubino, was replaced by Jane Bunnell, from the first cast of the season, because of illness.
Both of the newcomers were slow to warm to the occasion, Ms.
McLaughlin swooping with uncharacteristic heaviness at the start and Ms.
Fleming sounding oddly tentative at the end of an otherwise lovely "Porgi amor." But they seemed to have a good effect on each other in the second act, particularly toward the close, where they meshed brilliantly in the quartet's aching harmonies.


How an Ulster Vote Could Settle Irish Future; A Minority Party
To the Editor:
Your articles of Feb. 1 and 2 on the visit of Gerry Adams to New York fail to note that in the 1992 general election his party, Sinn Fein, received 10 percent of the total vote cast in Northern Ireland and less than 30 percent of the votes cast for parties that support the incorporation of Northern Ireland into the Republic of Ireland.
That omission leaves the misleading impression that he is the spokesman for all or most of those in Northern Ireland who support British withdrawal.
FRANK MYERS Prof. of Political Science, SUNY Stony Brook, L.I., Feb. 2, 1994


William G. Kay Jr. Management Consultant, 63
William G. Kay Jr., a management consultant and retired business executive, died last Saturday at St.
Luke's Hospital in New Bedford, Mass.
He was 63 and lived in South Dartmouth, Mass.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Marcia.
From 1976 to 1982, Mr.
Kay was an executive vice president of the Sun Company, formerly the Sun Refining and Marketing Company, in Philadelphia.
He had previously been an executive of the Rival dog food division of Associated Products and the Pepperidge Farms division of the Campbell Soup Company.
In recent years he was a management consultant.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Wallace Roney  Trumpeter Down Beat 101 Seventh Avenue South Greenwich Village Through tomorrow
In late 1963, Miles Davis began to assemble a group that would include Wayne Shorter, Herbie Hancock, Ron Carter and Tony Williams; its chilly beauty is still being explored.
Wallace Roney, a young trumpeter who has long been a favorite among his fellow musicians, has brought a band into Down Beat, and it is working from a blueprint first imagined by Davis and his sidemen, codifying and elaborating on the Davis band's improvisatory heritage, making jazz that's distinct and new.


It Truly Is the Year of the Dog at Madison Square Garden


How an Ulster Vote Could Settle Irish Future
To the Editor:
When the statelet of "Northern Ireland" was carved out by the British in 1922, it was the largest land area in which a loyalist or pro-British constituency could be contained.
If the opposite point of view had been taken and the British decided to carve out the largest land area in which a republican constituency could be contained, it would have included the entire territory of the island of Ireland.
The nine counties of the province of Ulster were cut down to six counties to form the occupation zone of "Northern Ireland." This is gerrymandering in its most basic form, and whole counties with a republican majority were forced at the point of a gun into the British occupation zone.
County government officials who demanded the right of self-determination for their constituents were jailed.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.16
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.25
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.38
3.40
3.08
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.87
5.92
6.33
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.40
6.43
7.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.25
7.25
8.30
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.53
5.52
6.18
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Rogers Bids $2.25 Billion For Maclean
By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH
Rogers Communications Inc., Canada's biggest cable television operator, lifted the veil today on its offer to acquire Maclean Hunter Inc., the country's biggest publishing company, and form another North American multimedia giant.
Rogers Communcations said it was offering $17 in cash for each Maclean Hunter share, making the bid worth nearly $3 billion (Canadian), or $2.25 billion (United States).
In addition, shareholders would receive a cut of the proceeds from the sale of Maclean Hunter's American cable television assets, if that sale generated more than $1.5 billion (Canadian), or $1.12 billion.


No Headline
I'm sure Maine is a beautiful place, but not today, please. - FREDRICK HAASKJOLD, whose flight from Oslo to New York had to land in Bangor.  [ 25:1. ]


Detroit's New Wrinkle: Leasing of Used Cars
IN the old days financing a new car was relatively simple.
Then came lease contracts, with jargon like "residual value" and warnings in fine print about "mileage limitations" and "normal wear and tear."
The latest wrinkle, announced earlier this month by the Ford Motor Company, is the leasing of low-mileage used cars.
The practice is reminiscent of the move by dealers a few years ago to sell "almost new" cars, which had spent a few months as rental cars, for substantially less than new models.


Iran Celebrates Islamic Revolution


Joseph Goto, 79, Dies; Abstractionist Sculptor
Joseph Goto, an Abstract Expressionist sculptor known for welded steel works, died on Jan. 18 at his home in Pawtucket, R.I.
He was 79.
The cause was complications of diabetes, his family said.


Winter Olympics; Kerrigan Finds Her Only Peace on the Ice
Nancy Kerrigan swooped into her first practice today like a running back behind a wall of pulling guards.
Seven Olympic and security types escorted her from a van to the Olympic Amphitheater.
Ten television cameras filmed her from behind a railing.
Nancy waved.
Photographers took pictures of other photographers taking pictures.
Inside the rink, Kerrigan emerged from a tunnel and her face wrenched into a look of momentary disgust.
"Are all these cameras and reporters necessary?" the look seemed to say.
Snow White was annoyed at the news media -- the same media that had made her the world's most visible and sympathetic athlete since she was clubbed above the right knee in January at the national championships.


The U.S.O.C. Charges Against Harding
When the United States Olympic Committee notified Tonya Harding that it planned to hold a hearing to consider her status as a member of the Olympic team, it provided the following list of charges:
1.
You will be asked to answer the charge that you committed an act, made a statement, or engaged in conduct in connection with a plan to injure Nancy Kerrigan and the subsequent investigation of that plan (the "Conduct") which violates the U.S.O.C. bylaw requirement that you conduct yourself "at all times and in all places that befits worthy representatives of (your) country and in conformity with the tradition of the Olympic and Pan American Games." U.S.O.C.
Bylaws Chapter XLII, Section 1.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Season's Harshest Snow Yet Paralyzes New York Area; Hope for Relief Is Buried Again in Region
The harshest storm of a relentless winter attacked the New York region yesterday with a foot or more of new snow that crippled transportation, business and education, redesigned city and suburban landscapes and deepened the sense of siege for millions trapped in a dazzling but difficult season.
The storm -- a swirling comma that obliterated the Northeast and mid-Atlantic states and trailed off to the Southeast -- shut down the Long Island Rail Road and Kennedy and Newark International Airports; disrupted air, rail, bus and highway travel across the region, closed suburban schools and all but emergency government services, and turned commerce into chaos from candy stores to Wall Street.
Winter's 12th Big Blow
The 12th big blow of the snowiest winter in a decade began before dawn in the metropolitan area and continued all day, often dropping snow at a rate of more than an inch an hour.
When the snow stopped in and around New York City last night, accumulations had reached 11.7 inches in Central Park, 10 inches at Kennedy and La Guardia Airports, 12.4 inches in Bridgeport, Conn., and 19 inches in Newark, which broke a 1983 record for the date in that city.


Downsize That Special Sea Change
I've just come from a Management Meeting," said one of America's top corporate executives, urgency in her voice. "After the third time somebody used sea change, the publisher wanted to know, 'Where the hell does sea change come from, and how does it differ from any other change?' "
Was I ready for that!


No End of Troubles at the Bastille, But Chung Has Been a Bright Spot
PIERRE BERGE, THE Yves Saint Laurent executive, fashion-industry strongman and recently deposed president of the Paris Opera, made some questionable decisions during his operatic regime.
But one sage choice -- or piece of blind luck -- was his 1989 appointment of Myung-Whun Chung as music director.
Reeling from the abrupt and apparently politically inspired dismissal of Daniel Barenboim, the company found solace in this young, relatively unknown conductor.
Mr.
Chung, who is now 41, opened the Bastille Opera in 1990 with an admired production of Berlioz's "Troyens," and since then, surrounded by turmoil and inefficiency and saddled with inept casting and erratic repertory planning, he has been the one positive constant, winning favorable critical and public response.


BEST SELLERS: February 13, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
4
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
2
79
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
3
15
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
4
4
3
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
5
6
44
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
5
4
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
7
7
3
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in Buenos Aires in 1942.
8
1
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
9
10
8
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
10
9
48
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
11
8
25
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
12
12
2
VOYAGER, by Diana Gabaldon. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman finds love while commuting between 18th- and 20th-century Scotland.
13
2
GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A romantic encounter between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a large hotel chain.
14
13
9
THE BOOK OF GUYS, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $22.) A collection of stories about American men and the strains of contemporary life.
15*
15
14
MR.
MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $23.95.) A mystery writer's happy family life is endangered by a madman determined to kill him and take his place.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
40
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
8
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
3
5
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
4
5
25
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
7
19
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6
8
11
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
7
6
23
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
8
4
13
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
9
11
19
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
10
9
17
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
11
10
79
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
12
12
28
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
13
13
4
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) A journalist looks at middle age through the prism of his favorite sport.
14*
14
5
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
15
23
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
4
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
38
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
1
16
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
4
29
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest) BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth, by Aharon Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of spiritual apprehension.
THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.
BITTER WINDS: A Memoir of My Years in China's Gulag, by Harry Wu and Carolyn Wakeman. (Robert L. Bernstein/Wiley, $22.95.) Mr.
Wu's memoir of 19 years in labor camps is grimly familiar as to abuse and deprivation but grotesque and surreal in its account of acting out each new political rectification campaign right in the heart of the prison system.
BRAZIL, by John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) In the vast, trackless wilds of a Brazil the author freely admits making up out of whole cloth, a tragicomic knight-errant and his dolly, madly in love, break all the rules of class and race.
THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $19.95.) Romulus Ledbetter, Mr.
Green's protagonist, is a homeless, black, paranoid private eye who can be roused to propriety only by a case as interesting as the one Mr.
Green has dreamed up for his first novel.
CROSSING THE RIVER, by Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $22.) A novel, covering two and a half centuries, that presents a brilliantly coherent mythified vision of the irreversible African diaspora.
GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A road novel that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.
HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise, humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die, omitting none of the clinical detail.
IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES.
Volume 2: The Economist as Saviour 1920-1937, by Robert Skidelsky. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50.) How Keynes reshaped the world's economy, made a lot of money and married a ballerina, by an economics professor whose mastery of many subjects seems to match Keynes's own.
JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart, by Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. (Random House, $27.50.) Prodigious research and outstanding narrative fluency mark this biography of Josephine Baker (1906-75), the irresistible American institution of French revues, cabaret and film.


Peacekeeping Is Crucial to U.S. Military Future; No Time to Squander
To the Editor:
Senator Bob Dole, the Republican Senate minority leader, is sponsoring a peace powers bill, whose purpose is to prohibit United States troops from serving under foreign command in United Nations operations, and to bar United States forces from any standing United Nations army.


THE TALES A TABLE COULD TELL
In "The Tales a Table Could Tell," by Thatcher Freund (Jan. 16), one factor in the $1 million sale stands out.
There was only one real bidder at Sotheby's for the card table.
Bidding by phone, he might not have known his only competition was the house.


Economic Recovery: Manhandle With Care
THE good thing about economic recoveries is that they help people.
There are more jobs.
They pay better.
There's more money around.
Right?
Curious, then, that the popular economic wisdom holds that the best way to nurture the present recovery is to administer pain.


Debate Over Community Policing Hitting Close to Home
After the disturbances in Washington Heights in the summer of 1992, when a police officer killed a Dominican drug dealer, police officials touted community policing as the answer to a historic mistrust between the neighborhood and the police.
So when memos criticizing community policing were released two weeks ago and Mayor Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton criticized the program as too passive, people in Washington Heights paid particularly close attention.


Does This Jury Count?
TONYA HARDING has not been charged with any crime, yet her trial in the court of public opinion (polling division) is well under way.
Public verdicts are also available for Lorena and John Bobbitt, Michael Jackson, Eric and Lyle Menendez and William K. Smith.
Lorena Bobbitt was guilty, according to the polls before and during her trial.
So is Michael Jackson, in the public mind.
The Menendez brothers are too, while William K. Smith is innocent.
Tonya Harding was seen as blameless in the earliest polls but is now taking a public flogging.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 The clock is frozen at 3:49 A.M.
But Sheldon Greenberg's job is to make sure that justice makes it through the night.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  How do you kill two birds with one stone in German?
You hit two flies with one swat.
In Italian?
In Korean?


Correction
An article on Feb. 6 about Andrew Birkin, a British film maker, misidentified the company that released the movie "Sweetie." It was Avenue Pictures, not October Films.


Gunmelt
It's time to figure out a good way to recycle guns.
Four mayors of big cities recently suggested that firearms confiscated during arrests should be melted down rather than resold at auction, as many are now.
Great idea.
The guns would be out of circulation permanently.
But it would be a shame for the gunmelt simply to disappear into the vast national scrap-metal pool, especially when it could be turned into something significant.
But what?
A national contest might provide some good ideas about the best use of melted guns.
Pending the start of such a contest, here are a few initial suggestions:


Careful on Those Intellectual Property Rights
To the Editor:
It was troubling to read in "A $500 Package That Makes Scan-and-Send a Snap" (The Executive Computer, Jan. 23) that yet another information technology developer, Visioneer, is completely oblivious to the intellectual property rights of authors and publishers.
Visioneer itself relies on copyright and trademark property rights in developing and marketing its work.
Therefore, its president's brushoff of its users' legal responsibility through the bold assertion that "No one has ever approached us with the idea that this scanning  [ of articles published in newspapers and magazines ]  was a problem" is astonishing.
Digitizers of published works should exhibit awareness of the copyright law, not cavalier attitudes.
JOSEPH S. ALEN  Danvers, Mass., Feb. 3  The writer is president of the Copyright Clearance Center, a nonprofit collective licensing arm of the publishing industry.


U.N. Speeds Arms-Monitoring Effort in Iraq
The United Nations is speeding up its monitoring of Iraq's military industries in an effort to determine whether Baghdad has complied with Security Council disarmament terms, a move that would bolster the position of Iraqi officials who have cooperated with the inspection effort.
The supporters of cooperation -- chief among them is Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz -- appear to be facing political difficulties in Baghdad, officials here say.


THE GUIDE
ART FROM POLAND
During the late 18th century, King Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski of Poland and Count Stanislaw Kostka Potocki collected fine art with a zeal and expertise previously unknown in their country.
As a result of that legacy, more than 150 drawings by European masters, on loan from 10 Polish museums, have been touring the United States since last April, reaching their final destination last month at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
YUGOSLAV BREAKUP
A forum on the disintegration of the former Yugoslavia will be held at Purchase College Friday at noon, free of charge.
Visitors may bring lunch.
The speakers, Evan Kraft, assistant professor of economics at Salisbury State University in Maryland, and Jill Benderly, a journalist and author, have family ties in that beleaguered region.


Under Health Plan, We Can Repay Britain
To the Editor:
Now that President Clinton is embarked on health reforms, it is to be hoped a long-overdue reciprocity for the free emergency health treatment given United States citizens visiting Britain will not escape his attention.


Black or White? Labels Don't Always Fit
AT ITS BEST, POP MUSIC PRESSES an anxious ear to American society, amplifying our deepest desires and fears.
At times, too, pop invites us to listen to ourselves in ways forbidden by cultural debates where complexity is sacrificed for certainty.
In this vein, the reascent to the top of the charts of Mariah Carey's newest album, "Music Box," signals more than her musical dominance.
Part of Ms.
Carey's significance -- and undoubtedly the sharpest controversy around her -- has nothing to do with the singer's musical gifts.
Instead it derives from the confusion and discomfort that her multiracial identity provokes in an American culture obsessed with race.
Though she has made no secret that she is biracial (her mother is Irish-American, her father is a black Venezuelan), Ms.
Carey's candor evokes clashing responses from fans and critics.
Some see her statement of mixed heritage as a refusal to bow to public pressure to choose whether she is black or white.
But in light of the "one drop" rule -- where a person is considered black by virtue of having one drop of black blood, a holdover from America's racist past -- many conclude that the issue of racial identity, for Ms.
Carey and other interracial people, is settled.


State Senator Assails L.I.R.R.
A day after huge snowdrifts shut down the Long Island Rail Road, stranding thousands of commuters for up to 10 hours, the chairman of the State Senate Transportation Committee called yesterday for an investigation of the line's response to the storm and its ability to deal with weather-related problems.
"While the storm was certainly severe, trains seem to be able to move in poor weather in Canada, in Switzerland or even on Metro-North," said State Senator Norman J. Levy, a Nassau County Republican.
"Unfortunately, the Long Island Rail Road seems to be always reactive instead of proactive -- and this appears to be the case again."


Courting


Not an Urbanist, Only a Genius
HE WAS A HUSTLER AND A GENIUS, though perhaps it would be fairer to say of Frank Lloyd Wright that he was a genius first and a hustler second.
But it is no accident that, 35 years after his death at the age of 91, Wright lives on, not only as the greatest architect of modern times but also as the only architect whose name is recognized by millions who pay no attention to architecture at all.
Wright worked at fame, and he knew his buildings alone would not earn for him the celebrity status he craved.
When he appeared on television in a long interview with Hugh Downs in 1953, Wright was quick to see the power of the new medium, and exploited it eagerly, dismissing most American architecture in a deft sound bite as "imitation by imitators of imitation." It was just as a younger Wright had done all he could to make his private life the stuff of high drama.
This 19th-century man became the 20th century's first architecture media star.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 13, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
6
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
2
1
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) In Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an heiress's heart by helping her family win a yacht race.
3
4
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The policeman Jack McGarvey on the trail of a serial killer in Los Angeles.
4
3
RUBY, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in New Orleans.
5
7
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
6
52
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
7
3
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
8
2
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a nurse's pursuit of him.
9
96
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
10
2
SEDUCED, by Virginia Henley. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) To safeguard property she has inherited, a British noblewoman masquerades as a male.
11
3
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
12
12
ALONG CAME A SPIDER, by James Patterson. (Warner, $5.99.) Detective Alex Cross on the trail of a serial killer in Washington.
13
3
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) A "Star Wars" novel.
14
2
SUDDENLY, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) A pediatrician finds romance after the death of her dear friend.
15
22
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
536
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
52
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
4
22
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
5
122
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
5
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
7
9
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
8*
136
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9*
15
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
10*
11
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
11*
11
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy, as seen in the actions of an A.A.
Milne character.
12
37
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
13*
11
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
14*
2
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day battle in Vietnam in 1965.
15*
42
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
16*
28
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
152
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
9
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
3
7
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1994. (World Almanac/Funk &amp; Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.
4
3
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


"Urban Warfare" Declared by City on Illegal Commuter Vans


Thwarted Prosecutor Displays Evidence
One day after his stunning refusal to proceed with the case against Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, a Texas prosecutor summoned reporters to a downtown hotel room here today for a guided tour of his evidence.
The prosecutor, District Attorney Ronnie Earle of Travis County, showed off dozens of cartons of memorandums, fund-raising letters, work sheets and other computerized records from Mrs.
Hutchison's two-and-half-year tenure as Texas State Treasurer.
Much of the material was seized by prosecutors in a controversial raid on Mrs.
Hutchison's office last summer.


Japanese Radiation Center Aids Russian Study
To the Editor:
In "Let's Support Research" (letter, Feb. 6), Prof.
Richard Wilson emphasizes the need for United States support of Russian science, particularly on radiation exposure.


Updating To Meet Needs
IT may all begin with frustration over lack of space, a desire for a room that was never needed before or even a fantasy of an updated kitchen or bathroom.
Whatever the catalyst, the family's current needs and yearnings govern most renovation programs.
Even so, the best of these projects should also reflect marketplace trends to help make the home more marketable when selling day arrives.


Iconoclasts Alive and Well in the Postmodern, Post-Soviet Era
Komar and Melamid have become fully Americanized.
The Russian emigres and partners in art who have long enlivened the scene with their ironic insights into Communism and democracy have commissioned a poll -- a first for them and possibly for art, too.
The poll's principal question, as announced by the Alternative Museum in Manhattan, is: What do Americans really like in art?
The answer will take the form of an exhibition by the artists that, scheduled for the museum next month, should be what the people want.
Although something of the kind happened a few years ago, when the Neuberger Museum invited its visitors to choose from among proposed acquisitions, this is more ambitious, attempting to align esthetics with politics, television programming and other marketing strategies.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Education: Vote on passage of a bill authorizing $300 million in state grants for partnerships between high schools and businesses to help students who do not go to college.
Approved 62 to 31, Feb. 8.
2.
Education: Vote on an amendment to an education bill providing for an experiment to give poor students a choice of attending public or private schools.
Rejected 52 to 41, Feb. 8.
3.
Education: Vote on passage of a bill authorizing $422 million aimed at raising educational achievement levels.
Approved 71 to 25, Feb. 8.
4.
Emergency Aid: Vote to kill an amendment to an emergency aid bill that would have enacted 56 separate government spending cuts totaling $94.2 billion through 1998.
Approved 65 to 31, Feb. 9.
5.
Emergency Aid: Vote on passage of a bill providing $10 billion in aid for the Los Angeles earthquake and other emergencies.
Approved 85 to 10, Feb. 10.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y. . .N. . .Y. . .Y. . .Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y. . .Y. . .Y. . .N. . .Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y. . .Y. . .Y. . .A. . .A  New Jersey (cont'd)  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y. . .N. . .Y. . .N. . .Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y. . .Y. . .N. . .Y. . .Y  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y. . .N. . .Y. . .Y. . .Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
Independent Counsel: Vote on passage of a bill that would restore the independent counsel law.
Approved 356 to 56, Feb. 10.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . Y
4. Shays (R) . . . Y
5. Franks (R) . . . Y
6. Johnson (R) . . . Y  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . Y
4. Smith (R) . . . Y
5. Roukema (R) . . . Y
6. Pallone (D) . . . Y
7. Franks (R) . . . Y
8. Klein (D) . . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y  New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . Y
3. King (R) . . . N
4. Levy (R) . . . Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . . Y
6. Flake (D) . . . Y
7. Manton (D) . . . Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Y  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
N  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Making an Ad Globally Correct
TransImage devised this image for a travel agency, with the theme of a friend away from home.
Candace Moss, director of corporate communications, explains what makes it suitable for the international market.
The face if blurred to make it ethnicity indiscernable.
The Goal: an everywoman.


UConn Tramples Seton Hall At Close
Seton Hall played well against Connecticut tonight -- for 32 minutes.
But then the Huskies ran away with the contest in the final eight minutes and won easily, 80-68.
It's hard to keep this team down.
In recent seasons, Connecticut teams have fallen into February slumps after terrific starts.
But there has been no sign of a slump this season, and certainly not last Wednesday night when the Huskies made a remarkable comeback from an 18-point deficit to defeat Boston College in double overtime, 94-91.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Brooklyn; For One Valentine, Love's Snow-Blind
The slushy streets and biting cold yesterday kept many potential Valentine's Day shoppers away from the Fulton Street Mall in downtown Brooklyn, but Larry Squires was not one of them.
Mr.
Squires, 31, a bank supervisor, insisted quite simply that he was "in love" with his fiancee and that he "would have done a backstroke through the snow to buy her a present."


Hidden Delights Of New Jersey
Many motorists view New Jersey's highways as merely a way to get through the state as fast as possible, oblivious of the attractions to be found a few miles from the exits.
At Exit 1 of the New Jersey Turnpike, for example, just north of the Delaware Memorial Bridge, an eight-mile detour on U.S. 40 East will take motorists to Woodstown and the Cowtown Rodeo, the oldest rodeo on the East Coast and the site of a flea market on Tuesday and Saturday.
Farther north, off Exit 28 on the Atlantic City Expressway in Wharton State Forest, they can visit Batsto Village, a source of iron for ammunition in the Revolutionary War.
And not far from Exit 34B on Interstate 80, in the northern part of the state, children can ride a miniature train in Fairy Tale Forest in West Milford.


POSTINGS: Italians Buy Madison Avenue Site; Building in a Secret Garden
Yes, it's a vacant lot at 720 Madison Avenue.
But, in keeping with the discreet ambiance, it is tastefully concealed behind a handsome brick wall, with pilasters and a round-arched doorway.
Next door is a picturesque three-story neo-Georgian bank building, at 64th Street, for which the lot was once a garden. (Only razor-coil wire of recent vintage detracts from this scene.)
The lot and the unused development rights from the bank have been bought for $4.75 million by Etro S.p.A. of Milan, a clothing and textile concern that sells to Saks Fifth Avenue and Bergdorf Goodman but does not yet have a New York outlet.


Opening Ceremony in Norway Inaugurates XVII Winter Olympics


New Car Insurance Law Requires New Decisions
CONNECTICUT motorists face new decisions when they buy automobile insurance and more risk of detection if they drive without insurance.
The Auto Insurance Reform Act, which took effect Jan. 1, repeals mandatory no-fault coverage and changes the way uninsured-underinsured motorist coverage works.
Regulations establish computerized tracking of -- and new penalties for -- people who cancel or fail to renew their auto insurance.


At Hotel, Tensions Rise Over Inmates
In New York City, Le Marquis is unique: part single-room-occupancy hotel, part halfway house for prisoners sentenced for nonviolent crimes.
Most of the time, the marriage has worked.
Permanent residents -- some there for more than four decades -- generally agree conditions are better than in the mid-1980's, when the hotel housed welfare families.
They do complain about noise and an overcrowded elevator, but the prisoners attend to separate lives, and enforced house rules forbid them from communicating with neighbors.


Eight Struggling Actors: A Story of Hope
"THIS is your second semester, the tough one," said Rick Curry, prowling the living room of his home and studio on Broome Street.
"It starts in the time of our enemy, ice, when you don't want to go out, and it ends in sunshine, when you'd rather be in the park, running with flowers in your hair."
The eight students, on crutches, in wheelchairs, blind, laughed.
But they were actors, so their opportunistic minds were buzzing; flowers in your hair, now that might get you noticed at an audition.


Need an Air Freshener? Try Plants
I HAVE an indestructible devil's ivy (Epiprenum aureum) winding its heart-shaped, green-and-gold leaves along a string looped beneath the skylight over my bed.
Some call it golden pothos.
Whatever its name, it's one of those dime-store plants that survives when its pot crashes to the floor or you forget to water it for weeks.
But I never knew it was a champion air cleaner.
So are the areca palm (Chrysalidocarpus lutescens), the Boston fern (Nephrolepis exalta Bostoniensis), the weeping fig (Ficus benjamina), the peace lily (Spathiphyllum), the corn plant (Dracaena fragrans Massangeana), the lady palm (Rhapis excelsa), the elephant ear philodendron (Philodendron domesticum) and a score of other house plants.


Clinton and Kazakh Chief Each Filling a Need
Kazakhstan's President, Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, is to arrive here on Sunday for an official visit during which the Clinton Administration plans to shower him with increased aid as it tries to make him a model for other leaders of the former Soviet Union.
In return, President Nazarbayev will give President Clinton what he wants most from the Kazakh leader: the signed document in which Kazakhstan formally joins the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and a pledge to become a nonnuclear state.


An Opening in Barcelona
It was supposed to be up and running for the 1992 Barcelona Olympics.
But what is billed as Europe's tallest hotel, the 44-story Hotel Arts Barcelona, officially opened just last month.
"There were construction problems, an ownership change and other difficulties," said a spokeswoman for the Ritz-Carlton company, which is managing the Hotel Arts.
The unfinished hotel was, in fact, used briefly as a bed and breakfast during the Olympics (a short hop from the Olympic Village, it overlooks the Mediterranean).
"Actually, we're just in time for the Olympics -- at Lillehammer," the spokeswoman added.
Opening rates, through Aug. 31, range from $130 to $1,080 a room; call (800) 241-3333.


After Deaths at a Stable, a Mystery


Store Manager Slain On Brooklyn Street
A 67-year-old Long Island man heading home from work was fatally shot in the back yesterday in East New York, Brooklyn, the police said.
Murray Lipkin, of Woodmere, L.I., was shot at 5:37 P.M., minutes after closing the sporting-goods store he managed, Harry's Belmont, at 84 Belmont Avenue.
He was shot two blocks away at Belmont and Stone Avenues, next to the Langston Hughes Apartments, and was pronounced dead at the scene, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a Police Department spokesman.
The shooting may have grown out of a robbery attempt, the sergeant said.


One Certainty for Mets: Question Marks
Five months ago, the Mets collapsed at the end of a season that could have been described only as unknowable.
Now, on the verge of what they hope will be a new, more palatable beginning, the Mets can only describe their 1994 hopes as "unknowable."
That was the word used by Joe McIlvaine, the Mets' general manager and architect, on the eve of the team's foray into spring training.
Pitchers, catchers and players recovering from injuries will report to camp and begin workouts in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., this week.
Position players will follow less than a week later.
What will come out of it by opening day in April is anyone's guess.


Fatal Attractions
QUICKSAND By Junichiro Tanizaki.
Translated by Howard Hibbett.  224 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
THE REED CUTTER AND CAPTAIN SHIGEMOTO'S MOTHER Two Novellas.
By Junichiro Tanizaki.
Translated by Anthony H. Chambers. 180 pp.
New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Two for the Roads: A Vision of Urban Design
WE'RE RIGHT TO BE SKEPTICAL OF URBAN visionaries.
Unchecked, even the most radiant dreams can turn into nightmares.
The towers Le Corbusier envisioned rising from green open space soon became a deadly formula for urban blight.
Robert Moses' idealistic vision of urban parkways grew into an asphalt octopus.
Frank Lloyd Wright's democratic vista of a decentralized America helped pave the way for the social atomization of the postwar suburb.
In light of this cautionary record, it's worth pausing before tooting the horn for even the worthiest talents.
Pause.


A Star Is Waiting. Who Will It Be?
The Winter Olympics always give us someone.
From Jean-Claude Killy, the suave Frenchman in 1968, to Dorothy Hamill, the wholesome young American skater with the stylish haircut in 1976, to Alberto (La Bomba) Tomba, the stubble-sporting Italian skier with the crowded late-night agenda in 1992, the smaller of the two Olympic Games has a gift for producing transcendent personalities.
Who -- other than someone named Nancy or Tonya -- will capture imaginations in Lillehammer over the next 15 days?


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE WORST OF TIMES By Patricia G. Miller.
Harper Perennial, $12.
Before the Supreme Court's Roe v.
Wade decision in 1973, women seeking abortion were often forced to resort to illegal procedures.
This book documents their experiences, not only in their words but also in those of abortion providers, police and the children of those who died.
"Anyone who even ventures an opinion on abortion should reckon with what this book so vividly conveys," Le Anne Schreiber said here last year.


Olympic Equipment
God-given talent.
Training.
Attitude.
Heart.
Athletes and the sports commentators swirling around then in Lillehammer will credit medal performances to all of these things.
But will they mention footwear?
In sports where fractions of a second separate gold from silver, equipment can provide the winning margin.


Some Districts Planning to Hire New Teachers
FACED with increased student enrollments and growing numbers of teachers eligible for retirement, many school districts are planning to hire teachers in the new school year.
For the first time in three years districts are beginning to rehire or replace teachers who were laid off as a result of losses of state aid and budget cuts.


After a Quarter-Century, the Stroll Stands Firm
It had just stopped snowing last week when Anna Vega looked out the window of her two-story house onto the corner of Lebanon Street and Devoe Avenue.
"I can't believe it," Mrs.
Vega said.
"Nothing stops them." On the street, she said, stood a woman in a trench coat that hung open, revealing a skimpy outfit and dark hose.
Soon a station wagon pulled up slowly beside her.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  A WARNING FROM JAPAN  Japan's Prime Minister warned the United States against imposing sanctions, which American officials had threatened as trade talks broke down, putting the countries on the brink of a trade war.  1  TOUGHER APPROACH FROM TOKYO  News analysis: Japan's Prime Minister, who inherited a postwar mandate to keep the Americans happy, has abandoned that strategy and said no at the trade talks, but it was a political gamble.  10


Janet Lee Burak, James L. Lanzillo
Janet Lee Burak, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sol Burak of Lake Worth, Fla., was married yesterday in Manchester, Vt., to James Louis Lanzillo, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
James L. Lanzillo of Troy, N.Y.
Judge Sally Cook of the Manchester Probate Court performed the ceremony at the Equinox Hotel.
Mrs.
Lanzillo is a vice president and the general counsel at Household Bank in Prospect Heights, Ill.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College and received a J.D. from New York Law School.
Her father, now retired, owned S. Burak &amp; Associates, a distributor of industrial equipment formerly in Orange, N.J.
Her mother, Marilyn Burak, retired as a management consultant.


Corrections
Because of the illness of a band member, a pop music listing in the Arts and Leisure guide today about the reggae group UB40 is outdated.
The concert, scheduled for tomorrow night at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden, has been postponed to Feb. 23 at 8 P.M.


The Last Romantics
Love in later life is a distillation of love, a reduction to the essence of human need.
Single adults past retirement, past the deaths of spouses and friends, past the confused gropings and hesitant sputterings of youth, are finally liberated to seek simple comfort in another's companionship.
They find it amid coat-and-tie gatherings in high-rise parlors and in the everyday cheer of senior centers, where ardent friends swing-dance in the afternoon and trade histories over cardboard cups of decaf.
Walk through any of these 335 centers in New York City and you can hear animated exploratory chat about books and politics, movies and weather; stay long enough and you notice the same couples pairing off, flexing in rhythm through Stay Well classes and saving seats near the television when it's time to cluck at the evening news.
Some hope to marry or remarry, while others seek only to escape the loneliness of tiny apartments or empty houses.
Few need to read the scientific studies that show how much longer and healthier life can be when it is shared.


Police Say Suspect Swindled Cabdrivers
A man who persuaded at least two livery-cabdrivers in Brooklyn that he would clear their parking and traffic tickets for a fee was arrested Friday evening on charges that he impersonated a police officer and robbed one of the drivers, the police said.
Police officers said they suspect that David Ortiz, 29, of 107-53 100th Street in Queens, swindled several other livery-cabdrivers in Brooklyn.
They said the suspect would tell cabdrivers to take him to a police station house, saying he wanted to check their vehicles' registration, and would then make them wait outside.
Inside at least two station houses, they said, Mr.
Ortiz chatted with police officers and asked for their cards, which the police suspect were used to make drivers believe he was a police officer.


F.Y.I.
Limits of the Law Q. Is there any such thing in New York as a citizen's arrest?
A.
Yes, but don't go thinking you're an ad hoc member of your local precinct.
A police officer can make an arrest based on probable cause.
But under the law, citizens can make arrests only when they witness a crime, and using only the force necessary to subdue a suspect.


Atlantic Highlands Journal; A Small Theater Holds Its Own Against Giants
A SMALL movie house here appears to be winning the battle to extend its run against the giant cinemas along the nearby highways.
The challenge comes in the form of the many-screen, first-run, up-to-the-minute, plenty-of-parking, soft-seat-rocking-chair theaters along the state highways only minutes away in Hazlet and Middletown, or the 15-screen cinema extravaganza being proposed for the county shopping center hub, the Monmouth Mall in Eatontown.


Murial Williams Hart; Actress, 80
Murial Williams Hart, a Broadway actress of the 1930's and a soap-opera heroine of the 1950's and 60's, died on Thursday at York Hospital in York, Me.
She was 80.
The cause was cancer, said a stepdaughter, Frederica Hart.


Mutual Funds; Strategies for Rising Interest Rates
IF the Federal Reserve thought it was being clear about the future of interest rates when it said on Feb. 4 that it was lifting the Federal funds rate by a quarter-point -- well, the markets bought the idea for a day.
On the Friday the rate rise was announced, stock prices dropped (wouldn't money be hightailing it to grab those higher yields?) and long-term Treasury funds lost a little over half a point (wouldn't they have to, to match the higher yields?).


Miss Ching, Mr. Weinstein
Traci Lynn Ching, a literary and talent agent, and Andrew Jay Weinstein, a lawyer, were married yesterday in Honolulu.
Both work in New York.
Judge James Burns, the Chief Judge of the Intermediate Court of Appeals in Honolulu, officiated at the Kahala Hilton Hotel.
Mrs.
Weinstein, 30, works at the Writers and Artists Agency.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
The bride is a daughter of Carole Reich of Brentwood, Calif., and King-Lit Ching of Los Angeles.


Falling Short
To the Sports Editor:
The otherwise well-written article by Anna Seaton on "Grace, Sass, etc." (The Times, Feb. 6) falls short in the very last paragraph.
Although both the news media and society have been known to be mercilessly intimidating, neither can be held responsible for inhibiting Harding from either acknowledging "Kerrigan's painful plight" or immediately revealing knowledge of the attack plot.
Whether because of fear of retribution, callousness, or whatever else, the lack of any response is unforgivable.
SIDNEY WEISSMAN  Bayside, Queens


A CALMING TREND
If everyone having a tough time right now joined hands, the result would probably look like the finale of Coca-Cola's classic "I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing" commercial.
Most of us couldn't wait to kiss off '93, but so far '94 has been no day at the beach.
And it's not solely the fault of a geological anomaly or an errant Arctic air mass, though they didn't help.
No matter how you try to bob and weave for relief, the world currently seems determined to stay on the edge, in your face, as if even the slightest gesture toward stress reduction was cause for a cosmic I-dare-you.
So you lie there with the comforter thrown over your head, suddenly feeling for old Ebenezer Scrooge as he waited for the Ghost of Christmas Future.
Who wants to venture out?
It's too cold, too scary, too much.
If only you could hang around the house all day, curled up and slopping around in your bathrobe.
Or at least, couldn't you just go to work in your pajamas?


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Barnes &amp; Noble Superstore Slated for April Opening When Barnes &amp; Noble opens its fourth and largest superstore -- in April on the Avenue of the Americas between 21st and 22d Streets -- the new outlet will be just four blocks from its flagship operation on Fifth Avenue and 18th Street.


Emergence of 'Striped Collar' Workers Is Making an Impact on L.I. Companies
WHEN Barbara Hatz, who heads the Nassau-Suffolk office of the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation, advertised for a bookkeeper, she was unprepared for the response.
"I was expecting to cross-examine secretaries to see if they could handle our books," Ms.
Hartz said of the $8-an-hour job.
"Instead, I was interviewing not just college graduates, but people with master's degrees. One applicant even had an M.B.A. Here were people with advanced degrees competing for a low-paying job that only required basic word-processing skills."


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Long Island; Customers Still Go To the Jeep Dealer
There was one four-wheel-drive Jeep left in Kenneth Brodlieb's showroom here this morning when he opened for business, and he didn't expect it to be there for long.
"They've been selling like hot cakes in this kind of weather," he said, as workers dug out more than a foot of new snow from his parking lot.
"When the snow was coming down like crazy and we were wondering how long we could stay open, I got a call from a woman who had come in about three weeks ago," Mr.
Brodlieb said.
"She said she and her husband want to come in and look at a Jeep; did we still have any left?


WHOSE LIFE IS IT?
It hurt to read Nora Johnson's words on abortion (Hers: "Whose Life Is It?" Jan. 23).
They were violent and harsh, like the procedure itself.
They were also right.


Is It the Thought (or Flower) That Counts?
TOMORROW, boxes of candy, red roses, lacy cards and all kinds of sentiment will be expressed for Valentine's Day.
This is Cupid's special time and boundless amounts of sweet nothings will be exchanged.
For many, the language of the flowers will have great significance, but all too often the senders and receivers of the flowers never know what it means.
They will respond to the standard emotion that it is the thought behind the giving that counts.
But there was a time when specific flowers meant specific things.
This was known as the language of flowers.


Harding on Way, and a Frenzy Is in Her Wake
Olympic officials expressed relief today that the furor over whether Tonya Harding would skate in the Olympics has been settled.
The matter had engulfed these Winter Games.
It may be, though, that one distraction has simply been exchanged for another.
Whenever Harding arrives in Norway -- believed to be Wednesday, a week before her first performance -- a new round of frenzied interest will begin.
Harding and Kerrigan are scheduled to train together at the two Olympic rinks.
News media interest will surge, and so will television ratings.
This will almost surely remain the dominant story of the Games.
In fact, it's now bigger than ever.
And while officials and other athletes may no longer be distracted, Kerrigan is certain to be.


Suspicious Queens Fire Damages 19 Stores
A fire that began in a restaurant in Jackson Heights, Queens, damaged at least 18 adjoining stores early yesterday, and investigators have declared the blaze suspicious, the Fire Department said.
Fire Department officials said a blaze started at Zaika Restaurant at 74-15 Roosevelt Avenue about 2:30 A.M. and spread quickly throughout the commercial building, gutting a cleaner and photo store next to the restaurant.
Other stores incurred only minor damages, and no one was inside the building at the time.


THE TALES A TABLE COULD TELL
First I read "The Tales a Table Could Tell," about an inanimate object of obvious beauty that brought an extremely high price, as the result of marketing, advertising and auction manipulation.
Then I read "The Littlest Prostitutes," about animate objects of obvious beauty that are marketed, advertised and sold to the highest bidder.
What a juxtaposition.
SALYE STEIN Telluride, Colo.


First-Time Wallpaperers Should Ask Questions
WALLPAPERING is a popular amateur project, but often intimidating for beginners.
It helps to read a well-illustrated book or view a videotape on wallpapering.
Besides selecting a color and pattern, which is best done by looking at samples, deciding what type of wallpaper to buy can be a stumbling block.
Standard wallpapers with machine-printed designs are usually best for amateurs to use.
They come in the widest variety, are easy to hang, usually cost less and are less fragile than exotic varieties like hand-printed papers, foils and papers containing fibers like silk or grass.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Agreed to terms with Jay Buhner, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
National League


Immigrant Family Fits In, Thanks to Neediest Cases
When Lidia Aquasanta first saw the family walk into Intermediate School 218, a new community school in Washington Heights, she did not even have to ask if they were from the Dominican Republic.
"I know my people by the walking and the talking and the dressing," said Mrs.
Aquasanta, who immigrated from Santo Domingo, the republic's capital, 16 years ago.
"They moved very slowly, not like New Yorkers, and I knew they had not been here long."


Correction
A map on Jan. 23 with an article headed "Mendham Journal" omitted the Borough of Mendham.
The borough is a separate six-square-mile municipality that should have appeared in the south-central portion of the area labeled Mendham Township.


'Double Lives'
To the Editor:
In his review of "Double Lives," Maurice Isserman writes, "Felix Frankfurter, Katherine Anne Porter, Norman Thomas and Emma Goldman . . . prior to and independent of any significant Communist involvement in the case -- believed Sacco and Vanzetti the victims of a miscarriage of justice."


Corrections
An article on Jan. 30 about intergenerational day-care centers misidentified a sponsor of a proposed center in Melville.
It is Automatic Data Processing, not ADT Security Systems.


For Haitians, The Carnival Must Go On
At the distant sound of a brass band, slowly, almost imperceptibly, a crowd forms.
Revelers step unevenly to the approaching beat as they gather.
Then the whole street is flowing like a river to a feverish rhythm.
While the army is often seen as the sole surviving institution in this shattered nation, another returns each year at this time: carnival.


Downsizers -- Lop Off Their Heads
To the Editor:
"Getting on the Merit-Go-Round" (Your Own Account, Jan. 30) glorifies a method of employee motivation that is not even suitable for a mule.
According to the experts, after mass firings (euphemistically called "downsizing"), the remaining employees are expected to perform better or lose their jobs, too.
What talented, self-respecting person would seek a job at a company like that?
Who would purposely look for an atmosphere of threats and intimidation?
Yet Hewitt Associates says this is a great time to get rid of "underperformers" and to "upgrade." If this strategy is the best that corporate leaders have to offer, then perhaps those leaders are the underperformers who should be the first to go.
RAY KATZ  Philadelphia, Jan. 30


Karyn Webb, B. K. Campbell
Karyn Rogers Webb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack W. Webb of New Canaan, Conn., was married in Boston yesterday to Benjamin K. Campbell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hazard K. Campbell of Buffalo.
The Rev.
Helen M. Moore performed the ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Campbell, 35, is a first vice president and the manager of the Boston office of Morgan Keegan &amp; Company, a securities brokerage.
She graduated from Wellesley College.


Wall Street; For Three I.P.O.'s, the Story Seems the Same
WHATEVER you say about the penny-stock company Stratton, Oakmont -- and Federal regulators say it was a boiler-room operation that defrauded investors -- you can't call the firm inconsistent.
The company, which earlier this month agreed to pay some investors $2 million under a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission, last year underwrote initial public offerings for several little companies, including Computer Marketplace Inc., Master Glazier's Karate International Inc. and Steven Madden Ltd.


'Double Lives'
To the Editor:
Maurice Isserman's review of Stephen Koch's "Double Lives" is a disguised polemic whose purpose is to discredit, rather than assess, an important new book on the international Communist movement in the 1930's and 40's.


Diane I. Peck, Charles Galbraith
Diane Ingrid Peck, the public relations manager for an architecture firm, was married on Friday to Charles Thomas Galbraith, a genealogist.
Both work in New York.
Bishop Herbert M. Groce Jr. of the American Anglican Church officiated at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Galbraith, 35, works at Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
She is the daughter of Sylvia Peck Hall of Edgewater, Fla., and Sgt.
Maj.
Parkins D. Peck of Gilbert, Ariz.


It's a Business. No, It's a Religion
THE Texas Medical Center here is the nation's largest health care complex by far, with more acreage than Central Park, more Federal money than the Johnson Space Center and more human traffic than Disneyland.
But for two of the nation's foremost heart surgeons, the place isn't big enough for the both of them.
In word and deed, these two rivals personify the struggle within the medical establishment over how to deal with outsiders clamoring to control health care costs.
On one side is Michael E. DeBakey, 85 years old and still practicing.
Many operations that are now routine first took place under his knife, including the bypass procedure that has kept millions of failing hearts throbbing.


Streetscapes/Sidewalk Sheds; Making a Construction Necessity the Mother of Art
SIDEWALK SHEDS are transient and thus dangerous territory for considered opinion.
But something has definitely changed about this throwaway craft, one largely unchanged in basic nature and technology from medieval times.
In the last decade these enclosures, put up to protect pedestrians and secure property during construction, have become decidedly more ornamental, and the underlying reasons mix salesmanship and safety.


BENEFITS
Valentine's Day at Christie's  MONDAY -- The outreach programs of the Unitarian Church of All Souls will benefit from a Valentine's Day auction at Christie's, 502 Park Avenue.
Travel packages, including a 24-day cruise and hotel stays in Italy, France, the Ivory Coast and other destinations, will be available at the live auction.
The evening will start with a cocktail party at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 535-5530, or at the door.
For God's Love We Deliver  MONDAY -- The cast of "Angels in America" will be among the hosts of a concert featuring the singer Buster Poindexter and nine New York-based rock bands at Wetlands Preserve, 161 Hudson Street at Laight Street.
The event, which begins at 7:30 P.M., benefits God's Love We Deliver, an organization that delivers meals to homebound people with AIDS.
Tickets, $12, from Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171, or $15 at the door.
For Dancing in the Streets  MONDAY -- Dancing in the Streets will raise money for its 10th-anniversary season of free dance and music performances in New York, with a Valentine's Day show.
The dancer and choreographer Ann Carlson and John Kelly, the performance artist, are among those scheduled to appear at TZ'Art &amp; Company, an art gallery at 28 Wooster Street (Grand Street).
The evening begins at 6:30 P.M. with a champagne-and-chocolate reception.
The organization suggests a donation of $15.
Information: (212) 989-6830.
A Ball in TriBeCa  TUESDAY -- The author Tom Wolfe will be the host of the New York Academy of Art ball in the academy's new home in TriBeCa, at 111 Franklin Street at West Broadway.
A 7 P.M. cocktail party will be followed by a buffet dinner and dancing.
The evening will raise money for the art school's building fund and for scholarships.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 966-0300.
A Lighthouse Gala TUESDAY -- The Lighthouse Inc. will raise money for its programs for visually impaired youth at its annual Winternight gala at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The dinner-dance will honor Elizabeth Tilberis, the editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar.
The evening begins at 7:30 P.M. with cocktails.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 614-0400.
Dinner for Babies Heart Fund  TUESDAY -- The Babies Heart Fund of the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, which provides research, training and clinical care in pediatric cardiology, will benefit from a dinner-dance at the Plaza.
Mary Alice Williams, the former television newswoman, will be the host of the event, which begins at 7 P.M. with cocktails and a live auction of vacation trips, jewelry and other items.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 305-3155.
An Anniversary Dance  WEDNESDAY -- Some 100 young students of the New Ballet School will appear in a 20th-anniversary celebration for Feld Ballets/NY.
The Feld company will also perform.
The program at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue at 19th Street, begins at 7 P.M.
A dinner at Tavern on the Green will follow.
Bus transportation will be provided from the theater.
Tickets, $300, or $100 for the performance alone, from (212) 777-7710.
Help for Learning Disabilities  WEDNESDAY -- A dinner-dance at the Marriott Marquis Hotel for the National Center for Learning Disabilities will honor Harold A. Poling, the former chairman of the Ford Motor Company.
The event will begin with a cocktail reception at 6:30 P.M.
A live auction will feature doll houses that have been designed and built by the architect Charles Gwathmey and others.
Tickets, $450, or $100 for those 35 and under, from (212) 362-2233.
Trade Center Mardi Gras  THURSDAY -- The junior committee of New York Downtown Hospital is sponsoring a Mardi Gras dance on the mezzanine of Tower One of the World Trade Center, beginning at 9 P.M.
There will be a cocktail buffet and a raffle.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 312-5577.
Dole to Be Honored  FRIDAY -- Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, will be honored at the Plaza at the 117th annual George Washington Birthday Ball.
The dinner-dance will benefit the Fraunces Tavern Museum and the Daughters of the Cincinnati scholarship fund.
Cocktails will begin at 7 P.M.
White or black tie.
Tickets, $185, from (212) 425-1776.


Begging The Question
To the Editor:
Ron Nyswaner's self-congratulatory ripostes to criticisms of his screenplay for "Philadelphia"  [ "The 'Philadelphia' Scribe Fights Back," Jan. 30 ]  beg the fundamental question: What is a modern romance doing masquerading as a slice-of-life drama?
Ducking the really tough issues, it seems to me.


A New Law Escalates the War Against Unlicensed Vans
New York City is preparing to enforce a new law that will ban an armada of illegal vans from established bus routes, where they siphon off millions of dollars in fares from the city by providing cheaper, swifter trips in vehicles that officials say are often unlicensed, uninsured and unsafe.
But whether the law will end what one official termed the "urban warfare" between the buses and an estimated 5,000 vans operating along some major thoroughfares in Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx remains uncertain.
Many operators of the illicit liveries have vowed to continue working the bus routes because, as one said, "that's exactly where the people are."


Monte Carlo: It's a Rich Experience
AT first I presumed Monaco only appealed to gamblers rich enough not to weep when luck betrayed them in the casinos of Monte Carlo.
How wrong I was.
Monaco draws all kinds of rich, such as those who come to deposit money in discreet bank accounts or to spend $500 for two for dinner or to escape inquisitive tax inspectors back home or to park their luxury yachts in the port or to . . .
In fact, it turns out that most people who visit or live in the principality are not gamblers at all.
My next discovery, though, was more interesting: You don't even have to be rich to enjoy Monaco.
But it does help to like being around the rich -- to get a vicarious thrill from admiring other people's Ferraris and Rolls-Royces or marveling at the prices in Chanel and Yves Saint Laurent boutiques or peeping into the exclusive realm of the Hotel de Paris's Louis XV restaurant or watching expressionless men and women risk thousands of dollars on the turn of a card.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
107.00
109.25
120.65
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7545
1.7623
1.6580
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3435
1.3287
1.2545
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4620
1.4770
1.4220
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$380.50
$386.55
$328.80
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Outrageous Salaries In Schools
The revelation that the teachers' union was the single largest contributor to New York State legislative candidates  [ "Inside Albany: A Guide to Power Centers," Jan. 16 ]  should come as no surprise to Long Island residents, who have seen school taxes skyrocket while their lawmakers in Albany appear to be completely unconcerned.
Although the Board of Regents sets the education policy in New York State, the fiscal control of school districts is left to local school boards who are helpless in their negotiations with the powerful teachers' union.
To make things worse many Long Island school boards are controlled by teachers and school administrators who make no attempt to resist the unions' unreasonable demands.


McCall, State Watchdog, Shows Cuomo His Teeth
If the New York State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, has a political albatross in his campaign this year, it is the perception that he is not sufficiently independent of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to serve as an aggressive fiscal watchdog.
The Governor, a longtime ally, supported Mr.
McCall's election by the Legislature last year after Edward V. Regan resigned the job in the middle of his term.
So it is that Mr.
McCall and his aides have taken every available opportunity to demonstrate his autonomy.


Chic Guests Wearing Other Guests' Clothes
The Council of Fashion Designers of America's annual awards for luminaries in the world of style, Lincoln Center, Feb. 7.


Kristine Murphy, Matthew Ferguson
Kristine Ann Murphy, a daughter of June Murphy of West Patterson, N.J., and William J. Murphy Jr. of San Diego, was married yesterday to Matthew Conor Ferguson, a son of Mary K. Moore of Sag Harbor, L.I., and Dr.
Matthew J. Ferguson of New York.
The Rev.
Arthur Caliandro performed the Reformed Church of America ceremony at Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
The bride, 35, graduated from the University of Delaware and is studying for a master's degree in social work at New York University.
She is a model and an actress in television commercials, in New York.
Her previous marriage was annulled.


Matisse Chapel
To the Editor: Barbara Crafton's beautiful description of the Chapelle du Rosaire in Vence, near Nice, in "A Chapel in Matisse's Fine Hand" (Nov. 28) brought lovely memories of my visit there with my daughter, Robin, several years ago.


Corrections
A picture last Sunday with an article about the Pine Barrens Protection Act appeared without a caption.
It showed Richard L. Amper Jr., executive director of the Pine Barrens Society.


Bell Labs Continues to Reach Out
To the Editor:
In reply to Frederick S. Zimnoch ("Speaking of the Breakup, What of Bell Labs?" Letters, Jan. 30), I am pleased to report that A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories is heartily pursuing its mission to provide A.T.&amp; T. and the world with the most efficient and inexpensive communications technology.
Our 25,000 engineers and scientists have been aligned with the new A.T.&amp; T. to bring even more relevance to that mission.
We continue to generate a patent a day.


Appeals to the Heart From the Unknown, Failed and Forgotten
They look up hopefully out of the pages of the Musical America directory: "Call me. Write for my press kit. Book me. Put my name on your recital program."
By virtue of its advertising, the Musical America International Directory of the Performing Arts may be the last billboard for hire still standing on classical music's narrow little two-lane highway.
The reputable, the unknown, the failed and the forgotten either make the call themselves or have their managements do it.
Checkbooks in hand and hearts full of hope, they want to tell us who they are.


Ms. Meirowitz, Mr. Nederlander
Suzanne Beth Meirowitz, a producer for "CBS Evening News," was married in New York last evening to Robert Elliott Nederlander Jr., the president of Interactive Concepts Unlimited, a multimedia development company.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Thomas K. Weiner performed the ceremony at the Plaza.
Mrs.
Nederlander graduated from Bryn Mawr College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Meirowitz of Glen Cove, L.I.
Her father is the president of Martin Meirowitz &amp; Company, a textile manufacturer in New York.


Profile; Workplace Discrimination? Don't Try It Around Her
IT was one of Judith P. Vladeck's early sex-discrimination trials, in 1978.
Her client, a Western Electric engineer, had been stunned one day to find that a co-worker had dropped on her desk an obscene cartoon that was a nude likeness of her.
Ms.
Vladeck made it her business to admit the sketch of her 200-pound client as evidence early in the trial.
"I used to keep it in a red folder at the counsel table," Ms.
Vladeck remembers.
"Whenever I thought the judge's attention was flagging, I'd start to wave it around."


Should Rifkin Be Called an 'Animal'?
I simply wonder wonder why in the debate over the calling of Colin Ferguson an "animal" for his terrible crimes there were no similar reactions when a suspected mass murderer, Joel Rifkin, was finally arrested on Long Island?  [ "Shooting Overshadows Budget Crisis," Dec. 19 ]  But then, Mr.
Rifkin's victims were poor, uneducated, living on the streets and obviously not registered to vote.
I prefer to reserve my disgust for those using that terrible tragedy on the Long Island Rail Road as a photo-op for higher office.
DENIS T. THOMPSON  West Islip


Downhill and Danger Cannot Be Separated
They say they are like airline pilots who fly their planes in the days after a crash, drivers who get behind the wheel after hearing of some horrific accident.
They are downhill racers.
It is what they do.
"Safety must come first," said Patrick Ortlieb on the eve of Sunday's Olympic men's downhill.
"But it's the speed, excitement and unpredictability which are the attractions of this sport."


Fighting Words
AIRING DIRTY LAUNDRY By Ishmael Reed. 284 pp.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $20.


Big, Easy Voices Give Real Power To Verdi's 'Forza'
LET'S START WITH THIS: IT IS possible to make some complaints about the singing on LCV-001, the Legato Classics videocassette issue of Verdi's "Forza del Destino." Renata Tebaldi sometimes scoops into her notes and has occasional bouts of flatness.
Franco Corelli phrases inelegantly in parts of his big aria.
Boris Christoff brings a rather unremitting emphasis to the lines of the Padre Guardiano.
Ettore Bastianini is neglectful of the softer dynamic shadings.
Several singers permit themselves those careless h sounds that interrupt the flow of sound.
But what a flow, and what a sound!
I cannot just at this moment think of any reservations to express about the other two leads in this almost literally unbelievable cast.
Oralia Dominguez is Preziosilla and Renato Capecchi is Fra Melitone, so there is strength in every department.
In any case, the exercise in judiciousness feels surreal.
This is a must-have.
If you're over 50 and think you might be romanticizing your memories; if you're young and think the old-timers are just trying to intimidate you with their stories; if you wonder why Mayor Giuliani started an opera club in his high school -- and, especially, if the beauty of the human voice means a lot to you -- get the video.


A la Carte; A Chip Off the Old Butcher Block
BREEDING tells, and the lineage of Majors, a straightforward neighborhood steakhouse in East Meadow, is obvious from the first taste of the creamy coarse-cut coleslaw to the final bite of intense, moist Mississippi mud pie.
This cozy blue-collar restaurant, with its fireplace, red-and-white checkered tablecloths, lazy overhead fans and photographs of the Old West, is the offspring of the pricier Bryant &amp; Cooper Steak House in Roslyn and Riverbay Seafood in Williston Park.


Home Depot Sales Are Brisk, but Foes Won't Quit
New York City's first Home Depot is now open for business, in South Ozone Park.
In its first two weeks, the store reported brisk sales and won a zoning board decision upholding its right to operate.
But Home Depot's opponents have not given up.
The nonprofit Coalition for Community Preservation and Stabilization is appealing the zoning case, arguing that the store is too big for the neighborhood and is hurting local merchants.


Donald Judd, Leading Minimalist Sculptor, Dies at 65
Donald Judd, one of the foremost American artists of the postwar era and a major figure in the Minimal Art movement, died yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 and had homes in Manhattan, Marfa, Tex., and Kussnacht am Rigi, Switzerland.
The cause was lymphoma, said his son, Flavin.


Two Decrepit Buildings, in Limbo, Become a Crime Haven
If a renter moves, who's responsible for the property?
It's not an easy answer, at least not when the owner is the city of New York and the renter is the Transit Authority, as community officials in West Farms have discovered after more than a year of efforts to have two decrepit, cavernous buildings renovated, sealed or torn down.
While this jurisdictional dispute goes unresolved, the buildings are used by drug dealers, prostitutes and squatters.
Late last week Transit Authority officials responded to an emergency ruling by the Department of Housing that one of the buildings is unsafe and signed a contract with the city to have the building torn down.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: The Overview; Staggering Under Heavy Snows, Region Digs Out
Downed by the one-two punch of snowstorms this week -- just the latest in a flurry of a dozen blows so far this winter -- residents of the New York metropolitan region began to stagger to their feet yesterday.
They tugged their boots through knee-deep drifts, baby-stepped along barely scraped sidewalk paths, made their way home after nights in strange places, or merely wondered whether the car was really still under there.
Hotels that had taken in toothbrushless guests saw them slip away in light of a new day.
Organizers of an annual Winter Festival in Central Park were spared the need for a man-made white blanket for cross-country skiing and snow-sculpting on the Great Lawn.


Jays Stand Pat, but Most Others Don't
Greg Cadaret.
Going into spring training, which begins Thursday for 8 of the 28 teams, including the Yankees and the Mets, Cadaret is the equivalent of a dozen Toronto players who ended last season in October.
In winning their second successive World Series, the Blue Jays used 12 players, nearly half of their team, who were not part of the first World Series championship.


Something Is Wrong With This Life
THEY WHISPER By Robert Olen Butler. 333 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.


'Tabloid' Charge Rocks Network News
TELEVISION NEWS, AS YOUR local anchor might put it, is under fire.
The target is not the violence that is agitating viewers and politicians, but a creeping tabloidization, not only of local news, which serious observers have never considered of much account, but of national news too, pride of the networks.
On Tuesday, "Frontline" delivers a hardboiled report, "Tabloid Truth: The Michael Jackson Scandal," which makes a strong case that more or less respectable news programs are succumbing to the subjects and techniques of the gossip shows.
A similar lament, from professional watchers and perpetrators, was heard a few weeks ago at the annual Alfred I. Dupont Forum at the Columbia University Journalism School.
The picture, simply put, is of television journalists chasing ratings.


Habitats/A Loft With Some Surprises; West Side Craftsmanship
WALKING down West 55th Street to the Hudson River is like seeing a cross section of New York City: giant commercial hives west of Fifth Avenue, elegant prewar apartment buildings between Eighth and Ninth and garages and parking lots on the block leading to the West Side Highway.
It is on this last block, along the heavily trafficked access route to the highway, that Joe Stone bought his 900-square-foot loft for $48,000.
Mr.
Stone, a former musician who now works for Bloomberg Financial Markets, bought the third-floor loft in a 1911 former car dealership building at 415 West 55th Street on Feb. 3, part of a Citibank foreclosure sale.


His Night in Court
AT 2 A.M. in lower Manhattan, store gates are down, lights are out, the entire world seems dark and shuttered -- with one exception.
Yawning, yes, and with occasional catnaps, sure, the criminal-justice system is indeed awake and open for business.
A teen-ager charged with possessing and selling cocaine stands before Acting Supreme Court Justice Sheldon Greenberg.
His Legal Aid lawyer, a woman of emphasis, argues that her client only possessed the drugs and did not sell them, that this is his first arrest, and that he is employed.


Midtown Japanese: Raw and Cooked
CHIKUBU **  (212) 818-0715; 12 East 44th Street; $$; all major credit cards
This trim, friendly spot offers some first-rate vegetable dishes, broiled entrees and casseroles.
Though Chikubu specializes in the cuisine of Kyoto, which is known for its cooked dishes, a nice selection of sashimi is available; it is better sampled at the bar.
Sushi -- usually including tuna, squid, cuttlefish and fluke -- is served only at lunch.
Among specialties, for starters, are tasty dengaku eggplant coated with a sweet soybean paste and tiny sesame seeds; tender boiled octopus; broiled scallions and tuna topped with a miso sauce; or crabmeat dumplings.
For main courses, broiled dishes are generally good options, including shioyaki flounder, a house special in which the skin is lightly salted and broiled to a crisp; salt-grilled shioyaki salmon; glazed chicken teriyaki; and negimaki, grilled beef rolls with scallions. (Review: 9/8/89; revisited: 1/31/94)


State Acquires Stretch of Popular Trout Stream
New York State has acquired a 14-mile stretch of shoreline on one of the state's premier trout and salmon fishing streams, Oswego County's Salmon River, which flows into Lake Ontario.
Without cost to the state, it received ownership of 1,768 acres that had belonged to the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation and conservation easements on an additional 1,073 acres.
The corporation, which operates two power dams on the river, retained ownership of 5,232 acres.


Easy as Pie? Not in New Mexico Town
In New Mexico as in other places, naming towns is a quirky business.
Some names honor people, like the Duke of Albuquerque.
Others are linked to Catholicism, including Santa Fe and Las Cruces.
And one, Truth or Consequences, pays homage to a quiz show.
But only this one owes its name to a dessert.
Conjuring up aromatic images of home and truck stop, Pie Town, a mile west of the Continental Divide, has always drawn people.
In New Mexico's territorial days, some say, weary cowboys came here for sweet sustenance.
Spotting it on a map in 1940, Russell Lee, a Farm Security Administration photographer, drove from Amarillo, Tex., and captured the indomitability and interdependence of its people, primarily homesteaders from Texas fleeing the Dust Bowl and the Depression.


Killing Time at O'Hare
It's America's busiest airport -- and in the winter, one of the snowiest.
So for passengers stuck for hours at O'Hare Airport in Chicago, Kelly Warnken, a Chicagoan who once worked at the airport, has written "Stranded at O'Hare." The 90-page pocket-size handbook lists nearby hotels, restaurants, fitness centers and other amusements, with addresses, methods and costs of getting there and back.
The Book Factory, Post Office Box 4430, Chicago, Ill. 60680; (312) 433-2346; books are $9.95 plus $2.50 for shipping (Illinois residents add 87 cents tax).


Luring Two Pigeons With One Bean
WHY did General Motors have such a hard time when it started marketing its Chevrolet Nova in Latin America?
Quite simple.
"No va" means "no go" in Spanish.
How do you kill two birds with one stone in German?
You hit two flies with one swat.
In Italian, you lure two pigeons with one bean.
In Korean, you catch two fish with one rod.


When Best and Worst Collide: Rangers Forced to Go Overtime
Had the mighty Rangers lost this one, to the lowly Ottawa Senators, Coach Mike Keenan might have told his New York players to take another bus trip, this time without bad weather to blame.
He could have canceled their charter flight and made them wait at the station, suitcases in hands, for the last, overnight coach to Quebec City and their next game, Monday night with the Nordiques.
Or he might have told them to keep their uniforms on their bodies while he dropped them off at the frozen Rideau Canal for a late-night skate to the St.
Lawrence River and up through French Canada.


A Royal Tribute in Iwo Jima


Two Benin Art Shows Touring the U.S.
Two exhibitions of art from the kingdom of Benin in southern Nigeria will be opening in the United States soon.
From next Sunday to April 3, two early 14th-century brass dwarfs from Benin will be on display at the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston as part of a major collection of Benin ivory, brass and wood art works on loan from the Museum fur Volkerkunde in Vienna.


POSTINGS: Brooklyn's on Its Mind; 4 Projects Await Art Panel's Approval
Brooklyn looms large on the Art Commission's agenda tomorrow.
At its monthly meeting on the third floor of City Hall, the panel is expected to give final approval to the reconstruction of the Fulton Landing Pier, near the Brooklyn Bridge; a Holocaust memorial in Sheepshead Bay; a sign and map program for downtown Brooklyn and a much-debated 2,200-car impoundment center along the Erie Basin in Red Hook, which includes a public esplanade.
Why is the Art Commission involved in a car pound?
The seven-member panel reviews the design of anything built or installed on city-owned property.


Zulu Party Shuns Vote
The Inkatha Freedom Party said it would not take part in South Africa's free elections, a move that increases the threat of election violence.


The Fleet Is In. Again.
The fashion fleet has gone overboard for the Navy pea jacket.
This classic sailor's coat is having one of its periodic revivals.
These have occurred like clockwork even since surplus coats first began appearing in Army-Navy stores after World War II.
Today, pea jackets have become the winter uniform of a new generation.
Some are hand-me-downs from fathers, others have come from flea markets, and a slew of sly imitations have been produced by Seventh Avenue.
The inky blackish-blue jacket in tightly woven wool, with its double row of signature buttons with an anchor motif, provides balance to long, slim skirts.


Writers and Rebels: In Southern Mexico, They Are Much the Same
IF the guerrilla uprising on New Year's Day in the Chiapas highlands in southern Mexico caught the country's leaders by surprise, they probably weren't reading the right books.
Chiapas is Mexico's Deep South.
Like ours, it is famous for its poets and historians.
Like ours, they write under the curse of Faulkner's quip, "The past isn't dead. It's not even past."
In Chiapas, the past lives in the thousand-year-old ruins of Mayan city-states at Palenque, Yaxchilan and Bonampak; in 17th-century baroque churches; in Mayan villages where office holders wear the garb and titles of 16th-century Spain; in tiny plots where corn is grown not as a commodity but as a way of life, a sacrament.
It also lives, less picturesquely, in entrenched patterns of racism, injustice and exploitation.


FEB. 6-12: A 'Mature' Relationship; Japan and U.S. Agree That They Can't Agree, And Trade Talks Collapse
It was, for President Clinton and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, an announcement that sounded anything but diplomatic.
Declaring that the trade relationship between the United States and Japan was at an impasse, they said Friday that they could not agree on how to measure Japan's commitment to opening its markets to American goods.
The announcement, at a joint news conference, came after weeks of negotiations between the countries and three hours of discussions between the leaders.


School Budget Fight
If ever there was an opportunity for harmony between the New York City Board of Education and City Hall it was provided last fall, when the board's majority faction hired a new Schools Chancellor and two members of that majority campaigned to elect the new Mayor and joined his administration.
But over the last 10 days, relations have been anything but harmonious, as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines have clashed repeatedly over questions like how many Board of Education administrators can be dismissed without hurting schools.


Greeley Only Wished He Had Said It
To the Editor:
No doubt it was in the noble interests of humor that Russell Baker asserted in "Bullish on Prisons" (column, Feb. 1) that the tip in "The Graduate" about getting into plastics "was surely sounder advice than Horace Greeley's 'Go west, young man, and grow up with the country,' which people have listened to without laughter since Greeley issued it in 1850."


Co-op Market Drift Continues In Manhattan
THE apartment market in New York seems dead to Jeff Mullen, who for the last year has been trying to sell his co-op on the Upper West Side for $118,000.
Not even his classified ad promising views of Maui and offering the lucky buyer two round-trip tickets to Hawaii has attracted much interest in his run-of-the-mill one-bedroom unit.
"We did get one person who wanted to know whether you could actually see Hawaii from the apartment," said Mr.
Mullen, an advertising copywriter.
"They obviously didn't get the joke and thought the building was taller than it is."


Efforts to Stem Violence in the Workplace
A Disgruntled employee at a Westchester-based manufacturing company began warning his supervisor that he would come to work one day with his semiautomatic weapon and go on a shooting spree.
The man, who appeared increasingly unkempt and whose behavior had become progressively more threatening, assured his co-workers that his aim was good because he had served in the Vietnam War.
A manager at a different corporation in the county was being stalked by one of her employees.
The harassment began with a call to the manager's home, but the campaign soon escalated.
The employee became more menacing -- showing up at the manager's house, following her around town and tracking her down on vacation.
HB&gt;Incident in Mount Vernon
Both of these incidents were defused by corporate employee-assistance programs before they could explode into violence.
The two companies involved would discuss the cases only on condition of anonymity.
Several weeks ago in Mount Vernon, however, a workplace dispute ended in tragedy.


World Markets; Foreign Investment Roars Into Bombay
SINCE November, one of the world's hottest stock markets has been the Bombay Stock Exchange, thanks to an avalanche of foreign investment and the gradual opening of what was once one of the world's most insular economies.
After soaring early last week to 4,162 points on the Bombay Sensitivity Index, the market closed Friday at 3,991 points, a 24 percent rise, in dollar terms, since the first of the year and a rise of almost 50 percent since November.
Bombay's is the third best performing market after Brazil and Finland this year.


Backroom Politics, Stock Characters
IF political clubs of the small-town, small-time backroom kind live on, then "Belmont Avenue Social Club," produced by Stamford Theater Works, might win points for authenticity.
But Bruce Graham, the playwright, is making his own cynical points about the clan -- men only, all white -- for whom doing favors, making deals and fixing parking tickets is a way of life.
Or for some, a way of avoiding life.
This is the scenario.
Pete, a councilman, dies.
A successor is needed.
Tommy, a 59-year-old comptroller, is most likely to succeed Pete.
Everyone else is "too old or indicted."


Statistics Offer No Solace To Those in Jobless Line
FOR Yvonne Harris, a former office manager and bookkeeper who was waiting in line with several hundred other unemployed workers at a State Department of Labor office here last week, it was little consolation that many of the country's economic indicators were signaling an end to the recession.
"All I know is my story," said Ms.
Harris, who lives in White Plains, "and I've gone from being a Cinderella to a Raggedy Ann: I've worked my whole life, and now this."


North Korea Remains a Missiles Novice
To the Editor:
"North Korea's Huge Military Spurs New Strategy in South" (front page, Feb. 6) may give readers an unrealistic view of the North Korean missile program.


Eliot Feld's Middle Name? Inventive.
THE LAST TIME ELIOT FELD CHOREOGRAPHED A role for himself in one of his ballets, Jimmy Carter was President and "The Executioner's Song" by Norman Mailer was a best seller.
But at 51, Mr.
Feld, artistic director of Feld Ballets/NY and among ballet's more inventive choreographers, is returning to the stage, albeit briefly, dancing the central role in a new work, "Doghead and Godcatchers." It will have its premiere during his company's five-week season at the Joyce Theater, beginning on Tuesday.
During a recent chat, Mr.
Feld stressed that this is not a career change or a midlife crisis.
In the new ballet, set to Haydn's Symphony No. 60, he dances the role of a choreographer, not unlike himself, who wears wire-rimmed glasses, chain-smokes and careers around the stage seated on a desk chair on casters.


Political Memo; Shift in Health Strategy: Give Details to Congress
With the Administration's 1,342-page health care proposal under withering fire from the left and the right, White House political strategists hope to rescue President Clinton from the debate over means and mechanisms and get him back to the basics of guaranteeing health care for all.
Administration advisers describe a two-track approach in the coming weeks: The President and Hillary Rodham Clinton will escalate their public campaign for universal health insurance and comprehensive restructuring of the health care system, goals that retain strong support in the polls, and let the Congressional committees get about the business of finding a bill that can pass.


Returning


Thirty-Five Days 'til Spring


The Waterfront: A Historical Portrait
THE spirit of New York's waterfront -- once grand, now the object of intensifying battles among developers, environmentalists and community groups -- is evoked in a Cooper Union exhibition of hundreds of photographs and architectural drawings.
"Essential City: The New York Waterfront Survey" traces the waterfront's transition from the city's economic bedrock to an abandoned dumping ground.
The exhibit includes architectural renderings from the 1870's, photographs from the 1930's, a bas relief topographical map of the metropolitan region, satellite photographs of the regionand current waterfront photographs by Stanley Greenberg.


After 13 years of drama and farce. . . EXIT THE CRITIC. . . humming the music and settling the scores.
My career as the chief drama critic of The New York Times began with a car crash and a death, and ended with another car crash and another death.
But don't get me wrong: there was lots of life, on stage and off, along the way.
The first crash took place on a hot morning in the Berkshires in July 1980, shortly after I arrived at The Times to serve as a second-stringer to Walter Kerr.
The previous night I had covered "Candida" at the Williamstown Theater Festival.
Driving back to New York, I lost control of the rental car, which skidded across the country road and flipped over on its roof.


Las Vegas, Theme City
WITH the opening of three flamboyant new hotels this fall, Las Vegas has surpassed even its own mystifying ability to give the visitor his money's worth while taking him to the cleaners.
The bells and whistles have bells and whistles at these three: The Luxor, a homage to ancient Egypt; Treasure Island, where the look is plunder, and the MGM Grand Hotel, a billion dollars' worth of building dedicated to Dorothy and Toto.


Right On for Getting Around Nasdaq
To the Editor:
You had it exactly right in "A Timely Call for Reform in Nasdaq Trading" (Market Watch, Jan. 30), pointing out why Nasdaq should not be the market of the next 100 years.
The solution is not new rules, which will be worked around, but a nationwide computer system into which public customers can enter orders and prevent trade-throughs.
There's no reason a seller should get less than what anyone, public or professional, is willing to pay.
MICHAEL GARNER  Bala-Cynwyd, Pa., Jan. 30.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Stranded Commuters; The Day Long Islanders Discovered They Couldn't Get There From Here
With a foot of snow outside, temperatures well below freezing and no way of getting home, there was nothing for Scott McNellis to do but mount the cramped karaoke stage of the Penn Bar Down Under and belt out a booming version of "Everbody's Talking."
The crowd of bar regulars, dog owners in town for the 118th Westminster Kennel Club show and, of course, lots of other Long Islanders, trapped but feeling little pain in the bar, cheered wildly.


UP AND COMING: Monique Meunier; First, Star in 'Swan Lake,' Then Be a Psychologist
BALLETOMANES TALKED OF the wonders of Monique Meunier well before she became a full-fledged member of the New York City Ballet in 1990.
She stood out in class, it was said, because of her strong classical technique.
She distinguished herself in lead roles in the end-of-the-year "workshop" performances presented by the company-affiliated School of American Ballet and in the solos she started to dance in 1992.
Today, though still a member of the corps de ballet, Ms.
Meunier is dancing a variety of major roles.
"Commanding," "lucid" and "exalted" are the kinds of adjectives critics use to describe her performances.
She seems capable of meeting technical challenges that might throw a much more experienced ballerina.
And she does it all with the same, almost teasing, aplomb.


MEN AND CARS -- TRUE ROMANCE
It goes anywhere he wants, never expects a phone call, or commitment, and lets him dress as he pleases.
No wonder he's in love.


Peacekeeping Is Crucial to U.S. Military Future
To the Editor:
"The Limits of Peacekeeping" (Op-Ed, Feb. 6), the homily by Anthony Lake, Presidential national security adviser, is glaring evidence that:


Legalizing Marijuana Would Allow Regulation of Its Potency
To the Editor:
" 'Pot' Surges Back, but It's, Like, a Whole New World" (The Week in Review, Feb. 6) is at the very least misleading to suggest that today's marijuana is 20 times stronger than the marijuana that was available during the 1960's, and that this is a reason to keep marijuana illegal.


The Strictest Censor Is the Bottom Line
ANYONE looking for a sign that the fight over Federal funding of arts is at an end need only consider this: Jane Alexander, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, recently invited Senator Jesse Helms to address a meeting of the National Council of the Arts.
The Senator, hitherto persona non grata to the arts community, accepted.


Bookstore Offers to Honor Eeyore's Gift Certificates
To the Editor:
In her letter of Jan. 30, Rosanna Trestman expressed her frustration over being stuck with worthless gift certificates when Eeyore's, the children's bookstore, went out of business.
At the Bank Street Bookstore, where I am the manager, we know how good the store was -- after all, we bought its inventory.


Getting Safely Through the Icy Blahs
WE were mushing home through the week's incredible snow, my wife at the wheel, when the car started to drift in a corner.
I say "drift," but it was really more of an out-of-control slide.


Correction
An article last Sunday about Merry-Go-Round Enterprises and its founder, Leonard (Boogie) Weinglass, included an outdated account supplied by the company of its plans for Boogie's Diner in Manhattan.
It closed the restaurant on Feb. 3.


Evelyn R. Toro, Todd S. Rosen
Evelyn Regina Toro, the daughter of Janet Declet of the Bronx and Benjamin Toro of Tampa, Fla., is to be married today to Todd Stuart Rosen, a son of Rhoda and Seymour Rosen of Little Neck, Queens.
The Rev.
Michael Tyson, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Jonathan Glatzer will perform the interfaith ceremony at Westbury Manor in Westbury, L.I.
Ms.
Toro, who is keeping her name, teaches the sixth grade at Intermediate School 125 in the Bronx.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Queens College, where she is a candidate for a master's degree in secondary education.


Fine Dining Comes to Vegas
Las Vegas has become the latest, and most unlikely, high roller on the national restaurant scene.
Just five years ago gastronomic opportunities there were circumscribed by garish institutional hotel fare and modest family-style establishments catering to year-round residents.
But with the arrival of spectacular new resorts like the $1 billion MGM Grand Hotel and Casino, the $475 million Treasure Island Casino and Hotel, and the $375 million Luxor Hotel, leading restaurateurs from around the country have decided that Las Vegas is ready for cutting edge cuisine.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Fewer Sharks Mean More Seals
I read with great interest "The Seals Have Returned, but Nobody Is Really Sure Why"  [ Jan. 2 ]  on the spotting of seals in Sag Harbor and general Long Island area.
Having been associated with the sea my entire life -- living in Hawaii, Seattle, San Diego and Sag Harbor -- I found it of great interest.
I have noticed seals in their habitats during my tens of thousands of miles sailing on my schooner, the Malabar X, along the coasts of Maine, the Atlantic Seaboard and the Pacific Coast, and I can tell you it is rather common knowledge to most seafaring people that seals are the favorite delicacy of sharks.
When any seal migrates, its greatest danger comes from the threat of being eaten by a shark.
Due to the incredible overfishing of shark by sports and commercial fishermen the shark population has dwindled substantially since the 30's to the point where shark fishing is barely being allowed.
This decimation of the shark population has made it possible for seals to migrate successfully.
While temperature, salinity and food source may have a bearing, the biggest influence on a successful migration is the lack of the major predator.


Will Bull Market Last for Years? They Guarantee It
IN the end, the battle for Paramount came down to one decision: Sumner Redstone was willing to guarantee a bull market in entertainment stocks.
Barry Diller, perhaps recalling movie flops that he had been confident would be hits, was not.
Mr.
Redstone, who got his start with his family's chain of drive-in theaters, is used to ignoring those who caution about overpaying.
His 1987 leveraged buyout of Viacom was widely, and wrongly, viewed as being for too high a price.
In fact, it worked out fine.


The West Moves to Silence the Guns And Change a State of Mind
TO hear the Pentagon tell it, the threat of NATO air strikes in Bosnia, voiced last week after so much diplomatic huffing and puffing, is neither a carrot nor a stick but an aspirin.
It is designed neither "to affect the military outcome nor to propel the parties to settle," said Walter Slocombe, a top official at the Defense Department, but to "reduce the level of violence while the peace process continues." And reduce the level of violence, other senior officers noted, only in a limited area around the besieged city of Sarajevo.
Well, not exactly.
The saber-rattling was also designed to break the psychological stalemate that has settled over what used to be Yugoslavia.
It was meant to achieve a limited military end with limited military means, yes, but if that is all it does, it will have to be counted a failure.
The real goal lies not on the scarred, wooded hillsides above Sarajevo but in the minds of the men and women whose passions keep this conflict alive.


John A. Snyder, 69, Ex-Investment Banker
John A. Snyder, a retired senior vice president of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, died on Feb. 6 at Stamford Hospital in Stamford, Conn.
He was 69.
The cause was prostate cancer and hemophagocytosis, a blood disorder, the company said.


Journal; Hyping Nancy Kerrigan
Cynics have it that a whack on the knee was the best thing ever to happen to both figure skating and Nancy Kerrigan.
A sport that many found thrill-free has been transformed into a violent soap opera as all-American in appeal as football.
If CBS could only clone the Winter Games, it might recoup the ratings franchise it lost with the defection of the N.F.L.


A Word of Praise
To the Editor: When using an airline I select the one that offers the lowest fares.
So on a recent trip to West Palm Beach, my father and I flew Kiwi Airlines.
Returning a week later, I realized I had lost a beloved paisley shawl, a gift.
The good news is that Kiwi has returned the shawl to me, through my father.


Steven Daniel Karen T. Lilly, Michael Raschid
Karen Thorn Lilly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Lilly of Draper, Va., was married yesterday to Michael Imran Raschid, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bilal Raschid of Alexandria, Va.
The Rev.
Dr.
Vienna Cobb Anderson performed the ceremony at St.
Margaret's Episcopal Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Raschid, 27, is a senior paralegal at the Student Loan Marketing Association, the Federal loan program known as Sallie Mae, in Washington.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
Her father is a contractor with Breakell Inc., a construction company in Roanoke, Va.
Her mother, Mary Agnes Lilly, teaches the seventh grade at Pulaski (Va.) Middle School.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Business inventories, Dec., pct. change
0.6
0.2
Tuesday
Industrial production, Jan., pct. chg.
0.7
0.4
Capacity utilization, Jan., percent
82.8
83.0
Wednesday
Housing starts, Jan., millions, annual rate
1.54
1.44
Housing permits, Jan., millions, ann. rate
1.48
1.42
Thursday
Consumer prices, Jan., pct. chg.
0.2
0.3
Trade deficit, Dec., billions
$10.2
$10.4
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
366
360
This Week Developments
Wednesday
Two- and five-year Treasury note auction announcement
Thursday
Bundesbank council meeting


Streetscapes/Sidewalk Sheds; Making a Construction Necessity the Mother of Art
SIDEWALK SHEDS are transient and thus dangerous territory for considered opinion.
But something has definitely changed about this throwaway craft, one largely unchanged in basic nature and technology from medieval times.
In the last decade these enclosures, put up to protect pedestrians and secure property during construction, have become decidedly more ornamental, and the underlying reasons mix salesmanship and safety.


Joan W. Konner, Alvin Perlmutter
Joan W. Konner, the dean of Columbia University's Graduate School of Journalism, was married last Sunday to Alvin H. Perlmutter, an independent television producer in New York.
E.
Leo Milonas, New York State's Chief Administrative Judge, performed the ceremony at the couple's home in Manhattan.
Ms.
Konner is keeping her name.
She is a former producer, writer and executive at NBC News and WNET, the New York public television station.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia.
She is a daughter of the late Tillie and Martin Weiner.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Taking Accurate Aim
To the Editor:
In "The Real Not-Ready-for-Prime-Time Players"  [ Jan. 16 ] , Sarah Lyall observes that "The Kids in the Hall" and "Saturday Night Live" differ in their comic targets.
She also reports that the Kids "try hard not to take cheap shots" at women.
That's the biggest difference in the comedy styles of the two shows.


William Conrad, 73, TV Actor In 'Fatman' and 'Cannon' Series
William Conrad, who starred in the television series "Jake and the Fatman," "Cannon" and other shows, died on Friday at the Medical Center of North Hollywood.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, said a hospital spokeswoman, Tricia Spellman.
She said Mr.
Conrad had become ill at home and died soon after being taken to the hospital.


St. John Night Life
To the Editor: While I was immediately attracted to the article by Reginald Thomas about St.
John, "Exploring a Pristine Isle" (Jan. 9), I was surprised by the author's reference to the lack of night life.
My husband and I have been to St.
John twice during the last three years and stayed at Maho Bay Campgrounds each time.
While there we were directed to local night life by the staff and resident tour director.
The many evenings we spent dancing to local bands at Freds in Cruz Bay and Sputnik in Coral Bay were highlights of our visits.


Valley of the Slacker Seekers
They are the twenty-something thinkers, the laconic purveyors of knowing sarcasm, the chain smokers.
Their philosophy-spouting can either be toxic or tonic, depending on how their mood has been altered within the last few minutes.
They can be manically benign, like Rory Cochrane's Slater in "Dazed and Confused," or darkly sociopathic, like David Thewlis's Johnny in "Naked." In comedies like "Reality Bites," they provide an it-kind-of-makes- you-stop-and-think ballast; in dramas, they provide, well, some more drama.
They are the latest batch of celluloid philosophers, often as misogynist as they are misanthropic, whose musings trumpet amovie's theme, or simply the screenwriter's arrested obsessions.
These philosophers brood.
They glower.
They make oblique cultural references.
They always get the girl. (Or, in the case of Mr. Thewlis, girls.)


Lebanese Hold 4 Palestinians In Killing of Jordan Diplomat
Lebanese security authorities say they have arrested four Palestinians in connection with the assassination of a Jordanian diplomat in Beirut last month.


That Evangelical, Revelatory Computer Industry
To the Editor:
Someone ought to tell George Forrester Colony ("Tough-Talk Consultant to a Darwinian Industry," Sound Bytes, Jan. 30) that Darwinian evolutionary change is incremental and imperceptible in the short run.
Mr.
Colony's language -- "fast, brutal and unforgiving" -- more accurately characterizes evangelical, revelatory dogma, which is, of course, what the computer industry espouses: the promise of a golden future just beyond the next generation of computers and software, and if not the next generation, then the next to the next . . . .
CHARLES PERRONE  Moorestown, N.J., Feb. 2


Emily D. Hewitt, N. T. Rhinelander
Emily Denison Hewitt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Hewitt of Dublin, N.H., was married yesterday to Nicholas Templeton Rhinelander, a son of David H. Rhinelander of Andover, Conn., and Anne S. Hurwitz of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Peter J. D. Allen, an Anglican priest, and the Rev.
Andrew C. Mead, an Episcopal priest, jointly officiated at the Church of the Advent in Boston.
The bride, 29, graduated from Wesleyan University.
She is a development assistant in the planned giving office at the Harvard Medical School in Boston.
Her father, now retired, was a trust administrator at the Rhode Island Hospital Trust National Bank.


Wall Street; Beware Management Talking Poor
MOST investors are wary of managements that hype their stocks.
What they don't realize is that with bankrupt companies, they can get just as burned by managers who are purposely too pessimistic about a company's future.
For junior creditors this undervaluing game is becoming a regular occurrence that is increasing their losses while allowing savvy senior creditors to make out like bandits by winning large portions of undervalued stock that suddenly jump in value after the company emerges from bankruptcy.


'Double Lives'
To the Editor:
Maurice Isserman's review of my book "Double Lives: Spies and Writers in the Secret Soviet War of Ideas Against the West" (Jan. 23) requires some response, beginning with a word about my personal politics.
In writing "Double Lives," I have met many researchers from the left, the center and the right -- all engaged in examining and at last dispelling the Stalinist lies in the West that Mr.
Isserman, with his own agenda, is so quick to minimize and brush aside.
With these young scholars, I have discovered a common purpose that transcends the antiquated shibboleths of the cold war's left and right in a most exhilarating way.
Mr.
Isserman has my politics wrong.
I began "Double Lives" as an anti-Communist liberal.
Now that the journey is over, I remain an anti-Communist liberal.
Just a whole lot more so.
Now to facts.


Susan E. Sommer, Jeffrey L. Futter
Susan Elizabeth Sommer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
A.
Sommer Jr. of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday in New York to Jeffrey Leesam Futter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Victor Futter of Port Washington, L.I.
The Rev.
Joseph I. Collins, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
The bride, who is a management consultant, is to join Management Partners Inc. as a vice president in the Scarsdale, N.Y., office next month.
She graduated from Wittenberg University and received master's degrees in education and business administration from the University of Virginia.


Effort to Oust Warriors in Exile Splits Nicaragua
Sergio Buschmann, wanted in his homeland, Chile, for being the mastermind of what he describes as the largest single weapons smuggling operation in the history of Latin American revolutions, has reverted to his other passion: the stage.
While governments decide his fate, Mr.
Buschmann, 51, teaches drama at the National Theater of Nicaragua.
Before the empty red velvet seats, his class is rehearsing "La Nona," which he describes as a play about the disintegration of a poor Argentine family living under a military dictatorship.


ONE LEG, ONE LIFE AT A TIME
In "One Leg, One Life at a Time" (Jan. 23), Donovan Webster gives the reader everything except names.
I want the names of the major stockholders of the land-mine manufacturing business.
Then, in the summer, we can travel to the residences of stockholders and lob a few well-rotted tomatoes onto the lawns as a protest.


First-Time Wallpaperers Should Ask Questions
WALLPAPERING is a popular amateur project, but often intimidating for beginners.
It helps to read a well-illustrated book or view a videotape on wallpapering.
Besides selecting a color and pattern, which is best done by looking at samples, deciding what type of wallpaper to buy can be a stumbling block.
Standard wallpapers with machine-printed designs are usually best for amateurs to use.
They come in the widest variety, are easy to hang, usually cost less and are less fragile than exotic varieties like hand-printed papers, foils and papers containing fibers like silk or grass.


Sports of The Times; Let's Begin The Legal Olympics
There they were, all the members of the Olympic movement, marching into the opening ceremony, holding their banners high, marching together in the spirit of fair play, sponsorship rights and litigation: the old powers, the newest members, the kindly multinationals that underwrite these games in the pure name of sportsmanship.
And who was that, proudly waving attache cases instead of flags?
Why, they were the other big players in these latter-day Games -- private lawyers, corporate counsels, public prosecutors, maybe even the American Bar Association and the World Court and the Civil Liberties Union, plus that grand old favorite of the Olympic movement, the Clackamas County Judge.


Document Reveals Lincoln's Deft Legal Mind
On April 2, 1864, almost a year before the end of the Civil War, President Lincoln wrote a telling one-line sentence on the side of a legal document that demonstrates the 16th President's deft ability to intervene and yet detach himself from a judicial proceeding, his technical knowledge of the law and, in this particular matter, his spirit of conciliation in the midst of war.
The newly discovered document involved a request by the Maryland District Attorney and the defense lawyer in a Federal treason case from 1861 that was to go to trial when victory for the Union appeared inevitable.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
FOR OLDER HOMES
The Vintage Home Show, devoted to aspects of restoring and maintaining homes that are 50 or more years old, will be an added attraction today at the Garden State International Antiques Show in Somerset.


THE MYTH OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Nicholas Lemann's article is unfair, wrong and harmful.
He presents a scorching critique of efforts to revitalize blighted urban communities, going back to the end of World War II.
He argues that advocates of urban-aid efforts always promise the sun and don't even deliver a sunspot.
They promise "economic revitalization," by which he means business development, but their main work is something else.
However, in an almost apologetic last paragraph, he concedes that community development corporations build houses and provide social services, including job training.
Aren't houses and job training "economic revitalization"?
Moreover, these groups are doing this without a lot of hoopla, building from the ground up.
A recent study says there are some 2,000 such groups operating today and that they have solid accomplishments.
Furthermore, community development corporations are increasingly turning their attention to business development in their target areas.


Seventh Avenue Picks 'Fashion' Over 'Garment'
The Garment District conjures up images of sample sales, of bent men pushing carts through tangled traffic, of hard negotiations between buyers and sellers.
By contrast, the Fashion Center is a sleeker stamp, evoking elegant runways.
That's the name local business leaders prefer and that's the name they have chosen for the city's newest business improvement district, an area bordered by Avenue of the Americas, Eighth Avenue, 35th and 41st Streets.
Soon the Fashion Center's logo -- black and white buttons -- will be seen all over the district.


A Beauty Queen With Eyes on the Law
UNDER the weight of the law, Debra Jean Strimike was listing to the right.
A shoulder bag filled with law books can test the best of postures.
Miss Strimike's is usually superb, even when wearing only six-inch heels and a bathing suit.
But after a day of classes at Hofstra University Law School, her 5-foot-8-inch frame was decidedly hunched over.
To make it upright, the 15-pound book bag would rotate to the other shoulder the next day.
"It's my upper-body exercise," she said.
Exercising body and mind are the workload for Miss Strimike, a 21-year-old who leads two lives.
During the week she is a first-year law student taking 23 credits.
On weekends she is a beauty queen.
Miss Strimike is Miss United States.
Which means that her life jumps back and forth from tiered classrooms in Hempstead to dropping ceremonial pucks at N.H.L. games.


In Court, College Defends Separation of Sexes
Virginia Military Institute, a state-financed college battling in court to stay all-male, won an endorsement this week for its plan to create a separate, but not quite equal, program for women at a nearby college.
A feminist scholar told a Federal district judge here that the idea was not only constitutional but would also actually benefit women.
The endorsement by Dr.
Elizabeth Fox-Genovese, an author who was the founding director of the women's studies program at Emory University in Atlanta, came in a trial that has featured hours of testimony about "the psychology of gender" and differences in the ways women and men develop in early life.


ONE LEG, ONE LIFE AT A TIME
Your article omitted one of the world's giant mine fields: Burma's war zone.
There, a pervasive form of human-rights abuse is the Burmese Army's forced conscription of ethnic-minority civilians to, as Amnesty International puts it, "sweep the roads ahead of troops for mines."


Is It the Thought (or Flower) That Counts?
TOMORROW, boxes of candy, red roses, lacy cards and all kinds of sentiment will be expressed for Valentine's Day.
This is Cupid's special time and boundless amounts of sweet nothings will be exchanged.
For many, the language of the flowers will have great significance, but all too often the senders and receivers of the flowers never know what it means.
They will respond to the standard emotion that it is the thought behind the giving that counts.
But there was a time when specific flowers meant specific things.
This was known as the language of flowers.


It's Couples And Pavin, With a Nod To Couples
There hasn't been a match-play event on the PGA Tour since the Seiko Tucson Match Play tournament was dropped after 1986, but the Nissan Los Angeles Open has turned into the next best thing.
Fred Couples and Corey Pavin, two of the top American golfers, are separated from one another by one stroke and from the rest of the field by much more.
Couples delighted his enormous galleries today by birdieing five of the final nine holes for a round of 68 that put him at 202, 11 under par and one stroke ahead of Pavin, who shot 72.
The three players tied for third, Peter Jacobsen, Craig Stadler and Jay Delsing, are six strokes behind Couples and are all but certain to be playing for third in Sunday's final round.


No Headline
"Look, we're not having an earthquake. We're not having a hurricane. There are people dying in Sarajevo. In this city, if you can't take a little inconvenience, move out." JOHN ISERNIA of Patchogue, L.I., stuck at Penn Station.  [ 46:1. ]


Trolley's Next Stop: Planning Commission
After months of public debate, Manhattan Borough President Ruth W. Messinger last week gave her conditional support to a proposal for a 42d Street trolley.
The plan now goes before the City Planning Commission, which will hold a final hearing and vote on Wednesday, and if approved to the Mayor.
Though Ms.
Messinger does not have the power to block the proposal, most people connected to the project said that, politically, her opposition would have been a fatal blow; the three community boards that would be affected by the trolley have all opposed it.


Ms. Bussell-Wolff And Mr. Siegel
Debragh Bussell-Wolff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira J. Zarin of Livingston, N.J., was married there last evening to Jeffrey J. Siegel, the son of Ruth Fisher Siegel of New York and Martin Siegel of Brookville, L.I.
Rabbi William Kraus performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


A Regal Tribute
To the Sports Editor:
I'm writing this with tears still streaming down my face.
Doug Henderson did what every writer prays to do in "A Steadfast Friend Whose Manner Spoke of Royalty" (The Times, Feb. 6).
Henderson  reached inside the reader, grabbed his emotions from the start and held on.


When It Isn't in The Cards
It's a thin plastic card that will completely change the way you pay fares on New York City's subway and buses.
No more searching for tokens in pockets or purses.
Metrocard is convenient to carry and easy to use."
So says the M.T.A. in its brochure on the new Metrocard, which can be obtained in several denominations and used instead of tokens in a number of subway stations.
But -- and there's always a but -- should any problems arise, then, in the dim light in the wee hours at Grand Army Plaza, follow these instructions:


Tracy Maass, Harry D. Korss
Tracy Maass, the daughter of Mrs.
Allan M. Cartter and Herbert H. Maass, both of Beverly Hills, Calif., was married on Friday to Harry David Korss, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Korss of San Francisco.
Rabbi Allan Schranz performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Korss, 37, received a certificate in early childhood education from the College for Developmental Studies.
Her father is a vice president in the investments division of Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company, the securities brokerage, in Beverly Hills.


Corrections
A chart in the Travel section on Jan. 30 with the What's Doing column, about Ottawa, characterized a figure for precipitation in February incorrectly, as does a related correction on page 3 of that section today.
The figure, 12, referred to the number of days with measurable precipitation, not to the number of inches of snowfall.


THE MYTH OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Although single-shot efforts at housing or education or health care can make important contributions to a better life, they cannot alone be effective in transforming the dreadful conditions at the bottom of our society.
What is required is literal transformation of these dysfunctional neighborhoods into fit places to live and raise families.
To this end, the Enterprise Foundation is working with residents of the Sandtown neighborhood of Baltimore (10,300 people, in 72 square blocks -- 44 percent jobless, the center of violent crime), in an effort to transform these conditions -- and all at the same time.
The project is being watched across the country as a potential model.


RUSSIAN SOFTENS STAND ON BOSNIA
Russia continued to move closer today to the modified Western position toward the Serbian nationalists in Bosnia and Herzegovina, sanctioning the possibility of NATO air strikes around Sarajevo as a last resort but stressing the primacy of a political settlement.
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev said that in specific emergencies, United Nations forces in Bosnia could ask for NATO air strikes in particular places in and around Sarajevo, which is ringed by Serbian heavy artillery.
But he stressed that in authorizing air strikes, the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, would have to consult with the Security Council, where Russia could use its veto.


At Work; After the Divorce, the Deluge
THERE are so many ways for a woman to end up living in poverty when she is elderly that it seems almost churlish to focus on one particular group as more victimized than any other.
Women may, for example, work at jobs in companies unlikely to offer significant retirement coverage and for wages so low that saving is virtually impossible.
Or, to increase their income, they may juggle two or three low-paying jobs.
Together, the jobs may add up to years of more-than-full-time employment and yield a living wage -- but no benefits and certainly no pension.
Or they may enter and leave the labor force as family duties ebb and flow, interrupting the long march toward qualifying for retirement plans, or lowering the amount they will receive.
Or their husbands may die, leaving them with considerably less than the expected amount of retirement income.
"Our life patterns are different than the life patterns of men," said Lou Glasse, president of the Washington-based Older Women's League.


'Hello and Goodbye,' Early Fugard Play
SINCE Athol Fugard is indelibly connected to a political and humanistic mission, it is enlightening to rediscover "Hello and Goodbye," an early work that holds the stage stirringly without a word about racial oppression.
Even though the play, which had its South African premiere in 1965, is apolitical, Mr.
Fugard was already celebrated as "the conscience of his country," given his acclaimed 1961 play, "Blood Knot," his rage against apartheid.


Desperately Seeking Someone?
MELISSA LEVINE says she went on 17 blind dates last month, and that's not even counting the guy she met by the bee pollen.
"I was in the health food store, and I saw this man looking at the products," said Ms.
Levine, a 33-year-old financial planner who lives in Manhattan.
"I went up to him and said, 'What are you buying?' and when he told me bee pollen, I said, 'Oh, get it, you'll have a lot of energy.' " He gave her his card on the way out, and they had a date soon after.


Behind a Dark Mirror: Traditional Victims Give Vent to Racism
BLACK racism.
For some blacks it is a laughable oxymoron. ("How can the victims of racism be racist?") For some whites it is an excuse for doing little to reduce the inequalities that still plague the country. ("See, blacks are just as bad as they say we are.")
The recent diatribe against Catholics, Jews and homosexuals (among others) by Khalid Abdul Muhammad, a member of the hierarchy of the Nation of Islam, has focused attention on the disturbing question of how much racism permeates black America.
Indeed, the public fascination with the Nation of Islam -- a fringe group with negligible political and economic power -- is partly explained by white fear that its views are shared by other blacks.
Looking at the cleaning women, the bank tellers, partners in their law firm, some whites silently ask, "Do you agree with Louis Farrakhan?"


Angel Falls
To the Editor: Your readers might like to know that it was a news photographer in search of a story who led the first overland expedition to Angel Falls, in May 1949.
Ruth Robertson, a photographer and former war correspondent, paddled, slogged and hacked her way through the jungle for two weeks to get there.
Robertson; Alejandro Laime, a guide; an engineer; a radio operator representing the Venezuelan Government, and 10 local people went in to chart the falls, fixing their height at 3,212 feet, the highest in the world.
Before that the falls had been seen by few, and only from the air.
Jimmy Angel, as Mr.
Brooke notes, crash-landed in 1937 atop the massif.


THE MYTH OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Nicholas Lemann's article is unfair, wrong and harmful.
He presents a scorching critique of efforts to revitalize blighted urban communities, going back to the end of World War II.
He argues that advocates of urban-aid efforts always promise the sun and don't even deliver a sunspot.
They promise "economic revitalization," by which he means business development, but their main work is something else.
However, in an almost apologetic last paragraph, he concedes that community development corporations build houses and provide social services, including job training.
Aren't houses and job training "economic revitalization"?
Moreover, these groups are doing this without a lot of hoopla, building from the ground up.
A recent study says there are some 2,000 such groups operating today and that they have solid accomplishments.
Furthermore, community development corporations are increasingly turning their attention to business development in their target areas.


Psychiatry Gets Religion
Psychiatry and religion, disciplines that have sometimes viewed each other warily, may be headed toward reconciliation, in their own way: The forthcoming edition of psychiatry's official catalogue of mental illnesses has added a brief entry titled "Religious or Spiritual Problem."
Does this mean that therapists are including religious beliefs among conditions requiring treatment?
Quite the opposite, say those who promoted the entry, which will appear next May in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.


THE MYTH OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
As one who has labored in the field of inner-city planning and housing for well over 40 years, I believe that Nicholas Lemann's "Myth of Community Development" (Jan. 9), with stunning economy, tells the whole story and separates the precious few grains of wheat from the enormous mound of chaff.
He gives me hope that the coming generation may contend better with reality than we did.
ROGER MONTGOMERY Dean, College of Environmental Design University of California Berkeley, Calif.


Data Bank/February 13, 1994
Data Bank/February 13, 1994
Consumer Credit
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
11.2
10.7
11.0
U.S. Productivity
IV Q' 93
III Q' 93
II Q'93
Monthly percent change
4.2
4.0
-0.4
Sales at Retail Outlets
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Monthly percent change
-0.5
1.2
0.7
Producer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
-0.1
0.0
6-Month Treasury Bills
Feb. 11
Feb. 4
Jan. 28
Rate in percent
3.38
3.36
3.10
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.24
3.20
2.92
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
6.40
6.35
6.21
Weekly Jobless Claims
Feb. 4
Jan. 28
Jan. 21
In thousands
366
413
363


Responsible Party
To the Editor:
Does Ron Nyswaner not comprehend the crucial role the media plays in relation to the issue of AIDS?
Does he not understand the impact his film "Philadelphia" has and will have on how the public views and deals with AIDS (and homosexuality, for that matter)?


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Electronic Library
SUSAN DRUCKER said she moved to Great Neck mainly because of its library.
Now she rarely goes to the library.
"I can browse from home," she said.
The Great Neck Library has installed such an advanced computer system that residents can dial it and from their home computers scan the card catalogue, the listings of videos, CD's and audio cassettes, reserve a book, peruse the periodical index and search for magazine articles.
All for free.


ONE LEG, ONE LIFE AT A TIME
Johnson is not so much pro-choice as anti-thought.
She hankers for the good old days of the 1950's when women could go out and have "one of those things" without having to think "for more than two seconds" about any moral implications.


THE TALES A TABLE COULD TELL
After all the stories about big Hollywood and New York "players," the most engrossing story so far is about the card table.
Freund's article was a pleasure to read.
BARBARA ROUX Centerport, L.I.


First-Time Wallpaperers Should Ask Questions
WALLPAPERING is a popular amateur project, but often intimidating for beginners.
It helps to read a well-illustrated book or view a videotape on wallpapering.
Besides selecting a color and pattern, which is best done by looking at samples, deciding what type of wallpaper to buy can be a stumbling block.
Standard wallpapers with machine-printed designs are usually best for amateurs to use.
They come in the widest variety, are easy to hang, usually cost less and are less fragile than exotic varieties like hand-printed papers, foils and papers containing fibers like silk or grass.


Flipping For a Lid
WHAT: The dome coffee lid.
WHY: The traditional flat lid -- the one that allows coffee to slosh over the top and onto the drinker's clothing -- may be acceptable for the 50-cent, no-name brew from the corner deli.
But not for $2.75 cappuccino or espresso doppio.
With their stylish brews, coffees bars have introduced the lids to Manhattan.
DOUBLES AS A HAT: The visual effect is startling.
The lid looks like a white derby sitting atop the cup.
Although there are several variations on the dome lid, all of them let the coffee drinker sip through a small hole in the curved mouthpiece.
The lid goes by a variety of names, depending on the manufacturer: Traveler Lid, Sipping Lid, Gourmet Lid.
SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE: Manufacturers claim that by raising the roof on the coffee cup, they have advanced the technology of take-out coffee in two ways.
First, they talk about "a splash barrier" or a "spill-free drinking environment." They say that with an inch of air above the cup, "coffee doesn't slosh out, doesn't bounce out." Second, they say the dome provides space for whipped cream or steamed milk.
In other words, they say they have eliminated "the squish factor." WHO MAKES IT: With the growing popularity of both coffee bars and America's takeout life style, competition in the lid business is steaming.
Solo Cup Company of Highland Park, Ill., says that it created the genre of the dome lid five years ago and holds a patent on it.
Sweetheart Cup Company of Chicago came out with a dome lid a few months ago.
Now, the two are locked in legal combat.
Solo has filed a lawsuit, charging patent infringement, against Sweetheart.
Molly Powers, Solo's marketing manager, said that no one at Solo could talk about the company's lid, or even provide a sample to be photographed, because of the legal battle.
Sweetheart is not reticent.
"The case is frivolous," said Daniel M. Carson, the vice president and general counsel of Sweetheart.
Steve Smith, the product manager for hot beverages at Sweetheart, is already claiming a victory.
"Our rate of delivery is better," he said.
"When you tip the lid to drink, you don't get too much and you don't get too little."
The main difference between the lids lies in the mouthpiece: indented on Solo's, raised on Sweetheart's.
COST: Despite the fancy engineering, manufacturers and retailers say the dome lids cost a coffee vendor no more than the flat versions.
Good news, no doubt, for people whose favorite coffee already costs as much as a sandwich.


THE MYTH OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Although single-shot efforts at housing or education or health care can make important contributions to a better life, they cannot alone be effective in transforming the dreadful conditions at the bottom of our society.
What is required is literal transformation of these dysfunctional neighborhoods into fit places to live and raise families.
To this end, the Enterprise Foundation is working with residents of the Sandtown neighborhood of Baltimore (10,300 people, in 72 square blocks -- 44 percent jobless, the center of violent crime), in an effort to transform these conditions -- and all at the same time.
The project is being watched across the country as a potential model.


The Culprit Is . . .
To the Editor:
I agree wholeheartedly with Vincent Canby's essay "Is Broadway Fogbound in a Special-Effects Age?"  [ Jan. 16 ] .
However, I think he missed the main reason for all the stage wizardry: There is no music.
Andrew Lloyd Webber has killed it.
Most of his work is based on something else, and now in "Sunset Boulevard" he seems to be stealing from himself.


Marx in Love
Everyone knows Heloise loved Abelard and Napoleon loved Josephine.
You probably also know that Boswell had a vigorous and ribald love life, as did Havelock Ellis.
But did you know that John Paul Jones was accused of rape in Russia and that Karl Marx could write a passionate love letter when so moved?
"History Laid Bare: Love, Sex and Perversity From the Ancient Etruscans to Warren G. Harding," a new book by Richard Zacks, specializes in the raunchy and perverse, a mild example being the story of a Colonial governor of New York, an early predecessor of J. Edgar Hoover, appearing in a woman's ball gown.


Computer-Age Tots Trading Building Blocks for Software
David Caropresi, who is 3, sits on a raised stenographer's chair in his family's upstairs office, using the computer to play with dinosaur software, clicking the computer's mouse to make things happen.
He has used the program since he was 26 months old, and "by the time he was 2 1/2, he could name six or seven dinosaurs -- before he could count to 10," said his mother, Christine Caropresi, a corporate relocation specialist in Wexford, Pa.


The Unpatriotic Academy
Most of us, despite the outrage we may feel about governmental cowardice or corruption, and despite our despair over what is being done to the weakest and poorest among us, still identify with our country.
We take pride in being citizens of a self-invented, self-reforming, enduring constitutional democracy.
We think of the United States as having glorious -- if tarnished -- national traditions.
Many of the exceptions to this rule are found in colleges and universities, in the academic departments that have become sanctuaries for left-wing political views.
I am glad there are such sanctuaries, even though I wish we had a left more broadly based, less self-involved and less jargon-ridden than our present one.
But any left is better than none, and this one is doing a great deal of good for people who have gotten a raw deal in our society: women, African-Americans, gay men and lesbians.
This focus on marginalized groups will, in the long run, help to make our country much more decent, more tolerant and more civilized.


UAL Soaring? Sinking, More Likely
Hardly a united and happy work force.
PETER LYON  Sparta, N.J., Jan. 31


The Exact Quote
To the Sports Editor:
Discussing the Tonya Harding case in the Feb. 2 Sports of The Times, George Vecsey writes: "Dickens said the law was 'an ass.' " It was Mr.
Bumble the Beadle in "Oliver Twist" who made the remark, and what he actually said was that "the law is a ass, a idiot."  LOUIS JAY HERMAN  New York


As Nations Trim Costs, Embassies Feel Pinch
Before the global marketplace, before the recession, before the decline of greed and the rise of austerity, there was the diplomatic party.
There were dozens of them.
Every night.
Any enterprising youth with a decent suit or little black dress could ditch budget meals at home to graze on hors d'oeuvres at some embassy function here.


Dispatches From the Alps Of Manhattan
On the busy corners of West 181st Street last week, the well-trampled snow was taking on the color and consistency of cookie dough.
Rose Bernstein grimaced as she reached another mound.
"How am I supposed to get over this?" she asked.
"I'm 85 years old and I shouldn't have to climb through the snow. They should clean it up properly."


Community Group Sues to Stop A Hospital Expansion Project
Park Slope residents are mounting a last-ditch campaign to halt construction of an office and parking complex that they fear will severely crowd the streets of the mostly residential neighorhood.
Park Slope Action for the Environment, a new community group formed to stop the construction, last week filed suit in State Supreme Court in Manhattan asking the court to overturn the Board of Standards and Appeals' approval of the project.
The suit, and a petition signed by about 2,000 residents, also called for the drafting of a comprehensive Environmental Impact Statement.
The project, a $30 million expansion plan by New York Methodist Hospital, is scheduled to begin this spring along Seventh Avenue.


Correction
A listing last Sunday about events for Black History Month misstated the time of a performance of poetry and jazz on Feb. 21 at the Gathering Space at the Harlem School of the Arts, 645 St.
Nicholas Avenue, near 141st Street.
It begins at 2 P.M., not 4.


Beth S. Berliner, Larry Hirschhorn
Beth S. Berliner, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James I. Berliner of Larchmont, N.Y., was married last evening to Larry S. Hirschhorn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Hirschhorn, also of Larchmont.
Rabbi Jeffrey J. Sirkman officiated at the Beach Point Club in Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Ms.
Berliner, who is keeping her name, is the guidance counselor at Murray Hill Academy, an alternative high school in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received a master's degree in guidance and counseling from Hunter College.
Her father is a managing director of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.


Sauerkraut With Pheasant and Sausage
FOR this kind of weather, you need a good choucroute," said a friend on a particularly bitter-cold day recently. He also happens to be a French chef and he missed the brasseries of Paris, where in the winter he would routinely warm up with a plate of choucroute garnie and a couple of glasses of Alsatian beer.
Choucroute is French for sauerkraut, and it is traditionally braised in white wine and served with sausages, smoked meats, pork or game and boiled potatoes.


The Lure Of Tempura
INAGIKU * (212) 355-0440; 111 East 49th Street; $$; all major credit cards


Angel Falls
To the Editor: Regarding your article "Venezuela's Sky-High Falls" by James Brooke (Jan. 16) -- it's all true.
I've had two trips there and can't wait to return.
Brooke's description of Angel Falls, the lodge at Canaima, Cuidad Bolivar -- all of that reassures me that conditions so far remain unspoiled.
I've traveled the world and Canaima gets my gold medal for breathtaking beauty.
Here a footnote about Jimmy Angel, the roughneck pilot who mapped the area of the falls that bear his name.
He collapsed while landing in Panama City in 1956 when his cargo of heavy pipes shifted and broke loose and punctured him.
He completed the landing but ran off the runway and died two days later in the hospital.


Exploring Morocco With Art Lovers
Morocco's rich artistic and cultural heritage is explored in two tours of the country this spring.
The San Francisco Museum of Modern Art is sponsoring an 18-day trip, leaving San Francisco for Casablanca on April 16 and returning on May 3.
The itinerary includes three-night stops in Tangier, Fez and Marrakesh, as well as visits to Essaouira, a former Portuguese maritime fortress dating from the seventh-century B.C., and of Taroudant.
Some notable sights include the Museum of Moroccan Art and the Museum of Antiquities, both housed in the former sultan's palace in Tangier, the village of Chefchaouen, the Roman ruins of Volubilis and the ninth-century Qararouine University.
Travelers will also visit the private residences of several art collectors, artists and writers.
The cost is $5,410 a person, which includes round trip air fare from San Francisco, accommodations, most meals and a tax-deductible donation to the Museum.
For information call the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, art tours and travel department, (415) 252-4190.


Environment President? Not Yet
On environmental issues, President Clinton has not displayed anywhere near the energy or enthusiasm he brought to the struggles over the budget and the North American Free Trade Agreement.
His appointments have been solid.
But in terms of measurable achievements, his first year was as spotty as that controversial little owl.
He is still haunted by his capitulation to Congress last March on Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt's plans to reform the country's destructive grazing and mining practices.
His legislative agenda will not survive similar failures of nerve in 1994.
Nor will it survive prolonged periods of Presidential inattentiveness.
The era of automatic Congressional acceptance of laws that promise cleaner air or cleaner anything is pretty much over.


Park Service Seeks To Buy Alaska Land
THE National Park Service is negotiating with Alaska natives to buy tens of thousands of acres of wilderness, paying for it with money collected from the Exxon Corporation as compensation for damages caused by the huge oil spill in Prince William Sound off Valdez in 1989.
"We are hoping to be able to put forward a package of proposed acquisitions by summer," said John Quinley, a spokesman for the park service, which is reviewing appraisals of the property.


Joanna Heimbold, Richard Zuckerman
Joanna Maria Heimbold, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Heimbold Jr. of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard Cox Zuckerman, the son of Rosanna Cox Zuckerman of New York and the late Gabriel Zuckerman.
The Rev.
Molly McGreevey performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Luke in the Fields in New York.
The bride is an actress with Instant Girl, a trio of performance artists in New York.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College, from which she also received a master's degree in education.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, the pharmaceutical manufacturer, in New York.
Her mother, Monika A. Heimbold, is a social worker at the Guidance Center in New Rochelle, N.Y.


After Quake, a Desperate Search for Lost Pets
Since the Jan. 17 earthquake, 71-year-old Arlowyn Schapers has been combing the streets of the San Fernando Valley, looking in trash bins and under damaged houses for her gray kitten, Piper, who ran off in the chaos of the tremor.
Mrs.
Schapers, a widow who lives alone, was close to tears when she returned to the West Valley Animal Shelter last week only to find that Piper had not shown up.


Offering Family Values And Plenty of Goals
On his visit to New York last month for the National Hockey League's All-Star weekend, 20-year-old Aleksei Yashin of the Ottawa Senators went out on the town the night before the game.
He had a good time, although he didn't exactly paint Times Square red.
"I went to a Broadway theater and I saw 'Phantom of the Opera' with my mom," he said.
"It was great, a great moment in my life." The next afternoon, at Madison Square Garden, he scored the winning goal for the Eastern Conference, another good moment.


The Big Train Wreck
From the time Japan's first postwar Prime Minister took office, the job has come with a single mandate: whatever you do, keep the Americans happy.
So whenever a trade crisis erupted -- first over textiles, then autos, computer chips, beef and citrus, cellular phones, baseball bats and construction -- there was always a last-minute sucking-in of breath from Tokyo and a deal.
Some worked, some failed, some markets opened and many had an odd way of remaining sealed, but open confrontation was avoided.


INSIDE
Back to Health Plan Basics
White House strategists hope to rescue the President's health care plan by moving the debate from mechanics back to the basics of guaranteeing health care for all.
Page 26.
Minimalist Sculptor Is Dead
Donald Judd, 65, who abandoned painting for sculpture, was one of the foremost American postwar artists and a major figure in the Minimalist movement.
Page 50.
East Europe's Arms Trade
As Eastern Europe tries to privatize, it has started an arms trade that troubles the United States; but these countries say they need more aid to convert to other industries.
Page 14.


Lorraine Bracco, Edward James Olmos
Lorraine Bracco, the beautiful, spirited 39-year-old actress who grew up in Brooklyn, met Edward James Olmos, the 46-year-old Latino actor and political activist from Los Angeles, when they made the movie "Talent for the Game" three years ago.
As actors they have very different sensibilities.
She is known for portraying fast-talking strong-willed women, the kind who throw shoes at their lovers with the accuracy of expert dart players.
He often plays brooding, mystical men, like the Mexican crime lord in "American Me."


Overturning The Courts In the 90's
There was a time in the not-too-distant past when I would find the discovery of a basketball game on television extremely comforting.
Whether it was watching the elegant selflessness of the 70's Knicks, the meticulously choreographed street wisdom of the 80's Lakers, or recapturing a moment of the likes of Erving, Barry, Johnson and Jordan, whose magnificence redefined the boundaries of magic, the sport provided a relatively safe haven from the cacophony of world problems.


A Baedeker to America in the Age of Anxiety
THE SITES OF HUMAN tragedies have been marked for commemoration at least since tradition settled on the place where Christ was crucified.
But artists cared more for the events, whether holy or secular, than for their locations -- they painted crucifixions infinitely more often than the hill of Golgotha, just as they preferred martyrdoms or the deaths of generals to a quiet spot that once saw blood.
When photography first came along, it was too slow for most events and had to settle for the sites.
In 1855, during the Crimean war, the English photographer Roger Fenton took a picture of the Valley of the Shadow of Death after the killing was over and nothing remained but spent cannonballs.
During the American Civil War, photographers unable to stop the action recorded bridges, ruins, "The Scene of General MacPherson's Death" after the general's body was removed.
When faster lenses and films were devised, the event itself became primary again, but since photographers are not always in the right place at the right time, the site and its aftermath have been subjects often enough.


When Steak Is What a Diner Desires
IT is our view that usually places that specialize in steak are like Gertrude Stein's line about a rose: a steakhouse is a steakhouse is a steakhouse.
Anyone interested usually finds such a restaurant without our help.
But what makes us point out Charlie B's Steakhouse in New Haven are its location and its value.
Anyone visiting the city for museums or theater-going will find this new restaurant right in the center of things, just a block from the Yale Repertory Theater and the Yale Art Gallery.
Even the most resolute quiche-eaters occasionally crave a good, tender hunk of meat and toss cholesterol worries to the wind.


Big Daddy's Strength May Be His Confidence
In the seventh grade, he was 6 feet 2 inches and 270 pounds, and his junior high school coach in Dayton, Ohio, dubbed him Big Beef.
Teammates gave him weight-inspired nicknames, including one he hated, Cheese.
Then the coach came up with the nickname that still follows him, Big Daddy.
Big Daddy is Dan Wilkinson, a 21-year-old defensive tackle from Ohio State.
He has grown to 6-4 and 325 pounds, and he has grown so much in ability that the Cincinnati Bengals may make him the first choice over all in April's National Football League draft.


Walking on Gel
They look like toeless plastic feet.
But when they're slipped into shoes, Gel Soles are supposed to cushion real feet, absorbing heel shock.
The washable insoles are filled with liquid gel.
The gel is also designed to massage feet as you move, though the effect is a little like standing on a waterbed.
Gel Soles cost $19 and can be ordered from the TravelSmith catalogue.
Call (800) 950-1600.
TERRY TRUCCO


Writing


Sound Bytes; The Not-So-Silent Screen
CRYSTAL DYNAMICS INC. is one of the new crop of video-game companies hoping to capitalize on the new game machines that use 32-bit microprocessors, similar to those in the most powerful personal computers.
The first of the machines, the Interactive Multiplayer, developed by 3DO and made and marketed by Matsushita, began selling in November, accompanied by Crystal's first title, a car-race game called "Crash and Burn."
Founded by two former marketing executives from Sega, the leader in the older 16-bit video-games, Crystal last fall recruited Strauss Zelnick, 36, as president and chief executive.
Mr.
Zelnick had already risen to C.E.O. of 20th Century Fox, and not surprisingly crafted a strategy similar to that of a movie studio: Crystal will both produce its own games and distribute titles made by independent producers.


Riding a Merry-Go-Round of Pathos and Camp
IT'S NOT FOR NOTHING THAT Michael John LaChiusa describes his ambitious new musical, "Hello Again," now at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, as having been "suggested" by the Arthur Schnitzler classic, "La Ronde" (titled "Reigen" in German).
The young American composer, lyricist and librettist has effectively deconstructed the melancholy and skeptical Viennese sex comedy without putting it back together.
The new work is not an adaptation of the Schnitzler play, but it is an impertinent, sometimes haunting, often jokey commentary on it.
"Hello Again," directed and choreographed by Graciela Daniele, is still about the daisy chain of sexual encounters that begins when a whore has al fresco sex with a soldier, who then makes love to a young woman, who moves on to a different young man, until, at last, the ninth and final partner returns to the whore.
The Schnitzler play, which is about romantic dreams repeatedly dashed, is contained within the small, hermetically sealed world of turn-of-the-century Vienna.
Mr.
LaChiusa liberates the Schnitzler characters but at a certain cost to coherence.
They now move freely back and forth in time, through the first nine explosive decades of the 20th century.


Change is In the Air in Cuba, but the Paint is Still Peeling
THE air of expectation is still heavy wherever one goes in Cuba these days, but it no longer seems to be for the quick, catastrophic fall of the Government following the Soviet Union's collapse.
Rather, one senses a pungent mixture of depression and hope that attends a more gradual passage.
As the photos on this page suggest, one world is withering in Cuba.
Another of still uncertain shape is being born.
The process continues even as the United States, for domestic political reasons, continues to shy from a relaxation of the decades-old trade embargo on Cuba, though it recently lifted the one on Vietnam.


Cyberspace Under Lock And Key
IN Silicon Valley some of the country's best computer hackers are talking about acts of civil disobedience in cyberspace.
Their target is a plan by the Federal Government to discourage a proliferation of coding schemes that insure electronic conversations are private -- from everyone including the authorities.
Under a plan being pushed by the Clinton Administration, the computer industry would be strongly encouraged to adopt a new data scrambling standard, embodied in a device called the Clipper chip, that would allow law enforcement agencies, armed with court orders, to eavesdrop on electronic communications.


Ms. MacKinnon And Mr. Henrici
Elizabeth Ann MacKinnon, the daughter of Maralen T. O'Neil of Potomac, Md., and Robert H. MacKinnon of New York, was married yesterday to Peter John Henrici, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Henrici of Pittsboro , N.C.
The Rev.
Matthew Lincoln, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
Francis Episcopal Church in Potomac.
The Rev.
John Inzler, a Roman Catholic priest, also took part in the ceremony.
The bride, 28, is an assistant vice president at J. P. Morgan Investment Management in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a senior partner at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
Her mother is the head of the lower school at St.
Patrick's Episcopal Day School in Washington.


Youths Meet to Discuss AIDS


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK AREA  $310,000
205 Third Avenue (18th St.) 2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq,-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area; maintenance $1,391, including utilities, 51% tax deductible, listed at $335,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Silverman Group)


Award-Winning Soloists Offer a Pair of Concerts
International prize-winners bracket the week at the Emelin Theater, Tomohiro Okumura and Anton Nel appearing in Mamaroneck today at 3 P.M., Pedja Muzijevic giving a solo recital at that same hour next Sunday.
Messrs.
Okumura and Nel, both winners of the prestigious Naumberg Award -- for violin last year and piano in 1987, respectively -- will be previewing their Feb. 28 Alice Tully Hall program, with sonatas by Bach, Bartok and Saint-Saens and shorter works by Paganini and Toru Takemitsu.


PARADISE, ECOLOGICALLY CORRECTED
FROM WHERE I AM standing, commoners must have watched prisoners of war being torn apart on the pyramid above, their anguished cries lost in the roaring crowd's celebration of the devastation of some neighboring stronghold.
But the cup in my hand contains Dewar's and water, not a ritual offering to bloodthirsty gods.
The pyramid is just a steep hill of limestone rubble, with the faint outline of steps visible through the thin vegetation.
And the only sound, beyond the occasional complaint of a parrot or the growl of a howler monkey, is the happy-hour murmur of sun-dazed guests.


Village Residents Support Housing for Prostitutes
To the Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's Feb. 6 column, "The 'Nimby' Wars: View From a Backyard," misrepresents neighborhood responses to Dr.
Joyce Wallace's plan for converting her West 12th Street town house into transitional housing for about a dozen drug-free former prostitutes.


Is Albany's Bureaucracy Half Full or Half Empty?
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo kept his pledge, made as the recession darkened three years ago, to cut 1 in 10 state jobs.
Now he says the pain is over.
This year, he is calling for almost no layoffs, as his re-election campaign nears and the economy tiptoes into a recovery.
But even after the elimination of 20,000 positions, the questions remain.
Is the state work force, connected in the minds of voters to the taxes they pay, at optimal size?
Or should Mr.
Cuomo seek deeper cuts from the Legislature?
The questions are likely to stalk him as he runs for a fourth term as head of a state administration still slightly bigger than when he took office in 1983.


Backroom Politics (as Usual), Stock Characters
If political clubs of the small-town, small-time backroom kind live on, then "Belmont Avenue Social Club," produced by Stamford Theater Works, might win points for authenticity.
But Bruce Graham, the playwright, is making his own cynical points about the clan -- men only, all white -- for whom doing favors, making deals and fixing parking tickets is a way of life.
Or for some, a way of avoiding life.
This is the scenario.
Pete, a councilman, dies.
A successor is needed.
Tommy, a 59-year-old comptroller, is most likely to succeed Pete.
Everyone else is "too old or indicted."


Moonlight in a Net
CRANES' MORNING By Indrani Aikath-Gyaltsen. 243 pp. New York: Ballantine Books. $20.


Harry Weltchek; Lawyer, 92
Harry Weltchek, an authority in probate law and a former president of the bar association in Union County, N.J., died on Feb. 5 at his winter home in Palm Springs, Calif.
He was 92.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his nephew, James Rosenfield.


Japan Sees Hosokawa Leveling Ties With U.S.
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's refusal to accede to American trade demands on Friday is being seen here as the beginning of a new relationship with the United States, one in which Japan has an equal voice and cannot be bullied into making concessions just for the sake of preserving peace with its main ally.
"The United States must learn that it can't simply make very unreasonable demands by using external pressure," said Kuniko Inoguchi, a professor of political science at Sophia University in Tokyo.
"Such a traditional style of negotiating won't work anymore. This reflects a change in political culture."


Terreri Can Only Sit and Wait
Jacques Lemaire has engineered several brilliant moves in his rookie season as coach of the Devils as New Jersey has become one of the league's better teams.
This afternoon at Boston Garden, however, Lemaire came up with a bad decision and the Devils paid the price in a 5-3 loss to the Bruins that ended a three-game winning streak.


Widowhood Is Powerful
LIFE ESTATES By Shelby Hearon. 231 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Grappling With Serial Rape Cases; Details, Plenty of Tips, and Waiting for the Big Mistake
In an apparent display of neighborly graciousness, a young man held the door for a woman struggling with her apartment keys and grocery bags.
Then he pulled a knife in the elevator.
With whispered bursts of curses and threats, he led his victim to the 11th floor, then pushed her up to a rooftop stairwell landing.
He snatched her jewelry, forced her to engage in oral sex, raped her and left her sobbing.


Editorial Notebook; The Rhetoric of Victimhood
Imagine losing a toe to the mower while cutting the lawn recklessly uphill, in defiance of common sense and the owner's manual.
Thirty years ago, the missing toe was poolside chat about an accident less serious than it might have been.
Today, a toe recklessly lost begets a lawsuit based on the doctrine of strict liability, seeking to place blame with the manufacturer and absolve us of using our machines with care and common sense.
What has this got to do with Lyle and Erik Menendez constructing a detailed plan for blowing their parents away, then claiming that parental abuse made them do it?
Both the mower suit and the murder are emblematic of the troubling American preference for taking on the role of the victim.


Guidebooks To Landmarks Of Black History
A RICH trove of material on African-American history has been been published in recent months.
Most has been produced for free distribution by state and regional tourist organizations; some has been commercially published for sale.
Often the editors have uncovered information on subjects that were neglected, enriching the possibilities of such travel.
For example, a new Illinois book points to the church were Nat (King) Cole's father was a minister and became a civil rights leader.
Along with the formation last year of the national African-American Travel and Tourism Association, the surge in black-history guidebooks is a barometer of rising interest in tracing family histories and developing new heritage trails.


Beyond 'A War And a Syndrome'
To the Editor:
In reading Lan Cao's essay "The Details Are Vietnamese, the Vision, Guilty American"  [ Jan. 23 ] , I was surprised that the sole example she cited for her grievances about the depiction of her homeland in Hollywood films, most recently Oliver Stone's "Heaven and Earth," is "The Scent of Green Papaya." I have seen this film and was distressed that the director, Tran Anh Hung, who is French-Vietnamese, perpetuates the long-held stereotype of Asian women as submissive servants.


About Director Duties: What of the Nonprofits?
To the Editor:
An article ("Have Shareholder Activists Lost Their Edge?") plus a Viewpoint ("Do Your Duty, Retirement Managers") and two letters ("Or Maybe It's Just Director Somnolence") -- all on Jan. 30 -- serve to underline the growth in the consensus that corporate directors have a duty for oversight and governance, one that many of them have neglected in the past.


Return Of the Winning Dogs
With four of the seven group victors returning, including last year's top winner of all breeds, the Westminster Kennel Club Fixture will open a two-day run at Madison Square Garden tomorrow.
It will be the 118th annual edition of America's most prestigious canine show, one of the oldest continuously held sporting events in the country.


Manager's Profile
Ann H. Benjamin Fund: Stein Roe Income, $166 million in assets.
Manager since 1990. (Sponsor: Stein Roe Mutual Funds, Chicago.)


Wrong Forum
To the Sports Editor:
Ira Berkow defends the possibility of sending Tonya Harding to the Olympics ("Harding, the Games and Us," Jan. 28).
Among other things, he says that he does not think that Olympic athletes represent him because he has never been asked to vote on them.


A Restoration Revived for Prayer And Posterity
For years, the roof did little to keep rain from sluicing down into the sanctuary of the Eldridge Street Synagogue, and in the 1950's congregants had to move into the basement.
Upstairs, in the richly detailed sanctuary, illuminated by dozens of stained-glass windows, pigeons alone occupied the pews.
Today, the leaks have been repaired and the birds are gone, but gaping, blackened holes in the soaring ceiling, caused by water damage, still need to be patched and replastered.
And only a tiny Orthodox congregation of 25 to 30 still worships at the Lower East Side temple, though it lies in what was once the largest Jewish community in the world.


Despite Hopes of Diet, a Full Plate of Street Fairs
Back in November, Community Board 7 passed guidelines intended to better manage the large street fairs that clog the Upper West Side almost every spring and fall weekend.
At the time, some critics said the limits did not go far enough.
What was really needed, they said, was fewer fairs.
Now the board has released its list of approved street fairs for 1994, the same number approved last year.
Twenty-six fairs were approved for the community district, which runs from 59th to 110th Street and from Central Park to the Hudson River.
And while the rules were supposed to keep fairs off the main commercial avenues on Saturdays, the board approved three.


Sauerkraut With Pheasant and Sausage
FOR this kind of weather, you need a good choucroute," said a friend on a particularly bitter-cold day recently. He also happens to be a French chef and he missed the brasseries of Paris, where in the winter he would routinely warm up with a plate of choucroute garnie and a couple of glasses of Alsatian beer.
Choucroute is French for sauerkraut, and it is traditionally braised in white wine and served with sausages, smoked meats, pork or game and boiled potatoes.


Rewriting Rules On the East Side
To the Editor:
I was very disppointed that your article on Jan. 23 headed "Rewriting Rules for East Side Avenues" gave minimal credit to the American Institute of Architects' Oculus Committee for what we consider to be a significant role in the development of the new regulations.


At Work; After the Divorce, the Deluge
THERE are so many ways for a woman to end up living in poverty when she is elderly that it seems almost churlish to focus on one particular group as more victimized than any other.
Women may, for example, work at jobs in companies unlikely to offer significant retirement coverage and for wages so low that saving is virtually impossible.
Or, to increase their income, they may juggle two or three low-paying jobs.
Together, the jobs may add up to years of more-than-full-time employment and yield a living wage -- but no benefits and certainly no pension.
Or they may enter and leave the labor force as family duties ebb and flow, interrupting the long march toward qualifying for retirement plans, or lowering the amount they will receive.
Or their husbands may die, leaving them with considerably less than the expected amount of retirement income.
"Our life patterns are different than the life patterns of men," said Lou Glasse, president of the Washington-based Older Women's League.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Around the Region; The Big Rigs Stop Rolling, But Not All Activity Stops
After a two-day drive from Iowa with a load of wheat starch, Joe Wadden finally surrendered to the snow early Friday and gingerly steered his 18-wheeler off the New Jersey Turnpike into the Vince Lombardi service stop here.
Like the dozen or so other truckers camped out this morning at the Bob's Big Boy restaurant, Mr.
Wadden does not expect to leave until Monday.
Even if he could move his truck, he would have no place to go.
The company in nearby Kearny that is expecting his delivery is closed for the weekend.
So Mr.
Wadden, James Wood and Dean Templeton lingered around the Formica tables at Bob's Big Boy, drinking black coffee, smoking cigarettes, swapping tales of the highway and musing about the trucker's lot.


ONE LEG, ONE LIFE AT A TIME
Nora Johnson betrays some of her generation's bankrupt experience when she readily admits "we were passive parties at the birth of a 'little stranger.' "
Perhaps it is because women today (and increasingly men) are "acquainted with their fetuses" that the debate around the subject of abortion grapples with issues not wholly centered on the "game plan" of the newly pregnant woman.


Determining Factor
To the Editor:
"A Chorus Line" is one of the most memorable Broadway shows, if not the most memorable, I've ever seen.
It told its story in words, song and dance, with minimal sets and no special effects.
Since seeing that show, and with the advent of the Andrew Lloyd Webber spectacles, I have a new rule: I will go to no show for which the theater has to be rebuilt.
If I want to see special effects, I'll go to the movies.
LARRY MCNELLY  Victor, N. Y.


In the News: Ploys
Beyond infomercial and advertainment lie ever new forms of marketing manipulation, including bogus (in-person) bonhommie.
Among the newest ploys:
"Treasure Island: The Adventure Begins . . . ," a one-hour special shown on NBC.
The television time was bought as advertising to promote Treasure Island, a new Las Vegas resort with a pirate theme.
True to the theme, advertising time was sold during the advertisement, to Coca-Cola.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HISTORY A HISTORY OF CIVILIZATIONS By Fernand Braudel. Allen Lane/Penguin, $30.


THE TALES A TABLE COULD TELL
The table's fascinating history reminds us that America's past need not always be thought of in terms of wars and racial strife.
SYLVIA FARRER-BORNARTH New York, N.Y.


Games Open Amid Pomp, Snow and Quiet Culture
The XVII Winter Olympics finally went from opening arguments to opening ceremony today, moving from the paneled indoors of a courtroom to the snowy outdoors of a ski jump arena, where Harding was the name of a fiddle, not a skater whose troubles have dominated these Games.
Neither Nancy Kerrigan nor Tonya Harding marched with the American team, which allowed the Winter Games to dismiss an embarrassing figure skating soap opera and refocus this gathering of 1,920 of the world's athletes on a celebration of sport and Norwegian culture.


Children's Books/Black History; Bookshelf
RITE OF PASSAGE.
By Richard Wright.
HarperCollins. $12.95. (Ages 12 and up) An eloquent afterword by Arnold Rampersad places this previously unpublished novella about "youth culture in the black community of New York City in the 1940's" in a social context and in the context of Wright's life and work.
The gang story is prescient about urban violence.
UNCLE JED'S BARBERSHOP.
By Margaree King Mitchell.
Illustrated by James Ransome.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $15. (Ages 5 to 9) Uncle Jed was the only black barber in the county, and came to call on Sarah Jean's family every Wednesday.
After the Depression, he started saving again and opened his own shop on his 79th birthday.


Gold Coast Adds a Glittering Newcomer
A FRESH east wind has blown into Locust Valley.
In December, Thomas Schaudel, chef and owner of the Downtown Grill &amp; Wine Bar in Montauk, transported virtually his whole crew to 107 Forest Avenue to Locust Valley on the northern Nassau Gold Coast.
The new restaurant, 107 Forest Avenue, occupies the slim quarters that housed Chatham's and before that, Marbles.
The newcomer is by far the best of the bunch.


In Other Words/Federal Budget; Why the Numbers Always Add Up
"NONE of us really understands what's going on with all these numbers," David Stockman, President Reagan's first budget director, said of the Federal budget in 1981.
But that was 13 years ago.
Today's streamlined budgets, in contrast, are nearly as easy to understand as the programming instructions for clock radios, in the original Malay.
Consider a typical entry in President Clinton's budget for fiscal 1995, released last week: Three-member board established in 1988 to regulate booming, lucrative bingo and card gambling on Federal Indian reservations.
Audits bingo books; checks backgrounds of gambling workers and businesses.
Chairman: Anthony Hope, son of comedian Bob.


THE MYTH OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
As one who has labored in the field of inner-city planning and housing for well over 40 years, I believe that Nicholas Lemann's "Myth of Community Development" (Jan. 9), with stunning economy, tells the whole story and separates the precious few grains of wheat from the enormous mound of chaff.
He gives me hope that the coming generation may contend better with reality than we did.
ROGER MONTGOMERY Dean, College of Environmental Design University of California Berkeley, Calif.


Technology; How to Keep Bandits from 'Snarfing' Your Passwords
WHEN the alarm finally went off 10 days ago, electronic bandits on the global web of computer networks known as the Internet had already made off with thousands of user passwords, the supposedly secret codes that act as keys to public and private computer networks around the world.
No one knows how many passwords were stolen after the break-ins started last summer, but officials at the Government-sponsored Computer Emergency Response Team say tens of thousands of computers around the world have been put at risk of being attacked by the intruders, not just on the Internet but on any computer network attached to it.


Scandal Over Tainted Blood Widens in France
In a new twist to the scandal here over the distribution of blood infected with the virus that causes AIDS, a French newspaper has published documents that appear to show that senior Government officials kept an American blood test off the market until a rival French test was ready for approval.
Although two French medical officials have been jailed for knowingly distributing contaminated blood stocks in 1985, the new evidence is likely to fuel demands that top politicians in the Socialist Government in power at the time be held responsible for delaying the screening of all blood supplies.


Reviving Interest in the Fan as an Expression of Romance
Flowers may say, "I love you," but fans can say so much more, like, "You are cool" and "I am already married."
For Valentine's Day, the Hammond Museum and Japanese Stroll Garden here is presenting "Fans of Love," an exhibition of 30 fans culled from its permanent collection.
The fans are shown behind glass, but visitors can learn their language of gesture from a glossary provided by the museum.


Fiona Aitchison, Todhunter Bensen
Fiona Marie Aitchison, a daughter of David C. Aitchison of Paraparaumu, New Zealand, and Shona B. Reichardt of Taupo, New Zealand, was married yesterday to Todhunter Weir Bensen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger D. Bensen of Cos Cob, Conn.
The Rev.
John Robson, the chaplain to the Queen of England, performed the Anglican ceremony at the Queen's Chapel of the Savoy in London.
The bride, 29, is an insolvency manager at Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm, in London.
Her father is a senior agent at the National Mutual Assurance Group, an insurance company, in Wellington, New Zealand.


'Double Lives'
To the Editor:
Maurice Isserman's review of my book "Double Lives: Spies and Writers in the Secret Soviet War of Ideas Against the West" (Jan. 23) requires some response, beginning with a word about my personal politics.
In writing "Double Lives," I have met many researchers from the left, the center and the right -- all engaged in examining and at last dispelling the Stalinist lies in the West that Mr.
Isserman, with his own agenda, is so quick to minimize and brush aside.
With these young scholars, I have discovered a common purpose that transcends the antiquated shibboleths of the cold war's left and right in a most exhilarating way.
Mr.
Isserman has my politics wrong.
I began "Double Lives" as an anti-Communist liberal.
Now that the journey is over, I remain an anti-Communist liberal.
Just a whole lot more so.
Now to facts.


Pitfalls of Pond Scum
Stop into any health store and ask the clerk to direct you to the spirulina.
You'll find several brands with labels touting the value of this blue-green algae as a "nutrient-rich food" or an appetite suppressant.
If you ask the clerk for more detail about what the product is good for you may get a knowing smile and an answer like "so many things."
People have been eating spirulina, which is no more than pond scum (above), for hundreds of years in some countries, like Chad and Mexico, and it is now, as one might expect with anything green (well, blue-green) and low in cholesterol, quite popular in the United States.
It has protein, it's not harmful and, best of all, it's sold dry, in tablets and capsules.


The Executive Computer; Quakes 4 Years Apart Show How Far Telecommuting Has Come
WHAT a difference four years makes.
In the fall of 1989, after the Loma Prieta earthquake knocked out a section of the Bay Bridge, San Francisco-area commuters saw a brief renaissance of the bay's once-thriving ferry industry, with more than a dozen boats jockeying for rush-hour dock space.
Last month, after the Northridge quake in Southern California sundered freeways, commuters seemed to have embraced a different technological solution: telecommuting.
"When the commute takes three hours, it doesn't make a lot of sense to drive in," said Bob Barnett, director of information services for Hollywood Records, a unit of the Walt Disney Company in Burbank, Calif.
He now has two employees telecommuting from their homes in Santa Clarita, in addition to 18 field sales people, who regularly log on to the headquarters network from remote sites using their Apple Powerbook notebook computers.


Is It the Thought (or Flower) That Counts?
TOMORROW, boxes of candy, red roses, lacy cards and all kinds of sentiment will be expressed for Valentine's Day.
This is Cupid's special time and boundless amounts of sweet nothings will be exchanged.
For many, the language of the flowers will have great significance, but all too often the senders and receivers of the flowers never know what it means.
They will respond to the standard emotion that it is the thought behind the giving that counts.
But there was a time when specific flowers meant specific things.
This was known as the language of flowers.


Taken at Their Word
After the New York Times/CBS News poll, the one-word test -- naming the single most important fact about oneself -- was put to these prominent people.
Here are the words they said held the keys to their identities:
PAT RILEY , coach of the New York Knicks.
"Traditional, because I'm old-fashioned. I believe in '57 Chevrolets, James Dean, family values, J.F.K., and civil rights. I don't believe in fads and trends."


Stephanie Horn, William Moulton
Stephanie Sullivan Horn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Stoddard Horn of New York, was married yesterday to William Bruce Moulton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
R.
Moulton 3d of New York.
The Rev.
Fredrick Hoesli performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Moulton, 26, graduated from Fordham University.
Her father is a partner in Benton, Corcoran, Leib &amp; Company in New York, a stock specialist firm for which the bridegroom, 26, is a clerk.


Arkansas's 1-2-3 Punch Stops a Battling Florida
Arkansas 99, Florida 87
Scotty Thurman scored 24 points, Corliss Williamson 20 and Darnell Robinson a career-high 15 as No. 3 Arkansas beat No. 20 Florida, 99-87, yesterday in a matchup of the Southeastern Conference leaders.


President Observes Lincoln's 185th Birthday in Weekly Radio Address


Coming Back Soon: Engine Company 294
Mayor Guiliani is losing little time in delivering on a campaign pledge he made to the people of Richmond Hill.
Last year he stood in front of the firehouse on Jamaica Avenue and promised, if elected, to restore its Engine Company 294.
Local leaders had assailed the fire company's elimination by the Dinkins administration in a 1990 economy move -- especially after two brothers died in a nearby fire a few days later.


'One Long Orgiastic Read'
THE LITERARY COMPANION TO SEX An Anthology of Prose and Poetry.
Edited by Fiona Pitt-Kethley. 419 pp.
New York: Random House. $25.


On Sunday; A Radio Angel For Mr. Sliwa At City Hall
IT'S too early to talk history, but one hallmark of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's young administration is already clear in the establishment of talk-radio politicking in the City Hall work day.
The Mayor was a deft radio host at his desk Friday during the snowstorm, fielding mid-morning compliments and easy questions on his weekly show in calls from Chris in Midwood and Deborah in Canarsie, and in a coquettish call about Valentine's Day from his wife, Donna Hanover, herself a knowledgable broadcaster.
There were no questions about such potential embarrassments as a commissioner's reference in a memo to "white guys" running the city, or the news that the City Hall inner-circle roster of chauffeured cars had somehow weathered Draconian budget plans.
The Mayor talked easily with constituents who called him a man of character and who said they were "thrilled" at the election of a "fair" and "objective" politician.


An Actress Finds She Really Has It All
I do have it all," Mary Beth Hurt said. "Only maybe I don't have as much of it as I'd like." But since she'd rather be a mother than a star, Ms. Hurt settles, adding that "the compromises are worth it."
And sometimes she goofs.
It was on a recent talk show, "Late Night" with Conan O'Brien, that she blurted out the wrong word.
Ms.
Hurt was on to plug "Six Degrees of Separation." "I called the movie elite," she recalled.
"And I'm sorry I said that; I meant it was bright," she explained.
"When they cut to the commercial, Robert Klein, who was sitting next to me, said, 'That was the stupidest thing.' "


Filming Turns Out to Be Just the Beginning
THE FILM "SHUTTLECOCK" HAS A FEW things going for it.
It stars Alan Bates, the gifted British actor who thrilled audiences in "An Unmarried Woman." Mr.
Bates's co-star is Lambert Wilson, not a household name in the United States but popular in France, a sort of thinking man's Aidan Quinn.
The cinematographer, Denis Lenoir, served as director of photography on Bertrand Tavernier's "Daddy Nostalgie" and Patrice Leconte's "Monsieur Hire." The script comes with a pedigree, too.
It is based on a novel by Graham Swift, whose novel "Waterland" was turned into the 1992 film of the same name, starring Jeremy Irons.
If "Shuttlecock" does not sound familiar, that's not surprising.
It has never been released.
It sits in a closet in midtown Manhattan, unseen by the public since being completed more than two years ago.


Jury Told of Gruesome Final Moments in Cult Fire
Jurors in the trial of 11 Branch Davidians were told this week that some sect members, terrified and trapped in the flames that were destroying their compound, killed their children, killed one another and killed themselves.
Still others, crammed in a concrete bunker under wet blankets and sleeping bags, suffocated as the fire turned their refuge into a kiln.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: The Struggle; Some Win, Some Lose, but Penguins Seem Fine
Maybe a dozen storms was enough.
Maybe there will be more.
Who knows?
Maybe it will snow on the Fourth of July.
But one thing is clear.
In ways big and small, this winter has changed lives, livelihoods and the way the world muddles through.
It is fascinating, or at least diverting, to see how people -- and penguins -- have so far gotten by.


Brother of Italian Front-Runner Is Arrested
With his election campaign just gaining steam, Silvio Berlusconi, the television network owner whose new political movement has taken a startling lead in early polls in the national election campaign, faced a bitter jolt on Friday when his brother became the latest prominent businessman to be arrested in Italy's two-year-old bribery scandal.
The accusations against Paolo Berlusconi, the 43-year-old younger brother of the politician and head of the family's far-flung real estate and building interests, cast a long shadow over his brother's campaign, which pledges a cleanup of the sweeping corruption scandals that range from kickbacks to ties to the Mafia.


Olympic Equipment
God-given talent.
Training.
Attitude.
Heart.
Athletes and the sports commentators swirling around then in Lillehammer will credit medal performances to all of these things.
But will they mention footwear?
In sports where fractions of a second separate gold from silver, equipment can provide the winning margin.


Susan C. Eby, Kenneth A. Posner
Susan Carol Eby, the daughter of Dr.
Robert Eby and Constance Eby of Lexington, Mass., was married yesterday to Kenneth Alan Posner, a son of Judge Richard A. Posner and Charlene Posner of Chicago.
The bridegroom's father, the Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago, officiated at the Mid-America Club in Chicago.
The bride, 35, graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in physical therapy from Columbia University.
She is a physical therapist at Joint Effort Orthopaedic Rehabilitation, a clinic in New York.


High Drama Returns to The Opera
Opera houses can be powder kegs, in which outsized voices are matched, onstage and off, by egos and temperaments.
In the good old days, opera fans were able to supplement their enjoyment of the performances by relishing the poisonous public feuds that invariably raged between singers and managers, singers and conductors, or singers and other singers.
Lately, a blanket of politeness -- a thin one, but a blanket all the same -- has descended on opera land, with bitter fights explained away as "artistic differences." So it was a galvanizing surprise Monday when the Metropolitan Opera dismissed the soprano Kathleen Battle from its production of Donizetti's "Fille du Regiment" for what it called "unprofessional actions during rehearsals."


U.S.O.C. to Let Harding Skate In the Olympics
After a week of legal maneuvering and hours of intensive negotiations today, the United States Olympic Committee cleared Tonya Harding to skate in the Winter Olympics, which opened today in Lillehammer, Norway.
A settlement was reached in a state circuit court in Oregon City, about 20 miles south of here, when the Olympic committee agreed to cancel a hearing next week in which Miss Harding faced administrative charges for her conduct relating to last month's assault on her rival, Nancy Kerrigan.
In exchange, Miss Harding agreed to drop a lawsuit filed earlier this week in which she charged the Olympic committee with interfering with her right to compete in the Olympics.
She asked for more than $20 million in damages.


Ty Smith, 38, Is Dead; Modeled Top Designs
Ty Smith, a fashion model, died on Wednesday in Miami Beach. He was 38.
The cause was cancer, said Jim Baldwin of the Baldwin Funeral Home in New Smyrna Beach, Fla.


Fighting


New Rivalry Erupts for the Stock-Car Season
As Nascar's stock-car racing teams prepare for the season-opening Daytona 500 next Sunday, they worry that the term "tire change" could acquire a troublesome new meaning this year.
For the first time in four and a half years, Goodyear will have a challenger as tire supplier to the Winston Cup series, stock-car racing's major league.
The giant corporation's opponent, Hoosier Tire, is a mom-and-pop operation that has made much of its money in short-track racing.
Hoosier's presence is causing dread among several top teams especially because of the mayhem -- mechanical, human and financial -- that was wrought the first time the two companies competed in the 1988-89 seasons.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Jan. 30, about using a personal computer and modem to get travel information, misstated the charges for the Prodigy on-line service.
The rate of $14.95 a month covers unlimited use of basic services and two hours of premium services.
After two hours, premium services cost $3.60 an hour. (The extra charge applies only to premium services.)


Just When You Thought You Knew Degas
IF PROTEAN TALENT IS THE measure of greatness, Degas was the greatest artist of the 19th century.
Who else mastered painting, drawing, sculpture, printmaking and photography to such a degree?
Nobody.
But versatility of technique is one thing.
Versatility of subject matter is another, and Degas has always been known as an artist preoccupied above all with the human figure.
Landscape was the business of Impressionists like Monet; Degas's name evokes the ballerina, the bather, the laundress, and the friends and family members whose portraits he so memorably recorded.


PHRASEOLOGY
Henry Alford's Endpaper "Phraseology: Actual Selections from Phrase Books and Language Primers for Travelers" (Jan. 9) put me in mind of "A Foreign Language Guide to Health Care," published by the Blue Cross Association.


POSTINGS: At the Foot of the George Washington Bridge; Koreans Buy a Building in Fort Lee
Hyosung (America) Inc., a large Korean import and export company, has just bought the 50,000-square-foot Grant Building in Fort Lee, N.J., at the foot of the George Washington Bridge.
Hyosung, which has more than 25,000 employees worldwide, joins other major Korean companies that own buildings in the Fort Lee area, among them Hyundai, Samsung, Dae Woo and Dongkuk.
Hyosung's current American headquarters, with 50 employees, is at One Penn Plaza in Manhattan.
It has not been determined whether the company will move its offices to Fort Lee.


Ann M. Sperber; Author, 58
Ann M. Sperber, whose biography of Edward R. Murrow was a best-seller in 1986, died on Friday at her Manhattan apartment.
She was 58.
The cause was an apparent heart attack, said her brother, Dr. Alan Sperber.


Whose Homes? The Trials Of Pueblo Nuevo
Pueblo Nuevo is little known beyond the Lower East Side, but for two decades it has been a major force in the neighborhood, becoming the largest nonprofit manager of low-income housing there.
Now it is suddenly finding itself in an unaccustomed position: fighting with squatters for control of abandoned buildings.
Aiming to create a home for AIDS patients, Pueblo Nuevo has been trying to take over an old glass factory on Avenue D. Worried that they would lose their homes, the squatters there rebelled earlier this month, throwing a steel beam, containers of urine and other debris in a confrontation with firefighters.
They were evicted by the police.


Anne Fitzpatrick, Peter Leland Getz
Anne Tower Fitzpatrick, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Fitzpatrick of Summit, N.J., was married in New York on Friday to Peter Leland Getz, a son of Henry Leland Getz of Bedford, N.Y., and the late Constance Getz.
The Rev.
Jack Miller, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Junior League Club.
Mrs.
Getz, 34, is a corporate communications specialist for Moody's Investors Service, the bond rating agency, in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University.


'Double Lives'
To the Editor:
Maurice Isserman's review of Stephen Koch's "Double Lives" is a disguised polemic whose purpose is to discredit, rather than assess, an important new book on the international Communist movement in the 1930's and 40's.


'White Guys' Memo to Mayor Arouses Anger
Several black and Hispanic politicians have expressed anger over a memorandum written by a senior aide to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani about welfare reform, charging that aspects of the document show racial insensitivity.
In the memo, written by Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson to Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers, Mr.
Dyson discussed an article in The Daily News that asked whether Mr.
Powers and Mr.
Giuliani were capable of running


The Separate Roles of Love and Money
For older couples contemplating marriage, something in writing has come to mean more than a Valentine's Day card.
The prenuptial agreement, entwining love with money, has become almost as essential a document as the marriage license, say lawyers who draw up such agreements.
"Increased longevity means that more couples who are in their 60's, 70's and even their 80's are marrying for the second or third time, and they want to make sure that their assets go to their own children and grandchildren and nowhere else," said James C. Kahn, a partner in the White Plains law firm of Kahn &amp; Kahn, which specializes in matrimonial law.
"It may not be romantic, but it's a fact of contemporary life to put something in writing, and most older couples deal with the issue realistically."


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD Jackson Sets World Mark in Hurdles Colin Jackson of Wales yesterday added the world indoor 60-meter hurdles record to his world outdoor mark.
Jackson, undeterred by two false starts, stormed out of the blocks and broke Greg Foster's seven-year-old record.
Jackson's time of 7.35 seconds shaved one-hundredth of a second off Foster's mark.
Jackson finished nearly three yards ahead of Tony Jarrett, a teammate, in a dual meet between the United States and Britain in Glasgow.
Jackson holds the outdoor record in the 110-meter hurdles, 12.91 seconds, which he set at last year's world championships in Germany. (AP)


The Cigarettes of Madison County
Robert James Waller is becoming a brand-name author in more ways than one.
In the best-selling "The Bridges of Madison County," the hero smokes Camels, often.
Otherwise, the author uses brand names only infrequently.
Chevy, Nikon, Budweiser, Wind Song and Allis-Chalmers creep in, but are not distracting.


Kerrigan Glides Through Compulsory Interview
Six police officers, dressed in severe black uniforms and with even more severe faces, provided escort for Nancy Kerrigan's interview with the world's sporting media today.
Fittingly, it was high noon.
The long-anticipated figure-skating shootout between Kerrigan and Tonya Harding is less than two weeks away.
Photographers formed a human gridlock in the auditorium, standing shoulder to shoulder on a railing, elbowing for position, awaiting Kerrigan's arrival amid a media throng that numbered in the hundreds.
Mike Moran, spokesman for the United States Olympic Committee, admonished reporters to ask their questions with a microphone.
"Don't injure yourselves," he said, in case this interview turned into a journalistic roller derby.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MOURNING AND RENEWAL REED'S BEACH  By Bret Lott.  Pocket Books, $20.


Viewpoints; You Decide: Puredrug's Dilemma
To stimulate thinking about global business ethics, the Columbia University Graduate School of Business has prepared case studies.
One study, by Joanne B. Ciulla, Karen Marquiss and Hans A. Wolf, is adapted below.
If you ran Puredrug -- a fictitious company, with fictitious employees -- what would you do?
YOU are the chief executive of Puredrug, a large, global pharmaceutical company.
Your firm has an outstanding reputation for quality as well as a long-term record of growth and profitability.


REALITY LAND
Steven Hall asserts (Letters, Jan. 2, in response to Sunday: "Reality Land," Dec. 5) that Disney's America will "build a battlefield on top of a real battlefield." In no way will our Virginia park encroach on that sacred ground.
It will be four miles from the historic Manassas battle site, which remains fully protected by the National Park Service.


It's Truly a Fresh Start for Yankees
Spring training is almost here, meet the new Yankees.
There is a new starting pitcher, a new leadoff hitter, a new closer and there will be a new shortstop chosen from two friendly faces.
As pitchers and catchers arrive in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., by Tuesday, there will also be new hopes.
There always are, for the Yankees and for 27 other teams who decide to dream.


Albert Maysles' Camera Sees And Says It All
ABOUT THE TIME "LEAVE IT TO Beaver" reached its apex, a handful of film makers set out to make a new kind of documentary.
Armed with modified lightweight cameras and sound equipment, they could follow a child who disappeared into a crowd at a race track or record the blows of a fist fight as it roared through a bar and spilled into an alley.
And so these intrepid film makers began to shatter the granite face of the documentary.
Critics called their work direct cinema; in France, they called it cinema verite.
Albert Maysles, now 67, was one of those pioneers; his latest documentary, "Umbrellas" (made with Henry Corra and Grahame Weinbren and featuring Christo's umbrella project as it unfolded in Japan and California in 1991), has been selected to have its premiere on Friday at the Berlin International Film Festival.
A year ago, "Abortion: Desperate Choices," which Mr.
Maysles (pronounced MAY-zuls) made with Susan Froemke and Deborah Dickson, won an Emmy for Outstanding Informational Special after it was shown on HBO.


Romantic New York: 12 Tell All
Sure, anyplace can be romantic, given the proper chemistry.
But some work better than others.
The City asked some well-known New Yorkers to name their most romantic spots.
RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI Mayor
Yankee Stadium.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
RIVERDALE Exploring Winter Scenes, Plants and Constellations
Wave Hill visitors can explore the heavens, the Earth and the wintertime regeneration of plants and animals at a two-day program starting on Saturday at the park.


What's It Worth To You
What is a penis worth?
One of Lorena Bobbitt's lawyers first raised this question during the recent trial in which Mrs.
Bobbitt was acquitted of what the State of Virginia delicately called "malicious wounding" and everyone else referred to as "cutting off her husband's penis with a 12-inch carving knife." The lawyer, Lisa Kemler, feared that the nature of the organ in question would overshadow all other issues.
"At the end of this," Kemler promised jurors in her opening statement, "you will come to one conclusion: that a life is more valuable than a penis."


Tiana Lemnitz Dies; German Soprano, 96
Tiana Lemnitz, a German soprano who was a major interpreter of opera and lieder in Europe after World War I, died on Feb. 5 in Berlin.
She was 96.
Miss Lemnitz was born in Metz, studied in Frankfurt and made her debut in Heilbronn in 1920 in the title role of Lortzing's "Undine." She was the leading lyric soprano in Hanover from 1928 to 1933, and joined the Berlin Staatsoper in 1934, remaining with the company until her retirement in 1957.


Fowl Decoys? Check. Retriever? Check. Crutches? You Bet.
Poking my crutches through brambles and knee-high meadow grasses in the pre-dawn murk, I lurched inch by inch over the rough ground toward the goose blind my brother Dan and Larry Hepler had erected for me.
Although it took me five minutes to negotiate the 15 feet to my throne, a stool that they had placed in the center of the blind, I was not distressed.
In spite of my smashed ankle and its cast and surgical screws, I was afield after a month of being house-bound, and it was the last day of Massachusetts' coastal permit season for Canada geese.


Fines and Costs Rise for Drivers Under New Law
BEGINNING Tuesday, drivers who violate the state's traffic laws will have a new, perhaps additionally compelling reason to change their errant ways: the penalties are going up.
Careless drivers will soon be paying $42 for their mistakes.
That is $9 more than the current $33 fine plus court costs.
And speeders caught whizzing along at 75 miles per hour in a 55-m.p.h. zone will pay for their haste by forking over $86 instead of $77 if they plead guilty or are found guilty in municipal court.


Parties With a Purpose
Four different events all around town, from a concert benefiting Phoenix House to an exhibition about the Chinese New Year.


Why Duchamp Was Wrong
To the Editor:
I've never before heard the anecdote recounted by Martin Filler in his article on Robert Morris  [ " 'Taking the Temperature of His Own Ideas,' " Jan. 23 ]  that when told of the death of Marcel Duchamp, Picasso said, simply, "He was wrong." Mr.
Filler and Mr.
Morris understand this as a put-down of Duchamp's art, and perhaps it was also that, but it sounds like a response to a famous mot of Duchamp's, which is inscribed on his tombstone: "D'ailleurs c'est toujours les autres qui meurent" -- "Besides, it's always the others who die." BARRY SCHWABSKY  Brooklyn


Stables Battle a Deadly Virus
It was a Saturday afternoon when Go Figure, a 10-year-old chestnut quarterhorse, went down in his stall at Jamaica Bay Riding Academy, his hind legs weakened by a rare virus.
He died four days later as his owner, Joseph Michaels, kept vigil in his stall.
Go Figure was the sixth of seven horses at the stable to die of the virus called equine rhino-pneumonitis, an airborne form of herpes.


Q and A
Soccer in London  Q. I am planning a trip to London in March and would like to attend a few soccer matches there.
Which teams play in London and what are their schedules? -- Walter Hodyn, Huntington, L.I.
A.
There are five London teams that play in the Premier League, which is made up of the country's 22 top teams.
They are Arsenal, Chelsea, Tottenham Hotspur, West Ham United, Queens Park Rangers and Wimbledon.
Following are the teams' March schedules, but all games are subject to change.
For up-to-date information check the sports pages of the London daily newspapers or the sports section of Time Out, a weekly London guide.
Arsenal: March 12 vs.
Manchester United (sold out); March 16, European Cup Winners Cup quarter-final match against Turin; March 26 vs.
Liverpool.
Tickets cost $15 to $34.50; for credit card sales call (71) 226 4050 (the 71 is preceded by a zero if you are calling from within England).
More information: Arsenal Football Club, Arsenal Stadium, Avenell Road, London N5 1BU; (71) 226 0304.
Nearest Underground station: Arsenal on the Piccadilly Line.
Chelsea: March 12 vs.
Coventry City (unless Chelsea qualifies for the fifth round of the annual Football Association Cup on Saturday); March 16 vs.
Wimbledon at 7:45 P.M.;March 26 vs.
West Ham United.
Tickets for the Coventry and Wimbledon games are $13.50 to $45; tickets for the West Ham game are $15 to $45; for credit card bookings call (71) 386 7799.
More information: Chelsea Football Club, Stamford Bridge, Fulham Road, London SW6 1HS; (71) 385 5545.
Nearest Underground station: Fulham Broadway on the District Line.
West Ham United: March 12 vs.
Blackburn Rovers; March 19 vs.
Newcastle United.
Tickets $19.50, $22.50 and $25.50; credit card bookings (81) 472 3322.
More information: West Ham United Football Club, Boleyn Ground, Green Street, London E13 9Az; (81) 472 2740.
Nearest Underground station: Upton Park on the District Line.
Tottenham Hotspur: March 5 vs.
Sheffield United; March 19 vs.
Ipswich Town.
Tickets are $27.75 and $33.75 (a special offer with the $27.75 ticket allows the buyer to buy a second ticket at half price if bought with a credit card).
More information: Tottenham Hotspur Football Club, White Hart Lane, 748 High Road, London N17 0AP; (81) 808 3030.
Nearest British Rail station is White Hart Lane, reached from the Liverpool Street Station in east London.
Credit card sales through Ticketmaster, (71) 344 4444.
Queens Park Rangers: March 5 vs.
Manchester City and March 19 vs.
Wimbledon (tickets $16.50 and $18); March 30 vs.
Arsenal (tickets from $16.50 to $37.50).
Tickets can be bought at the ground or by credit card through Ticketmaster, (71) 344 4444.
More information: Queens Park Rangers Football Club, Rangers Stadium, South Africa Road, London W12 7PA; (81) 743 0262.
Nearest Underground station, White City on the Central Line.
Wimbledon: March 5 vs.
Norwich City and March 29 vs.
Blackburn Rovers (tickets $10.50 to $27); March 26 vs.
Leeds United (tickets $12 to $30).
Credit card sales, (81) 771 8841.
More information: Wimbledon Football Club, Selhurst Park, Whitehorse Lane, London SE25 6PY; (81) 771 2233.
Nearest British Rail station, Selhurst, reached from Victoria Station.
St.-Tropez Day Trips  Q. I will be in St.-Tropez, France, for the last week in March and the first week of April and would like to travel on day trips to places like Vence, Nice and Cap-Ferrat.
Are there buses from St.-Tropez to these places? -- Susan Wexford, New York, N.Y.
A.
Bus service from St.-Tropez is very limited, but there are alternatives that will get you where you want to go.
One bus trip that you might not want to miss leaves from La Foux, three miles west of St.-Tropez, at 7:40 A.M. on Saturday, March 26, and proceeds the length of the Riviera to San Remo, Italy.
The trip to San Remo, which the tour organizers describe as the flower capital of the Riviera, takes close to three hours and costs $22 round trip without meals, calculated at 5.8 francs to the dollar.
More information: St.-Tropez Tourist Office, Gare Routiere, St.-Tropez; 94.43.26.98.
Only two towns, Toulon and St.-Raphael, are served by buses from the bus station at St.-Tropez.
Toulon is west of St.-Tropez, and therefore not in the direction you wish to go.
St.-Raphael, northeast of St.-Tropez, is 1 hour, 25 minutes away by bus.
The first departure from the St.-Tropez bus station (94.97.41.21) is at 6:20 A.M. every day; departures after that are more or less hourly until the last bus at 7:15 P.M.
The fare is $15.50 round trip.
The good news about St.-Raphael is that it has a railroad station (94.91.50.50) from which trains leave for Nice at frequent intervals, starting at 7:33 A.M.
The journey takes about an hour and costs $19 round trip.
Once in Nice, a city with splendid museums and art galleries, you have a couple of options.
The Santa Azur company offers a variety of sightseeing bus tours in and around Nice.
They also offer minibus tours with a bilingual driver and on these the passengers pick where they would like to go, putting such places as Vence, St.-Jean-Cap-Ferrat and Monte Carlo within easy reach.
Prices range from $206 for a half day for one to three people to $310 for a nine-hour day.
Prices for four to eight people are $250 for a half day and $336 for a full day.
More information: Santa Azur, 11 Avenue Jean-Medecin, 06000 Nice; 93.85.46.81, fax 93.82.38.78.
To rent a car with a bilingual driver contact Richard Dems at Avis Chauffeur, Agence Cote d'Azur, Place Massena, 2 Avenue des Phoceens, 06300 Nice; 93.62.50.96.
Rates start at $168 for four hours and $327 for a full day.
The Budapest Expo  Q. Two years ago I read of plans for a World's Fair in Budapest either in 1995 or 1996.
Do you have any updated information about it? -- Harlan D. Everett, Canandaigua, N.Y.
A.
The original proposal, in the 1980's, called for the 1995 World Expo to be held jointly in Budapest and Vienna.
It was to have been the first formal linkage of the two cities since the collapse of the Hapsburg Empire in 1918.
In May 1991, however, a referendum was held on the proposal among residents of Vienna and the measure was defeated.
Since then Hungary has decided to go it alone.
The Hungarian Parliament voted in December 1991 to hold the event in Budapest in 1996.
The exhibition, to be held from May 11 to Oct. 4, will have communications as its main theme.
Some 10 million to 12 million visitors are expected.  TERENCE NEILAN


Bosnia: Keep Diplomacy Honorable
NATO's response to last weekend's mortar attack on the Sarajevo market is not limited to threatening air strikes against the Serbian gunners ringing the city, the presumed authors of the atrocity.
It also includes intensified diplomatic pressure on the gunners' target, the Bosnian Government, pressure Europe wants Washington to apply.
That is the nub of the trans-Atlantic deal that clinched NATO's 10-day bombing ultimatum last Wednesday.
European allies finally accepted Washington's idea of using air power to relieve besieged civilians in the Bosnian capital; in exchange, the Administration finally agreed to join European efforts to prod all sides into a peace agreement.


THE ENDLESS WINTER: Connecticut; Goodbye, Frosty. Hello, Matterhorn.
Shoveling is not the problem.
Digging out is not the problem.
The crux of the matter, as residents here work their way out from under the load of snow, is: Where to put it?
At many homes in this Hartford suburb and across central Connecticut, the front corners of driveways and the edges of sidewalks -- where far too many snowplows and shovel loads have gone before -- look more like replicas of the Matterhorn or K-2: jagged and forbidding, often six to seven feet high or more, and with steep icy slopes.
Even if a shoveler were strong enough and determined enough, the new snow, on top of so much older snow, will not stay in place.


To Be a Revolutionary
Uptown -- Backstage, before the tribute to Marian Anderson at Aaron Davis Hall at City College on Feb. 3, a reporter for WABC-TV was asking the poet Maya Angelou about the late contralto, who, having been denied permission to sing at Washington's Constitution Hall in 1939 because of her skin color, sang on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial instead.
"It's interesting that a lot of people said she wasn't a radical," said Ms.
Angelou, resplendent in a red gown threaded with gold.
"I don't know if she thought of herself as a revolutionary, but to be refused permission to sing in a building she paid taxes for and then to go and stand on the steps of a Federal building and sing of what? -- of America -- that is to be a revolutionary."


Mutual Funds; Strategies for Rising Interest Rates
IF the Federal Reserve thought it was being clear about the future of interest rates when it said on Feb. 4 that it was lifting the Federal funds rate by a quarter-point -- well, the markets bought the idea for a day.
On the Friday the rate rise was announced, stock prices dropped (wouldn't money be hightailing it to grab those higher yields?) and long-term Treasury funds lost a little over half a point (wouldn't they have to, to match the higher yields?).


Q and A
Liability Coverage For Co-op Officers  Q. I understand that it is wise for officers of co-ops to maintain liability insurance to protect themselves, but I am not sure what types of risk they may be exposed to.
Would you please elaborate on this? . . .
Christopher Iono, Manhattan A. According to Stuart Saft, chairman of the Council of New York Co-operatives, the officers and directors of a co-op should buy liability insurance that provides coverage for any suits in which they may become involved while acting as an officer or director.


FEB. 6-12: The Dreyfus Affair, Cont'd.; A French Officer Is Accused Of Betraying History
The wrongful conviction on treason charges of Capt.
Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish officer in the French army, has been a stain on French military history all this century.
It seems all the odder, then, that French army historians should again cast doubt on his innocence in a study published to mark the centenary of his arrest.
The Government's quick response, though, illustrates how the Dreyfus Affair remains a symbol of simmering anti-Semitism in France.
Furious that the officer's innocence could be questioned, the country's Defense Minister, Francois Leotard, last week fired Col.
Paul Gaujac, the head of the army's history section, who was responsible for the three-page study.


Holmes Fans Mark Birthday
THE story for the evening, "The Adventure of the Sussex Vampire," was a succinct masterpiece of Victorian suspense, a whodunit with a Freudian twist.
It might easily have passed for something more recently composed, were it not for a certain polished elegance and an occasional giveaway phrase -- like "Rubbish, Watson, rubbish!"
But the group of 35 people who assembled at Town Hall here to celebrate the 140th birthday of Sherlock Holmes needed no reassurance of their hero's relevance.
Many in the group, which is named the Three Garridebs -- the title of another story by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle about the master detective -- were dressed like illustrations of Holmes in deerstalker caps, three-button jackets and high-collar shirts.
They had come to match wits and exchange scholarly views about what they call "the canon," the 56 short stories and 4 novels by Doyle featuring the sleuth of Baker Street.


Is There Another Airport in the State's Future?
TRAVELERS using Bradley International Airport at Windsor Locks will be able to fly to more destinations and to choose from more flights under a $364 million plan to expand the airport over the next 20 years.
The plan, developed by the state's Department of Transportation, calls for a new terminal, expansion of an existing terminal and three concourses serving 36 aircraft gates.
Ultimately a fourth concourse could be built, raising the number of gates to 54.


PROFILE: AT THE HELM
NAME -- Captain Richard J. Rosa AGE -- 46


Black Studies To Be Focus Of an Institute
The City University of New York and City College have established an African-American research institute separate from City College's black studies department, which along with its chairman, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries, has been at the center of controversy.
The institute, which university officials say will be a center for "serious scholarship," will be at the City University Graduate School on West 42d Street in mid-Manhattan.
Its head will be Dr.
Edmund W. Gordon, a retired Yale psychologist who was acting chairman of the City College black studies program for 18 months until last August.
He was named to that position after Dr.
Jeffries had been removed by the university, which oversees the college; Dr.
Jeffries was reinstated by court order in August.


It's a Wise Physician Who Can Diagnose Himself
DOCTORS AND PATIENTS What We Feel About You.
By Peter H. Berczeller, M.D. 256 pp.
New York: A Lisa Drew Book/ Macmillan Publishing Company. $20.


Sauerkraut With Pheasant and Sausage
FOR this kind of weather, you need a good choucroute," said a friend on a particularly bitter-cold day recently. He also happens to be a French chef and he missed the brasseries of Paris, where in the winter he would routinely warm up with a plate of choucroute garnie and a couple of glasses of Alsatian beer.
Choucroute is French for sauerkraut, and it is traditionally braised in white wine and served with sausages, smoked meats, pork or game and boiled potatoes.


SURFACING
SERVICE  The visiting chef: Like part-time maids, these cooks occasionally visit a home and prepare a mix of fresh and frozen meals that can be eaten over the subsequent weeks.
The price range is from $8 to $12 a meal per person.
Information: (800) 995-2138.
GAMES  Pog mania: A craze among children in Hawaii, who flip, trade and collect them, these silver-dollar-size cardboard caps -- known as pogs -- are making in-roads on the mainland.
Savvy marketers have already introduced X-Man pogs, above, based on the popular comic-book series, and Madonna pogs.
FASHION  Camouflage ties: Anyone who wears these ties in the jungle of stylish society is not trying to hide. $85 from MNW Wardrobe.


Amy Sue Weber, Marc A. Weiner
Amy Sue Weber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley L. Weber of Westbury, L.I., was married last evening to Marc Alan Weiner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn Weiner of East Meadow, L.I.
Rabbi Douglas D. Weber, a brother of the bride, officiated at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 31, and the bridegroom, 28, graduated from the State University at Buffalo.
The bride received a master's degree in education from Hofstra University.
She is a prekindergarten teacher at the Franklin Early Childhood Center in Hewlett, L.I.


Bird Seed's Coming, but Where Are the Birds?
The hundreds of Brant and Canada geese that fled their frozen homes in Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge found a friend and protector when they landed on the campus of Kingsborough Community College.
Last week, the college's president, Leon M. Goldstein, ordered 100 pounds of cracked wheat and corn, to be placed at various sites on the campus.
The supplies are scheduled to arrive tomorrow, but the big question is: Where are the birds?


SLOVAK IS BALKING AT PRIVATIZATION
Efforts by Prime Minister Vladimir Meciar to retain control of Slovakia's privatization have led to a political stalemate, with his refusing to relinquish power over the ownership of the largest state-owned industries.
"Privatization has become a way to concentrate political power instead of a means of economic transformation," said Ivan Simko, a member of Parliament for the Christian Democratic Movement.


Belgians March for Peace in Bosnia


Corrections
A chart on Jan. 30 with the What's Doing column, about Ottawa, referred incorrectly to the precipitation in February.
It takes the form of snow, not rain.


Park Service Charges $10 for Golden Age Pass
The National Park Service is charging $10 for its Golden Age pass, which was previously free.
The pass, available to American citizens over 62, admits the holder, and anyone else in the car, free to any park where there is an entrance charge.
It also provides discounts on other user fees, for camping or riding a tram, for example.
The pass is good for a lifetime, and the old free ones continue to be valid.
Priscilla R. Baker, the park service's tourism director, said that a worn, but recognizable, card could be traded in for a new one.


JAPAN WARNS U.S. AGAINST IMPOSING TRADE SANCTIONS
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa warned the United States today against imposing trade sanctions on Japan after their failed negotiations.
His top aides said such action would cause Tokyo to retaliate with sanctions on American products.
"I very much hope the U.S. will refrain from such action," Mr.
Hosokawa told reporters before leaving Washington, a day after the eight-month-long trade negotiations between the United States and Japan collapsed.


U.S. and East European Weapons Dealers Clash
Three years ago, the tank factory here, reeling from the loss of its reliable Warsaw Pact customers, was greatly relieved when Syria signed a contract for 300 tanks.
Then disaster struck.
Washington did not like the idea, and Poland responded by canceling the tank deal.
"It's a miracle we survived," Marek Jurkiewicz, spokesman for the Bumar Labedy factory, said recently.


Heidi Beutler, Eric Sherman
Dr.
Heidi Elizabeth Beutler, an associate in clinical pediatrics at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, was married on Thursday to Dr.
Eric Howard Sherman, an internist and an assistant clinical professor of medicine at the hospital.
Rabbi Burt A. Siegel performed the ceremony at the Terrace Restaurant in New York.
Dr.
Beutler is keeping her name.
She graduated from Antioch College and received her medical degree from Yeshiva University.


First-Time Wallpaperers Should Ask Questions
WALLPAPERING is a popular amateur project, but often intimidating for beginners.
It helps to read a well-illustrated book or view a videotape on wallpapering.
Besides selecting a color and pattern, which is best done by looking at samples, deciding what type of wallpaper to buy can be a stumbling block.
Standard wallpapers with machine-printed designs are usually best for amateurs to use.
They come in the widest variety, are easy to hang, usually cost less and are less fragile than exotic varieties like hand-printed papers, foils and papers containing fibers like silk or grass.


Who Are You?
Is it possible to define oneself in just a single word?
Can one sort out all the complicated, complicating factors of public and private life, measure all the facets of one's personality, cast off what's extraneous and then name an essential, identifying characteristic?
Without a lot of soul-searching, without reading social philosophers like Martin Buber (whose writings included the book "I and Thou") or paying homage to bubble-gum bands like the Monkees ("I'm a Believer"), some answers come to mind quickly: the Rev.
Jesse Jackson's trademark, "I am somebody." Or Cicero's "I am a Roman citizen." Or Descartes's "I think, therefore I am." Or the poet Robert Lowell's "I myself am hell."


ONE LEG, ONE LIFE AT A TIME
I suspect that Nora Johnson and I share similar birth dates.
Contrary to her claims, my cohorts and I experienced conflict and guilt as we "hung over the abyss." We did not need advanced technology to create "high-fetal visibility." Our imaginations and consciences were sufficient stimuli.
LILLIAN GERSTMAN Buffalo


Is It the Thought (or Flower) That Counts?
TOMORROW, boxes of candy, red roses, lacy cards and all kinds of sentiment will be expressed for Valentine's Day.
This is Cupid's special time and boundless amounts of sweet nothings will be exchanged.
For many, the language of the flowers will have great significance, but all too often the senders and receivers of the flowers never know what it means.
They will respond to the standard emotion that it is the thought behind the giving that counts.
But there was a time when specific flowers meant specific things.
This was known as the language of flowers.


Lesson in Harm
To the Editor:
Why am I not surprised by Ron Nyswaner's flip and superficial response to his critics?
I personally was stunned by "Philadelphia" because it seemed to be a movie written by someone who heard about homosexuality and AIDS at a cocktail party, pulled the covers over his head, slept for a decade and turned up late with this weak, condescending effort.


'Double Lives'
To the Editor:
In his review of "Double Lives," Maurice Isserman writes, "Felix Frankfurter, Katherine Anne Porter, Norman Thomas and Emma Goldman . . . prior to and independent of any significant Communist involvement in the case -- believed Sacco and Vanzetti the victims of a miscarriage of justice."


Angel Falls
To the Editor: Adding to your tale of the discovery of Angel Falls in Venezuela, the mysterious stranger who hired Jimmy Angel to fly him to an uncharted area deep in the mountains was actually a mining engineer and prospector from Oakland, Calif., named Durand Hall, the uncle of my late wife.
That 75 pounds of gold that Mr.
Brooke says he and Angel panned in three days sounds a little much, but some gold was there.
Neither Hall nor Angel could ever find that spot again.
Lucky thing that Angel was the one who found the waterfall.
Hall's Falls would have been a lousy name for one of the wonders of the world.
FREDERICK S. PETERS  Falmouth, Mass.


Schindler's Jews Find Deliverance Again
IF the Jews on Oskar Schindler's list had their way, "Schindler's List" would win more than the 12 Oscars for which it was nominated last week.
It would also receive gold statuettes in a number of newly created categories, including Most Wrenching, Most Cathartic and Most Accessible Treatment of an Impossible Subject.
Because of it, they are convinced, millions of moviegoers and even their own families can at long last understand the pain they long bore by themselves.
"The picture is wonderful," said Edith Wertheim of Fort Lee, N.J., who was one of the first employees in Oskar Schindler's enamel work factory.
"Spielberg just went into hearts, he saw what happened, he put it on the screen, and we love him for it."


Favorites From A Little Trove Of Folk Art
AFICIONADOS OF AMERICAN folk art are having a good year.
Two pioneer collections -- one huge, one small -- have already come on the market.
The larger holding, of 450 pieces from the estates of Bertram K. and Nina Fletcher Little of Boston, was auctioned two weeks ago at Sotheby's in Manhattan.
The sale fetched a total of $7.4 million, a record for folk art.
The smaller offering, 31 pieces, is from the private collection of Edith Gregor Halpert, a Manhattan art dealer, who began acquiring American folk art in the late 1920's, five years before the Littles started to buy.
Halpert's pursuit of this material -- to sell or to keep -- continued until shortly before her death in 1970.
Some Halpert favorites -- quirky drawings, stenciled watercolors and stark sculptures -- are on display at the Upper East Side gallery of David A. Schorsch, a private dealer, through this month.


UAL Soaring? Sinking, More Likely
To the Editor:
Although I am all for employees owning a piece of the action ("Sell United to Its Workers. It May Soar," Viewpoints, Jan. 30), the United Airlines buyout proposal is clearly unfair to current shareholders.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES HAPPINESS By Ann Harleman. University of Iowa, $22.95.


Autry Walks All Over Ford and Wildcats
Basketball shoes had been replaced by hiking boots, dozens and dozens of hiking boots that suddenly overwhelmed the security force and tromped all over the floor of the Carrier Dome.
They had spilled out of the stands soon after Syracuse's 93-85 victory over Kentucky, the most special of this Orange season, was complete.
They were beaten to the floor by Jim Boeheim, the Syracuse coach, whose clenched fists at his side at the end said more than he ever could.
The hiking boots help students survive the winter here.
The Orangemen helped again, the way they once did, outscoring the Wildcats by 14-4 and holding them without a field goal for the final 2 minutes 57 seconds.
Adrian Autry, the 6-foot-4-inch guard, led the Orangemen with 30 points, one less than his career high.
He made 10 of 15 shots, including 4 of 7 from beyond the 3-point line.
He riddled Kentucky's press with 10 assists.


Road Project Has Stores Hunting for Buffers
The West Side Chamber of Commerce and some elected officials are working with the city to devise ways to help businesses along Columbus Avenue survive a two-year street reconstruction project.
The project, set to begin in the spring, has a price tag of $85 million -- not counting the collateral damage those businesses are expecting.


CLINTON CONSIDERS TAXING AID TO POOR TO PAY FOR REFORM
The Administration is considering a plan to finance President Clinton's proposal to revamp the welfare system by taxing food stamps, welfare benefits and housing assistance and by cutting aid to legal immigrants who are elderly and indigent.
While no decisions have been made, those are among the options being considered by senior officials at the White House, Treasury Department and Department of Health and Human Services, confidential documents and interviews with officials show.
The money from the cuts would be used to expand work and job training programs.


U.S. Plans Deep Cuts in Malaria Vaccine Program
The Clinton Administration is planning deep cuts in a program to develop a malaria vaccine just as tests of a promising experimental vaccine get under way in Africa, Government officials say.
The Administration is seeking to trim the budget for health programs at the Agency for International Development because of demands for more money to bolster the Commonwealth of Independent States and the peace efforts in the Middle East, Joseph J. Byrne, a spokesman for the agency, said on Friday.


Not Your Usual Benefit
A party for the Children's Hope Foundation, an AIDS charity, at the Garage, a new indoor flea market on 25th Street, Feb. 5.


The Surcharge Surprise
PEOPLE convicted of offenses ranging from parking violations to possession of illegal drugs are often surprised to discover that in addition to fines, the municipal courts often impose court costs and various surcharges.
Under current law, municipal court judges are required to recite the individual fines, costs and surcharges for each offense at sentencing.
But under the new law, all the surcharges may be combined with costs, so that a person who pleads guilty or is found guilty will be told only the fine and the total amount of court costs, including the surcharges.


A ZULU-LED PARTY TO BOYCOTT VOTE
The Inkatha Freedom Party, once a contender to become the main opposition party in a post-apartheid Government, announced today that it would not take part in South Africa's first free elections.
Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, the party leader, called on his mainly Zulu followers to forgo their first chance at a free vote, saying months of intricate bargaining had failed to satisfy Inkatha's demands for Zulu autonomy and decentralized government.


Unpleasant Dreams
HAUNTED Tales of the Grotesque.
By Joyce Carol Oates. 307 pp.
New York: A William Abrahams Book/ Dutton. $21.95.


Sauerkraut With Pheasant and Sausage
FOR this kind of weather, you need a good choucroute," said a friend on a particularly bitter-cold day recently. He also happens to be a French chef and he missed the brasseries of Paris, where in the winter he would routinely warm up with a plate of choucroute garnie and a couple of glasses of Alsatian beer.
Choucroute is French for sauerkraut, and it is traditionally braised in white wine and served with sausages, smoked meats, pork or game and boiled potatoes.


They Came From the Planet Debbie
STRAITJACKET &amp; TIE By Eugene Stein. 277 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


St. John's Pops Its Head Above the (.500) Water
Their season has all but slipped away.
And for a while tonight, it looked as if the St.
John's Redmen were going to let this one slip away, too.
But behind the second-half play of James Scott and Sergio Luyk and some timely foul shooting by Charles Minlend and Derek Brown in the last 23 seconds, the Redmen held off a frantic Pitt rally to win their third straight Big East contest, 68-62, in front of 6,592 at the Fitzgerald Field House on the Pitt campus.


Gains Aside, Bill Seeks Equality of Sexes in School
No one calls them "coeds" any more.
A dozen years have passed since women started to outnumber men on college campuses.
Now, for the first time, more women than men expect to attend graduate schools as well.
Gone are the days when the educators of the late 1800's fretted that schoolwork would make women sick, diverting blood from their wombs to their brains.
Resolved, too, is the more nuanced debate of the 1960's over whether the presence of women on the tree-lined swards of academe would take the luster off pedagogic jewels like Princeton, Yale and Dartmouth.


In the Region/Westchester; Sales of Homes Maintain Momentum of Record '93
SINCE the Christmas holidays, Irene Stahl has worked every weekend.
Even through the deep freeze last month, she was out showing houses.
"I was walking across frozen driveways," she said.
"The only break I got was the few hours when the Super Bowl was on."


U.N. Acting 'Hard-Nosed' in Sarajevo
The United Nations commander in Bosnia said today that he had called in surveillance planes, requested ground radar and taken steps to nearly double the peacekeeping troops in Sarajevo in a new, "hard-nosed approach" to turning the fragile cease-fire here into a durable truce.
A Malaysian battalion of around 1,000 troops that began arriving in Bosnia today will be assigned to help form a double buffer between the Muslim and Serbian combatants here next to the French marines who have already secured a half dozen key confrontation points in and around the city.


FEB. 6-12: Sex and the British M.P.; Just Another Scandal (Or Is It One Too Many?)
Even Britain's most rabid tabloid newspaper could not have invented this: the body of a Conservative member of Parliament is discovered sprawled naked on the kitchen table of his London apartment, clad only in woman's stockings and a garter belt; a cord is tied around his neck, and a plastic bag is over his head.
After days of wild speculation about homosexual sex rings, drugs and murder, Scotland Yard last week offered a less lurid explanation.
While the investigation is incomplete, detectives say Peter Milligan, a 45-year-old bachelor and former journalist, appeared to have died as the result of an accident, probably asphyxiating himself while engaging in what television commentators here politely described as an auto-erotic practice.


Supplies Of Blood Decline
While many parts of the country are reporting that blood supplies have dropped to the lowest level since World War II, blood bank officials in Westchester and the greater New York region say they have been able to maintain a two-to-three-day supply.
"The blood supply is a little soft," said Vivien Epstein, an associate administrator for Hudson Valley Blood Services in Elmsford.
"We should have a five-day supply, but we are O.K." The organization supplies blood and blood products to about 50 hospitals in the Bronx, Westchester, Putnam, Dutchess, Rockland, Orange, Ulster and Sullivan Counties.


Bosnia Talks Fail Despite NATO Threat
Negotiations between the warring parties of Bosnia and Herzegovina broke up in acrimonious disagreement today, and senior United States and European officials said there was no chance of a settlement before the Feb. 21 deadline set by NATO for the withdrawal of heavy weapons from Sarajevo under a threat of air strikes.
"To be honest, we had no progress over the past three days," said Thorvald Stoltenberg, the United Nations mediator in the negotiations between Bosnia's Serbs, Croats and the Muslim-led Government.
He said the talks would resume at the end of the month, a week after the NATO deadline.


A Downtown Hotel in Search of a Niche All Its Own
A FAVORITE sport in the hotel business is "positioning," or even better, "repositioning." Hotels are often busy doing one or the other.
The New York Vista Hotel at the World Trade Center was in the midst of a repositioning by way of an expensive renovation, its first since the hotel opened in 1981, when the explosion heard 'round the world on Feb. 26 last year disrupted the schedule.
The hotel was evacuated and attention turned to structural reapirs.


An Attractive Exhibition of What Watercolorists Can Do
AS the pictures are juxtaposed on this page, Julio Larraz's bulldog seems as conscious of the cat as of the leash that restrains him (or her).
Meanwhile, the cat, by Joseph Raffael, appears oblivious to everything except perhaps the way stripes and paisley go with a tabby pelt, never mind the gleaming whiskers.
The images come from "Excellence in Watercolor," a show mounted at the New Jersey Center for Visual Arts by Joan Good, Hanna Woicke and Perijane Zarembok.
Their purpose is to demonstrate the virtuosity possible in watercolor, a medium taught at the center.
That most of the artists chosen have enjoyed the limelight in Manhattan will doubtless provide students with further incentive.


Refined Sugar
Viennese cakes are as intrinsic to Vienna as waltzing, the opera and psychoanalysis.
All are excruciatingly mannered and complicated, and in each case, the form is immutable.
There is something perverse about having an awakening in Vienna.
The city is wrapped too tightly in loden and memories and its own stern nature for expansiveness or indulgence to flourish.
But I was 19, a student, and dizzy with the freedom of living abroad.
I was also just too dumb to feel constrained by local custom.


Many Radio Talk Shows: Mean-Spirited and Senseless
To the Editor:
I agree with Jules Feiffer's Jan. 30 essay, "I Need Civility, Calm . . . WNYC," and his criticism of the "dumbing down" of so much of commercial radio in this area.


Connecticut Composers At Work: 3 Premieres
IN Schubert's day, most concerts consisted of music contemporary to the time -- the latest sonatas, the newest lieder -- as opposed to the current programming that puts a heavy emphasis on works from earlier eras.
Perhaps it's appropriate, then, that today's 2 o'clock recital at Waveny Carriage Barn in New Canaan -- which honors American Music Month and is entirely devoted to music by living composers -- is being presented by the Schubert Club of Fairfield County.
Three local premieres are among the entries: Elizabeth Lauer's "Diamonds: Double Solitaire for Xylophone and Piano," Eugenie Rocherolle's Piano Sonata No. 2, and Constance Walton's "Momentous Moments" for voice, flute and piano.
Three songs by Lauriston Avery and Joe Utterback, plus another by Winifred Keane, round out the program.
Ms.
Walton, Ms.
Avery and Ms.
Keane, from Greenwich, Rowayton and Westport respectively, are among the 18 performers; for more details, call 762-2020.


Brooklyn Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1 Greenpoint, Williamsburg; second Tuesday of the month; next March 8, time to be announced, 211 Ainslie Street; (718) 388-4440.
DISTRICT 2 Fort Greene, Downtown, Brooklyn Heights, Boerum Hill; second Wednesday of the month; next March 9, 6 P.M., Borough Hall Community Room, Joralemon and Court Streets; (718) 596-5410.


Dunham Will Be First Up as U.S. Goalie
With an aggressive, enthusiastic and adventuresome style of its own, the United States Olympic hockey team will open play Sunday with a game against France.
The American net will be guarded by 21-year-old Mike Dunham, who battles mood swings when the puck goes sailing past him but who is talented enough to be an Olympic star.


Young and the Restless Take Over All-Stars
Patrick Ewing remembers being at All-Star Games in past seasons, sitting next to Michael Jordan and Larry Bird and competing against Magic Johnson.
Today, Ewing sat at his locker after practice, looked across the room and saw Shaquille O'Neal, Alonzo Mourning and Kenny Anderson.


A CAUTIONARY FABLE
Afterward, when all Washington was abuzz with talk of the President's astonishing, audacious gamble to shed his Whitewater baggage, the pundits agreed that they should have seen it coming.
As soon as those headlines hit, a jittery White House had begun its usual damage control.


Michelle J. Paletz, Jay C. Goldstein
Michelle Joy Paletz, a daughter of Neal and Lenora Paletz of Valley Stream, L.I., was married last evening to Jay Charles Goldstein, the son of Gerald and Barbara Goldstein of Plainview, L.I.
Rabbi Morris Friedman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 25, graduated from the State University College at Cortland, N.Y., and received a master's degree in special education from Long Island University.
She teaches the sixth grade at Public School 159 in Bayside, Queens.


In America; Health Care Squeeze
The women who work for Ticketmaster in New York are not participants in the great national debates over health care and welfare reform.
Drawing from direct and often painful experiences, they have plenty to say.
But they are members of the exploited class to whom few are inclined to listen.
Besides, these women don't have a lot of time for instructing their betters.
Their days are spent in a constant sprint as they try to stay one stride ahead of catastrophe.
That means, above all, hanging on to their low-paying jobs, chasing every available hour of work and praying that neither they nor their children get sick.


Aqueduct Race Track: Will It Live Past 100?
Aqueduct race track celebrates its 100th birthday this year, but the odds on its survival are uncertain enough that local officials have drafted a contingency plan to redevelop the site into parks, schools, housing and stores.
Doubts about the track's future have grown as its attendance has dwindled.
Some racing experts have proposed closing it and moving its races to nearby Belmont Park.
They question the need for both tracks, which operate in alternating seasons.


Angel Falls
To the Editor: I read with interest James Brooke's article on Angel Falls and Canaima Camp, but was disappointed to find no mention of the trips our company, Clipper Cruise Line, makes to the area.
Your readers may want to know that since 1990, Clipper Cruise Line has offered voyages of the Orinoco River aboard its 138-passenger Yorktown Clipper that include a full day excursion to Camp Canaima with a flight over Angel Falls.
Our team of naturalists accompanies passengers, narrating the flight and describing flora, fauna and the people on walks in the Canaima National Park.


Again, Barriers Are Falling In a Place Called Jericho
THE place names are slammed together so routinely now that they come out sounding like a single word: Gazajericho.
In the argot of Middle East peace talks, Gazajericho is shorthand for the plan to phase in Palestinian self-rule and phase out Israeli forces from the occupied territories, starting in the Gaza Strip and this small West Bank town.
They are an odd couple.
With about 800,000 people, Gaza is a grim mass of poverty and desperation, awash in guns and militant groups ready to shoot it out.
Ancient, little Jericho (pop. 15,000) is genteel by comparison.
It, too, is poor.
But it is a pleasant backwater, where men ride bicycles under the palm trees and restaurant owners dream of the old days when this was a winter retreat for the Jordanian king and, later, an oasis for Israeli day trippers -- until the intifada scared them off.
Merging Gaza and Jericho into a single entity and nucleus of a possible Palestinian state is vaguely akin to starting over in New York City by pairing burned-out stretches of the south Bronx with breeze-washed Sheepshead Bay.


Business Diary: February 6 - 11
COMPANIES A.T.&amp; T.'s Workers Get This Message Loud and Clear  With all the talk about communications, one might well think that's where the job growth would be.
Far from it: Communications companies account for by far the largest share of recent job cuts.
Clearly, phone companies and the like have to battle constantly over what is really a finite market: people have time for only so much communicating; they've got other things to do, like shovel snow.
And to compete, of course, companies have to fit the 90's style: lean, lean, lean.
In the latest dieting blitz, A.T.&amp; T. said last week that it would cut up to 15,000 jobs, or 15 percent of its long-distance work force.
Yes, the competition's brutal, but are such drastic steps necessary?
One analyst, noting that over half the cuts would be white-collar jobs, said, "This is an effort to de-bureaucratize." But a union official called it "another example of a healthy company playing to Wall Street."


Two Paths Taken In the Flight From Be-Bop
THE MOVE TOWARD abstraction in music is tough to prove, given its generally evasive nature.
But in jazz, the tendency to tinker, to reshape the past, to make it more modern, is all over the place.
It can be heard in the response of early New Orleans bands to the march or in free improvising, where harmony gets thrown out the window.
And it can be heard every time a musician makes something new from a precedent -- Charlie Parker plays his version of Lester Young or Buster Smith.
Two recently released box sets, Ornette Coleman's "Beauty Is a Rare Thing" and "The Complete Blue Note 1964-1966 Jackie McLean Sessions," find abstraction in full bloom.
Both alto saxophonists were running away from the baroque complexities of be-bop, and both landed in different places.
Mr.
Coleman created a music that not only borrowed from jazz but also from folk, gospel and other black forms and even Mexican music.
Mr.
McLean, as much as he understood what Mr.
Coleman was doing, was a strict product of New York City's intellectual hothouse, where musicians rarely looked outside jazz for influences.


World Markets; Foreign Investment Roars Into Bombay
SINCE November, one of the world's hottest stock markets has been the Bombay Stock Exchange, thanks to an avalanche of foreign investment and the gradual opening of what was once one of the world's most insular economies.
After soaring early last week to 4,162 points on the Bombay Sensitivity Index, the market closed Friday at 3,991 points, a 24 percent rise, in dollar terms, since the first of the year and a rise of almost 50 percent since November.
Bombay's is the third best performing market after Brazil and Finland this year.


Fast Track at Gulfstream Raises Horsemen's Fears
In horse racing, how fast is fast?
Try this: In the space of four days this week, a 5-year-old gelding and a 5-year-old mare both broke a Gulfstream Park track record set in 1956 by the illustrious champion Swaps.
No record lasts forever, but this one had lasted 38 years and was then broken by two ordinary horses.
And many other ordinary horses have been dazzling the public at Gulfstream this season by their apparent speed.


Filming Turns Out to Be Just the Beginning
THE FILM "SHUTTLECOCK" HAS A FEW things going for it.
It stars Alan Bates, the gifted British actor who thrilled audiences in "An Unmarried Woman." Mr.
Bates's co-star is Lambert Wilson, not a household name in the United States but popular in France, a sort of thinking man's Aidan Quinn.
The cinematographer, Denis Lenoir, served as director of photography on Bertrand Tavernier's "Daddy Nostalgie" and Patrice Leconte's "Monsieur Hire." The script comes with a pedigree, too.
It is based on a novel by Graham Swift, whose novel "Waterland" was turned into the 1992 film of the same name, starring Jeremy Irons.
If "Shuttlecock" does not sound familiar, that's not surprising.
It has never been released.
It sits in a closet in midtown Manhattan, unseen by the public since being completed more than two years ago.


Class Against Dash In Battle of Styles
When pairs figure skating begins on Sunday, and Russian gold medalists from the previous two Olympics take the ice, nine judges will have a decision to make.
Not a decision about talent, but about style.
What do they prefer: the husband-and-wife artistry and harmony of Yekaterina Gordeyeva and Sergei Grinkov, the 1988 champions?
Or the muscular invention and flexible contortions of Natalya Mishkutienok and Artur Dmitriev, the 1992 champions?


Spinning Dreams
On fashion's food chain, figure-skating outfits are considered a petit four, falling somewhere between Las Vegas showgirl get-ups and circus regalia.
Consisting of a yard or two of stretch fabric, a few wisps of chiffon and a heap of sparkles, they sometimes look like something a skater's mother could make -- and occasionally does.
A leotard with a flippy skirt and some glue-gunned appliques, however, isn't the stuff Olympic dreams are made of.
The idiosyncrasies of ice couture are so complex that the seemingly simple costumes, some so small they can be crumpled up and held in one hand, require a designer to be part Balenciaga, part aerodynamicist.


Across 6 Age Groups, Women's Games Highlight Talent
Anybody who doubts that track is the one sport that is every bit as exciting on the lower levels as it is at the heights wasn't at the 20th Colgate Women's Games at Madison Square Garden yesterday when 36-year-old Joan Sterret nosed out Alicia Kelly to win the over-30 1,500 meters.
And anybody who doubts that the meet's founding director, Fred Thompson, has an eye for early promise didn't see Tiffany Abney's picture-perfect runaway victory in her 400 meters or Neffertitti Cooper's Garden record in her 55-meter dash.


Market Place; Despite Bullishness, Fujitsu May Be Following the I.B.M. Path.
THE information superhighway might be paved with gold for Fujitsu Ltd., Japan's largest computer company.
But investors who are bidding up the stock may be overlooking the potholes the company will hit along the way.
Fujitsu shares have gained more than 20 percent this year, advancing 10 yen on Friday, to 1,050 yen, about $9.70.
The stock has outperformed the overall Japanese market, as measured by the broad Topix index, by 11 percent in the last month, while shares of rivals Hitachi, Toshiba and Mitsubishi Electric have underperformed.


Star Pick Is Oakley's Validation
For most of his career, Charles Oakley has used the National Basketball Association's All-Star break as a time of physical and spiritual renewal: a time to revitalize and reaffirm his worth.
Ignored by fans in All-Star voting and overlooked by coaches, Oakley has used the three-day break to make an annual pilgrimage to Richmond, where he visited friends and coaches at Virginia Union University.
It was here, between 1981 and 1985, that Oakley established himself as one of the best players in Division II history.


Treasury Auction Schedule Offers Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.24 percent and thesix-month bill was at 3.38 percent.


Explosion of Black-Market Fuel Exposes Leaks in Haiti Embargo
Drums of black-market gasoline exploded in flames Saturday night in downtown Port-au-Prince destroying a half-block of buildings and providing further evidence of leaks in the oil embargo on Haiti.
Witnesses and diplomats said that the gasoline drums, trucked across the border from the neighboring Dominican Republic, were to have been added to a nearby stockpile of contraband fuel being held in one of many warehouses in the area believed to be owned by the Haitian military.


Union Schools Get 'A' in Efficiency
Being singled out as one of the state's most efficient school districts is a little like being the teacher's pet: You get a lot of attention from the people in charge, but your classmates will probably not like you much.
The Union Township School District is reaping accolades from state officials after the release of a report touting its solid academic performance and its per-pupil costs, which are below average.


No Headline
By definition, we are all fallen creatures.
Do they want a Government or Parliament of people who never committed any sin?
It would be a bizarre place. -- PETER LILLEY, British Cabinet minister, on press investigations into politicians' private lives.  [ A2:4. ]


Cuomo and New Assembly Chief Pay Tribute to Weprin at Funeral
Nearly 1,500 people, from longtime constituents to the top officials of state and city government, gathered yesterday in Queens to mourn the death of Saul Weprin, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly.
He was eulogized by two of his political proteges, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Sheldon Silver, the new Speaker, as a quiet but forceful leader in the Legislature.
Mr.
Weprin, a Democrat from Queens who served as Speaker for three years, died on Friday of complications from a stroke he suffered on Jan. 18.
He was 66.


U.S. Hockey Team Survives Tough Breaks to Earn a Tie
It was not practice.
It was not college.
But for the United States hockey team, the first Olympic hockey game turned out to be a learning experience against the French.
The Americans discovered the drama and pressure of the Olympics as they wasted two periods of dominant shooting and passing.
Making matters worse, the United States lost two goal decisions based on video replays by the officials.
But after the Americans suddenly found themselves down, 4-2, more than halfway through the third period, they rallied for a pair of goals and a 4-4 tie.


For People Magazine, a New Charity Program May Be Good Business, Too
In a move that it hopes is as shrewd as it is generous, People magazine will announce tomorrow an ambitious effort to promote charities that have particular significance for its readers.
As part of its 20th anniversary celebration, the magazine will give up more than $3 million in advertising space this year to these charities, which include organizations for women with ovarian cancer, children with AIDS and homeless children, according to Ann S. Moore, president of People.


E.M.S. Cited By Complaint In Baby Death
An emergency crew argued at length early yesterday with a pregnant Queens woman over her choice of hospital, then made her walk to the ambulance while she was in labor, her family charged.
Her baby, later delivered by an emergency Caesarean section, died shortly after it was born.
The allegation was made by the family of Tracy Ortega, 24, in a complaint filed with the Emergency Medical Service.
The woman's father, Frank Bolanos, said he believed that the baby was dying while technicians spent half an hour arguing with his family about whether to take Ms.
Ortega to St.
John's Hospital, where her obstetrician was based, or New York Hospital Medical Center in Queens, which was closer.


Population Update
The population in New York City is holding steady while other northeastern cities, especially in New England and New Jersey, continue to shrink, according to new estimates by the Census Bureau that cover 1990 to 1992.
The fixed boundaries of older northeastern cities and the lack of space for new housing inhibit their growthand prompt a population shift to the farther reaches of these metropolitan areas, census analysts say.
While immigration has helped keep New York City's population relatively stable, the recession took its toll on cities like Hartford, Boston and Bridgeport.
Suburban counties in the New York region continue to grow and the New York metropolitan area, by far the nation's largest, added about 120,000 people.


U.S. AIDE WIDENS THREAT TO SERBS
Defense Secretary William J. Perry said today that NATO would consider increasing the intensity and widening the area of threatened air strikes if the raids did not end the resistance of Bosnian Serb forces to demands that they end the shelling of Sarajevo.
But he expressed confidence that Serbian gunners would meet NATO's ultimatum to relinquish all their mortars, artillery and other heavy weaponry to United Nations control or pull them back at least 12.4 miles from the center of the Bosnian capital.


Hearts May Safely Flutter Over Valentine Chocolates
Millions of Americans will assume on Valentine's Day today that the quickest way to a lover's heart is through a box of luscious chocolates, even if it is not the healthiest of gifts.
But according to recent studies of chocolate's effects on cholesterol, at least in the medical sense these hopeful Valentines need not worry.
National food surveys clearly indicate that chocolate sets many a heart aflutter.
But, the studies show, even a three-pound heart-shaped box of the richest pure chocolate -- as sinful as its 6,900 calories may seem -- is unlikely to literally stop hearts dead in their tracks.


Being a Therapist In the Age of AIDS
To the Editor:
In " 'Some Place Thrilling' " (column, Feb. 3), Frank Rich quotes from Harry Kondoleon's novel: "Psychotherapy for the terminally ill is a little like a pedicure right before having both feet amputated."


Critic's Notebook; Are the TV Images Father To U.S. Action in Bosnia?
If the latest atrocity in Sarajevo had not been caught by the cameras, it is being suggested, the Administration would not finally have been moved to do something more strenuous about Bosnia than hold meetings with allies.
Maybe the error of the gunners who killed 68 people in the city's central marketplace on Feb. 5 was one of timing.
Could their intelligence service have failed to notice that Peter Jennings was in town, ready to bring the spotlight of a network news anchor's presence to the painful pictures?
Mr.
Jennings used some impassioned language ("Against civilians this is not war, this is terrorism.") and drew repeated attention to American inaction.


Ray Dandridge, 79, Negro Leagues Star And Hall of Famer
Ray Dandridge, a Hall of Fame third baseman who starred in the Negro Leagues and the minors, died Saturday.
He was 79.
The cause of death was prostate cancer, his wife, Heneritta, said.


Review/Television; Like Card Companies, Networks Love Holidays
Always eager to make the most of a marketing opportunity, prime-time television is pouncing on St.
Valentine's Day in its own disorganized, almost charmingly daffy way.
The past week has been cluttered with Valentine's tie-ins.
NBC probably led the pack with heart-shaped plots stretching from Thursday's "Mad About You" and "Frasier," both in top form, to Saturday's "Sisters," which managed to spike assorted love affairs, reunions and breakups with subplots involving leukemia and Alzheimer's disease.
All right, name a current movie that ventures even gingerly into such not-uncommon realities.


Zvereva Tops Rubin in Final
With the top five seeded players, including Martina Navratilova, a 12-time champion, fallen by the wayside, sixth-seeded Natalya Zvereva was able to seize her first singles title since 1990 by defeating a first-time finalist, Chanda Rubin, 6-3, 7-5, today in the Virginia Slims of Chicago final.
Zvereva said her singles breakthrough was almost too long in coming.
"I didn't think I could a win a tournament anymore," she said.
"Not that I don't believe in myself, but I don't expect to win."


Quake Raises Fears About Safety Of California's University Buildings
The collapsed parking garage on the campus of California State University at Northridge is in many ways the signature image of last month's violent earthquake here, a tangle of concrete and steel that in one deadly instant could have been a coffin for countless students and faculty members had the quake not struck in the predawn hours and during the semester break.
Classes for 24,000 students are to resume at Northridge on Monday in a hastily assembled village of trailers and tents.
Repairs to the 53 buildings on campus, all of them damaged in varying degrees, are expected to cost at least $250 million.


Self-Made Monster: An Actor's Creation
"Evil may well be nearer the surface than we like to admit," said Ralph Fiennes.
The 31-year-old actor pushed aside his teacup and picked up an imaginary rifle.
He peered through the scope with one eye closed and squeezed the trigger.
For just an instant, he stopped being a diffident, sensitive young man with chiseled good looks and the slightly distracted, angst-ridden air of an existential poet.
He looked more like Amon Goeth, the Nazi labor camp commandant who sits on his balcony and picks off victims with capricious abandon, using his rifle as if it were God's lightning, in Steven Spielberg's film on the Holocaust, "Schindler's List."


Cuomo and New Assembly Chief Pay Tribute to Weprin at Funeral
Nearly 1,500 people, from longtime constituents to the top officials of state and city government, gathered yesterday in Queens to mourn the death of Saul Weprin, the Speaker of the New York State Assembly.
He was eulogized by two of his political proteges, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Sheldon Silver, the new Speaker, as a quiet but forceful leader in the Legislature.
Mr.
Weprin, a Democrat from Queens who served as Speaker for three years, died on Friday of complications from a stroke he suffered on Jan. 18.
He was 66.


Donald Judd, 65, Painter, Sculptor and Designer
Donald Judd, one of the foremost American postwar artists and a major figure in the Minimalist art movement, died on Saturday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 and had homes in Manhattan; Marfa, Tex., and Kussnacht am Rigi, Switzerland.
The cause was lymphoma, said his son, Flavin.


Paris Journal; France Is a Match Breaker, Mixed Couples Say
Quietly sobbing in the 17th-century hall of the central Paris law courts, a young French woman learned the other day that her quest to marry the Algerian man she loves had been frustrated once again.
"I am completely bewildered," said the woman, Fabienne Bricet, a 24-year-old communications student.
"The French state does not want me to get married. And against the state, I seem to be powerless. Why? I have gone round so many times I feel I am in a Kafka novel."


Review/Dance; Trading the Cerebral for the Sensual
Permutation and pattern lie at the base of Lucinda Childs's ingenious choreography.
"One and One," the final New York premiere in the 20th-anniversary season of the Lucinda Childs Dance Company at the Joyce Theater, proved no exception to the rule.
Nonetheless, the work as a whole, which is set to two compositions by the contemporary Greek-French composer Iannis Xenakis, has a sensual glow that differs markedly from the more cerebral, pristine look of Ms.
Childs's signature pieces of the past.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Lemieux Scores Twice  Mario Lemieux, in his second game back from back problems, scored two goals as Pittsburgh beat host Philadelphia, 3-0, yesterday, ending a four-game losing streak.
On Saturday, in his first game since Nov. 7, Lemieux had his first goal of the season and an assist in a 9-3 loss to Dallas. (AP) GOLF  Thompson's 61 Wins  Rocky Thompson had 10 birdies in a record-tying 61 yesterday to post the biggest comeback in Senior PGA Tour history and a stroke victory over Raymond Floyd in the GTE Suncoast Classic in Lutz, Fla.
Thompson started seven strokes behind second-round leader Mike Hill. (AP) SOCCER  Penalty Kick Beats U.S.
A disputed penalty kick in the 72d minute lifted Romania to a 2-1 victory over the United States National Soccer Team in the third-place game of the Carlsberg Cup in Hong Kong yesterday.
Marcelo Balboa scored for the Americans. (Reuters) MEN'S BASKETBALL  Michigan Holds On  No. 11 Michigan almost fumbled away a seven-point lead in the last 90 seconds before holding off host Ohio State, 72-70, yesterday.
The Wolverines (17-4, 9-2 in the Big Ten) won their sixth straight game. (AP) WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Penn State Wins  Missy Masley had a career-high 21 points, and No. 1 Penn State beat Indiana, 70-65, yesterday in Bloomington, Ind.
Penn State (19-1, 10-1) held the Hoosiers (14-5, 5-5) scoreless over the final three minutes. (AP) TENNIS  Farewell Triumph  Top-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere beat No. 5 Iva Majoli, 6-1, 4-6, 7-5, yesterday in the final match of her career, the Asian Women's Open final in Amagasaki, Japan.
Maleeva-Fragniere, 27 today, won 19 tournaments in a 13-year career. (AP) HORSE RACING  Speed at Gulfstream  I Can't Believe won the Deputy Minister Handicap yesterday at Gulfstream Park, Fla., coming within one-fifth of a second of the track record set 21 years ago by the renowned Mr.
Prospector.
I Can't Believe, with Eddie Maple riding, zipped the six furlongs in 1 minute 8 seconds flat..
DOG SHOW  A Special Shar-Pei  Although 21 specialty shows at six sites in the metropolitan area caused the principal excitement among dog fanciers yesterday, they were only a prelude to Westminster, which opens a two-day run at Madison Square Garden today.
The Empire Specialty Associated Clubs had 14 shows on Pier 92, in the Hudson River, at 55th Street.
There were 107 Chinese Shar-Pei, and the winner chosen by Dee Hutchinson was Sandy Woodall and Debby Smith's Ch.
Elite's Face the Nation.
HIGH SCHOOLS  Lopez 43 Not Enough  Felipe Lopez scored 43 points yesterday.
The problem was, it wasn't enough.
Rice (18-3) of Upper Manhattan, which was ranked No. 4 in the nation by USA Today, was still defeated by bitter rival No. 15 Bronx St.
Raymond's, 90-88, in a Catholic High School Athletic Association rematch at Fordham's Rose Hill Gym.
Charlton Clark had 24 for the winners.


No Surprise: Heating Oil Is Going Up
If constant shoveling is not enough to cause homeowners to lose patience with the harsh winter, perhaps their coming heating bills will: Oil customers may see their bills climb not only because of increased fuel use, but also because many suppliers are raising prices.
Oil delivery companies blame wholesalers for the increases, saying they have been charging about 20 cents more a gallon since December as oil supplies dwindle.
Still, many retailers say they have not passed along the full brunt of those increases to customers.


Middle-Aged Prostate Patients Can't Risk Watchful Waiting
To the Editor:
A study published in the Jan. 27 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine examined the roll of watchful waiting as a treatment option for prostate cancer.
It received widespread news coverage, for which the American Urological Association offers some follow-up clarification.


Guardian Angels Celebrate 15th Anniversary


QVC Won't Sweeten Offer for Paramount
The chairman of QVC Network, Barry Diller, said yesterday that the company would not raise its bid for Paramount Communications.
Coming less than 48 hours before Tuesday morning's expiration of both QVC and Viacom's competing tender offers in the long-running battle for control of Paramount -- and with Viacom still perceived as the leader -- the statement was viewed by some traders and industry executives as tantamount to concession.


Hospital Holds Valentine's Party for Its Most Special Patients


Cupid, Rider on the Storm
Face it, this is a tough city for Eros.
Everyone is too busy.
They work 10-hour days.
There are other priorities. (Is it possible to construct a meaningful sentence containing the words "love" and "priorities"?)
But now the endless snows have conspired to soften the city's hard edges, to force otherwise serious people into outfits befitting the Klondike, to make each intersection an arctic adventure, requiring wild leaps across rivers of slush, or the balance and nerve of a rock climber -- and often a helping hand.


CHRONICLE
When JOYCE RANDOLPH , the renowned Trixie Norton of "The Honeymooners," and RICHARD I. CHARLES , a retired advertising executive, were married 38 years ago, they barely had time to celebrate, because Miss Randolph had to be back at work shooting the television show the next day.
Today along with some 50 other couples, they will renew their wedding vows in a Valentine's Day ceremony of reaffirmation at the Milleridge Inn in Jericho, L.I.


Ray Dandridge, 79, Negro Leagues Star And Hall of Famer
Ray Dandridge, a Hall of Fame third baseman who starred in the Negro Leagues and the minors, died Saturday.
He was 79.
The cause of death was prostate cancer, his wife, Heneritta, said.


Kennedy to Make 2 Runs at Record Book
Sittin' more or less pretty is the position Duncan Kennedy found himself after the first day in the men's single luge at the Winter Olympics here this morning.
Kennedy, the 26-year-old from Lake Placid, N.Y., finished the day's two runs in fourth place, and prepares for the final two runs Monday in his quest for a medal.
Sittin' any which way is uncommon for a slider, since he generally lies flat on his back on the small sled, like a colorfully clad corpse, as he sweeps down the icy chute.
And any kind of nice sittin' in the Olympic standing is uncommon for an American luge competitor because never in the sports' history has one won a medal.


Inflation and Unpaid Bills Haunt Russia
Since Russia's best-known economic reformers left the Government two weeks ago, there has much been casting about for signs of impending salvation or doom, enough to drive omen mavens back to bird entrails.
The Prime Minister, Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, has suddenly doubled his own inflation forecasts, now projecting a rate of 15 to 18 percent a month by the end of the year.
The state energy sector warned of "a complete paralysis of economic activity" unless somebody started paying bills owed to it.
The Economics Minister, Aleksandr N. Shokhin, talked of price controls and unpaid Government obligations of 7 trillion rubles ($4.4 billion), which Mr.
Chernomyrdin vows to pay.


Operatic Mayors
To the Editor:
I am encouraged by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's love of opera, but hope he looks elsewhere for professional role models.
Swallow, the Mayor in "Peter Grimes," drinks heavily and chases women between conducting inquests and forming posses.
The Mayor in "Jenufa" is competent, but dull, never missing the opportunity to say -- or sing -- the obvious.
Jack Rance, the Sheriff in "La Fanciulla del West," gambles away his outlaw and never gets the girl.


Norway Rates Medal For a Classy Opener
Judging the televised version of an Olympic opening ceremony generally means critiquing the culture of the host country.
Two years ago, in Albertville, we mocked the ostentatious performance art foisted on us by the French.
On TV, the bubble women and cymbal-playing human mobiles flopped while the gushing by the prime-time hosts, Tim McCarver and Paula Zahn, made one wonder if they were hiding a better show on their monitors.


Bridge
In the seven decades of bridge competitions, one might think that every possible major type of event has been attempted.
But no.
The Chinese have just come up with a new one, and two Americans recently took part in it.
James E. Cayne of Manhattan, president of Bear, Stearns Inc., the brokerage house, and owner of many national titles, and Kathie Wei-Sender of Nashville, a world champion and long the American link to Chinese players, were in Beijing last month and competed in a one-table duplicate game.
And that, by definition, is impossible.


New Scandal Rocks Tory Party, With M.P. Admitting Infatuation
In the latest in a blizzard of allegations of sexual impropriety involving politicians, a married Tory member of Parliament resigned a foreign affairs post today after a London newspaper published details of what it described as an extramarital affair with a 22-year-old woman.
The legislator, Hartley Booth, 47, the father of three children, first denied and then acknowledged his infatuation with Emily Barr, a college student who was a researcher in his parliamentary office, The Sunday Mirror said.
But Mr.
Booth adamantly denied the pair ever had a sexual relationship.


Dance in Review
'Coppelia'  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
The world outside the New York State Theater may have been stormy on Tuesday, but there was nothing but sunshine onstage when the New York City Ballet presented "Coppelia," that great 19th-century comic ballet about a young man who falls in love with a mechanical doll.
The choreography by George Balanchine and Alexandra Danilova owes much to tradition and offers its soloists roles that require fine acting and technical virtuosity.


Mezzo-Soprano Wins Richard Tucker Award
The Richard Tucker Music Foundation has given its top award for 1994 to Jennifer Larmore, an American mezzo-soprano from Atlanta.
The honor includes a $30,000 cash award and participation in the Tucker Foundation's annual gala concert, to be held this year on Oct. 30 at Avery Fisher Hall.


A Master Programmer's New Pitch
Behind Brandon Tartikoff's new desk, on the seventh floor of an aging office building here, hangs a full-length portrait of Ryne Duren.
Mr.
Duren, the former New York Yankees relief pitcher, is a particular favorite of Mr.
Tartikoff, the former president of NBC Entertainment and the former chairman of Paramount Pictures.
The bespectacled Mr.
Duren was famous 35 years ago for freezing batters by uncorking wild fastballs.
Mr.
Tartikoff, who declared himself an independent producer last year after nearly 25 years as a programmer and production executive, has been making some unorthodox pitches, too.


U.S. Weighs Trade Actions on Japan
After Japan's rebuff of American trade demands, Clinton Administration officials said today that they had agreed that a swift response was needed but were struggling to find one unlikely to start a trade war.
"There is a unanimous understanding on the American side that there is a range of actions and that we will undoubtedly be choosing one or more of them," a senior official said.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A French Skin-care Line Seeks To Take America By First Winning Over Pharmacists And Doctors.
HOW does a best-selling line of French skin-care products win shelf space in the $4 billion American market, where cosmetic giants spend lavishly on sumptuous advertising?
Roc S.A. makes Europe's leading brand of hypo-allergenic lotions, with sales of $125 million in 1992, the most recent figures available.
But instead of trying to outspend Revlon or Estee Lauder in an advertising blitz to introduce itself to the United States, Roc is using a strategy borrowed from drug makers like its new parent, Johnson &amp; Johnson.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 HOW U.S. SHIFTED ON BOSNIA
The story of how the United States decided to enter the Bosnia negotiations illustrates how President Clinton does business, favoring deliberation over bold action and delegation over micromanagement.
A1


Patents; Ideas, Advice and Critism Spring Forth on How, and Whether, to Grant Patents Involving Software.
FOR the last month the Patent and Trademark Office has listened to advice, complaints and recommendations from the public on how it should patent software-related inventions.
The agency got a healthy dose of doubt and distrust from lawyers, software developers and inventors who say they do not believe the Patent Office is competent to evaluate such applications.
The Patent Office held hearings last month in San Jose, Calif., and again last week at its headquarters in Washington.
In both places, witnesses warned against new or separate patenting regulations for software-related inventions.
Instead, they said, the agency should simply clean up its present system.


U.S. Skier Captures Gold In the Downhill
The United States Olympic team got an unexpected gold medal when Tommy Moe of Palmer, Alaska, won the men's downhill at the Winter Games in Norway.


Neediest Cases: When Layoffs Replace Dreams
John O. remembers the exact moment he and his wife, Monique, decided to move from London to the United States.
It was during a vacation in 1985, when they flew into Houston and rented a car to drive west to San Antonio through the rolling Texas hill country.


WINTER OLYMPICS: Sports of The Times; Hey, Nancy, Baby, Wanna Getta Beer?
FIRST they let Tonya skate.
Then they let her practice on the same ice with Nancy.
Now they're letting her sleep under the same roof.
Is this what the judge in Clackamas County had in mind?
Talk about cruel and unusual punishment -- and poor Nancy is the whackee, not the whacker.
This is absolutely true.
Once the United States Olympic Committee couldn't find a way to ban Tonya from the Games -- merely because her ex-husband had Nancy's knee whacked and claims Tonya knew about it -- they went the whole nine yards and gave Tonya her regular room at the athletes' village.
It happens to be in the very same unit as Nancy.


In Figures, Let The Games Begin
Olympic officials were wrong if they thought the frenzy would diminish after Tonya Harding was given her Olympic green light.
That was quickly apparent today when a crush of reporters and photographers showed up to watch Nancy Kerrigan struggle through practice.
More security was put on alert than is usually needed for King Harald.
Even Chelsea Clinton showed up to see what all the fuss was about.
What did Kerrigan think about Harding's being allowed to compete?
It was a question everyone wanted to ask, but nobody got the chance.


Dance in Review
Cornfield Dance  Dia Center for the Arts SoHo
Ellen Cornfield delighted in the physical vigor of dancing in the program that her company, Cornfield Dance, presented on Thursday night


In Toy World '94, Boundaries Are Freely Crossed
One product that will be introduced at the American International Toy Fair, which opens this morning in Manhattan, says a great deal about current toy trends: Classic Star Trek Turtles.
With it, the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles boldly go where no Turtles have ventured before -- across product lines to meet Captain Kirk and the crew of the Starship Enterprise, all under the auspices of Playmates Toys Inc. of La Mirada, Calif.


Two for the Assembly
A special election will be held tomorrow to fill vacancies in New York's State Assembly.
Here are our endorsements in two hotly contested races:
The Bronx, 81st District (Riverdale, Kingsbridge, Kingsbridge Heights, parts of Norwood and Woodlawn, the western part of Van Cortlandt Park): This race, to replace G. Oliver Koppell, who has become State Attorney General, features two undistinguished candidates who both come out of the political morass of Bronx Democratic politics.
They have run a dispiriting campaign.
Jeffrey Dinowitz, the Democrat, is allied with the so-called reform wing of his party.
He is a political ally of Mr.
Koppell who works as a traffic court judge and is active in local party politics.
The Liberal Party candidate, Mark Friedlander, who comes out of the old Bronx Democratic machine, is commissioner and president of the city's Tax Appeals Tribunal.


For Many Big Companies, Storm Was a Minor Glitch
Highways were treacherous, rail service uncertain, airports shut and small shops emptied by the winter storm on Friday, but to many big companies the snow and ice were barely a blip on the corporate radar.
"Our bakery in Fair Lawn is just one of 13 we have around the country, and even though some workers couldn't get in on Friday we were able to staff up most of our product lines there," said Mark Gutsche, a spokesman for Nabisco Foods, based in Parsippany, N.J.
"The weather hasn't meant much to geographically diverse companies like ours."


From Indecision To Ultimatum -- A special report; As U.S. Sought a Bosnia Policy, The French Offered a Good Idea
When President Clinton learned of the deadly mortar attack on the main marketplace in Sarajevo on Feb. 5, his instinct was to ask the allies what to do.
For two weeks, the Administration had been moving toward a consensus that its own credibility and NATO's would be at stake if the United States did not come up with a diplomatic initiative to end the 22-month war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
When Mr.
Clinton summoned his national security team to a 45-minute meeting in the Oval Office, he said he was "outraged" by the bloodshed but had no clear idea how to respond.


Snow Tests the Mettle Of Crews on the Tracks
Many trains bogged down in the storm on Friday, but even for the ones that kept going, it wasn't easy.
It might seem that the 110-ton cars of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad and the Long Island Rail Road, riding snugly between steel rails, could zip through snow where a 1.5-ton automobile could not.
But sometimes the rails themselves, and the third-rail power system, succumb.


Review/Theater: Three Tall Women; Edward Albee Conjures Up Three Ages of Woman
The woman identified simply as A in Edward Albee's "Three Tall Women," the startlingly personal work that is receiving its New York premiere at the Vineyard Theater, shares many of the linguistic and psychological traits common to characters in Mr.
Albee's more abstract plays.
She is given to questing reiteration of certain phrases that take on different shadings in the repetition; she shifts disjunctively between arrogant complacency and fearful disorientation; and her memory slides and stumbles like a neophyte skater.
"I can't remember what I can't remember," she says.
But A is a woman whose speech patterns are not merely stylized representations of Mr.
Albee's enduring obsessions with the elusiveness of personality and its self-deceptions.
There is a purely naturalistic reason for her behavior.
Played with virtuosic reversals of mood by the superb Myra Carter, A is a 92-year-old woman (or is it 91, as she insists?) who is on the threshold of death.
And the way she talks is rooted in the very familiar struggle of the aged with encroaching senility.


Faulk Shrugs Off Poking And Testing at Combine
At age 20, Marshall Faulk is a victim of his success.
He became such a dominating college running back that other teams deemed it a success not necessarily to beat his San Diego State team, but to hold him to 100 yards.
The public was just as unreasonable.
If he ran for 200 yards in a game, so what?
He had done it before.
If defenses put everyone except the safeties on the line of scrimmage and held him to 100 yards, he was deemed a failure.
A three-time all-American, a runner for the ages, but still a failure.
Enough Was Enough
So Faulk did the only thing he could do retain sanity and pride.
He said enough was enough, and he ended his college career after three years.
He declared himself eligible for April's National Football League draft, and he is spending the weekend here at the N.F.L.'s annual combine testing program.
Even though he bypassed the on-field drills, he underwent psychological and intelligence tests and endless interviews with teams.


Yen Soars and Stocks Fall on Collapse of Trade Talks
In the first sign of business's deep disappointment over the collapse of trade talks between Japan and the United States, the yen soared and share prices on the Tokyo Stock Exchange fell sharply today.
The dollar settled at 105.90 yen in late trading here, down from 107.20 yen in New York late Friday.


Ewing and O'Neal Find Each Other, Well, Human
All-Star Game weekend gave Patrick Ewing and Shaquille O'Neal a chance to break through some barriers created by their on-court rivalry.
O'Neal and Ewing made headlines earlier this month, after the Knicks defeated Orlando at Madison Square Garden.
Ewing outplayed O'Neal and declared afterward that O'Neal was not "the man." And O'Neal dared Ewing to defend him one-on-one.


Officials' Comments on Peace Talks Leave Israelis Unsettled
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin found himself embroiled today in a dispute over whether he has been straightforward on where Israel is headed in peace talks with Syria and the Palestinians.
The catalyst for the debate was an unlikely source, the secretary general of his own Labor Party.


Redirecting Technology to Travelers From Troops
A steel net used on aircraft carriers to stop jet fighters from plunging into the sea is being tested at Illinois railroad crossings to stop cars from driving into the path of oncoming trains.
Materials involved in the production of Stealth bombers are being used in the construction of a San Diego bridge, and a technology developed to simulate tank battles is being tested for the study of automobile traffic in urban areas.
The beating of swords into plowshares is booming in the world of transportation, where military technology is being applied to an array of new projects.
Technology was the big winner in President Clinton's budget, and the Transportation Department proposed $692 million for research and development, a 14 percent increase over current spending.
Of this amount, $425 million was for projects designed to enhance commercial applications of defense-related technology.


Books of The Times; The Making of an Economist, Part 2
John Maynard Keynes  Volume II: The Economist as Savior, 1920-1937  By Robert Skidelsky  Illustrated. 731 pages.
Allen Lane/The Penguin PressPearson. $37.50.
In the first volume of his monumental biography, "John Maynard Keynes: Hopes Betrayed, 1883-1920," Robert Skidelsky fit together like the parts of a matrushka doll the multiple lives of his subject -- the Bloomsbury esthete, the Cambridge don, the gadfly journalist, the currency speculator, the lover of young men, the adviser to statesmen -- and showed how Keynes was able to encapsulate his seemingly conflicting personae.


Dance in Review
'Coppelia'  New York City Ballet New York State Theater
The world outside the New York State Theater may have been stormy on Tuesday, but there was nothing but sunshine onstage when the New York City Ballet presented "Coppelia," that great 19th-century comic ballet about a young man who falls in love with a mechanical doll.
The choreography by George Balanchine and Alexandra Danilova owes much to tradition and offers its soloists roles that require fine acting and technical virtuosity.


Pavin Comes Up Big With Key Putts
He has always run counter to prevailing wisdom.
Throughout his career, Corey Pavin has fought glib characterizations that held he was too short off the tee and too small of stature to ever stand tall among the game's big boys.
Today, at the Nissan Los Angeles Open, he once again pulled out his sling and slew a giant.
Pavin, who began the final round one stroke behind Fred Couples, shot three-under-par 68 to Couples's even-par 71 and won the tournament.
In so doing, he demonstrated once again the absolute truth of that hoary golf apothegm: drive for show, putt for dough.


A Demeaning Travel Ban to Cuba
It is hard to deny the value of a free trade in ideas and information across international frontiers.
Yet for five years, successive Administrations have resisted lifting restrictions on travel by writers and artists during trade embargoes against countries like North Korea, Vietnam and Cuba.
Now the Clinton Administration appears to be playing the same game.
It promised to review existing bans in order to fend off a liberalizing amendment put forward by Representative Howard Berman, a California Democrat who is chairman of the subcommittee on international operations.
But after the review, Cuba was still excluded from any relaxation of travel bans.


Mobil Unit Dismisses Fallon McElligott
The Mobil Chemical Company has dismissed Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis, its agency on the Hefty trash bags account, after only a year.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.


INSIDE
Family Faults E.M.S. Actions
The Emergency Medical Service is being criticized for its handling of a pregnant Queens woman whose baby died later in a hospital.
Page B1.
Division in South Africa
The Inkatha party's pullout from South Africa's elections stems largely from differing visions for the nation.
News analysis, page A3.
Hazardous Classrooms
The California earthquake has raised questions of how quickly -- or if at all -- the state's universities should upgrade unsafe buildings.
Page A10.
A2 Arts


SUITS CHALLENGING REDRAWN DISTRICTS THAT HELP BLACKS
A year after Congressional redistricting sent a record number of minority lawmakers to Capitol Hill, newly created black Congressional districts face a rising tide of court challenges that may threaten those electoral gains.
At stake are not just the future of the districts and the representatives being challenged.
At issue is a tangle of politics and race that has the potential to affect the nature of districts, from city councils to Congress, and the makeup of Congress at a time when President Clinton is trying to maintain the fragile margin of support in the House that provided him with legislative victories in his first year in office.


Special Elections Will Fill Nine Seats in the State Legislature
Nine empty spots in the state Legislature -- seven seats in the Assembly and two in the Senate -- will be filled in special elections on Tuesday.
The elections will not change the balance of party power in the Democratic-led Assembly or the Republican-led Senate.


Lucius Clay Jr. Is Dead at 74; Led Air Defense
Gen.
Lucius D. Clay Jr., a four-star Air Force general who directed Air Force combat operations in Vietnam and later headed the North American Air Defense Command, died last Monday at Alexandria Hospital in Virginia.
He was 74 and lived in Fort Belvoir, Va.
The cause was cardiac arrest and emphysema, his family said.


Look for the Human Rights Label
To the Editor:
In "Trade vs. Human Rights" (front page, Feb. 6), you describe the growing tension between human rights and trade, not only in government circles, but also within the business community.
You neglect, however, to mention the response of several leading corporations to the human rights versus trade debate.


Pakistanis Offer Troops for Bosnia
Pakistan has 3,000 soldiers waiting to go to Bosnia and Herzegovina, but the United Nations has no money to get them there or give them weapons once they arrive, Foreign Minister Sardar Assef Ali said today.
"It is a problem of finances," he told reporters at his first briefing since returning earlier this month from a visit to the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, with Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.


Review/Cabaret; A Singer With Traces Of Ella
Karrin Allyson, a young jazz singer from Kansas City, is a reassuring musical presence at a rather sad moment.
Emerging at a time when many of the vocalists who pioneered modern jazz singing have died or are nearing the ends of their careers, she has a natural feel for a tradition that matured long before she was born.
The singer, who is appearing at Michael's Pub (211 East 55th Street, Manhattan) through March 5, does not possess a commanding voice, but she wields what equipment she has with technical skill and expressive savvy.
Her light voice, which contains more than a hint of nasality, swivels around notes and phrases in a way that suggests a combination of Helen Merrill, Susannah McCorkle and Rickie Lee Jones, although her jazz phrasing is more orthodox than any of those singers.


South African Vote: Zulu Party Moves to Margins
Peter Miller and Ziba Jiyane defected to the Inkatha Freedom Party last year from opposite directions.
Mr.
Miller came from the governing white National Party, Mr.
Jiyane from the black nationalism of the Pan Africanist Congress.
Both were convinced that Inkatha -- rooted in the tradition of South Africa's largest tribe, the Zulus, but Western in its talk of federalist democracy and free enterprise -- would hold the political center in a democratic South Africa.


Review/Rock; David Johansen Returns as Himself
"It's a delight to be back in this guise," David Johansen told the sold-out Bottom Line on Saturday night.
Then he paused, scrunched up his face and asked, "Who the hell is that?"
To his longtime fans, Mr.
Johansen is one of the quintessential New York rockers, facing subways and cockroaches, frustration and random death with a knowing yet resilient grin.
He acts out his songs, strutting and shimmying or staring pensively.
He lets audiences know he's posing, but he also means what he sings.


Minutemen Find a Hero In the Final Seconds
Today's episode in the ongoing saga of the University of Massachusetts against Temple went to the Minutemen -- barely.
Mike Williams's 15-foot jump shot over Rick Brunson with three seconds left won the game, 56-55, for the Minutemen, who had trailed by 8 points with six minutes left.


No Doubt About It, UConn Tops the East
Three weeks from March Madness, the chant heard around the nation is not "We're No. 1," but "Who's No. 1?"
But in the Big East, there is no doubt as to who is on top: UConn.
On Saturday night, the Huskies started slowly once again, this time against visiting Seton Hall, and they trailed by 7 at the half.
But behind Donyell Marshall's 26 points, UConn turned it up in the second half and coasted to an 80-68 victory over the Pirates, who have lost six of their last eight.


Rangers Thrive in Winter Wonderland
After the Rangers defeated the Senators by 4-3 on Mike Gartner's overtime goal in Ottawa Saturday night, Mark Messier looked up to see Phil Bourque in a long coat, a big hat and a thick scarf.
"What's up, 'Two-Niner?' " asked Messier, using the nickname from Bourque's uniform number, 29.
Bourque said he and defenseman Jay Wells were skating back to the hotel down the frozen Rideau canal, joining thousands of others gliding past colorfully lighted ice and snow sculptures decorating the "Winderlude" festival. 'Never Hurt Anybody'
"Come on!" said Messier, eyes widening and smiling. "Really?"
"Sure," Bourque replied. "Little river skate never hurt anybody."


Who Pays Physicians
To the Editor:
Re "Fond Memory: The Family Doctor Is Rarely In" (The Week in Review, Feb. 6): I agree that doctors seem greedy and arrogant, and that they "don't care about people as much as they used to."


All That's Left for Jansen Is to Just Go Out and Skate
After three attempts and three failures, an Olympic gold medal in speed skating for Dan Jansen seems, if not guaranteed, then inevitable.
On Monday, Jansen skates the 500 meters, a distance where he is far and away the world's best, having set two world records this season, including one here on the indoor Olympic oval, commonly known as the Viking ship because the roof is shaped like an inverted drakkar.


Abroad at Home; Shultz On Bosnia
"It is the ultimate end of a disgrace."
That was how George Shultz began when I asked him what he thought of President Clinton's new policy on Bosnia.
The Administration is joining European governments in pressing the Bosnians to accept "reasonable" terms for dismemberment of their country.


UB40 Postpones Show
The UB40 concert scheduled for tonight at the Paramount has been postponed because the group's saxophonist, Brian Travers, is ill.
The new date is Feb. 23 at 8 P.M.; tonight's tickets will be honored.
If refunds are preferred, they may be had at the point of purchase no later than tomorrow.
Information: (212) 465-6741.


No Longer in a Shadow, Pippen Is Star of Stars
Scottie Pippen spent much of his career performing in Michael Jordan's shadow.
Tonight, Pippen grabbed the spotlight.
Winning the most valuable player award of the 44th annual All-Star Game today, Pippen led the Eastern Conference to a 127-118 victory over the Western Conference before a capacity crowd of 17,096 at the Target Center.
Pippen, a multitalented forward with the Chicago Bulls, led all scorers with 29 points, had 11 rebounds and set the tone for the game with his suffocating defense, 3-point shooting and open-court creativity.


METRO DIGEST
PREVENTING MURDER ON THE JOB
With homicide now the leading cause of death in the workplace in New York City and the second-leading cause across the nation, the crimes are increasingly being viewed as occupational health threats that are potentially preventable, rather than simply as random criminal acts.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY PUBLIC ADVOCATE, PRIVATE STRUGGLE In the six weeks since his inauguration, Mark J. Green, New York City's new Public Advocate, has seized the issue of reinventing government with a passion.
He said that embracing the issue was only natural, and that he had long been a champion of making government leaner and more efficient.
But others suggest that it is one of many ways Mr.
Green has chosen to make a mark in the city's second-highest post, a job that is ill-defined and widely perceived as just short of ceremonial.
B3.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Business Inventories . . .
Dec.
Tuesday  Industrial Production . . .
Jan.
Capacity Utilization . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Jan.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; As a Family Business, The San Francisco Chronicle Is Finding That Pain Accompanies Change.
IN her new office at The San Francisco Chronicle the other day, Nan Tucker McEvoy, 74 years old, was explaining that owning a newspaper is not like owning a shoe company.
"If we'd inherited a shoe company," she said, "it would be very hard to be very emotional about that."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ABT Building Products Corp., Neeneh, Wis., two million common shares. Merrill Lynch.


Executive Changes Made by Ayer
Ayer Inc. has made a series of top-level personnel changes days after its long-pending merger discussions with Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco were abruptly called off.
Thomas F. Maxey, 56, vice chairman and chief operating officer, who the agency said had expressed a desire to retire 14 months ago, will do so as soon as possible, Ayer said on Friday.
He relinquishes his duties as chief operating officer to Glenn Corlett, 50, executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Keeping Elderly at Home and Care Affordable
After Rosa Alston had her second leg amputated, her surgeon began making arrangements for her to go to a nursing home.
But Mrs.
Alston, a 73-year-old widow who lives alone, would have none of it.
Instead, she signed up for Palmetto Senior Care, a comprehensive-care program for frail elderly people based on a San Francisco model that is winning support among health policy makers nationwide.


Clinique Chooses Riney for TV Spots
Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco has been awarded an assignment from Estee Lauder Inc.
Separately, the agency has been eliminated from the Philips Consumer Electronics Company review.
Clinique Laboratories U.S.A., a Lauder division in New York, said last week that it had selected Riney as the first agency to develop television advertising for the cosmetics line.
Billings have yet to be determined.
Clinique will continue creating print ads in-house.
AC&amp; R Advertising of New York retains media duties on the print account.


Private Couriers and Postal Service Slug It Out
Over the last three years the United States Postal Service has collected more than $500,000 in fines from companies that sent "nonurgent" mail by private couriers like Federal Express or DHL.
Now private couriers and their customers -- outraged that the postal service could abuse its monopoly position in an effort to win back some of the express mail business -- are fighting back.


Beyond Pigs and Quilts in Cooperative Extension; In New York City, Growing Trout in the Bronx and Teaching About AIDS and Drugs
Philson Warner showed off the catfish and striped bass that he was rearing in dozens of gurgling tanks and plastic garbage bins in a makeshift laboratory in the South Bronx, remembering with some antipathy the time the central oxygen pump expired for a day and hundreds of fish simultaneously moved heavenward.
He didn't care to talk much about the occasional floods.
He nodded at his vegetables and spices -- celery, spinach, basil -- being grown hydroponically in nutrient-rich solution.
That is how you do things when you are a high-rise farmer.
He's working on a device that will hang from the ceiling.
"Won't take up as much space, great for the city," he said.
"Listen, I'm always dreaming."


Di Centa of Italy Shouts 'Volare' to Freestyle Gold
The had just won the first gold medal of her long career, which just so happened to be the first gold medal of these Winter Olympics, and Manuela Di Centa, like so many Italians, was having no difficulty finding words to match her feelings.
"Volare, volare, volare, volare," she said in her native tongue.
"After the second kilometer, I just felt like I was flying, flying, flying, and I just kept on flying all the way to the finish."


Trip to Arkansas Helps President Catch Up and Visit With Family
President Clinton returned to his boyhood home this weekend for the first time since his mother, Virginia Clinton Kelley, died and turned his attention to what he had left undone because of the demands of office.
Mr.
Clinton spent Saturday and much of today at the lakefront home where his mother's husband, Richard Kelley, now lives alone.
He spent time going through his mother's papers and devoted this morning to reminiscing with Mr.
Kelley and his younger brother, Roger, who also spent the night.


People
*
Calease Tynes-Gibson was named to the new position of business manager for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company account at FCB/ Leber Katz Partners, New York.
She previously held a similar position at Young &amp; Rubicam New York. *
R.
John Oliver was named to the new position of director of integrated marketing at Pentacom, Troy, Mich.
He was previously a vice president and account manager at Maritz Inc., Southfield, Mich.
Also, Terrance Harrison Edward Calloway was named to the new position of director of minority media planning and purchasing.
He was previously president at Diversified Media Brokerage, Chicago.


Review/Pop; Salsa Stars Who Give Their All For Love
Gilberto Santa Rosa closed a salsa love-in at a jam-packed Madison Square Garden on Saturday night, and from his first notes it was clear he knew how to sing, which is more than can be said for some of the other performers.
Mr.
Santa Rosa headlined a handful of singers, most of them based in Puerto Rico and not regularly heard here, who were celebrating Valentine's Day with romance in a program titled "Concierto del Amor."
Mr.
Santa Rosa, all chubby elegance, put on a characteristically spectacular show, improvising and hitting notes clearly.
He has found a path between pop salsa, the soft, romantic salsa that doesn't feature much improvising, a product of the recording studio, and the harder salsa of dance clubs.
His records always sound moderated and smooth, but in concert, when he improvises, he always finds a relationship between his voice and his drummers.


Moe Makes a Golden Rush Right Into the Heart of Dear Old Dad
Eleven years ago, Tom Moe Sr. and son Tommy made a father-and-son connection, laying the foundation for a dream.
Tom Moe needed 46 weather-plagued hours to reach Norway from Alaska, through Dallas and Copenhagen, and six more this morning to get from Lillehammer to the grandstand at the bottom of the mountain to see it all come true.
For the race of his 24-year-old son's life, he arrived with a couple of minutes to spare.


Nicholls Scores 1,000th Point
Center Bernie Nicholls, trying in his 13th season to show skeptics that he still belongs, tonight became the 39th man in National Hockey League history to reach 1,000 career points as the Devils and the Lightning tied in overtime, 3-3.
Nicholls's milestone came in spectacular fashion -- on a 30-foot laser beam of a shot that eluded Tampa Bay goalie Pat Jablonski in the left corner.
The second period goal gave the Devils a 2-2 tie.
But Nicholls wasn't through.
With the visitors down by a goal and less than nine minutes left in the game, he scored again, this one a rocket over Jablonski's left shoulder.


Serbs Demand a Pullback by Bosnians, Confusing the Peace Effort
Serbian nationalists threw confusion into the United Nations-brokered peace effort today with a demand that the Bosnian Government pull back its infantry in exchange for a Serbian withdrawal of artillery.
The Serbian nationalists made their proposal as the clock ticked toward a NATO deadline to either withdraw the heavy guns or turn them over to the United Nations by midnight next Sunday, or face air strikes.


Chaney Lambastes UMass's Calipari
The intense rivalry between Massachusetts and Temple, the leaders of the Atlantic 10 Conference, reached a new level today when Temple Coach John Chaney threatened and nearly came to blows with Massachusetts Coach John Calipari.
Chaney was upset that Calipari, after the emotional 56-55 Massachusetts victory at the Mullins Center, was critical of the officials Gerry Donhehy, Joe Mingle and Larry Lembo as the three left the floor.
Witnesses said they heard Calipari tell the officials they would never officiate a game here again.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A tiny American Indian bank in Montana is challenging the insurance industry's hold on the lucrative annuity business.
The move will have ramifications far beyond the reservation because insurance companies have been fighting to keep banks from encroaching into this area of their operations.  [ Page D1. ]


Rumors Beget Rumors On Possible Beatles Reunion
The latest in a long string of rumors about a partial Beatles reunion has the three surviving former Beatles -- Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr -- reuniting for a concert in Central Park, joined by John Lennon's two sons, Julian and Sean.
John Lennon was shot to death at the Dakota apartment building, only a few yards from the park, on Dec. 8, 1980.
A London newspaper, The Mail on Sunday, quoting unnamed sources, reported that the three former Beatles were to be paid $30 million each for the concert, but did not say who would pay these fees, or who was producing the event.
However, Henry J. Stern, the New York City Commissioner of Parks and Recreation, said yesterday that he had not been approached by anyone hoping to present the Beatles at Central Park.
His department would have to approve plans for such a concert.


With Officer's Acquittal, Anger at the Prosecutor
The 1992 narcotics case that led to the takeover of the Police Department and two years of law-enforcement upheaval in the tiny borough of Sussex in rural northwestern New Jersey has ended with quick acquittal of an officer accused of stealing cocaine from the police evidence locker.
In the eyes of the jury, it seems, the whole affair was much ado about nothing.
And Sussex's Mayor, Peter Horvath, says the borough feels victimized by the state and now unfairly faces large expenses because of the prosecution.


Jews Had Negligible Role in Slave Trade
To the Editor:


Poor Representation For Poor Defendants
Today, Jimmy Davis faces sentencing in Anniston, Ala., in the murder of a store clerk in a holdup.
His judge's choices are life in prison without parole, or death.
The story of how Mr.
Davis, a lanky 23-year-old high school dropout with a low I.Q., came to be facing the death penalty demonstrates the flawed legal representation given to poor defendants in capital cases, legal experts say.
Nothing Mr.
Davis's lawyers did was negligent or even particularly shocking, they say.
But as more death sentences are appealed, courts are increasingly consumed by the extent and adequacy of the trial defense.


Public Advocate, Private Battle
On a recent morning in a midtown Manhattan hotel, Mark J. Green, New York City's new Public Advocate, stood before about 200 business and civic leaders and offered a treatise on turning some functions of city government over to private companies -- an issue that was a cornerstone of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's campaign last year.
Indeed, in the six weeks since his inauguration, Mr.
Green has seized the issue of reinventing government with a passion.
He has prepared position papers, met with a national expert on the topic, and traveled to Washington to share his ideas with Vice President Al Gore.


U.S. Mint Hires Grey For Coin Campaign
The United States Mint has named Grey Advertising in New York and its specialized divisions to handle an integrated marketing program to promote commemorative coins to be issued in conjunction with the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
Billings were estimated at $25 million over the program's three-year contract with Grey, which has handled five big coin assignments for the Mint since 1985.


Workplace Murders Provoke Lawsuits and Better Security
After a 22-year-old sales worker, Lisa Steinberg, was murdered two years ago in the Manhattan clothing store where she worked, the culprit who repeatedly stabbed her with a screwdriver and then shot her in the mouth was tracked down, convicted and sentenced to 25 years to life in prison.
Now, Ms.
Steinberg's parents are going back to court, this time trying to pin part of the responsibility for their daughter's murder on two security companies, an armored-car company and a construction company -- all of which had duties at the store at the time of the murder, but have never been accused of laying a hand on her. 'This Was Preventable'
With homicide now the leading cause of death in the workplace in New York City and the second-leading cause across the nation, the crimes are increasingly being viewed by the legal system, the government and employers themselves as occupational health threats that are potentially preventable, rather than simply as random acts by criminals.


The Emerging School Bureaucracy
In the weeklong budget fight between New York's City Hall and the Board of Education, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has hit pay dirt.
The city's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, now admits that the board has routinely understated the number of managers at headquarters -- perhaps by as much as 50 percent.
That confirms Mr.
Giuliani's worst suspicions that the board is a "bureaucracy out of control," and gives new credence to his demand that the board eliminate 2,500 administrative jobs.


World Economies


Did Olympic Committee Lose? Hardly an Accurate Appraisal
While it might appear that the United States Olympic Committee was a resounding loser and Tonya Harding the big winner as a phalanx of lawyers in the Clackamas County circuit court shaped events some 5,000 miles away, looks have often been deceiving since that whack on a knee six weeks ago.
A closer examination of the negotiated settlement, allowing the 23-year-old skater to compete in the Lillehammer Olympics, suggests that the Olympic committee has suffered little beyond the incredulity of those who presume she was involved in the attack on her rival, Nancy Kerrigan, even though she has not been charged.


Court-Appointed Defense Offers the Poor a Lawyer, But the Cost May Be High
For Jimmy Davis, a 23-year-old accused of murdering a sales clerk in a robbery attempt, the justice system moved with frightening speed: After a five-day trial in December, it took 90 minutes for a jury to find him guilty of murder and two hours for it to recommend that he be put to death in the electric chair.
As Calhoun County sheriff's deputies led the lanky defendant with protruding, frightened eyes from the courtroom, he softly muttered under his breath: "This ain't right. This is wrong."


Race for Artificial Blood Heats Up
When 22-year-old Don Olson arrived at Denver General Hospital's emergency room with deep stab wounds recently, he got a routine transfusion of four units of blood.
He also got, after agreeing to it, one unit of an artificial blood substitute, one of a group of innovative products that could some day save thousands of lives and create a multibillion dollar industry.
The transfusion of the substitute, made by Northfield Laboratories of Evanston, Ill., was the start of the most realistic test yet of the progress in creating alternatives to blood transfusions for accident victims and surgical patients.
Until now, products like Northfield's had been tested only on healthy volunteers or with much smaller doses than would be used in real therapy on patients.


Cease-Fire Threatened
Serbian nationalists in Bosnia, who had agreed to withdraw their artillery from around Sarajevo, are now demanding that the Muslim-led Bosnian Government pull back its infantry in exchange.
Page A7.


Canvassing by Federal Agents Is Reported in Crown Heights
Investigators in the renewed Federal effort to prosecute in the 1991 killing of a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights are canvassing the Brooklyn neighborhood for witnesses and seeking possible photographic evidence from the press, according to community leaders and others familiar with the inquiry.
Attorney General Janet Reno announced on Jan. 25 that the Justice Department would pursue a grand jury investigation into the stabbing of the scholar, Yankel Rosenbaum, during four days of violence in the area.
Since then, local leaders say, Federal agents have been "on the streets talking to people, going up and down President Street," as one put it, referring to the scene of the slaying.


After Fierce Storm, A Crippled Region Goes Back to Work
Although the snow still remains piled high as a vivid reminder of the ferocity of Friday's storm in the New York region, the work week is expected to begin without major disruptions.
New York City officials say most roads are clear, and the Long Island Rail Road, whose riders suffered major disruptions because of the storm, says it expects that nearly all trains will run on schedule.
All airports in the region have reopened, as have the major bridges, tunnels and highways.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani warned New Yorkers not to fall victim to "false expectations," saying the city would definitely not be back to normal.
He warned drivers against taking cars into work because of icy roads and parking problems, and urged people to take mass transit instead.
The Mayor's aides said that garbage collection -- one victim of the storm -- should resume today with the help of 2,000 newly hired laborers, half of whom would be used to clear snow.


Accounts
*
Lionel Trains Inc., Chesterfield, Mich., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill Advertising, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle advertising for its preschool train line, the World of Little Choo Choo.
Billings were not disclosed.


Storm's Fury Is Past, but Its Malice Lingers Still
Most highways were clear, railroads and airlines were nearly back to normal, sledders frolicked on snowy hillsides and blue skies and brilliant sunshine returned to the New York region yesterday.
But it was only an illusion that the city and suburbs were out from under the biggest snowstorm in years.
Mountains of snow still choked roadsides, countless cars were buried at the curbs, garbage had gone uncollected for a week, thawing-and-freezing cycles made roads and sidewalks treacherously icy, and despite round-the-clock plowing and shoveling, officials said it might be days before the fight was truly over.


CHRONICLE
An unexpected Valentine: GINNY ROSENBLATT was paging through an advance copy of her husband, ROGER ROSENBLATT'S new book, "The Man in the Water," a collection of essays and stories that will be published by Random House next week, when she noticed something startling in the acknowledgements.
Where Mr.
Rosenblatt had written in the acknowledgements, "To my lifelong and most exacting editor, Ginny Rosenblatt," she saw the words, "To my lifelong and most exciting editor."


Tiny Bank Challenges Insurers
A tiny American Indian bank in Montana is challenging the insurance industry's hold on the lucrative annuity business.
The bank on the Blackfeet Indian reservation has introduced the first certificate of deposit with the tax advantages of an annuity, according to its promoters, who hope to license the unusual product to larger banks.


Times Mirror Widens Environmental Push
The environment is to most Times Mirror Magazines publications what fashion is to Vogue and yachts are to Yachting.
With that in mind, the company -- whose publications include Field &amp; Stream, Outdoor Life and Salt Water Sportsman -- has given more than $200,000 to environmental causes since 1990.
At that time, it established a group to lobby Congress and Government agencies on legislation affecting natural resources.


Essay; Sink the Clipper Chip
Well-meaning law and intelligence officials, vainly seeking to maintain their vanishing ability to eavesdrop, have come up with a scheme that endangers the personal freedom of every American.
Nobody doubts that F.B.I. wiretaps help catch crooks or that the National Security Agency's "Big Ears" alert us to the plans of terrorists.
And nobody can deny that new technology makes it easier for the bad guys to encode their communications to avoid the eavesdropping of the good guys.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater
George Balanchine was seldom long-winded.
Sometimes he even simplified his own choreographic utterances.


Dividend Meetings


We Need Storage Site For Nuclear Waste
To the Editor:
I am as concerned as you are in "Safeguard All Plutonium Now" (editorial, Feb. 2) about the possible proliferation of nuclear materials from the dismantled nuclear arsenals of the United States and the former Soviet Union.
No one is eager to see the nuclear community expand, especially to include such countries as North Korea, Iran, Iraq or Libya.
I think that it is so vital that the likes of Saddam Hussein or Kim Il Sung not have a nuclear option at their disposal that I would be willing to accept the Clinton Administration's suggestion that materials from dismantled nuclear weapons be permanently stored in the United States.


For Pairs, Victory Is in Eyes Of Judges
It is no secret that figure skating judges monitor practices as closely as competitions.
And it is every skater's suspicion that the judges often rely on what they expect to see instead of what they actually see.
That appeared to be the case tonight as Natalya Mishkutienok and Artur Dmitriev, the defending Olympic champions from Russia, skated an inspiring, creative short program only to wind up in second place, behind the 1988 gold medalists, Yekaterina Gordeyeva and Sergei Grinkov, also of Russia.
A judging controversy in figure skating.
Imagine that.


Shock Therapy for the Pentagon
Only shock therapy can change the mind set that developed in the Department of Defense during the cold war.
Since the tearing down of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the Pentagon has experienced a great deal of attempted therapy and next to no shock.
When the Bush Administration was treating it benignly, one of the Pentagon's severest critics was Les Aspin, then chairman of the House Armed Services Committee.


Maley Is Upset By High Stick
Dave Maley, the Islander forward, was still seething today after almost losing an eye Saturday night in a game against the Florida Panthers, when a former Islander goaltender, Mark Fitzpatrick, swung his stick at him.
"When you get a stick swung up that high at your head, anything could happen," Maley said.
"There are bones up here and they are fragile. Your helmet doesn't cover your eyes."


CHRONICLE
A musical fallout from last week's storms: when it became clear on Friday that many of the 110 members of the Philadelphia Orchestra scheduled to perform that evening would be unable to get to the Academy of Music in Philadelphia, WOLFGANG SAWALLISCH, the orchestra's new musical director, leapt into the breach and decided that he would fill in for the orchestra.
He took his baton to the piano and played the orchestral scores for Wagner's "Tannhauser" and "Die Walkure" while simultaneously conducting the Philadelphia Singers Chorale and the soloists.


Like Tommy Moe, CBS Says It's 'Flying'
You. You out there. In cities and rural areas.
You're watching the Winter Olympics as never before.


Miscellany
*
Frank Delano, former chairman and chief executive at Delano Goldman &amp; Young Inc., New York, has opened the Delano Group, New York, specializing in naming brands and marketing imagery. *
Lowe Group, London, has acquired a minority interest in Adam Tanitim, Istanbul, Turkey, and plans to acquire a majority interest in the future.
Terms were not disclosed.
Adam Tanitim, which will be renamed Lowe Adam, will continue to be headed by Nazar Buyum, the chief executive, and Ersin Salman, the chairman.


Riders in the Storm; Blasts of Winter Weather Drive Commuters to the Trains
In fair weather, mass transit officials plead and beg for riders; they advertise, they offer discount packages for sporting events, they even jot down license plate numbers of cars at highway toll plazas and write to the owners, offering them free weekly tickets.
But in the snow and ice, people flock to the trains.
Sales of one-way tickets for peak-hour trains were up 11.5 percent on Metro-North and 8 percent on the Long Island Rail Road in January of this year compared with January 1993.
Ridership was up on New Jersey Transit and on Amtrak, too, officials there report, although neither one has January figures yet.
The Transit Authority said it would not know for a few weeks whether token sales for city subways were up in January.


Dallas Protects Erik Williams
The Super Bowl champion Dallas Cowboys decided to forgo the National Football League's "franchise player" designation for the second straight year, but declared ERIK WILLIAMS a "transition player," allowing the team to match any offer made to the Pro Bowl tackle.


Seles No Longer Has a Ranking
MONICA SELES, who has not returned to pro tennis since being stabbed during a match last April, dropped out of the world ranking yesterday.
Seles was ranked No. 1 when she was stabbed in the back in Hamburg, Germany, by a man who said he was a STEFFI GRAF fan.
The 20-year-old Seles was No. 18 last week, but she no longer has three tournament results during a 52-week span, a requirement for a WTA ranking.
She had been No. 1 for 21 straight months before Graf regained the top spot in June. (Reuters)


Group Heckles Reno Over Crown Heights
Attorney General Janet Reno was heckled and booed during an appearance in Manhattan last night by people demanding that she include former Mayor David N. Dinkins and former Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown in the Federal investigation of the killing of Yankel Rosenbaum in Crown Heights in 1991.
Speaking at Congregation Kelilath Jeshurun at 125 East 85th Street, Mrs.
Reno was asked several times why she had not included both former city officials in her decision to open a Federal investigation into the death of Mr.
Rosenbaum, a rabbinical student who was fatally stabbed when attacked by a group of blacks during street disturbances in Crown Heights.


Why Doctors Push Women Into Prenatal Tests
To the Editor:
Your front-page article of Feb. 5 on prenatal tests ignores the severe physical and psychological trauma many women suffer after a midpregnancy miscarriage of a healthy fetus because of fetal tests complications.


H.M.O.'s Propose Nationwide Uniform Standards for Health Plans
Health maintenance organizations, which now serve 45 million Americans, today proposed uniform Federal standards for the operation and financing of health plans across the country.
The H.M.O.'s, concerned about the possibility of 50 different sets of state regulations, would go much further than President Clinton's health care plan in trying to establish uniform national standards.


Patterns
From the Fire Department
Such are the injustices of life that Laura Whitcomb, who showed glamorous dresses based on United Parcel Service uniforms last season, should find her collection held up in Los Angeles because of a U.P.S. strike.
The strike, that is, combined with an earthquake and a snowstorm.
So while Ms.
Whitcomb sat at the New York Premier Collections trade show at the Javits Center with last season's dresses (including the U.P.S. one), her new collection was in cargo at the Los Angeles airport.
Still, Ms.
Whitcomb's hormone-injected uniform dresses, drawing from regulation wear of fire and police departments and U.P.S., look fresher than what others are offering.


Ottawa Journal; Canada in a Nutshell: 2 Lawmakers, Poles Apart
They met at a bilin- gual pancake breakfast -- Maurice Dumas, a 66-year-old high-school teacher from St.-Jerome, Quebec, and Elwin Hermanson, 41, a grain farmer from Beechy, Saskatchewan.
With more than 200 other newcomers, they recently took their seats in the House of Commons in what promises to be one of the most momentous parliaments in the 127 years since confederation.
Although they arrived here with fundamentally conflicting visions of Canada, they share the naive enthusiasms of freshmen.


Winter of Death and Dislocation for Wildlife
IF this seemingly longest of all Northeastern winters has smashed humans' routines to smithereens, consider the region's wildlife.
For many creatures of field, forest and pond, 1994 has so far brought not mere inconvenience and lost dollars, but a choice between wrenching dislocation and certain death.
And for some, death no matter what they do.


Merle Thorpe, 76, Shareholders' Rights Advocate
Merle Thorpe Jr., a Washington lawyer who fought for the rights of shareholders in the United States and of Palestinians in the Middle East, died on Sunday at his home in Chevy Chase, Md.
He was 76.
He had throat cancer for two years, said his stepson, Peter M. Castleman.


Clues Emerge To Rich Lodes Of Diamonds
DIAMONDS are travelers from the earth's interior.
How they form there is well known.
Crushing pressures and blistering heats work in unison to squeeze ho-hum carbon into stones of unrivaled hardness that can be shaped into dazzling gems.
But how diamonds make their journeys of a hundred miles or more to particular spots on the earth's surface, and not to others, has long been a mystery.
Now, clues to a possible explanation have emerged in the Canadian tundra amid a rush for diamond riches reminiscent of the Yukon gold days of a century ago.
Braving a riot of claims, finds and swindles, geologists have been carefully examining the rocky ground and discovering what may prove to be new indicators of diamond-bearing ores.
These signs, dikes of ancient lava that are often visible on the earth's surface, could make future prospecting for diamonds easier.


Oracle Hopes to Steal A March on Microsoft
What if they gave a party and nobody invited Bill Gates of Microsoft?
Universally feared in the computer industry because of his company's domination of the software market, William H. Gates 3d has been attempting to stake out a similar claim to the emerging world of interactive television.


Trade the Bum. No, Keep Him.
Both Aleksei Kovalev of the Rangers and Aleksei Yashin of the Ottawa Senators are talented young players who roomed together in Moscow as members of the Dynamo team before they joined the National Hockey League.
While Yashin is enjoying a successful rookie season on a bad team, Kovalev is struggling through his second year with a good one, having problems with league authorities and with his coaching staff.
The two 20-year-olds speak frequently by telephone, and Kovalev tells Yashin his troubles.


Right Answer For Big Money
It was an $89,003 question, and the police are eager to say it was answered appropriately.
The money was a bribe offer; the response was no.
"The money is always there, $1,000, $5,000, but that was about as much as I've ever seen," said Sgt.
Paul Piekarski of Brooklyn's 75th Precinct.


Employer Health Costs Still Rise
The growth in medical spending by employers is easing, but their costs are still rising much faster than the 3 percent general inflation rate, according to a national survey released yesterday.
The survey showed that the average cost of care was $3,781 an employee last year, an increase of 8 percent, compared with 10.1 percent in 1992 and ending a five-year string of dougle-digit growth.


City Ballet Change
Darcey Bussell, a guest ballerina from the Royal Ballet of Britain, will dance an additional performance with the New York City Ballet tonight at the New York State Theater.
Ms.
Bussell will appear in "Agon," which replaces "Cortege Hongrois" on the program.
She will also dance "Agon" on Wednesday as scheduled.


Gas Guns Could Launch Spacecraft, Testers Say
FOUR times in recent months the coyotes, vultures and squirrels that inhabit the desolate Altamont Hills here have had their tranquility ruptured by a 150-foot cannon blasting a jet-engined projectile into a nearby hillside.
For scientists working in the rarefied realms of light gas guns and scramjets, the test shots at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory's remote Site 300 have been breakthrough events.
They say the tests show that a large gun could be used to send large objects into space at far lower costs than today's rocket and shuttle technology.
Such an approach was first hypothesized by Jules Verne in his 1865 novels, "From the Earth to the Moon" and "A Trip Around It."


U.S. TAKING ACTION AGAINST JAPANESE IN ONE TRADE CASE
The Clinton Administration decided today to initiate sanctions against Japan for failing to live up to promises to allow Motorola Inc. to penetrate the lucrative Tokyo cellular phone market.
The decision on Motorola, which officials said would be announced on Tuesday, had been in the works for months, with a deadline that happened to fall on Feb. 15.
It involves a 1989 trade agreement between the United States and Japan and was not part of the eight-month-long broad-based talks intended to open Japan's markets for autos, telecommunications, insurance and medical equipment.
Those talks collapsed on Friday, after a meeting between President Clinton and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa failed to resolve differences.
A White House Warning
President Clinton warned today that he would soon decide on other measures intended to force Japan to open markets.


Fatal Crashes Raise Questions of Safety
The events at the Daytona International Speedway the last four days have been deeply disturbing to the stock-car racing community, with two disparate drivers -- one a veteran of high-speed racing of the sort that takes place on Daytona's high-banked turns and another relatively new to it -- dying in one-car crashes and two others surviving bad wrecks.
Rodney Orr, a 31-year-old racer from Palm Coast, Fla., was killed in a one-car crash yesterday when his Ford Thunderbird went out of control and flipped in Turn 2 on the 2.5-mile oval and smashed into the concrete wall at the top of the banking, the roof over the driver's side of the car taking the initial impact.


U.N. COMMANDERS IN BOSNIA TO MAKE USE OF TECHNOLOGY
United Nations commanders here are developing a complex, ambitious peace plan, using NATO's advanced technology to strengthen the threat of air strikes on the combatants in Bosnia.
As the ad hoc plan unfolds, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose and other commanders said in a series of conversations during the last few days that they hoped first to restore besieged Sarajevo to the life of a normal European city and then to use the effort as a model to apply to Mostar and other battlegrounds throughout Bosnia.


Economic Watch; Big Trade Deficit With Japan: Some Think It's No Problem
"America's trade deficit with Japan is not very popular with the American people or the American Government," President Clinton allowed at the news conference with Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan in which the two agreed to disagree over trade.
"It's hard to explain it, year in year out, always getting bigger," he added.
Most economists would undoubtedly agree with Mr.
Clinton that mega-deficits are not popular, nor easy to explain to the great majority of Americans who prefer their economics lessons in easy-to-swallow gel caps.
But it is equally safe to say that few economists think the chronic trade deficit with Japan is a problem in itself worth much of a fuss -- or, for that matter, an economic problem at all.
Individual Complaints
This does not necessarily mean that individual American exporters don't have a legitimate gripe with the Japanese: Motorola may encounter a lot of static when it tries to sell mobile phones in Tokyo, and Chrysler may hit a brick wall when the company tries to sign up dealers for its nifty little Neon runabout.
But there is no reason to believe that free trade nirvana -- an entirely open world trading system -- would balance the Japanese-American account or even change it measurably.





METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BOMBING TRIAL NEARING CLOSE The World Trade Center bombing trial moved abruptly to closing arguments after three of the four defense lawyers declined to put on cases in defense of their clients.
The lawyers in essence left it to the jury to decide the case entirely on the strength or weakness of the evidence presented by the prosecution.
A1.


Sports of The Times; Dan Jansen Just Skates On Thin Ice
TOUGH sport, this speed skating.
No chance to get back on defense.
No rally in the bottom of the ninth.
Yes, Chris Webber of Michigan still wishes he hadn't called timeout against North Carolina last April, but he had 39 valiant minutes to get himself into that corner.
You can't pull the goalie in speed skating.
One slip, you lose.
Slipping is what happens to Dan Jansen, the man who said "Sorry, Milwaukee" yesterday.
Milwaukee is sorry.
The entire United States is sorry for Dan Jansen, a nice fellow who slips in the Winter Games.


Executive Changes
CANTEEN CORP., Spartanburg, S.C., a subsidiary of Flagstar Cos., appointed Joseph A. Aprile president for the company's food service and vending machine division.
KEY TRONIC CORP., Spokane, Wash., named Thomas W. Cason president and chief operating officer.


Dollar Falls Sharply Vs. the Yen
Accelerating a descent that began about 10 days ago as trade tensions between the United States and Japan intensified, the dollar plunged yesterday to a six-month low against the Japanese yen.
The dollar's 4.7 percent decline against the yen in New York trading to 102.25, from 107.20 late Friday, was particularly steep.
In the last 10 days, the dollar has fallen and the yen has risen by about 10 percent.


Honors
*
Carlo Vittorini, chairman, publisher and chief executive at Parade Publications Inc., New York, has been named to receive New York University's Prism Award, honoring executives in graphic communications. *
Ted Isaac has been named to receive the Maxwell Sackheim Award for his role in creating the free-standing newspaper coupon insert.
Mr.
Isaac will be honored at a luncheon in New York on Feb. 24 sponsored by the John Caples International Awards, which present an annual direct marketing honor.


Sorrell Booke, A TV Actor, 64; Was Boss Hogg
Sorrell Booke, a film, television and stage actor whose best-known role was that of Boss Hogg, the flamboyant, bumbling mayor in the television series "The Dukes of Hazzard," died on Friday at his home in Sherman Oaks, Calif.
He was 64.
The cause was colon cancer, said his daughter, Alexandra.


Bumpy Roads of Life Ease His Way
THE road crews have brought out the heavy artillery, using backhoes and front-end loaders to move boulders of snow.
And what Joseph DeMarco sees underneath them looks promising.
"The potholes," he said, "are already coming back."


Islands Make New York New York
New Jersey's attempt to snatch Ellis Island from New York City is unfriendly, unbecoming, un-American, untoward, unhelpful, unprincipled, unseemly, unwarranted and underhanded.
Actually, the island is National Park Service territory, but New York State has civil jurisdiction under an 1864 compact.
New Jersey wants it as a magnet for tourists, who would get there over a short foot bridge from a state park on the mainland.


By Design; The A-Line, Short and Sweet
Last year, the skirt to have was skinny.
Now it's the slightly flared A-line, which comes in solid and printed versions and looks snappiest if it's several inches above the knee.
If you're looking for a way to update last spring's jackets and sweaters, the A-line would definitely fill the bill.
Calvin Klein has several versions, including black matte jersey ($335) at Barneys New York and black and ecru printed silk ($245) at Bergdorf Goodman.
Barneys also has a black silk skirt with a beige poinsettia print ($165) from Mr.
Klein's CK line and a metallic skirt ($89) by Elisabeth Rogiana.


A Piece of Fiscal Folly
Two Senate hearings are scheduled today on one pesky proposal -- a balanced-budget amendment to the Constitution.
This idea is fiscal sleight-of-hand at its most devious, a solemn pledge by the current crowd that some future Congress will finally balance the budget.
The amendment stipulates that the budget must be balanced two years after ratification -- or in 2001, whichever is later -- and forever after, except in wartime or unless three-fifths of both the Senate and the House approve a deficit.


A Title Is Diminished But the Salary Soars
The man who would not be commissioner is earning more than the last man who was commissioner.
Bud Selig, who has served in the role of acting commissioner for 17 months but has refused the title of commissioner, has a $1 million-a-year salary, several men in and close to major league baseball said yesterday.
One of the men said that the Executive Council had approved Selig's salary last September, after he had been in the job for a year.


Fight Looms on Tax Cuts in New Jersey
New Jersey residents are virtually certain to get some level of state tax relief this year.
But a struggle over the form and size of any tax cut is just beginning.
In the month since Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, a Republican, took office with a pledge to deliver the largest tax cut in state history, even the Democrats have weighed in with tax-cutting plans of their own.


Once Again, a Medal Eludes Jansen
Dan Jansen as his left skate slipped in the final turn of yesterday's 500-meter speed-skating race in Norway.
The slip cost enough time to drop him to eighth place.
SportsTuesday, page B7.
RUSSIANS STUNNED IN HOCKEY
Russia suffered its worst Olympic loss ever when it was routed by Finland, 5-0, the first time the squad formerly known as the Soviet Union and Unified Team had been shut out in Olympic competition.
The Finns, seeded seventh in a 12-team field, are 2-0 against higher-seeded teams.
KENNEDY CRASHES IN LUGE
Duncan Kennedy of the U.S. failed in his bid for a medal, crashing toward the end of the course.
Georg Hackl of Germany won the gold.
NEW CROSS-COUNTRY STAR
As expected, a Norwegian won the 30-kilometer race, but it was little-known Thomas Alsgaard.
SportsTuesday, page B7.


An Animal House Of Good Standing
On the first day of classes last fall at the New York State College of Veterinary Medicine at Cornell University, students actually saw live animals -- a cat, a dog, a cow and a horse.
To those unfamiliar with how veterinarians are trained, that may seem unremarkable.
But Cornell administrators are billing that development and other changes in the curriculum as "Veterinary Education for the 21st Century." And other veterinary schools say they are closely watching what is happening here.


Books of The Times; Amelia Earhart a Spy? Author Answers Yes
Lost Star  The Search for Amelia Earhart  By Randall Brink  206 pages.
Illustrated.
W.
W.
Norton &amp; Company. $25.
During an attempted flight around the world, Amelia Earhart, the first woman to fly the Atlantic and a pioneer aviator between the two world wars, mysteriously disappeared over the Pacific Ocean in July 1937.
No trace of her two-engine Lockheed Electra was ever found and nothing was ever heard of her or her navigator, Fred Noonan, again.
After weeks of combing the seas by a fleet of Coast Guard and Navy ships and planes, the search was given up.
Her legend and the mystery survive.


Last Week's Hero Is This Week's Bride


California Loads Sprayers, Fearing Return of the Medfly
At 9 P.M.
Tuesday, a squadron of helicopters is to begin spraying the neighborhoods, parks, schools and farms of this Riverside County community 45 miles east of Los Angeles, with the insecticide malathion in a much-disputed effort to save California's $18 billion-a-year agriculture industry from the Mediterranean fruit fly.
If the spraying is successful -- preventing the insect's return in this area -- it will represent a small victory in the state's 20-year war to eradicate the Medfly, which lays eggs in fruit and vegetables, causing them to rot and become unfit for sale.


It's a Black Day as Russia Loses in Hockey
There was no mistaking the final score, but you had to blink tonight when Finland finished off a stunning 5-0 victory over Russia.
This was the worst loss in Olympic history for a Russian team and its first shutout, although the history is a bit revisionist.
Starting in 1956, in Cortina D'Ampezzo, Italy, the team representing what was the Soviet Union and then, in 1992, the Unified Team won seven of the nine Olympic tournaments, missing only in 1960 and 1980 when the United States scored upsets.


A Call for Economic Intervention by Government
President Clinton's economists want the Government to do more to tweak the economy, addressing areas like health care and technological research where they think the free market has failed.
They put forward their most comprehensive version of this view today, releasing their first annual Economic Report to Congress, a book-length document mandated by Congress since 1946.


Outbursts by Coaches Show Lack of Control
This was before the resentment within John Chaney raged out of control, before his profane, threatening tirade against University of Massachusetts Coach John Calipari and his players following a nationally televised game on Sunday became one day's definition of the nature of major college basketball.
This was before Chaney, the Temple coach who last month spoke of the necessity of gaining more control in higher education's decision-making process, displayed a complete inability to control himself.


Misperceptions Permeate and Poison Our Relations With China
To the Editor:
In "Chinese Economy Threatens to Pull Ours Down" (letter Feb. 3), C. K. Chen attributes the growing United States trade deficit with China to China's failure to reform its internal markets more rapidly.
In doing so, he repeats an error that permeates and poisons our relations with China: that is, treating China as different, distinct, unique.


Foreigners' Bus Shot Up in Egypt
Gunmen believed to be Islamic militants opened fire today on a bus carrying Romanian engineers, in the first attack against foreign residents since the violent campaign to topple the Government gained force two years ago.
No one was hurt in the attack, which occurred in the city of Asyut, 210 miles south of Cairo.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL Hofstra Edges Fordham, 63-61  James Shaffer scored a game-high 28 points, including Hofstra's final 10 points of the game, in a 63-61 victory last night over Fordham at Hempstead, L.I.
Shaffer, who scored 19 in the second half, broke a 59-59 tie with a 3-pointer with 1 minute 30 seconds left in the game, then hit the second of two foul shots with 4.8 seconds left to seal the victory for Hofstra (4-17).
Sherwin Content led Fordham (10-12) with 18 points.
Fordham had a chance to force overtime, but Ryan Hunter's 3-point shot at the buzzer hit off the front end of the rim. (AP)


Forgive Vietnam?
To the Editor:
The headline "Forget Vietnam? No. Forgive? Perhaps" (news article, Feb. 2) represents an extreme expression of the arrogance of power.


Sentencing Is Delayed For Indigent Defendant
A county judge has postponed a sentencing hearing that was scheduled for today in the case of Jimmy Davis, a 23-year-old convicted of murdering a convenience store clerk in a robbery attempt last March.
Mr.
Davis's case was the subject of an article that appeared today in The New York Times about the quality of defense representation typically given indigent defendants facing the death penalty.


Long Shot by a Long Shot (B.C.) Wins Title in Beanpot
An unlikely goal from an unlikely player won the Beanpot tournament championship tonight for Boston College, an unlikely team.
The goal by Tom Ashe, a sophomore defenseman, in overtime beat Harvard, 2-1, before a capacity crowd of 14,448 at Boston Garden.
It was only the second goal of the season for Ashe.
And his unobstructed shot, a 40-footer from just inside the blue line near the boards, was one that Aaron Israel, the Harvard goalie, might well have stopped.
Israel made far more difficult saves in the tense game, which amounted to a duel between the goalies.
Both were superb.


Dow Utilities
The Dow Jones utilities average, comprising the stocks of 15 large power companies including Consolidated Edison and Pacific Gas and Electric, hit a 52-week low on Thursday, rose on Friday and declined again yesterday.
These stocks, rich in dividends, tend to parallel trends in interest rates.
When the average goes up, rates tend to go down, so analysts often look to the average as a predictor.


At Home in Her Prison, a Caged Bird Is Silenced No Longer
The garden that her mother had once tended so lovingly is now overgrown with weeds and a mesh of rotting tree limbs, and the resulting small jungle just outside Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's door is simply one more barrier between the world's most famous political prisoner and the outside world.
"I just can't afford a gardener," she said, leading a visitor around the villa that today is her prison.
"Sometimes I have not had enough money to eat." She smiles at the lunacy of her situation, showing the mettle that has allowed her to survive.


Record Was Underdeveloped
GREG FOSTER is back in the record books.
The American's indoor record in the 60-meter hurdles still stands, two days after COLIN JACKSON thought he had surpassed it.
Embarrassed track officials admitted yesterday that the Briton had only tied the mark.
A review of the photo-finish print from Jackson's run at Glasgow, Scotland, on Saturday revealed that his time was fractionally slower than first judged.
The difference was enough to round the Briton's time up to 7.36 seconds, instead of 7.35, to tie Foster's seven-year-old mark.


U.S. Will Triple Its Foreign Aid To Kazakhstan
President Clinton pledged today to triple foreign aid to Kazakhstan to help efforts at political reform, assist in the dismantling of nuclear weapons and provide critical underpinning for the dozens of American businesses who are profiting from an oil boom there.
President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, who met with Mr.
Clinton today, signed a number of agreements with the United States and used his White House visit to formalize Kazakhstan's agreement to take part in the treaty to ban the spread of nuclear weapons.


Chess
If you want to become a world-class player, you must not only handle winning positions forcefully but you must also win from positions in which you stand worse.
Because there will always be those days on which your opening goes sour or you play a muddled middle game or underestimate the opponent.
Some of them will defeat you, but if you intend to reach the top, you must steel yourself to hang on for the opportunity to hoodwink the enemy.
There is no set way to do that.
Sometimes stubborn passive resistance is the answer, while at other times bluffing an attack that doesn't really exist is the plan of choice.
Still other occasions are best served by feigning greater weakness, thus prompting the opponent to overreach himself and overlook your suddenly lethal resources.


Race to Synthesize Cancer Drug Molecule Has Photo Finish
AFTER decades of excruciating effort and cutthroat competition, chemists have at last synthesized taxol, a cancer drug that is arguably the most complex molecule ever cobbled together by human hands.
The achievement, announced last week by two rival laboratories, is a major coup in synthetic chemistry, said Dr.
Matt Suffness, program director of biochemistry and pharmacology grants at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.
"At least 40 to 50 research groups around the world have been working on the synthesis of taxol since 1971," he said.
"It is a very challenging molecule."


Seton Hall Exploits St. John's Injury
Tonight's Big East lesson was: As Shawnelle Scott's right thumb goes, so goes St.
John's.
Both came crashing down at Byrne Meadowlands Arena as Seton Hall coasted to 67-57 victory over the Redmen before a crowd of 13,026 in what looked like a preview of next month's matchup of the eighth- and ninth-place teams in the Big East tournament.


'93's Dog of the Year Is on Track in '94
Ch.
Altana's Mystique, the top-winning canine performer in the country in 1993, last night cleared a big hurdle in her quest for the silver bowl that goes to the Westminster Kennel Club best in show winner, when she won in the herding group at Madison Square Garden to gain tonight's final in America's most prestigious dog show.
Not that it was any surprise for the German Shepherd, who is owned by Jane Firestone of Southern Pines, N.C., and handled by Jim Moses.
Last year Mystique defeated 169,980 dogs to finish first in the Science Diet Winners' Circle competition, which keeps a year-long tally of dogs' individual performances.


On My Mind; Five Honest Men
On Sunday, during another day of thinking, talking and reading about American policy on Bosnia, I knew suddenly that my mind badly needed fresh air.
For the U.S., Bosnia is one of the most miserable exhibitions I have seen in a lifetime of journalistic involvement in American foreign policy.
It was, and is, evasive and stumbling.
But its major failure is that to this moment it has not been honest or clear with the U.S. public.


Business Digest
International
The Clinton Administration has decided to initiate sanctions against Japan for failing to live up to a 1989 agreement to allow Motorola to enter the lucrative Tokyo cellular phone market.
The Administration, which did not rule out the possibility of a trade war with Japan, will reportedly announce the steps today.  [ Page A1. ]  Motorola has long favored sanctions.  [ D7. ]


South Africa's Wreckers
Two groups have formed an unscrupulous alliance to disrupt the first elections in South Africa in which all races will have a vote.
A glance at opinion polls shows why die-hard white separatists have joined with the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party to boycott the April election.
Their own political strength is anemic.
The boycotters together get less than 10 percent, and Inkatha trails badly even in its Natal Province stronghold.
Unable to rule, the Inkatha leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi and his white fellow wreckers now threaten to ruin anyone else's chance to govern.
Nobody can say for sure how much of this is pure wind.
By no reasonable measure does Chief Buthelezi speak for seven million Zulus; nor does his cousin, King Goodwill Zwelithini, who yesterday demanded creation of an independent Zulu nation based on its 1834 borders.
Once allied with Nelson Mandela's African National Congress, Chief Buthelezi has over the years dwindled into a marginal rabble-rouser, his standing further diminished by disclosures that his party was secretly financed by Pretoria's white rulers.


Walter H. Judd, 95, Missionary To China and U.S. Representative
Dr.
Walter H. Judd, a physician and missionary who rose to national prominence as a crusader against Chinese Communism and Japanese expansionism in the years before World War IIand who later became a United States representative, died on Sunday at Collington Life Care Community in Mitch ellville, Md.
He was 95.
The cause was cancer, said Cindy Carpenter, his granddaughter.


People
*
Thom McKinney, president and chief executive at the Cabletelevision Advertising Bureau, New York, since October 1991, said yesterday he would leave the trade organization, effective on April 29, to seek more "hands on" opportunities in the communications industry.
Gregory J. Liptak, the group's chairman, said a committee had been formed to search for a successor.


New French Film Festival Succeeds by Audacity
Twenty-one years ago to be exact, there was a slightly sterile but picture-perfect and perfectly organized new French ski resort called Avoriaz.
Its builders, who had erected this entirely self-contained village on previously pristine Alpine meadows, decided they needed to attract attention to their venture.
And so the midwinter Avoriaz Festival, devoted to "fantastic" films -- science fiction, fantasy, horror and all-purpose weirdness -- was born.
It proved a great success, the high point of many junketing French journalists' winters.
But clouds darkened after last year's 20th-anniversary festival.
Gerard Bremond, president of the Pierre et Vacances organization that runs this and many other French resorts, decided to divest himself of things fantastic and booted out the festival's longtime organizers.
After some grumbling they, in turn, repaired to a pleasant but less picturesque Alsatian town called Gerardmer (pronounced zhay-rard-MAY).


Corrections
A picture in some copies yesterday with a rock music review of David Johansen was published in error.
The picture, showing a man looking through a magnifying glass, had been published on Sunday in Styles of The Times with an article about defining oneself in a single word.


Rental Service Is Accused Of Bias on L.I.
A Long Island apartment referral service was sued today by the New York State Attorney General for systematically denying information to Hispanic people, blacks and Indians about apartments available in white areas.
In what was termed one of the most blatant examples of housing discrimination in the New York area in recent years, John McDermott, the owner of Places to Live Inc., in East Meadow, was accused of having programmed his company's computer to indicate the ethnic background of prospective tenants and landlords, along with the biases of the landlords.


Norway Crowns New Cross-Country King
The temperature in the Birkebeiner Ski Stadium had soared all the way to 4 below zero, and Gunnar Rundhovde, a bearded businessman from Bergen, Norway, was happily jogging in place.
Like many of the estimated 60,000 cross-country fans lining the tracks on this Monday morning, Rundhovde had his stylish backpack, his handmade sweater, his Norwegian flag and, most important, his portable rubber footmat to keep the cold from from infiltrating the soles of his boots and chilling his sturdy Nordic bones.


Patronage Dividend: Liberal's Son Is Giuliani's Man in Albany
Robert M. Harding does not try particularly hard to deny that his appointment as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's chief lobbyist in Albany was anything but the purest of patronage politics.
His father, after all, is Raymond B. Harding, the colorful leader of New York's Liberal Party, who gambled mightily by backing Mr.
Giuliani, a Republican, in both the 1989 and 1993 mayoral campaigns.
Last November the elder Mr.
Harding hit pay dirt when Mr.
Giuliani won 62,469 votes on the Liberal line, 9,129 votes more than his margin of victory over the incumbent, David N. Dinkins.


A.C.C. Signs Network Deal
The Atlantic Coast Conference will reap about $70 million from five-year agreements signed yesterday with ABC and ESPN that go into effect in 1996.
The deals speed the disintegration of the College Football Association television package.
ABC is expected to sign the Southwest and Big Eight conferences later this week.
CBS signed the Southeastern Conference to a $100 million deal last Friday and expects to add the Big East to a $55 million deal within days.


INSIDE
Health Plan and Retirees
The Clinton health plan's proposal to cover early retirees is in growing jeopardy because of troublesome financial projections.
Page A17.
Skirting Medicare Rate Caps
A growing number of doctors, angry at Medicare's limits on charges for treating the elderly, are finding ways to get around the rates.
Page B1.
Dead End on the Digital Path
Telephone companies are cutting jobs by the tens of thousands and many of those laid off will have trouble finding work.
Page D1.
Influential Israeli Indicted
A former Ambassador to the United States who heads Israel's powerful immigration program was charged with credit card fraud.
Page A3.


Executives Say That Viacom Has Won Paramount Battle
Viacom Inc. finally won the drawn-out bidding war for Paramount Communications Inc. last night, several executives involved in the deal said.
They said Viacom had received more than the necessary 50.1 percent of Paramount shares, ending its five-month battle with QVC Network Inc.


Digital Woes for Babes in the Woods
IT took very little time for Toby Mardis to open the cartons in which her family's Dell computer was delivered, plug the pieces together and flip on the power.
"It was just plug A into B, and so on," she said.
"The hookups were very well explained in the booklet."
With her husband at work and their two daughters at school, Ms.
Mardis made the transition from shopper to computer user in just a few swift keystrokes.
She began with a built-in tutorial program, then played some electronic games that came with the Windows program.


Trade Center Trial Nearing Close As Defense Team Rests Its Case
The World Trade Center bombing trial moved abruptly to closing arguments yesterday after three of the four defense lawyers declined to call witnesses.
After just two days of testimony on behalf of one defendant, the three lawyers in essence left it to the jury to decide the case entirely on the strength or weakness of the prosecution's evidence.
The detailed, methodical presentation by the prosecution, which often tested the patience of the presiding judge, Kevin T. Duffy, contrasted starkly with the decision of most of the defense lawyers to call no witnesses.


A Referee's Campaign: Whistle And Stop
When a losing team complains about the officiating, it's not always wise to take the negative comments too seriously.
Sometimes, they're just sour grapes.
But when a winning team makes harsh observations about the chief justice of the ice, it suggests that something is seriously wrong.
That was the case tonight at le Colisee, where the Rangers defeated the Quebec Nordiques, 4-2, for their second consecutive victory.


Leader of House Arms Panel to Visit North Korea
As a deadline in the Administration's standoff with North Korea looms, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee is to travel there this week on a secretly arranged trip at the invitation of the Government of Kim Il Sung.
In a brief telephone conversation today, the chairman, Representative Ronald V. Dellums, declined to comment on the trip.
But Administration officials said Mr.
Dellums hoped to help defuse the dispute over North Korea's nuclear weapon programs.


Review/Fashion; Dressing for 90degrees Days (Just Wait)
Call it minimalism.
Call it comfort or practicality.
Whatever the tag line, summer collections end up being cool and easy to wear.
The fabrics seem lighter than air.
The colors are white or pale.
After a frigid winter in most parts of the country, designers have developed clothes that can take the heat.
They are clothes that skim the body and don't clutch at it.
They are very short -- or very long -- and in addition to skirts there are pants, short and long.


For 5th Time in Weeks, Chrysler Recalls Vehicles
The Chrysler Corporation today recalled about 110,000 sedans to adjust electrical wires that the company said were in danger of short-circuiting from wear.
The recall was Chrysler's fifth since December, once again raising questions about the quality of the company's cars and trucks.


Classical Music in Review
Hans Peter Blochwitz  Tenor Frick Collection
Hans Peter Blochwitz is not a lieder singer of caressing subtlety, but he and his pianist, Erich Schneider, demonstrated more fundamental musical values on Sunday afternoon.
In music by Schumann, Schubert, Brahms and Britten, Mr.
Blochwitz offered a tenor voice in good health and one that he controls well even at quiet levels.
If none of the sounds are terribly beautiful, the foundation beneath them is firm.
Mr.
Blochwitz has the sound of German diction naturally in his ear and the swing of German poetic meter in his limbs.


Fear in Wake of the Shooting at the Fulton Mall Sets Off Tremors
When the Fulton Mall was first proposed by the Lindsay administration in the 1960's, it was conceived as a project that would bolster a blighted downtown Brooklyn, one that would maintain a commercial base in an area suffering a long decline.
Now more than a decade old, the strip ranks among the nation's busiest urban shopping streets, doing more than $1 million a day in business.
But recently, the Fulton Mall has drawn attention not for the business it attracts, but for some particularly disturbing crimes.
In the most recent incident, an off-duty police officer getting her hair done was in a shootout with three robbers, and survived only because a gun aimed at her head misfired twice.


Classical Music in Review
Goliard Chamber Soloists  Merkin Concert Hall
Performances by flexible chamber groups are abundant in New York City, but the Goliard Concerts are more flexible than most.
Often they are choral performances, sometimes with ambitious programs.
The program on Sunday, though, was a chamber concert that gave the impression of an intimate salon evening in which musicians read through disparate works that interest them.


Harding Bids Adieu Skating to Love Song
Tonya Harding bid her loyal supporters goodbye today after a final public practice before the Olympics.
During the hourlong workout, she skated her long program to music from the movie "Jurassic Park," followed by an exhibition to the song "When I Fall in Love."


Stocks Advance Despite Trade Tensions
The winter skies cleared over Wall Street yesterday as the stock market rose despite the darkening trade relations between the United States and Japan.
The tensions between the two nations pushed the dollar down by nearly 5 percent against the yen, with much of the selling coming in the afternoon.
Stock prices also stumbled briefly, But most of the major market indicators recovered in heavy trading.


Americans on Course In the Alpine Combined
Just in case anyone thought Tommy Moe's winning the Olympic downhill Sunday was an Alaskan-sized fluke, Moe roared impressively down the mountain again today and brought one of his American buddies with him.
Actually, Kyle Rasmussen of Angels Camp, Calif., made a prophet of himself, nosing past Moe for second place in the downhill segment of the Alpine combined, one day after predicting that he has "beaten Tommy in practice before and I know that I'll beat him again."


Nike Names Executive As President
Nike, the athletic-shoe giant, today named Thomas E. Clarke president.
Mr.
Clarke, 42, replaces Richard K. Donahue, 67, who had been president for four years.
Mr.
Donahue was named to the newly created post of vice chairman.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CANADIAN PACIFIC LTD., Montreal, said it would sell 22 million shares for $22.75 (Canadian), or $16.81 (United States), in a deal with a group of brokerage firms led byRBC Dominion Securities Inc.


Motorola, Long a Backer of Sanctions
It is not a surprise to see Motorola Inc. emerging as the first testing ground in the developing trade dispute between the United States and Japan.
Motorola has long been a leading proponent in corporate America of the necessity of using sanctions to pry open Japanese markets and protect domestic ones from unfair import competition.
"We cannot allow our competition to have a sanctuary," Robert Galvin, then Motorola's chairman, said in a 1989 interview with Business Week that summed up more than a decade of battling in Tokyo and Washington to level the trade playing field.


Smith Barney's Account in Review
Smith Barney Shearson Inc. said yesterday that it had placed its account in review after seven months at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.
Though billings have yet to be determined, trade publications estimated them at $12 million to $20 million.
Bob Connor, a spokesman for Smith Barney Shearson in New York, confirmed reports of the review this week in Advertising Age and Adweek, attributing it to a new management team that "would like to look at other sources of ideas." Some of the participants include Ogilvy New York and four other New York shops: BBDO, CME KHBB Advertising, McCann-Erickson and Young &amp; Rubicam.


Review/Rock; Hatfield On Women And Choices
Juliana Hatfield has a little-girl voice, high and airy.
When she was the singer for the Blake Babies, she sounded fragile and kittenish.
But two albums into a solo career, she has grown tougher and more complicated.
When she led the Juliana Hatfield Three at the Academy on Friday night, she moved from the delicacy of folk-rock to the muscle of heavy metal, her vulnerability now balanced by self-assertion and flashes of anger.
Ms.
Hatfield's songs encompass the contradictory choices and impulses facing the kinds of collegiate and post-collegiate women who seemed to be a majority of the audience.
The lyrics veer from aggressive sexuality to wounded pride, from enjoying artifice to longing for honesty, from chasing connections to retreating into isolation.
Her first-person narrators take chances, make mistakes, grow bewildered or get even.


A 3-Strike Law Shows It's Not as Simple as It Seems
In the fight against violent crime, perhaps no idea is more popular than "three strikes and you're out" -- locking up repeat offenders for life without parole.
With 30 states considering some version of this concept, it is proving to be a bipartisan prescription by politicians from President Clinton on down.
But only one state, Washington, has any experience with it.
Two months after a law went on the books here requiring criminals to spend life in prison without parole if they are convicted of three felonies, the first faces of "three strikes" are emerging.
And they present a picture that is much more complicated than the baseball slogan that inspired 76 percent of Washington State voters to back the measure last fall.


Crash Ends Kennedy's Hopes to Capture Luge Medal
Duncan Kennedy's dream was to stand on the podium in his red, white and blue uniform, in the clear-blue cold and amid the snow-clad Norwegian mountain pines, with an Olympic medal draped about his neck.
On Sunday, it seemed possible.
No one could have foreseen the stunning crash on the icy track today that would ruin his dream.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.S.
SANCTIONS ON JAPAN  The Clinton Administration decided to initiate sanctions against Japan for failing to live up to a 1989 agreement to allow Motorola to enter the Tokyo cellular phone market.
A1


Sol D. Kapelsohn, 88, Civil-Liberties Lawyer
Sol D. Kapelsohn, a leading New Jersey civil-liberties and labor lawyer until he retired seven years ago, died on Wednesday at Chandler Hall Nursing Home in Newtown, Pa., where he had lived for four years.
He was 88.
The cause was old age, said his son, Emanuel Kapelsohn of Bowers, Pa.


The Feisty Pathfinder of the Philharmonic
"I'm about change," said Deborah Borda.
"When the New York Philharmonic was about to hire me, I asked them: 'Are you sure I'm the person you want? Because change is what I've always thrived on, and if that's not what you want then I'm probably not the right person.' But they said they did, and they've been supportive all the way through."
When Ms.
Borda became executive director of the Philharmonic two and a half years ago, change was in the cards for the Philharmonic anyway.
Kurt Masur had been named music director only a few months earlier, and his demanding brand of Germanic discipline was something the players were not used to.
In short order he had the orchestra sounding better than it had in more than a decade.
Still, as the Philharmonic headed toward its 150th anniversary it was facing contract negotiations (often fraught with the prospect of a strike) and a deficit of more than $2 million.


Final, Done, Set in Concrete: They'll Practice Side by Side
The highest-ranking figure-skating authority at the Winter Olympics said today that an irrevocable decision had been made to keep Nancy Kerrigan and Tonya Harding in the same practice group for the figure-skating competition.
Harding is due to arrive in Norway on Wednesday from Portland, Ore., and will likely begin skating in the same practice session with Kerrigan on Thursday.
The women's competition begins on Feb. 23.
American figure-skating officials had requested several times that separate practice groups for Kerrigan and Harding be arranged by the International Skating Union, the sport's world governing body, but the I.S.U. rejected each request.
It is customary for figure skaters from the same country to train together at the Olympics.


Prices of Treasury Issues Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, with longer maturities lower on concerns that economic data due this week would be strong enough to signal another interest rate increase by the Federal Reserve.
The breakdown of trade talks between Japan and the United States also worried the market, analysts said.


Three Specialists Check the Vital Signs Of the Art Museum
At the Whitney Museum of American Art, they don't do things by halves.
The topic of a sold-out three-way debate on Sunday night was supposed to be the death of the museum audience.
About 90 minutes into the evening, however, Arthur C. Danto, the art critic for The Nation, lobbed a hot potato.
"The art museum as an institution is only 200 years old," he said.
"There's no reason why it has to go on forever. It's not like a hospital, after all."


Once Again, Commuters Are Up in the Air


NASA Has New Plans For Exploration of Mars
WITH the blessing of the Clinton Administration, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration is making plans for a new program of Mars exploration.
It will begin with the launching of two small unpiloted flights in November 1996, in an attempt to recover as quickly as possible from the failure of the Mars Observer mission last summer.
The decadelong program would involve relatively low-cost spacecraft, including some designed to make scientific observations from orbit and others capable of landing on the Martian surface.
The launchings would be scheduled every 25 months, taking advantage of each favorable launching opportunity that occurs as Mars comes into alignment with Earth.


Bridge
The stated purpose of Leandro Burgay, the Italian television producer, in challenging all comers last month for a stake of $50,000 was to demonstrate the efficiency of his method of bidding in response to one no-trump.
But the post-mortem was not always easy.
On the diagramed deal, for example, his methods reached an inferior game contract, but it succeeded with a little help from the defense.
North and South for the Burgay team were the star French pair, Herve Mouiel and Alain Levy.
After the compulsory one no-trump opening, showing 16-18 points and 4-3-3-3 or 4-4-3-2 distribution, North described a hand with 4-1-4-4 distribution.
South had to settle in three no-trump, a contract that seemed doomed.
He had a little help when a heart was led and he was able to win with the nine.


Reviews/Television; A Chimp Who 'Talks' With a Computer's Aid
"Can Chimps Talk?" The answer to the title question of tonight's edition of "Nova" seems to be: in a manner of speaking.
Since chimpanzees lack the sort of vocal apparatus possessed by humans, they cannot make the sounds that constitute human language.
But researchers have developed methods of communication that, they maintain, demonstrate that at least one species of chimpanzee -- the bonobo -- can learn to communicate in much the way children do.
There is an internecine argument about this, but tonight's program belongs to champs of the chimp.


Clinton Faces Pressure to Remove Health Plan's Provision on Early Retirees
The sudden need to carve savings out of its health care plan is putting pressure on the Clinton Administration to drop or scale back its proposal that the Government assume companies' costs of health care coverage for early retirees.
Eliminating that provision could save more than half of the increase in the deficit that the Congressional Budget Office foresaw from President Clinton's plan.


Clash on Fossil Sales Shadows a Trade Fair
THERE was something for everyone: $5 fossil sea urchins for customers on tight budgets, museum-quality dinosaur skeletons at prices up to $1.1 million and hundreds of thousands of other fossils of all types and values.
But as crowds packed the Tucson Minerals and Fossils Show last week to ogle the paleontological treasure on sale, Federal officials were looking for new ways to crack down on fossil trading.


Tapes From Sect Compound Reveal Talk of Setting Fire
Listening devices placed inside the Branch Davidian compound during the standoff with the religious sect last year seem to support the Government's contention that cult members started the fire that raced through the building, transcripts released today in Federal court showed.
In one passage recorded at 6:05 on the morning of April 19, the day the compound burned to the ground and 80 people were killed, an unidentified man asks, "Pablo, have you poured it yet?"


Misperceptions Permeate and Poison Our Relations With China; History Rewritten
To the Editor:
One of the saddest developments in China in recent decades has been the destruction of Chinese history.
What most Chinese carry in their heads about the national past has little to do with historical fact.


On Quake-Ravaged Campus, Classes Go Outdoors
Tracy Gustafson taught her Math 094A class today -- if you can call it teaching -- next to a stop sign on Prairie Street and Lindley Avenue on the campus of California State University at Northridge here, amid the rattle of jackhammers and the billow of construction dust.
The algebra class was to have met in one of 400 trailers hastily thrown up around the campus, where virtually all 53 buildings were ruined in the earthquake that struck the San Fernando Valley on Jan. 17.


Board of Ed's Maintenance Office Is Broken Beyond Repair
To the Editor:
Three times in the last decade (as a Channel 2 News investigative reporter and as education adviser to the City Council president and the comptroller), I have conducted investigations of the New York City Board of Education's Division of School Facilities, which has charge of maintenance and custodians.
In this period I also watched the physical conditions of the schools continue to decline.


Irked by Medicare Limits, Doctors Ask Elderly to Pay Up
A small but growing number of doctors, angry with the Federal Government's limits on what they can charge for treating elderly patients, are finding ways to get around the Medicare rates by having patients pay extra fees, doctors, patients and Government officials say.
The practice, which usually involves doctors' asking their elderly patients to sign contracts that result in added out-of-pocket payments, is drawing scrutiny from the Government and from advocates for the elderly.
And Medicare officials have written to some doctors warning them that taking excess payment under contract leaves them open to prosecution, fines and sanctions.


Housing Chief Wields A Wrecking-Ball Plan
Vincent Lane is the chairman of the Chicago Housing Authority, a post that is a lot like being the engineer of a train wreck.
Every time he turns around something is going wrong, someone is angry with him, another car is flying off the track.
But after nearly six years as chairman, Mr.
Lane has become one of the brightest stars in the nation's galaxy of public housing officials.
He is a pragmatist, a businessman, a black role model, a registered Democrat with the soul of a Republican, a man who says he is willing to try almost anything to turn his dreary and dangerous patch of urban America into a safe and shining home where the poor can rear their children instead of burying them.


Gascoigne Is Almost Back
England's new soccer manager, TERRY VENABLES, said yesterday that PAUL GASCOIGNE might play for the national team, which did not qualify for this summer's World Cup finals.
Gascoigne, the inspirational but volatile midfielder who has played 28 times for England, scored on a free kick in Lazio's 4-0 victory over Cagliari in an Italian first-division game in Rome on Sunday.


A Novel Genetic Therapy Holds Promise in Treating Pneumonia
A novel immune therapy has cured a respiratory viral infection in mice, and a scientific report issued today says it holds great promise for treating the most common cause of pneumonia in infants and young children.
Experiments to prove the therapy's effectiveness in humans have yet to be done.
But in a report in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, the authors said success with the animal experiments "may signal the beginning of an era of immunotherapy" for many serious human viral infections, including influenza.


CHRONICLE
Hail, oh hail nonagenarians of note!
GEORGE F. KENNAN, the architect of the United States' post-World War II foreign policy toward the Soviet Union, and HERBERT W. BROWNELL, the Attorney General from 1953 to 1957, both turn 90 this week, and their friends, relatives and colleagues will gather to pay tribute.
First on the calendar: a party for Mr.
Kennan this evening at the East 68th Street headquarters of the Council on Foreign Relations.
The guest list is drawn from the highest echelons of the State Department and diplomatic, academic and philanthropic circles.
Among those who have sent in acceptances: Madeleine K. Albright, Robert S. McNamara, Cyrus R. Vance, William P. Rogers, Winston Lord, David Rockefeller and Franklin Thomas.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In the competition among professional athletes for commercial endorsements, N.B.A. stars rule.
WHEN the biggest football game of the year was played, basketball stars dominated the television screen.
So when one of the biggest basketball games of the year was played, where were the football stars?
On the sidelines, again.


West, at U.N., Warns Serbs Of Its Resolve to Use Force
The United States, with support from Britain, France and most other Security Council members, sought today to convince Serbian forces ringing the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo that they really do face immediate retaliatory air strikes if they shell the city again or fail to meet NATO's deadline for removing their heavy weapons.
At the start of a two-day public debate on the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, these three countries, as well as the many nonmembers who spoke, said they were also trying to stiffen the resolve of the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and his representatives on the ground who must request the strikes if the Serbs have not complied with NATO's ultimatum by Feb. 21. 'Force Plus Diplomacy'
"The objective of peace cannot be achieved by diplomacy alone," said the chief United States delegate to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright.
"Our diplomacy must be backed by a willingness to use force when that is essential in the cause of peace. For it is only force plus diplomacy that can stop the slaughter in Sarajevo and break the stalemate in Geneva," where peace talks have again broken down.


Bones of Contention In Bitter Court Fight
IN 1990, Peter Larson, president of the Black Hills Institute of Geological Research, and his colleagues discovered an outcrop of fossil bones on the South Dakota ranch of Maurice Williams, a Sioux Indian, whose property was "in trust" to the Federal Government -- an arrangement by which the Government retains certain rights to the land, in exchange for freedom from property taxes.
The Black Hills company paid Mr.
Williams $5,000 for the right to excavate the fossil, which proved to be the finest and most complete Tyrannosaurus rex ever found.


No Headline
"Whatever they do to me, that's between them and me; I can take it. What's more important is what they are doing to the country." -- DAW AUNG SAN SUU KYI, the Burmese dissident leader, referring to her captors.  [ A1:2. ]


U.J.A.-Federation Account Resigned
Taylor-Gordon &amp; Company in New York said yesterday that it had resigned, effective on April 1, after four years as the agency for the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies of New York's Operation Exodus campaign, aimed at rescuing and resettling Soviet Jews.
Elaine Taylor-Gordon, the agency's president, said the resignation came as the agency completed work on the final phase of the campaign.


Classical Music in Review
Quartet Sine Nomine  Weill Recital Hall
In the midst of Friday's snowstorm and before a determined audience of respectable size, the Quartet Sine Nomine played music by Mozart, Brahms and Michel Hostettler.
The four Swiss musicians are models of moderation and informed taste, and nowhere were they more satisfactory than in Mozart's "Hunt" Quartet.
Ensemble was precise but wholly natural.
No one individual called attention to himself.


Detained Burmese Laureate Speaks Out to U.S. Visitors
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace Prize winner and the leader of the Burmese democracy movement who has been under house arrest here for more than four years, was allowed to break her silence today, and told visitors that while she was ready to negotiate with her jailers, she would never leave her homeland.
"The concept of driving somebody out of their own country is totally unacceptable to me," Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi, 48, said in a calm, resolute voice that betrayed none of the suffering of her isolation.
"They have tried to pressure me to leave the country in ways that no self-respecting Government should try."


Tetley and Agency Break Over Conflict
Tetley Inc. and Rotando Partners Advertising in Stamford, Conn., said yesterday that they had agreed to part ways within the next four months because of a serious conflict.
Lynn Rotando, president at Rotando, said Tetley's ready-to-drink teas, which are distributed through Cadbury Schweppes, conflicted with the agency's largest client, Ocean Spray, which is developing juices and other beverages with the Pepsi-Cola Company.
Pepsi, in turn, has a relationship with Lipton, a Tetley rival.


Market Place; It's time to ask: When will the auto makers' stocks peak?
HISTORY tends to repeat itself in the cyclical auto business, although, as with an aging storyteller, a bit more slowly each time around.
As a result, analysts who follow auto stocks look to past performances to try to answer two questions: When will this recovery end?
And when will auto-related stocks peak?


For Knicks and Nets Stars, Official Business Beckons
Now that the festivities of the All-Star weekend are over, it's time for the Knicks and Nets to turn their attention to the second half of the season and, for the moment, to each other.
Tonight, it will be Knicks Versus Nets Part III, with the Nets serving as hosts at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Knicks are the team in first place in the Atlantic Division, with a 34-14 record, and the Nets are the 22-24 club still trying to get their heads above .500.
But it is the Nets who emerged triumphant in the first two encounters between these teams this season.


Corrections
An obituary on Jan. 28 about Kim Sang Man, former publisher of South Korea's most influential national daily newspaper, Dong-A Ilbo, misstated the paper's position on authoritarian Governments that ruled the country until recent years.
The paper indeed challenged those dictatorial Governments and has been a consistent voice for democratic reform and press freedom.
The obituary also misstated the paper's circulation.
It is 2,160,000.


SOCCER
Earthquake Aftershocks
The Rose Bowl, the site of eight games during the World Cup -- including the final on July 17 -- didn't suffer any damage during last month's earthquake in Los Angeles, but there is growing concern among American organizers about whether the damaged roads that lead to the Rose Bowl will be repaired in time for the tournament, which starts on June 17.


Eustace Tilley's on Vacation, And, My, What a Stand-In
The enduring symbol of The New Yorker magazine -- the aristocratic, top-hatted Regency dandy, Eustace Tilley, studying a fluttering pale pink butterfly through a monocle -- was gone from the anniversary cover yesterday for the first time since the magazine's founding in February 1925.
In his place was a scuzzy but recognizable descendant -- an adenoidal, acne-plagued teen-ager with chin-stubble, a gold earring, a reversed baseball cap and a yellow T-shirt, squinting myopically, perhaps uncomprehendingly, at a handbill for an X-rated Times Square sex shop.


Dressed for Posterity: 'I Ran With President Clinton'


The Five-Year Stain on Iran
Just five years ago yesterday, Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran issued a decree calling upon the Islamic faithful to murder Salman Rushdie and all associated in publishing his novel "The Satanic Verses." A few months later the old ayatollah died, but the deadly fatwa stands.
Murderous goons have struck fatally at Mr.
Rushdie's Japanese translator, and tried to kill his Italian translator and Norwegian publisher.
Yet Iran's leaders behave as if they are the injured parties when other countries dare make a fuss about this barbarism.
After visiting Bonn two weeks ago, an Iranian member of Parliament saw "no reason why German politicians should antagonize Islam" by defending Mr.
Rushdie's right to live.
"We must be able to protect our interests in the world in the best possible way," said Mohammad Larijani.
He means that Iran should be free to offer $3 million for the death of a British subject and to assault exiled foes in a dozen countries -- without jeopardizing its ability to buy nuclear reactors from infidels.


U.S. IS SUPPORTING NEW HAITIAN PLAN
The Clinton Administration expressed its support today for a new plan to end the crisis and military dictatorship in Haiti, but it criticized the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's exiled President, for not endorsing the plan.
Parliament members agreed on Friday in Washington to call on Father Aristide to name a new prime minister and form a broad-based Government that would pass legislation paving the way for restoring democracy and getting the military to step down.


Classical Music in Review
New Jersey Symphony Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
Zdenek Macal, the artistic director of the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra since September, brought his orchestra to Carnegie Hall to play Dvorak's Stabat Mater (Op. 58) on Saturday evening.
The Stabat Mater should have been an ideal calling card.
Choral extravaganzas tend to go over well, and rarities by well-known composers always attract attention.


700,000 in South Remain Without Power After Storm
Hundreds of thousands of households from Arkansas to Delaware remained without power today as work crews struggled to restore electricity where huge towers had bent under the weight of ice-laden high-voltage wires and utility poles had snapped like twigs.
"People are just doing the best they can," said Harry Bonner, general manager of the Delta Electric Power Association in Mississippi.
"But tempers are going to flare and they are going to get ugly soon."


Christopher Lasch Is Dead at 61; Wrote About America's Malaise
Christopher Lasch, the author of "The Culture of Narcissism," "The Minimal Self" and other theoretical works on modern culture, died yesterday at his home in Pittsford, N.Y.
He was 61.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Nell Commager.


Robert Sherrod, 85, a Journalist And Author of 'Tarawa,' Is Dead
Robert Sherrod, an author of books on World War II who had been the editor of The Saturday Evening Post and a correspondent in World War II, died on Sunday at his home in Washington.
He was 85.
The cause was emphysema, said Dr. John H. Sherrod, a son.


CHRONICLE
Hail, oh hail nonagenarians of note!
GEORGE F. KENNAN, the architect of the United States' post-World War II foreign policy toward the Soviet Union, and HERBERT W. BROWNELL, the Attorney General from 1953 to 1957, both turn 90 this week, and their friends, relatives and colleagues will gather to pay tribute.
First on the calendar: a party for Mr.
Kennan this evening at the East 68th Street headquarters of the Council on Foreign Relations.
The guest list is drawn from the highest echelons of the State Department and diplomatic, academic and philanthropic circles.
Among those who have sent in acceptances: Madeleine K. Albright, Robert S. McNamara, Cyrus R. Vance, William P. Rogers, Winston Lord, David Rockefeller and Franklin Thomas.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
ANR Pipeline Inc., Detroit, is selling $125 million of 7.375 percent debentures due in 2024 at 99.28 to yield 7.435 percent through Citicorp Securities.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service, BBB- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Nortek Inc., Providence, R.I., is selling $190 million of 9.875 percent senior subordinated notes due in 2004 at 99.214 to yield 10 percent through Bear, Stearns.
Callable in five years, the issue is rated Caa by Moody's and CCC by S.&amp; P.


Crew Is Faulted in Ambulance Dispute
A preliminary investigation into the case of a pregnant woman whose baby died shortly after birth on Sunday found that Emergency Medical Service workers violated agency procedures in their response, Giuliani administration officials said yesterday.
The workers failed to perform an initial assessment of the woman's condition when they arrived, and then had her walk to the ambulance -- both violations of standard practice in such cases, the officials said.


Zulu King Is Back, Now Seeking a Kingdom
The last time King Goodwill Zwelithini decided that the monarch of seven million Zulus should be more than a ceremonial figure, his prime minister quickly cut him down to size.
The prime minister, a royal cousin named Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, paraded the King before the Parliament of the Zulu homeland and accused him of plotting to overthrow the constitution.
The show trial was so humiliating that the King reportedly leapt from his royal box and fled back to his palace in distress, swallowing his dream of real power.


500 Victories for Coach
Victory No. 500 was sweet for JOHN REESE, the winningest active wrestling coach in the nation.
Reese's Wilkes Colonels swept four matches on Sunday at the Coppin State Tournament in Baltimore, beating Manhattan, Princeton, Coppin State and Wagner.
He is 500-159-9 after snapping a 10-match losing streak.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.14
3.59
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.28
3.24
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.43
3.38
3.07
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.89
5.87
6.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.44
6.40
7.14
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.28
7.25
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.53
6.16
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


To Fight Pollution Now, Ride a Bicycle
To the Editor:
You point out in "For Cleaner Air, a Cleaner Car" (editorial, Feb. 1) that cars and trucks still account for nearly half of all urban smog.


Israel Charges an Official With Fraud
Simcha Dinitz, chairman of the influential Jewish Agency and a former Israeli Ambassador to the United States, was indicted today on charges of having fraudulently used agency credit cards to pile up thousands of dollars in personal expenses.
Insisting he was innocent, Mr.
Dinitz said he would take a leave of absence from the agency to defend himself against the charges, which could carry a prison sentence of up to five years if he is convicted.


Woman Who Lost a Right-to-Die Case in Canada Commits Suicide
Sue Rodriguez, who fought unsuccessfully all the way to the Supreme Court of Canada for the right of the terminally ill to end their own lives, died Saturday in what the police are calling a doctor-assisted suicide.
Assisted suicides are illegal in Canada, as they are in the United States.
Mrs.
Rodriguez's death at her home in Victoria, British Columbia, has revived the debate over whether such activity should be criminal in Canada.


Why Doctors Push Women Into Prenatal Tests; 'Patient, Heal Thyself'
To the Editor:
The increasing use of amniocentesis among ever-younger pregnant women with extremely small chances of having babies with birth defects (front page, Feb. 5) is a perfect example of how the American mind-set of entitlement to sophisticated medical technology works against all efforts at cost control.


Bank Asked To Delay Its Annuity C.D.
Federal regulators have asked a tiny bank on a Blackfoot Indian reservation in Montana to delay plans to offer a certificate of deposit that the bank contends qualifies for the tax advantages of an annuity, an investment normally offered by insurance companies.
A spokeswoman for the Comptroller of the Currency, which regulates national banks, said the agency had not approved the certificates, contrary to a statement by its promoters.
"We have notified the bank we think they may be operating with incorrect information," Lenore Cross, the spokeswoman, said.
"We let them know we have concerns about the financial and legal risks to the bank, and we think it is in the bank's best interest if they hold off until they provide additional information."


Norman Arthur Hall; Sales Representative, 86
Norman Arthur Hall, a retired sales representative for publishing houses, died on Friday in Novato, Calif.
He was 86.
The cause was pneumonia and renal failure, said his son, Norman Alastair Hall of Novato.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Designated Shawn Bryant, pitcher, for assignment.


Along Digital Path, Dead-End Jobs
When Richard Baldomar of Flatbush, Brooklyn, was laid off in July 1991 after 14 years offering help over the phone as an A.T.&amp; T. customer service representative, he -- like many of his peers -- assumed his experience at one of the world's leading telecommunications companies would open a lot of doors.
To enhance his chances for work in the rapidly changing communications industry, Mr.
Baldomar finished his bachelor's degree in media studies at St.
Francis College in Brooklyn.
But now, after several months seeking customer-service jobs from communications companies as diverse as Time Warner, MCI and Metromedia, and even branching into other fields by approaching Hertz, Chemical Bank and Wells Fargo, Mr.
Baldomar has concluded that his $28,000-a-year A.T.&amp; T. job may not be convertible currency. 85,100 Lost Jobs
"It did help me with initial contacts and put me in the first level of applicants," said Mr.
Baldomar, 54.
"But after that, nothing." He is now studying video production at the New School for Social Research in Manhattan.


This Time It's a Slip As Jansen Fails Again
Six years after another unhappy Valentine's Day, Dan Jansen lost another speed-skating race at the Olympics today.
He is the sport's greatest sprinter, the world-record holder at 500 meters, the only one to skate the distance under 36 seconds.
But the Olympics somehow diminish his talent, leaving him unfulfilled and tormented.


No Footloose Feeling Amid Snowy Mounds
One way to measure last week is to say that it snowed a total of 22.4 inches in Central Park.
Another way to measure last week did not become apparent until yesterday: the storm and the plowing over the weekend created 14,600 piles of snow.
That works out to about one snow pile for every 500 residents.
The Sanitation Department arrived at that estimate after its 78 crews had used their front-end loaders and dump trucks to clear (and count) 4,000 snow piles.


Q&amp;A
Wild Cattle
Q.
In a list of domesticated animals was one I had never heard of: the mithan, believed to be derived from the gaur.
What are they?


Cleaning Windows, Both Files And Icons
MICROSOFT WINDOWS was intended to make our lives at the PC easier, and in many ways it does, until it is time to get rid of a program.
It is easy to delete the icon representing a program, but its files remain on the hard disk.
It is easy enough to delete the files, either with the Windows File Manager or by going to DOS, but the icon remains.
It takes two separate operations to delete the icon and its files.
And the program may have added lines to WIN.INI or one of the other crucial Windows files.


An Acquisition By Microsoft
The Microsoft Corporation said today that it would acquire Softimage Inc., a Canadian developer of computer animation and visualization software used in movie and video special effects applications.
The acquisition is an important one for Microsoft, which has been trying to strengthen its role in the emerging market for interactive television and multimedia production.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Anthony S. Fauci; Consummate Politician On the AIDS Front
IF everyone in the world were like Dr.
Anthony S. Fauci, there would be no need for Prozac.
By any sensible reckoning, the man should be wilting around the edges.
He has been at the center of the AIDS tornado since the epidemic began, serving as the director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases and the Government's Office of AIDS Research, which together oversee much of the AIDS-related research carried out around the nation.
Apart from his official credentials, he has been the most visible and quotable spokesman on every medical, epidemiological and social aspect of the disease, the de facto AIDS czar until the appointment last year of Kristine Gebbie as the czar de jure to the President.


Leonard Feldman, 66, Expert in Electronics
Leonard Feldman, an authority on high fidelity and consumer electronics, died on Monday at his home in Great Neck, L.I., after a two-year battle with cancer.
He was 66.
Mr.
Feldman wrote seven books on audio and electronics and hundreds of articles about audio technologies.


Reviews/Television; Diagnosis for a Dismal Emergency Room: Incurable
HBO Showcase drifts into commercial-television territory with "State of Emergency," the kind of hospital story that has been a staple of prime time ever since we all loved Lucy.
There is a difference.
Not in thrall to advertisers, HBO can be grittier and tougher.
Starring Joe Mantegna, a leading member of David Mamet's personal repertory company, as a bitterly overworked and underappreciated physician in a Los Angeles public hospital, "State of Emergency" refuses to play television's typical uplift game.
It can next be seen on HBO tonight at 8.
Dr.
John Novelli (Mr. Mantegna) is already juggling 20 patients when a Mr.
Anderson (Paul Dooley) is wheeled into the overcrowded emergency room, the victim of a car accident.
Suffering from head injuries, Anderson desperately needs a CAT scan, but the hospital's apparatus is not working.
That's not unusual, but this case is different.
Neither poor nor desperate, Anderson is a middle-class executive with a wife (Melinda Dillon) not about to tolerate what she deems to be neglect and incompetence.


Taking the Measure of Soy Sauces, to Compare the Tastes
SOY sauce has many personalities.
Its saltiness can vary from breathtakingly intense to mellow and muted.
Its consistency ranges from watery to viscous.
And unlike many other products, the cheapest sauce is often the best.
Soy sauces, essential in most Asian cuisines and increasingly common in America, can be grouped into two main categories: Chinese and Japanese style.
Chinese sauces come in various intensities, but most are "thin" or "light" style, referring to the consistency, not the amount of sodium.


CHRONICLE
As president of Duke University, NANNERL O. KEOHANE may have a pressing schedule, but she would not consider missing a ceremony at Wellesley College today: her sister, GENEVA OVERHOLSER, the editor of The Des Moines Register, is receiving one of the college's Alumnae Achievement Awards for 1994.
"For me this is the fulfillment of a longtime hope," Dr.
Keohane said yesterday.
"I am so proud of my sister. She represents the best of what Wellesley has come to stand for, and it is great to take part in a ceremony to honor her for our shared alma mater."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Viacom's Victory
Viacom edged out QVC Network in the five-month battle for Paramount Communications, with a winning $9.7 billion bid.
The victory makes Sumner Redstone, the chairman of Viacom, even more powerful in the entertainment business.  [ Page A1. ]


Warrants Issued for Suspect Linked to Sara Anne Wood Case
Arrest warrants have been issued for Lewis Lent Jr. for murder and kidnapping in connection with the disappearance of Sara Anne Wood last summer, a New York prosecutor said yesterday.
The warrants were filed with authorities in western Massachusetts, where Mr.
Lent is in jail facing charges of abducting and killing a 12-year-old boy and of trying to kidnap a 12-year-old girl, said the Herkimer County District Attorney, Michael Daley.


With Nets, The Knicks Don't Have The Knack
Playing the Nets this season has become embarrassing for the Knicks.
Tonight, the outcome wasn't even close.
The Nets talked trash, backed it up and left the slumping Knicks (34-15), who have lost four of their last six games, groping for answers.


CBS Gets Deal With Big East
The Big East agreed yesterday to a five-year deal with CBS to televise college football games from 1996 to 2000 and to extend its current basketball agreement through the 2000-2001 season.
The deals are worth $65 million.
CBS last week signed the Southeastern Conference to a five-year, $100 million deal, starting in 1996.
CBS's signings, plus ABC-ESPN's $82 million deal with the Atlantic Coast Conference and expected deals with the Big 8 and Southwest Conferences, will put the College Football Association out of TV.
Primarily, CBS will split the country into two parts to telecast Big East and S.E.C. simultaneously at 3 P.M., but it will also feature up to three doubleheaders each season at noon and 3:30 P.M.


Dante V. Bizzarri, 80, Doctor and Inventor
Dr.
Dante V. Bizzarri, a physician and an inventor who helped make anesthesiology a major medical specialty, died on Feb. 1 at his home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 80.
The cause was cancer, said Wilfried Schmid, his son-in-law.


The Addamses Check Out the Library
It is a place where cemetery plots have cellar doors.
Where the gates of hell have express lanes for those with six sins or less.
Where children trick or treat by cab.
Where snake-coiffed gorgons present themselves to wary hairdressers.
And where members of the Addams Family pour boiling oil on Christmas carolers.
In short, it is the darkly comic universe of "The Compleat Charles Addams," a retrospective exhibition of the works of the artist and New Yorker cartoonist who died in 1988 at the age of 76.
The collection of 170 original drawings and watercolors in the Gottesman Exhibition Hall at the New York Public Library opens today and will be on view in the building at 42d Street and Fifth Avenue through May 7.


SAUDI ARABIA IN AIRCRAFT DEAL WORTH BILLIONS
Saudi Arabia has agreed to buy billions of dollars worth of commercial airliners from the Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
A spokesman for the White House said President Clinton would announce the deal today.
Although The Associated Press reported last night that the sale would total $6 billion, the spokesman could not confirm that figure.
In August, Senator Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, said President Clinton had told her that Boeing and McDonnell Douglas were expected to win a $6.2 billion aircraft order from Saudi Arabia's national carrier.


Andrea Heinemann Simon; Community Leader, 84
Andrea Heinemann Simon, a community leader in Riverdale, the Bronx, died yesterday at her home there.
She was 84.
The cause was lung cancer, said her daughter, Joanna Walker.


What Is 'Universal' Is Center Of Fight Over a Health Plan
Universal insurance coverage has become the touchstone of the debate over health care.
President Clinton threatens to veto legislation "that does not guarantee every American private health insurance that can never be taken away."
But what precisely does universal coverage mean?
How would it be administered?
Would everyone voluntarily enroll in a health plan?
Would the Government force people to buy insurance?


Meadowlands Boss: Major Fund-Raiser Becomes Cost-Cutter
In 1981, when a neighbor of Michael D. Francis wanted to run for governor, he asked him to raise money for the campaign.
Mr.
Francis's neighbor, the former State Senator James H. Wallwork, lost the Republican primary that year, but his request set Mr.
Francis on the course that will culminate Wednesday with his swearing-in as chairman of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
"That was my entry into politics," Mr.
Francis, a lawyer and businessman from Short Hills, said of his work for Mr.
Wallwork.


A Trade Is Reversed
The Pittsburgh Penguins traded defenseman MARTY McSORLEY back to the Los Angeles Kings yesterday for center Shawn McEachern, reversing a deal made before the season.
McSorley, 30, was a key to the Kings' success last season, when they reached the Stanley Cup finals.
The trade also sends defenseman JIM PAEK to Los Angeles and right wing TOMAS SANDSTROM to Pittsburgh. (AP)


An Infant Is Killed as Fire Sweeps a House in Queens


Vietnam Commitment Goes Back to Truman
To the Editor:
I was startled to read in "A Passion Spent, Finally," your Feb. 4 front-page news analysis on the end of the United States trade embargo of Vietnam, that while the Vietnam War was Lyndon B. Johnson's war, the commitments were made in John F. Kennedy's Administration.


Healthcare Acquisition Is Planned
The United Healthcare Corporation announced a definitive agreement yesterday to acquire Ramsay-HMO Inc. in a stock deal that analysts valued at about $500 million.
The announcement pushed Ramsay shares up $9.375 to close at $55.25, a 12-month high, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
United Healthcare, a large diversified managed care company based in Minnetonka, Minn., slipped 62.5 cents, to $85, on the Big Board.


City Council Celebrates Black History Month


Government Securities Are Mixed
Prices of government securities were mixed yesterday, as investors and dealers remained worried about a weaker dollar against the yen.
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond fell 1/16 yesterday.
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from price, rose to 6.45 percent, a tick higher than 6.44 percent on Monday.
The prices of most of the intermediate maturities rose, while shorter maturities were unchanged.


Review/Pop; Art Garfunkel Croons A Program of Romance
Art Garfunkel is a singer who deals exclusively in pastel colors and misty reveries.
With a breathy folk tenor that, when pushed, threatens to break into a sob, Mr.
Garfunkel has always been the vocal embodiment of a quivering post-adolescent sensitivity.
Although now over 50, the singer, who gave a Valentine's Day concert at Carnegie Hall, still projects the image of a bookish college boy newly infatuated with the flowing cadences of English Romantic poetry.
As Mr.
Garfunkel performed folk-pop ballads that his former partner, Paul Simon, wrote for them in the 1960's, the singer imbued self-consciously poetic phrases like "dappled and drowsy" with a wide-eyed ingenuousness.


Off the Menu
A Chef Is Chosen
Alison Price-Becker, the owner of Alison on Dominick Street, near Varick Street in SoHo, has just completed an intensive search for a chef.
She has named Scott Bryan, who was the chef at Soleil on the Upper East Side, to replace Tom Valenti, who is going to Cascabel in SoHo.
The new chef starts next week, but his menu will not go into effect until March 4.
"It will still be country French but perhaps lighter, with more seasonal changes," said Ms.
Price-Becker, who has also decided against moving the restaurant for the time being.
"Now I'm thinking of starting a catering company called Alison Off Dominick Street." Latin in Manhattan
Patria, a new Latin American restaurant, opened Monday at 250 Park Avenue South, at 20th Street, the space formerly occupied by Positano, which is planning to move to TriBeCa.
The multilevel restaurant has been given a warmer look with straw-colored sponged walls, sinuous railings framing the balcony and a bright tile mural around the door.


Seeking $70 Million in Nickels
For nine years, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has urged the Legislature to let the state claim $70 million in nickel deposits left with beverage distributors each year by people who throw away returnable bottles and cans.
He appointed a study commission, issued glossy pamphlets and held hearings at which thousands of nickels were dropped vividly on the floor.
He failed.
This year, Mr.
Cuomo has tried a new approach.
Tucked among 2,000 pages of budget legislation is a bill calling for $50 million in environmental programs, mostly in the districts of influential Republican senators who have traditionally sided with the bottling industry.
The bill comes with a promise, and a threat: If, and only if, the legislation passes, will the Governor guarantee money for the coveted projects this year and every year.


Daly to Return 2 Weeks Early
The suspended golfer JOHN DALY, following what his agent described as a meeting of the minds between the PGA Tour commissioner, DEANE BEMAN, and Daly, will return to the tour at the March 10-13 Honda Classic, two weeks earlier than expected.


Wine Talk
QUICK, what's the greatest white wine in the world?
Why, Le Montrachet, of course, the glory of Burgundy, the pride of France, the summit of perfection for the chardonnay grape.


Prosecution Completes Case Against 11 Koresh Followers
Federal prosecutors rested their case today in the trial of 11 Branch Davidians accused of killing four Federal agents during a botched raid on the cult's compound near Waco, Tex., nearly a year ago.
The prosecution's final day began with the playing of recordings made with 11 eavesdropping devices planted in the cult's compound from March 3 to April 19.
Prosecutors said the tapes showed that cult members had conspired to destroy themselves and their compound by fire if Federal agents moved in.
The agents did storm the compound on April 19, using tanks equipped with battering rams and tear gas to end a 51-day standoff.
Nearly 80 people died as the compound burned.


U.N. Forcing Croatia to Acknowledge Its 'Invisible' Army in Bosnia
Croatia's ambivalence is showing.
Publicly, Government officials applaud the Western effort to break the siege of Sarajevo and say they hope it will lead to a peace agreement throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Giuliani Goes to School: Where Has All the Hope Gone?
Even before Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani arrived at the Esther Clarke Hunter Junior High School in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn to talk to students yesterday, voices of the city's youth could be heard.
Windows on the third floor of the building popped open at the first sight of visitors, some students banged on the panes, and others others shouted mean and vulgar things about the Mayor from behind a chain-link fence.
And once the Mayor began talking with some 60 students from Hunter and from Thomas Jefferson High School, it became clear that the polite, groomed youths gathered in an auditorium had more than a hint of the anger still other students exhibited from the windows -- until they were silenced by school officials before Mr.
Giuliani's arrival.


Vermont Garrison, 78, Fighter Pilot in 3 Wars
Col.
Vermont Garrison, an ace fighter pilot who flew missions in World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War, died on Monday at his home in Mountain Home, Idaho.
He was 78.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter Jayne.


A Parting Shot at the Crime Bill Backed by Clinton
One day after stepping down as second in command at the Justice Department, Philip B. Heymann today attacked several cornerstone provisions of a multibillion-dollar crime bill that has emerged as the Clinton Administration's main legislative vehicle to crack down on crime and violence.
Mr.
Heymann, who headed the Justice Department's effort to produce an Administration approach to crime legislation, said popular proposals like the "three strikes and you're out" measure, which would lock up repeat offenders for life without parole, were largely empty solutions that would have a negligible effect. on crime.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Boston College
When the Eagles won the Beanpot tournament on Monday night, a feat considered beyond their expectations or those of anyone else, they did it because they had an inspired goaltender, which will happen in tournaments.


Hospital Panel Votes to Close Burn Unit in Budget Cuts
The board of directors of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation voted last night to close the burn unit at Harlem Hospital and to shut down a neighborhood health clinic in Queens as part of a plan to cut 1,100 jobs.
The board also agreed to eliminate about 314 managerial jobs in the corporation's central offices and throughout the city's 11 municipal hospitals -- half of those through layoffs.
The vote was 8 to 1 with 2 abstentions.
Five of the 16 members were absent.


Theater in Review
It Is It Is Not Cino Theater Theater for the New City 155 First Avenue, at 10th Street East Village Through Feb. 27 By Manuel Pereiras Garcia; directed by Maria Irene Fornes; costumes by Carol Bailey; set by Donald Eastman; lighting by Ellen Bone; stage manager, Brian DeCubellis; technical assistant, Mark Tambella.
Presented by the Theater for the New City and Bartenieff-Field.
WITH: Angela Chale Millington, Crystal Field and Steve Hofvendahl.


Under Court Order, U.S. Lays Out Rules For California's Air
Under court order, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency today released proposals to bring parts of California into compliance with national clean-air standards.
The objective is to reduce carbon-monoxide pollution in Los Angeles and to bring areas surrounding Los Angeles, Ventura and Sacramento into line with standards for ozone pollution.


Regulators Lift Order On Citicorp
Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, said yesterday that Federal regulators had released it from the strict supervision under which it had operated for two years.
In February 1992, after mounting losses from bad real estate loans and other operational problems, Citicorp was forced to sign a memorandum of understanding with the Federal Reserve and the Office of the Comptroller of the currency, the agency that regulates national banks.


INSIDE
Surprise Plea in Florida With relatives of his victims gathered in the courtroom, the man accused of murdering five college students in Gainesville in 1990 stunned a courtroom by pleading guilty.
Page A10.
Solarz Job: On Again
The long-delayed nomination of Stephen J. Solarz as Ambassador to India will move ahead, Administration officials said.
Page A8.
Merit Scholar Bias Charged
A Federal civil rights complaint charges that the method of awarding prestigious National Merit Scholarships discriminates against girls and should be changed.
Page A18. 'Catch-22,' Part 2
Thirty-three years after his bitterly satirical war novel, whose title entered the American lexicon, Joseph Heller has written a sequel.
Page C13.
Canis Major
A Norwich terrier, the aptly named Ch.
Chidley Willum the Conqueror, was judged best in show last night at the 118th Westminster Kennel Club dog show.
Page B13.


In America; Jewels in Harlem
Walking along the clean and quiet corridors of the Frederick Douglass Academy, a hugely successful junior and senior high school in Harlem, you wonder about the tragic succession of events over so many years, and in so many places, that resulted in such a school in an inner-city neighborhood being so unusual.
The academy once was Intermediate School 10, which counted among its students James Baldwin, the artist Romare Bearden, the sociologist Dr.
Kenneth Clark and Representative Charles Rangel.
But I.S. 10 was allowed to deteriorate, and by the time it closed in June 1991, it was a chaotic school marked by violence and abysmal academic standards.


Robert Bloom Is Dead; Oboist and Teacher, 85
Robert Bloom, an oboist, composer and teacher, died on Sunday at Christ Hospital in Cincinnati.
He was 85 and lived in Cincinnati.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Sara Lambert Bloom.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Cardinal Health Inc., Dublin, Ohio, is selling $100 million of 6.5 percent notes due in 2004 at 99.787 to yield 6.529 percent through Smith Barney Shearson.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Hillenbrand Industries, Batesville, Ind., is selling $100 million of 7 percent debentures due in 2024 at 98.762 to yield 7.10 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.


Inflated Worries?; Fed Is on the Case, but the Markets Give Hints of a Message Misread
Inflation, Wall Street would have us believe, is not good for brokers, bond traders and other living things.
Why, then, did blue-chip shares take their biggest one-day drop in two years on news that the Federal Reserve was nudging up interest rates as a pre-emptive strike against the dread condition?
And why, two weeks later, despite repeated assurances from the economics establishment that inflation is nowhere in sight, do professional investors wait with bated breath for the dribs and drabs of price data released periodically by Washington?
One answer is that after three years of benign neglect of prices and another year of words without deeds, even the delicate squeeze on credit signaled by the Fed was bound to shock.
"The move was a surprise in its timing" if not its direction, concluded Lesley Daniels Webster, a securities trader and economist at the Union Bank of Switzerland.


The Yen's Rise Forces a Reassessment in Japan
Just days after Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's firm stand against American trade demands met widespread approval at home, the damaging surge in the value of the yen has sent waves of anxiety through the business community and reversed sentiment about the wisdom of a confrontation with the United States.
Corporate executives and economists initially extolled the pluses of a more assertive Japan after trade talks with the United States collapsed last Friday.
Mr.
Hosokawa had rejected President Clinton's demand that Japan guarantee increased levels of imports, or targets, to insure reductions in Japan's yawning trade surplus.


This Land Is His Land


Review/Pop; An Oddity: No Extremes
Ana Gabriel, a Mexican singer who sold out two shows at Radio City Music Hall over the weekend, exists in a strange realm for pop music, the realm of everyday.
She's not extreme or reserved.
She's neither overtly sexual nor chaste.
She's just hugely popular.
Miss Gabriel, who is in her 30's, is one of several Mexican pop stars who have begun cultivating a wider Latin audience, and her fans flock to hear her sing about love and its lack.
Ms.
Gabriel sings ballads, and in virtually all of them she plays the traditional role of the woman suffering from unrequited love.
Song after song had her wishing for the return of a man or of her desire for a new one.
Occasionally she rubbed her stomach or breasts to signify a mild sort of lust, but for the most part the desire was more family style.
She struck poses or put her head in her hands to get a point across; the audience, which included children and grandparents, was on her side.


So You Consider Hair Dye Safe?
To the Editor:
Re "It's Safe to Hide the Gray, a New Cancer Study Says" (news article, Feb. 2): The American Cancer Society-Food and Drug Administration study that finds "almost no connection between hair dyes and fatal cancers" is seriously flawed in design and interpretation.
While a fourfold increase in mortality from relatively rare cancers, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and multiple myeloma, was noted in some 1,100 women using permanent black dyes for more than 20 years, the study trivialized the significance of that increase as based on only very few cases.


A Classic Chardonnay Returns to New York
THE chardonnay of Hanzell Vineyards, one of the most influential producers in California's wine-making history, is staging a comeback in the New York region.
The 37-year-old Sonoma County boutique winery, famed for powerful chardonnays that age as long and as well as the best white Burgundies, is aggressively placing its delicious 1991 chardonnay in stores and restaurants.


In School
This has not been Len Romano's winter.
"My brains are like mush," said Mr.
Romano, manager of bus transportation for the schools here.
Already the public school district has missed seven days because of snow.
It has suffered through another three days of delayed openings. ("They're the worst," Mr. Romano said, "a classic damned if you do, damned if you don't situation.")


Books of The Times; Family Circles Set Askew by Surprising Angles
Anonymity
The Secret Life of an American Family
By Susan Bergman
Illustrated. 198 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $20.
The Sweeter the Juice
A Family Memoir in Black and White
By Shirlee Taylor Haizlip
Illustrated. 271 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


Assisting The Needy Amid Guns
Bernard Hanson, an art historian who lives in New Haven, believes in gun control so strongly that he has considered putting bumper stickers on his pickup truck calling for the repeal of the Second Amendment.
"But I'm afraid I'd get my window bashed or something," said Mr.
Hanson, who calls New Haven "the northern branch of the South Bronx" because of the crime and guns that have invaded even his cloistered neighborhood of 19th-century houses and walled yards.


N.Y.R.A. Rescinds Ban
The equine virus plaguing stables in the metropolitan area has abated enough that the New York Racing Association yesterday announced that it would rescind its ban on horses shipping to and from Aqueduct and Belmont tomorrow night.
"We've had no new cases for two weeks now," said the N.Y.R.A. veterinarian Dr.
THEODORE HILL, about the viral outbreak.
"As a result, we will remove all restrictions Thursday after 6 P.M."


YELTSIN ADAMANT ON ROLE IN BOSNIA
In his first public appearance in more than a week, President Boris N. Yeltsin warned today that Russia would not allow its views to be ignored in any negotiations on a settlement in Bosnia.
"Some people are trying to resolve the Bosnian question without the participation of Russia," Mr.
Yeltsin said in his first remarks since NATO threatened the Bosnian Serbs with air strikes.
"We will not allow this."


Davis Too Busy To Tally Payout
Martin S. Davis, the chairman and chief executive of Paramount Communications Inc., stands to collect at least $117 million in cash and securities as a result of the acquisition of Paramount by Viacom Inc.
But he seems to be quite unconcerned about the exact amount.
In an interview yesterday, Mr.
Davis said he owned 1.7 million shares of the stock.
After his secretary was told that the figure did not seem to square with Securities and Exchange Commission filings, a spokesman for Mr.
Davis quoted him as saying the accurate figure was about 1.5 million shares.
The spokesman also said Mr.
Davis was too busy to pay attention to such things.


Review/Film; Hard Work Without Just Reward In China
In a rural Chinese village, the men make furtive plans to watch the occasional sex or action videotape from Hong Kong (though the sex films never seem to arrive).
How misguided: if they're looking for lurid stories, these men needn't look far from home.
As "Women From the Lake of Scented Souls" unfolds, it becomes clear that the village's own secret life is a lot more torrid and scandal-ridden than anything Hong Kong could come up with and that beneath this film's tranquil surface there lurks an intense and tragic soap opera.
If the men don't notice, maybe that's because the story's strongest figure is a demure-looking woman.
"Women From the Lake of Scented Souls," which opens today at Film Forum, was a co-winner of the Golden Bear Award at last year's Berlin Film Festival.
The film is a much slier and harder-edged drama than its delicately lovely title suggests. (This title may be oblique, but it's a big improvement upon "Woman Sesame Oil Maker," as the film was previously known.) The story revolves around a mom-and-pop sesame oil making business in which the mom, a no-nonsense matriarch named Xiang, does all the work.


Cultural Capital
To the Editor:
Most of the politicians who run New York City seem to have no trouble subsidizing the Yankees, the Mets, the Knicks and the United States Tennis Association.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget speech (news article, Feb. 3) makes no mention of reducing these subsidies, and yet the Mayor suggests reducing the pitiful city contributions to our museums.


U.S. Hoping to Use Fears of Trade War To Pressure Japan
The initiation today of formal United States trade sanctions against Japan for protecting its cellular phone market touched off a new wave of anxiety about a trade war -- just the reaction the Clinton Administration appears to be trying to generate to get Japan to return to the bargaining table on American terms.
At a news conference attended, to the Administration's delight, by television networks from around the world, the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, announced that his office would publish within 30 days a list of the Japanese companies that would be punished in the American market, unless Japan fully opens its cellular phone market to Motorola Inc.


IN TAILHOOK DEAL, TOP ADMIRAL SAYS HE'LL RETIRE EARLY
After four days of high-level discussions about how to close the latest chapter in the tortured history of the Tailhook scandal, the Navy's top admiral announced today that he would retire two months early in exchange for a tribute from the Defense Secretary that would clear his name.
Under an arrangement worked out by the Pentagon's civilian leaders and Navy officers, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, said at a a news conference that he would retire at the end of April, two months ahead of schedule.


A Shot Heard in the N.H.L.
The Viacom-Paramount deal even has implications for the National Hockey League.
As a result of Viacom Inc.'s $9.7 billion takeover of Paramount Communications, H. Wayne Huizenga, the founder and chairman of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, would seem to wind up with an ownership interest in two hockey teams, the Florida Panthers and the New York Rangers.


Scheduled Out of Playoffs
The University of Maine women's basketball coach, JOANNE PALOMBO, is taking the blame for the scheduling error that has cost her first-place team the right to play in the North Atlantic Conference post-season tournament.
Palombo said she "didn't read the fine print" in the rules that specified post-season games must be counted toward the 27-game limit.
"It was simply my mistake," said Palombo, a rookie coach. (AP)


Esther Sherman; Theatrical Agent, 56
Esther Sherman, a theatrical agent and a vice president of the William Morris Agency, died on Sunday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 56.
The cause was cancer, the agency said.


Food Notes
Soup, Soup and Soup
New York has had its share of soup weather this year.
Fortunately, three new cookbooks are available to inspire the soup maker, but some advice is in order.
Anyone intimidated by recipes with long lists of ingredients or requirements for overnight soaking or chilling or long simmering should consider opening cans.
Good soup often requires a complex assortment of vegetables and seasonings.
It also takes time, though much of it involves leaving the pot on the back burner, unattended.
"Splendid Soups" by James Peterson (Bantam Books, $29.95) is encyclopedic and filled with sound advice.
But if you pick up this 524-page volume looking for a quick but hearty recipe to try for dinner, you may become so diverted reading about making hominy from scratch or using ingredients like gelatinous konnyaku that you'll wind up ordering Chinese hot and sour from a menu slipped under the door.
Even a section with charts and tables about improvising soups takes an hour's study.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMCORE FINANCIAL INC., Rockford, Ill., agreed to acquire First State Bancorp of Princeton, Ill., in an $18.4 million stock swap.
AMERICA WEST AIRLINES INC., Phoenix, plans to begin taking reservations on Feb. 28 for four daily nonstop flights from Philadelphia to Columbus, Ohio, and Las Vegas, Nev., beginning on April 18.


Seymour Herscher; Productions Manager, 82
Seymour Herscher, a manager of more than 60 Broadway productions during a show business career that spanned 30 years, died on Saturday at the New York Hospital Medical Center.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was old age, said his son, David.


New Publisher for Mirabella
Catherine Viscardi, advertising director of New York magazine, was appointed yesterday as publisher of Mirabella magazine.
She replaces Rebecca Darwin, who has left the company.
The appointment was announced by Joseph Barletta, who was named president of Murdoch Magazines last week.
Mr.
Barletta was on vacation yesterday and not available for comment.
People at the magazine, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said a decision to dismiss Ms.
Darwin had been made before Mr.
Barletta's appointment, but that the choice of Ms.
Viscardi was made by Mr.
Barletta and Anthea Disney, who was named editorial director of Murdoch Magazines last week.


Hillary Clinton Opens Campaign To Answer Critics of Health Plan
After two weeks of bad political news about the Clinton Administration's proposed health plan, Hillary Rodham Clinton opened a counterattack today.
The insurance industry took most of the fire.
At the same time, the Christian Coalition announced that it was beginning a $1.4 million campaign to build grass-roots opposition to the Clinton plan among conservative Christians.
Ralph Reed, the group's executive director, declared in a statement that the plan "would replace the finest health care system in the world with a bureaucratic, Byzantine, European-style syndicalist nightmare that has no precursor in the American experience."


Woman Pitches and Wins
Freshman ILA BORDERS became the first woman to pitch in a National Collegiate Athletic Association or National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics college baseball game yesterday, and she was a rousing success.
The 5-foot-10-inch, 160-pound left-hander pitched a complete-game victory for Southern California College of Costa Mesa, scattering five hits in beating Claremont-Mudd, 12-1, in Los Angeles.
Borders threw 104 pitches, walked 3 and struck out 2.
Southern Cal College is an N.A.I.A.
Division I school. (AP)


For Punsalan, Emotions Still Run Deep
Even on the plane Sunday night, as she was headed to the Olympics from her home in Detroit, Elizabeth Punsalan was still not sure whether she would be able to compete in the ice dancing competition, which begins Friday.
Only nine days earlier, her father, Ernesto Punsalan, a surgeon from Sheffield Lake, Ohio, had been stabbed to death, and her troubled brother, Ricardo, had been arrested and charged with the crime.


Review/Opera; After the Hoopla, 'La Fille du Regiment'
When Kathleen Battle was fired last week and Harolyn Blackwell was thrust into the role of Marie in "La Fille du Regiment" at the Metropolitan Opera, the stage was set for another grand drama.
A young soprano with a clutch of warm reviews and solid credentials steps in for one of the best-known singers of our time.
Will a new star be born?


Korey, Kay Forms A New Division
Korey, Kay &amp; Partners in New York said yesterday that it had formed a direct marketing division called Korey Kay Response.
Initially, the unit will serve existing clients like I.B.M.
Pennant Systems and Virgin Atlantic Airways.
Cecilia Greene, 33, was named to head the new unit, with seven other employees, as vice president and general manager.
She previously was a vice president and copy supervisor at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct in New York.


Juchitan Journal; Mexico's Indians Heed Rumble of Distant Guns
Streets all over this torrid market city are filled with bristling black pigs, ancient oxcarts and whitewashed walls exploding with anger at someone else's fight.
"Assassin Army Out of Chiapas," reads the scrawl on one wall.
Too far away to be involved in the fighting, but not too far to feel the pain that led to the revolt across the state line in Chiapas, 62 miles away, Juchitan (pronounced hoo-chee-TAHN) has nonetheless been involved in the Indian uprising that started on Jan. 1.


Message to a Bronx School Board
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, has overruled a Bronx school board with a history of mismanagement that refused to rehire its reform-minded superintendent.
Though Mr.
Cortines is on uncharted legal ground, he has sent an important message in support of education instead of patronage-driven politics.
For years, Bronx District 9 has ranked at or near the bottom in citywide reading and math test scores.
Several board members and administrators have been charged with mismanagement and corruption in official investigations.
In 1991 Chancellor Joseph Fernandez pushed the district to hire Felton Johnson, one of the city's most highly regarded principals, as its superintendent.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Loses in First Round  Pete Sampras, seeded No. 1, was knocked out of the first round of the U.S.
Indoor tennis tournament in Philadelphia last night, losing in straight sets to Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands.
Eltingh, who also beat Sampras last year in Atlanta, ousted the defending Wimbledon and U.S.
Open champion, 7-6 (10-8), 6-4.
Sampras, in his first match since winning the Australian Open last month, admitted he was "a little flat." (AP) N.H.L.
Lemieux-less Penguins Win  Rick Tocchet started a three-goal first period that helped carry the Pittsburgh Penguins to a 5-3 home victory last night over Winnipeg, stretching the Jets' winless streak to 0-11-2.
The Penguins played without center Mario Lemieux, who was scratched when he complained that his sore back was bothering him.
Lemieux played twice over the weekend and had three goals and an assist in his first action since Nov. 7.
He also practiced Monday. (AP) Maple Leafs 5, Red Wings 4: Wendel Clark's power-play goal at 2 minutes 55 seconds of overtime lifted Toronto 2 points ahead of visiting Detroit and idle Dallas atop the Central Division.
The Maple Leafs' 71 points is also tops in the Western Conference and second over all behind the New York Rangers (76). (AP) Capitals 2, Oilers 2: Bill Ranford stopped 41 shots as struggling Edmonton snapped Washington's four-game winning streak and earned a rare point on the road. (AP) Blues 3, Canucks 2: Brett Hull tied the game with his 40th goal, then got the game-winner with 5:44 to go as St.
Louis beat visiting Vancouver. (AP) N.B.A.
O'Neal Monopolizes Rebounds  Shaquille O'Neal grabbed 24 rebounds and scored 10 of his 36 points in the final 3:41 last night, leading the Orlando Magic to a 102-92 victory over the visiting Boston Celtics.
The Magic trailed, 82-72, before putting together a 30-10 run to extend the Celtics' losing streak to five games.
A team-record 14 of O'Neal's rebounds came on the offensive end. (AP) SuperSonics 133, 76ers 105: Shawn Kemp scored 24 points, including 6 dunks, and grabbed 13 rebounds in three quarters as Seattle won its fifth straight game with its highest point total of the season.
Playing at home, the Sonics improved their league-best record to 36-10. (AP) Rockets 103, Hawks 99: Hakeem Olajuwon scored 8 of his 28 points in the deciding final minutes, leading Houston over visiting Atlanta.
The Rockets trailed by 53-48 at the half, but went on an 18-8 run to start the third quarter and never trailed again. (AP) Cavaliers 111, Nuggets 99: Gerald Wilkins scored 15 of his 27 points in the first quarter and made four 3-pointers as Cleveland won at home.
Wilkins sank six of his first seven shots, including three 3-pointers. (AP) Spurs 109, Pacers 100: David Robinson had 34 points and 10 rebounds as the Spurs matched their franchise-record winning streak of 10 games in beating visiting Indiana.
Robinson had nine assists. (AP) Pistons 100, Bullets 93: Joe Dumars, despite a sore left hamstring, scored 25 points as Detroit extended visiting Washington's losing streak to four games.
Dumars pulled his hamstring against Houston last Thursday, didn't practice Monday, but he started and led the Pistons to just their fourth victory in 28 games. (AP) Trail Blazers 106, Mavericks 103: Clifford Robinson scored 24 points, including a critical off-balance jumper with 26 seconds to play.
Robinson's high-arching 12-footer as the shot clock wore down pushed Portland's lead to 103-100 and helped snap the Trail Blazers' four-game road losing streak. (AP) Timberwolves 97, Bucks 90: Christian Laettner scored 23 points and had 13 rebounds as Minnesota snapped a seven-game losing streak. (AP)


Aristide Rejects U.S.-Backed Plan To Name a New Premier for Haiti
Aggravating already frayed relations with the Clinton Administration, Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, today rejected a United States-backed plan that called on him to name a new Prime Minister as a step toward restoring him to power.
In rejecting the plan, Father Aristide said it "would be irresponsible" to appoint a Prime Minister before the military leaders who ousted him in 1991 stepped down.


Youth Is Shot to Death
A 16-year-old youth was shot to death last night at the corner of 109th Street and Columbus Avenue in Manhattan, the police said.
The victim, who was identified as Ramon Contin of 249 West 109th Street, was shot twice in the head about 10 P.M.
The police said they had no motive or suspects.


Public &amp; Private; Justice for Justice Barkett
Before Rosemary Barkett was the Chief Justice of Florida's Supreme Court, she was a trial judge.
Before she was a trial judge, she was a trial lawyer.
And before she was a trial lawyer, she was a nun.
Which is why, during her confirmation hearings, Senator Joseph Biden harked back to his days in parochial school and asked whether she had a clicker.


AT TEA WITH: The Duchess of York; Mercy, Mischief and a Royal Fiction
THERE was one red rose on the tea tray, and a pair of china cups.
Tea for two: That had been the plan.
But then the Duchess of York's entourage began trooping in, finding seats and, when the seats ran out, lining the wall.
Soon the suite at the Carlyle Hotel had taken on all the intimacy of the stateroom in "A Night at the Opera."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Holy Pecs! Sports Illustrated's 1994 swimsuit issue includes pictures of some topless models.
ONE of the most attractive models in the annual Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue is an athletic, leggy creature who looks fetching in a black skintight outfit that leaves little to the imagination.
Displaying in shot after shot what was once called a Pepsodent smile, this dark-haired charmer's poise and personality are sure to overwhelm any objections to having been photographed topless.
But then, men haven't worn tops to their bathing suits for 60 or 70 years.


Forecast Warns Of Inflation Clouds
To the Editor:
In "The Fed Goes for Overkill" (Op-Ed, Feb. 8), James K. Galbraith maintains there is no justification for the quarter-point boost in short-term interest rates announced by Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve Board chairman, "to forestall an inflationary threat that all agree has not appeared." I do not agree.


CHRONICLE
Patrons who asked their waiter if there were any celebrities on hand in Le Cirque one night last week, were told, "Yes, Michael Douglas is at that table, Steven Seagal is over there, and a woman is giving birth in the ladies' room."
Not quite, but it was a close call for PAT D'ANTONIO, a public relations manager for a champagne importer, who was at the restaurant for dinner with five business colleagues two weeks before her due date.
Sometime between the lamb and the dessert, Mrs.
D'Antonio's water broke.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.56
3.35
3.09
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.28
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.41
3.43
3.02
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.87
5.89
6.26
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.45
6.44
7.10
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.28
7.28
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.54
5.52
6.15
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Trade Frustrations of Motorola
When the United States and Japan agreed to open a big part of Japan's cellular telephone market to Motorola Inc. in 1989, Robert A. Mosbacher, the Commerce Secretary at the time, hailed the pact as "a model for future negotiations."
But rather than a model of success, the cellular telephone agreement has become an example of what American trade negotiators have long found frustrating about dealing with Japan: first, when one barrier seems to be swept away, another obstacle seems to arise to take its place; second, agreements often seem to fall apart when it comes time actually to put them into effect.


U.S. Says North Korean Decision Is Welcome
American officials said today that they welcomed North Korea's decision to allow international inspectors to visit its nuclear sites, but said the United States would wait until the inspectors gave Pyongyang a clean bill before improving ties.
Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, said that in response to Pyongyang's move, the United States had taken the modest action of restarting informal, low-level talks today in New York with North Korea.


No Headline
"There are some things you just can't run from." DANNY HAROLD ROLLING, confessing to five murders.  [ A10:1. ]


Texaco Says New Fuel Will Cut Emissions
Texaco Inc. announced yesterday that next month it would begin selling a gasoline with new additives that it said would keep engines cleaner and reduce the emissions of nitrogen oxides, a big cause of pollution.
Texaco said its tests showed that the fuel reduced nitrogen oxide emissions by 22 percent, compared with current gasolines.
The company would not disclose how the new additives worked.
Additives are chemical compounds put into gasoline to help control the combustion of fuel and to dissolve deposits that foul fuel injection valves and combustion chambers.


Theater in Review
The Au Pair Man  Irish Repertory Theater Company 28th Street Theater 120 West 28th Street Chelsea Through March 6 By Hugh Leonard; directed by Brian Murray; sets by Aleksandr Solodukho; costumes by David Toser; lighting by Gregory Cohen; sound by Jay DeLemos; hair design by Michael Kriston; fight instructor, Linwood Harkum; production stage manager, Kathe Mull.
Presented by the Irish Repertory Theater Company and One World Arts Foundation.
WITH: Charlotte Moore and Ciaran O'Reilly


L.I.R.R. Removes Storm-Damaged Cars
Commuters found themselves competing for fewer seats as at least a third of the trains that rolled in and out of the Long Island Rail Road station here today were shortened by a lack of operable cars.
With fewer cars available, trains were delayed up to 14 minutes as commuters squeezed through the doors hoping for a seat instead of standing room only.


METRO DIGEST
SOLARZ NOMINATION BACK ON TRACK
Ater months of delay, the Clinton administration said that it was moving ahead with the nomination of former Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn to be the Ambassador to India.
A8.
NEW YORK CITY


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  NORTH KOREA SHIFTS ARMS STANCE  North Korea said it would allow complete inspections of its suspected nuclear arms sites, in a surprise reversal of its position shortly before a deadline set by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
A1  Washington reacted with caution to North Korea's statement.
A8


Scott Is Lost for Season
St.
John's, whose three-game winning streak was ended by Seton Hall Monday night, had its season all but ended by injury yesterday.
Shawnelle Scott, the team's leading scorer and rebounder, was declared out for the rest of the season after an examination determined that he would need surgery for a torn ligament in his right thumb.


2 U.S. Women Earn a Final Shot in Mogul Event
She was not the post-operative wonder who has dominated the moguls circuit this season, but Donna Weinbrecht, the defending Olympic champion, was more than good enough today to qualify for the final round Wednesday.
The top 16 finishers today advanced from the 24-woman field.
Weinbrecht could do no better than sixth, which is five places lower than her current World Cup ranking.


Germans Arrest Serb as Balkan War Criminal
The German police have arrested a 38-year-old Serb who they say committed war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and prosecutors plan to charge him with "participation in genocide, murder and serious assault."
The suspect, Dusko Tadic, is the first Balkan war-crimes suspect to be arrested outside the war zone.
His trial would probably be a forum for prosecutors to present evidence of war crimes in Bosnia that has never been presented to a court outside that country.


Russians Win in Pairs Skating


Rage and Disbelief in Gaza Strip


A Justifiable Rap to Japan
Last week, the issues in contention between the U.S. and Japan were complex and could be argued either way.
But yesterday the U.S. was clearly in the right to declare Japan in violation of a 1989 accord that promised the Motorola corporation unfettered access to the cellular phone market in the heavily populated Tokyo-Nagoya region.
The declaration triggers a several-months' process during which the U.S. will prepare a list of sanctions.
The declaration is fully justified.
Japan has systematically thwarted promises it made under the accord.
Five years later Motorola, a technological leader around the world, accounts for less than 2 percent of the Tokyo-Nagoya market.
Sanctions are also warranted: because telecommunications services are not covered by international treaty, the U.S. has no good recourse other than to retaliate unilaterally.


Personal Health
THERE is one incontrovertible fact of life: sooner or later it comes to an end.
As societal conditions and medical care change through the decades, the causes of death change with them.
In the early part of this century, infectious diseases were leading causes of death.
But environmental controls, vaccines and antibiotics brought most deadly infections to their knees and permitted a sharp increase in life expectancy.


The Footprints of a Gigantic . . . Sloth!
Something there is about a mapinguari that would make most of us reluctant to meet one.
Something about the combination of shaggy red hair, monkey-like face and a mysterious chemical defense that paralyzes its opponents, maybe.
Or jaws and feet reputed to be powerful enough to rip palm trees apart.
Or the fact that said feet are on backward.
But so curious a set of physical characteristics on a six-foot, 500-pound frame don't deter Dr.
David C. Oren.
Dr.
Oren, an American biologist employed by the Brazilian Government, hopes to enter the trackless rain forest of western Brazil next month -- and make a mapinguari's acquaintance.


UConn's Big Shot Doesn't Drop In
At the very end, when the crisis had suddenly become much too real, Donyell Marshall struggled to find an open area in the lane as he searched desperately toward the right sideline.
Just 1.1 seconds remained in a game at Villanova.
Marshall was aching for the basketball, and one last chance, and a buzzer-beating victory that could have preserved the highest ranking in the history of the University of Connecticut.
Marshall received two of the three -- the pass from Kevin Ollie near midcourt and a 15-foot shot that was contested by the reach of Villanova forward Ron Wilson.


Pietro Belluschi, 94, an Architect Of Major Urban Buildings, Dies
Pietro Belluschi, a modernist architect whose career began with a series of elegantly simple structures in the Pacific Northwest and went on to include such major urban buildings as the Pan Am Building and the Juilliard School in in New York and the Bank of America in San Francisco, died on Monday at his home in Portland, Ore.
He was 94.
A native of Italy, he was the last survivor of a generation of architects born in Europe around the turn of the century -- also including Marcel Breuer, Josep Lluis Sert and Louis I. Kahn -- who became major presences in American architecture.


Drinking by College Women Raises New Concern
In a darkened corner of the smoky Green Leafe Cafe, five women from the College of William and Mary had polished off one pitcher of beer and were working on a second.
Before the night's end, they would also have several mixed drinks.
"It's more socially acceptable for women to drink now," said a woman who identified herself only as Tiffany, a 22-year-old junior majoring in elementary education.
"I feel like I have to try twice as hard because I'm a woman. Alcohol reduces the stress."


Gathering Round the Chinese Hot Pot
IN the late 18th or early 19th century in northwest China, on a cold winter day when the temperature was probably 5 degrees and the wind was racing across the open desert, some Chinese Muslims were cold and hungry.
So they invented what is now a famous dish, the fire (huo) pot (guo), or as it has become more commonly known, the hot pot.
It is eaten throughout the winter and especially during the Lunar New Year holiday, which began this year on Feb. 10 and continues through Feb. 25.
Although the holiday is often called the Chinese New Year, it is celebrated in many Asian countries.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 11
Feb. 4
Feb. 12
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
6.9
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.1
2.8
Gasoline stocks
228.8
232.0
236.7
Distillate stocks
113.4
116.8
123.3
Crude imports, daily
5.6
7.2
6.2
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.8
2.0
Crude stocks
331.3
335.6
338.1
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
90.3
88.5
86.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Cabinet Officers Assail Balanced-Budget Bill
Jabbing at every exposed political nerve it could find, the Clinton Administration told Congress today that a Federal balanced-budget amendment would imperil the national defense, increase crime, cheat veterans, squeeze the elderly and weaken the economy.
Analyzing how cuts would affect the economy and their departments, five Cabinet officers testified today against a proposed amendment that would require the Federal budget to be balanced, probably by the year 2001.
The Senate plans to begin debating the measure next Tuesday, and neither side is sure how the vote will go.


La-Z-Boy Chair
After the market closed on Monday, the La-Z-Boy Chair Company reported a 25 percent rise in third-quarter earnings.
But the results were below expectations.
Management attributed the slight shortfall in part to winter weather adding to production costs.
Nonetheless, the stock price fell yesterday.


For U.S. Pilots, Chief Worry in Bosnia Is Weather
During the Persian Gulf war, Capt.
John Borneman, a combat pilot with the United States Marines, flew some 40 sorties from Bahrain over Kuwait and Iraq, braving barrages of Iraqi missiles to do so.
Today, as he contemplated the possibility of flying into combat again -- this time over Bosnia -- he pondered a different, less predictable and not nearly so modern adversary, one that has dogged pilots since people first thought of flying: the weather.


Another Comeback Nets Another U.S. Tie
The way it seems to work is, the United States Olympic hockey team spots the other team two goals and then engineers a roaring comeback to bring about a tie.
It may not be the stuff of champions, but to some tastes it does make for a certain drama.
Tonight, the United States fell behind by 3-1 in third period against Slovakia but managed to score twice in a span of 1 minute 36 seconds to gain a 3-3 tie at Olympic Cavern Hall.


All Ends Tied Into One Story In Blast Trial
A prosecutor in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday delivered a daylong summation of the Government's case, keeping the jury rapt and, after weaving the multitudinous strands of circumstantial evidence into a single story, asking it to find the defendants guilty in an elaborate plot to "send a terrorist message" to the United States.
"If you sift through the evidence, you will see that these are the World Trade Center bombers before you," the prosecutor, Henry DePippo, told the jury.
"You will conclude that they are guilty on every count beyond any reasonable doubt."


For U.S. Pilots, Chief Worry in Bosnia Is Weather
During the Persian Gulf war, Capt.
John Borneman, a combat pilot with the United States Marines, flew some 40 sorties from Bahrain over Kuwait and Iraq, braving barrages of Iraqi missiles to do so.
Today, as he contemplated the possibility of flying into combat again -- this time over Bosnia -- he pondered a different, less predictable and not nearly so modern adversary, one that has dogged pilots since people first thought of flying: the weather.


Yegorova Is Going Up On Olympics' Medal Ladder
For the many Winter Olympic mavens who have yet to learn the name Lyubov Yegorova, consider the following:
Sonja Henie, Jean-Claude Killy, Alberto Tomba and Bonnie Blair each have won three Winter Olympic golds.
Yegorova, a soft-spoken Russian cross-country skier from St.
Petersburg, has now won four.


Autopsy in Baby's Death Finds an Umbilical Defect
The baby whose death prompted questions about the treatment ambulance workers gave a pregnant Queens woman had a relatively rare condition that obstetricians say can be fatal unless a Caesarean section is performed immediately when the mother's water breaks.
An autopsy by the City Medical Examiner's office found that the otherwise healthy 5 1/2-pound girl had an abnormality in her umbilical cord, said Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the Medical Examiner.
She said veins normally encased in the cord were exposed and were vulnerable to being lacerated when the mother,


First, the Snow; Now, the Garbage


At Studio, Jobs and Films Hang Fire
The planned merger of Paramount Communications with Viacom Inc. makes top jobs at Paramount vulnerable, throws into question future projects and leaves the company's film studio here virtually frozen.
The most pressing speculation is about the fate of Stanley R. Jaffe, the president of Paramount Communications, and Sherry Lansing, his one-time producing partner and the Paramount studio head.
The departure of a studio chief like Ms.
Lansing would not only ripple across the studio in terms of jobs but disrupt the flow of production for at least a year.
A big studio like Paramount generally produces 20 to 25 films a year.


North Koreans Agree to Survey Of Atomic Sites
Acting to avert a confrontation with the West, North Korea reversed itself today and told the International Atomic Energy Agency that it would permit a full inspection of seven sites that are thought to be part of a nuclear-weapons program.
The surprise announcement came less than a week before the agency's board is to meet in Vienna, where it was expected to declare that North Korea's refusal to allow inspections violated international accords.


Gordeyeva And Grinkov: A Matter Of Style Wins
This morning, the coaches of the three Russian figure-skating pairs were involved in a fender bender when someone rammed their car from behind.
As a traffic accident it wasn't bad, one of the superstitious coaches said, but as an omen it might be.
"We will see tonight if it's bad luck," said Tamara Moskvina, who coaches the 1992 Olympic champions, Natalya Mishkutienok and Artur Dmitriev.
Even before the accident, Moskvina had her suspicions that Mishkutienok and Dmitriev would not repeat as gold medalists.
Their gymnastic, innovative style has never seemed to impress judges as much as the lilting harmony and husband-and-wife artistry of Yekaterina Gordeyeva and Sergei Grinkov, the 1988 champions.
"I think the inclination is not toward my couple," she said.
Moskvina was right.
Gordeyeva and Grinkov strayed from perfection in tonight's long program, with the normally steady Grinkov struggling through two jumps.
But the pair won a second Olympic title, receiving a perfect score of 6.0 from the Russian judge, and 5.9's from the other eight judges for artistic impression.
Mishkutienok and Dmitriev won the silver.
A Russian pair has now won the gold medal for the ninth straight Winter Olympics.
Isabelle Brasseur and Lloyd Eisler of Canada won the bronze medal.
Eisler later complained about a new rule that allowed professional skaters such as the gold and silver medalists to regain their amateur status for the Olympics.
"I don't agree they should be back," Eisler said.
"Tonight, we're the gold medal winners."
"I'm a skater; I skate," Dmitriev said.
Clearly, Dmitriev and Mishkutienok won the crowd's favor, as they had done in the short program on Sunday.
They performed more difficult jumps and more creative spins, but, in the end, the competition distilled itself to a matter of style.
And the judges, especially the American judge, Elaine DeMore, preferred the balletic unison and classic line and of Gordeyeva and Grinkov to the engaging inventiveness of Dmitriev and Mishkutienok.
"The panel could have gone either way," said John Nicks, coach of the American pair, Jenni Meno and Todd Sand of Costa Mesa, Calif., who skated another consistent program and finished an encouraging fifth.
"The winning side made a couple of minor errors, but I think they won because of their general approach to skating. They are what I would call a purist's pair."
There was one scary moment in the competition, when Mandy Woetzel of Germany fell during a spiral maneuver and bounced hard off the ice with her chest and chin.
She was carried from the rink by her partner, Ingo Steuer.
Woetzel received three stitches in her chin, but did not suffer any broken ribs or require hospitalization.
After a short pause, the competition resumed and headed toward the much-anticipated showdown between the gold medalists from the previous two Olympics.
Newfound Maturity
Gordeyeva was only 16 and Grinkov was 21 when they won their first gold medal at Calgary in 1988.
She is 22 now, the mother of a young daughter named Daria.
Gordeyeva brings a newfound maturity to her skating, and she has become a more impressive jumper.
She has a presence that forces all eyes on her, and Grinkov, her husband, has the self-assurance to restrain himself in a supporting role.
When they are at their best, he is all but invisible.
Tonight, though, his minor faults kept intruding on their lilting routine, skated to Beethoven's "Moonlight Sonata." Grinkov lost his balance on a double flip jump, and he reduced an intended double salchow to a single.
Gordeyeva lurched forward while landing a throw double axel, but otherwise she was flawless.
Their unison was never in more brilliant display than when they spun, side by side, fast, then slow, their bodies remaining in perfect unison.
Mishkutienok and Dmitriev are polar opposites to Gordeyeva and Grinkov.
Dmitriev is built like a tight end, Mishkutienok is as much a gymnast as a skater.
She grabbed her left leg and held it above her head on one spin, then inverted herself, her head at his skates, for another maneuver that has come to be known as the Natalya Death Spin.
They are full of emotion and expressiveness; near the end of tonight's program, they skated to Rachmaninoff's piano concerto No. 2, Dmitriev ripped a flap from the front of his black bodysuit, revealing a red patch apparently meant to signify his passionate heart.
The audience loved it, but the judges weren't buying it.
Only one of nine placed them ahead of Gordeyeva and Grinkov.
"It is the eternal question between lyrics and physics," Moskvina said.
A question that was answered again in the favor of Gordeyeva and Grinkov.


As Snow Problems Melt, the Garbage Challenge Heats Up
The liberation of West 99th Street began yesterday at 12:37 P.M.
Some people embraced in the streets.
Children stared out from school windows.
The uniformed liberators, their fat orange rubber gloves raised in the air, returned the salutes.
The garbage was being picked up.


Fences Undented as Jordan Swings Away
"Which one is he?"
"The tall one," a modern-day Greek chorus of reporters responded.


Theater in Review
Tin Pan Alley and the Silver Screen 13th Street Theater 50 West 13th Street West Village Written, directed and performed by Wally Peterson.


Rival Bidder Diller Says: 'It's History'
When did Barry Diller finally let go of the dream he had been nursing for so long to merge his company with Paramount Communications and oust an old rival while he was at it?
In an interview, a prickly Mr.
Diller would not say.
"I don't want to get into any of that," he said from QVC Network Inc.'s offices in West Chester, Pa.
"It's history."
But Brian L. Roberts, the president of the Comcast Corporation and a partner of Mr.
Diller's in his five-month quest to take over Paramount Communications, said the fateful decision came shortly before Feb. 1, when final bids were due.


Baltimore Almost Back
Symbolically returnikng professional football to Baltimore, Mayor KURT SCHMOKE yesterday handed over the keys to Memorial Stadium to JIM SPERSO.
With the five-year lease signed, all that is needed to fulfill Sperso's effort to bring a Canadian Football League expansion team to Baltimore is approval by Commissioner LARRY SMITH and the league's board of governors. (AP)


Union Calls for Returning Teachers to the Classroom
The union representing New York City teachers said yesterday that more than a thousand teachers were working in Board of Education offices and that Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines should cut those jobs that are not necessary and shift the teachers back to classroom duties.
"Some of them may be doing things that may not be necessary, especially considering the budget situation," said Susan Amlung, a spokeswoman for the United Federation of Teachers.


'Presumed Innocent' Isn't in Constitution
To the Editor:
Those who favor Tonya Harding's right to compete in the Winter Olympics invariably rely on the famous "presumption of innocence" to support their view.
Like most people, including many lawyers, her proponents are under a misconception about this legal principle.


Pet Who Died in Jet's Hold Is Ruled 'Baggage'
At home, a dog may be family.
But on a plane, a Federal judge ruled yesterday, a pooch counts for luggage.
That's it.
In a case that pits a young man and his dog against American Airlines, Judge Shirley Wohl Kram of the United States Second Circuit ruled that even though a golden retriever died after being kept too long in a plane's steamy cargo hold, the dog's owner, Andrew Gluckman, could not sue for anguish and loss of companionship.


Yankees Sign Jeff Reardon
Hoping that Jeff Reardon might still have something worthwhile to offer from his once impressive right arm, the Yankees today signed the 38-year-old to a minor league contract.
He will report to camp Wednesday and participate in New York's first workouts for pitchers and catchers Thursday.
New York signed the pitcher because there is "no risk" involved, said General Manager Gene Michael, who also praised Reardon's versatility.
Michael was also somewhat optimistic about the pitcher's chances.


AIDS in San Francisco Hit Peak in '92, Officials Say
The AIDS epidemic has passed its peak in San Francisco, the first city to be struck by the disease, the city's health department said yesterday.
The number of new AIDS cases reached its highest level in 1992, 10 years after the peak year for newly reported infections with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Maclean Set To Resist Bid By Rogers
The board of Maclean Hunter Ltd. made clear today that it would actively resist a takeover bid by Rogers Communications Inc., advising shareholders that Rogers's buyout offer was not good enough.
Rogers is offering $2.9 billion (Canadian), or $2.25 billion in United States currency.


Equitable, Recovering, Reports Profit for Year
The Equitable Companies said yesterday that record profits at its Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette subsidiary and a sharp turnaround in its insurance business led to a profit of $234.5 million for 1993, in contrast to a loss of $128.6 million for the previous year.
The fourth quarter was the strongest of the year for Equitable, with a profit of $83.9 million, in contrast to a loss of $$28.9 million a year earlier.


Harding Leaves; Mother Is Ill
After six weeks of searing scrutiny over the extent of her knowledge of the assault on Nancy Kerrigan last month, Tonya Harding left today for the Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway, vowing to win a gold medal.
In a brief statement at the Portland International Airport, Harding pronounced herself "really excited" and eager to skate to the championship in the women's competition next week.
Then she entered a van that drove her to a commuter flight to Seattle.
From there, she was scheduled to fly to Copenhagen, then to Oslo.


Ben Bows Out in Fine Style
The hardest-working local dog in show business, a ruddy 7-year-old Akita named Ch.
Tobe's Return of the Jedai, has finished his career with a flourish at the Westminster Kennel Club by winning his breed for the seventh consecutive year, tying a show record.
When he isn't indoors polishing off his favorite treat, leftover wonton soup, Ben, as he's known, shares a backyard kennel with nine other canines at the Lido Beach, L.I., home of his owners, Justin and Ruth Winston.
The 85-pound Akita, who turns 8 in June and has spent the equivalent of 49 dog years pounding the show circuit, collected his 365th best-of-breed rosette at Westminster on Tuesday but failed to advance beyond the working group.
No Akita has ever won the group at Westminster.
Ben's best showing there has been a pair of second-place finishes in the group.
His 22 career best-in-show victories and two national specialties make him the leading Akita in victories in the history of the breed, which originated in Japan as bear-hunters.


Lawmaker Meets Again With Burmese Dissident
The American lawmaker who was allowed to meet om Monday with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi at her home in Myanmar said today that he was "cautiously optimistic" that the Burmese military Government would soon agree to negotiate with her.
The lawmaker, Representative Bill Richardson, Democrat of New Mexico, led the first delegation of foreign visitors permitted to see Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi since she was placed under house arrest in 1989 for her efforts to promote democracy in her country.


Executive Changes
INTEL CORP., Santa Clara, Calif., named Andy Bryant chief financial officer.
JENNY CRAIG INC., Del Mar, Calif., appointed William R. Lewis chief financial officer.


Man in the News: Jeremy Michael Boorda; A 'People's Admiral' With a NATO Burden
Over the last few months, Adm.
Jeremy M. Boorda may have been the only officer in the Navy with more headaches than the man he is expected to succeed as Chief of Naval Operations.
As commander of North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces in southern Europe, Admiral Boorda has been preparing to do something the alliance has never done: commit acts of war to try to bring a semblance of peace.
If bombing begins next week to blast Serbian artillery from the mountains around Sarajevo, Admiral Boorda will be in charge.


In 'Catch-22' Sequel, Heller Brings Back Yossarian, Milo, et al.
Thirty-three years after publishing "Catch-22," the novel whose title became an enduring part of the lexicon and whose bitter satire helped change America's view of war, Joseph Heller has written a sequel that promises to reveal what has become of characters like Yossarian and Milo Minderbinder.
Last week, Mr.
Heller delivered the completed manuscript of the book, "Closing Time," to his publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster; it should be on sale in the fall.
The new novel is more a follow-up to "Catch-22" than it is a conventional sequel, Mr.
Heller said in an interview.
It doesn't pick up directly where "Catch-22" left off, somewhere in the Mediterranean in the last months of World War II, but instead is set in New York in the present.


Navratilova's Farewell Won't Always Be Fair to Her
Upon losing her last-ever singles match here at the Virginia Slims of Chicago, where her role as marquee idol lasted close to two decades and yielded an unprecedented 12 titles, a tearful Martina Navratilova felt like she had just emerged from a funeral: her own.
Navratilova is swiftly discovering that imminent retirement can have its macabre side, particularly when you make an ungainly and premature quarterfinal exit from an event that has done almost everything but bronze you.


Man Pleads Guilty in Killings That Terrorized Florida Students
With relatives of his victims gathered in the courtroom and his trial about to begin, the man accused of murdering five college students in Gainesville, Fla., in 1990 stunned onlookers girding for a long and gruesome trial by pleading guilty today to all charges against him.
"There are some things you just can't run from, this being one of those," the defendant, Danny Harold Rolling, told Judge Stan R. Morris of Florida Circuit Court this morning in Gainesville, where jury selection had been scheduled to start today.


VIACOM IS WINNER OVER QVC IN FIGHT TO GET PARAMOUNT
Viacom Inc. emerged yesterday as the winning bidder for Paramount Communications Inc., surviving a five-month battle fought on Wall Street, in board rooms and in courtrooms.
In a complex offer worth about $9.7 billion in cash and securities, Viacom edged out its rival, QVC Network Inc., whose own offer was similar enough that it was not until late Monday evening that a majority of Paramount's shareholders had agreed to cast their lot with Viacom.


This Guy Twists and Twirls And Turns by the Name Elvis
There will be no Elvis impersonators at these Winter Olympics.
No other figure skater will attempt what Elvis Stojko has planned for his long program: a quadruple toe jump -- four revolutions in the air -- followed by a triple toe jump.
If he hits the combination, by the time Elvis has left the building it could be with a gold medal.


Collusion Sweepstakes Creates 7 Millionaires
Seven players, led by Jack Clark, have emerged from the first round of collusion claims with awards of more than $1 million.
Thomas Roberts, one of two arbitrators who found major league club owners guilty of collusion against free agents in the mid-1980's, issued an order Monday awarding $59.5 million in claims.
Checks will be in the mail Feb. 28 or March 1, the Players Association said.


Sarajevo's Disabled Brave the Snipers


Once Again, a U.S. Stunner on the Slopes
One day after Dan Jansen slipped to his own tortured level of Olympic ineptitude, Diann Roffe-Steinrotter descended brilliantly from the mountain toward a golden state of blissful retirement.
Is it better to have thoroughly dominated one's sport but won nothing on the most visible stage of all, or to have basically been a career also-ran who somehow seizes the great Olympic moments?
The bowed heads of Jansen, the American speed skater, and Roffe-Steinrotter, the Alpine skier, less than 24 hours apart said it all -- Jansen's in mourning over squandering another Olympic chance, Roffe-Steinrotter's for a gold medal to be slipped around her neck. 'Inspiration for the Peaks'
"The valleys have been an inspiration for the peaks," the 26-year-old Roffe-Steinrotter said today, jubilant after becoming the shocking winner in the women's super-giant slalom.
Her victory made it 2-0 here at the Olympic Winter Games for the previously beleaguered United States Alpine team over the rest of planet Earth.


A Challenge to Families and Teachers


Calm in Currency Markets Bolsters Stocks
After the White House moved to calm the turbulent currency markets, stock traders strongly bid up most of the main stock indicators in heavy trading.
With bond and currency markets more stable, equity investors continued to pour funds into economically sensitive stocks like Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, Allied Signal and Goodyear Tire and Rubber.


Theater in Review
Little Eyolf  Pearl Theater 125 West 22d Street Chelsea Through March 19 By Henrik Ibsen, translated by William Archer; directed by Shepard Sobel; stage manager, Mary-Susan Gregson; set by Robert Joel Schwartz; lighting by Stephen Petrilli; costumes by Deborah Rooney; properties by Deborah Roth; sound by Donna Riley; dramaturge, Dale Ramsey.
Presented by the Pearl Theater Company.


Sports of The Times; The Judge Can't Be The Czar
AS Tonya Harding prepares to arrive in this favored land of frozen fjords, reindeer salami, and people bundled and masked like burglars against the cold, there will be included in her baggage, on paper or in her head, Circuit Court Judge Patrick D. Gilroy's Judgment of Dismissal issued last Saturday afternoon in Clackamas County, Oregon.
It is her ticket to skate in the Winter Olympics.
But with it comes further evidence that a new world is dawning in sports, and that athletes in the United States -- and perhaps those under international governing bodies, as well -- may be assured they will be treated fairly, subject to the same democratic laws and judgments as anyone else.
Sports, in other words, are not above the law.
Not even the Olympics.


New Woman Account in Review
New Woman magazine said yesterday that it had placed in review its trade advertising account, now at Mezzina/Brown in New York.
Billings were estimated at $1 million.


A Plantation Church Becomes a Biracial Cause
On the surface, the majestic Rosedown plantation house, perhaps the most famous antebellum home in Louisiana, and the tiny Rosedown Baptist Church, most of whose 90 members are descended from the slaves who built the house, don't share much more than a name and some common soil.
But often the surface does not tell very much about life in a place like St.
Francisville, which is about as Old South as it gets.
Just ask the out-of-town businessman who bought the plantation and is now trying to evict the church, bringing down the wrath of an unlikely alliance whose most visible members are black parishioners and white dowagers.


Down 31, Kentucky Makes Record Rally
Kentucky 99, LSU 95
Kentucky pulled off the greatest comeback in college basketball history tonight, rallying from 31 points down with 15 minutes 30 seconds to play to defeat Louisiana State, 99-95, at Baton Rouge, La.


Going Wild?
"You know what really stinks?" the young Navy officer asked me.
He pushed aside his third Scotch and leaned across the table in a chain restaurant near the Naval Air Station in Norfolk, Va., where the Tailhook prosecutions have crept along for more than a year and where he was one of the dozens accused of "conduct unbecoming."
"What about all the female officers who were going wild at Tailhook? How come they haven't been prosecuted?"


Find Ingredients. The Rest Is Easy.
THIS Thai-inspired one-dish meal is adapted from one served at the Golden Door, the spa in Escondido, Calif.
It calls for things like lemon grass, coconut milk, galangal and chili paste with garlic; ingredients that might be difficult to find in some places.
Lemon grass, which looks like a piece of dried bamboo with a knob on the end, has an exotic citrus fragrance and flavor for which there is no true substitution.
You can use lime, but the dish will not taste the same.
The same is true of coconut milk.
Soy milk could be used, but the taste will be different.


A Norwich Terrier Makes History at Westminster
A black-and-tan Norwich terrier, Ch.
Chidley Willum The Conqueror, stood alone in the center of the big green-matted ring in Madison Square Garden.
He had just made history last night by capturing the best-in-show honors at the Westminster Kennel Club event.
It was the first time in one of America's longest continuously held sporting events that a representative of the breed had gone to the top; he defeated a field of 2,580 champions.


NAMING OF SOLARZ AS ENVOY DUE SOON
After months of delay and reports that it was dead, Clinton Administration officials said today that the nomination of former Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn as Ambassador to India was back on track.
They said the White House would soon send his name to the Senate for confirmation.
"People are now proceeding as if it's going to happen, and sooner rather than later," said a senior Administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity.


In Special Elections, Democrats Win Two Senate Seats
In special elections for nine seats in the State Legislature, Democrats won both open Senate seats tonight and three of the seven open seats in the Assembly.
A Liberal with strong ties to the Democratic Party also won an Assembly seat in a hotly contested race in Queens.
The Senate may have picked up two more supporters of the death penalty, which could be enough to carry an override of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's annual veto of the measure in that house.
But the Assembly appeared to pick up only one more vote, not enough to carry an override in that chamber.


Voting Rights Under Siege
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 has helped minority voters elect thousands of candidates of their choice in states where getting out the black vote once brought lynch mobs.
Dramatic gains extended to the U.S.
House of Representatives, where 39 African-Americans now sit -- up 50 percent just from the 1990 redistricting and 1992 elections.
But those gains are under perverse legal attack, encouraged by a wrongheaded Supreme Court opinion last June.
A 5-to-4 Supreme Court majority said one long, thin black-majority district in North Carolina had created "an uncomfortable resemblance to political apartheid" and was constitutionally suspect.
It sent back for trial, scheduled for next month, a lawsuit by white voters who say their rights have been violated by a racial gerrymander.


Debate on Using Marijuana as Medicine Turns to Question of Whether It Works
THE enduring debate over the legalization of marijuana for medical purposes has taken a new turn recently as a number of doctors have begun asking whether it actually works.
Critics point out that no well-designed study has ever shown any medical benefit from smoked marijuana.
And even though people may tell poignant stories of how they or their friends or acquaintances found relief by smoking it, the reports are nothing more than anecdotes, the sort of evidence that is normally rejected by medical authorities.


U.S. Says Serbs Can Unload Big Guns or Re-Aim Them
Acting with the United Nations, the United States has agreed to give Serbian nationalist forces extra latitude in meeting a NATO ultimatum that they remove or surrender control of their heavy weapons around Sarajevo, , Administration officials said today.
Under the agreement, rather than handing the weapons over to peacekeepers, the Bosnian Serbs would be permitted to keep some weapons in their own hands as long as they are not loaded or aimed at the Bosnian capital, the officials said.


Prevent Offense and Defense Prevent Islanders From Losing
For only the second time in their 22-year history, the Islanders were held without a shot tonight in a period.
To make matters worse, it was the third period of a tight game that the Isles needed badly.
Unbelievably, the shot on goal was never necessary.
Ron Hextall stopped 21 of 22 shots, including a great glove save on a low slapper from Shawn Chambers with 1 minute 25 seconds remaining, and the Islanders made two early goals stand up as they defeated Tampa Bay, 2-1, at the Nassau Coliseum before 10,156 fans.


Johnny Mitchell Gets Call As Jets' Transition Player
Faced with the prospect of making some tough financial and personnel decisions during the free-agent signing period, the Jets made one of their easiest moves yesterday when they named tight end Johnny Mitchell their transition player for 1994.
Mitchell's contract doesn't expire until 1995, and when it does he will be an unrestricted free agent.
But by making him the team's transition player, the Jets will be able to match any offer he receives from other National Football League teams.
Mitchell is scheduled to earn $600,000 in 1994 and $675,000 in 1995.


Tiger Haynes Is Dead; Musical Actor Was 79
Tiger Haynes, a musician and actor who created the role of the Tin Man in the Broadway musical "The Wiz," died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said his wife, Joy.


CHRONICLE
From the tempus fugit file: could it be a quarter of a century since the release of the starkly painful Academy Award-winning "Midnight Cowboy?"
To commemorate its 25th anniversary, the film will reopen on Feb. 25, the exact date on which it opened the first time.
It will be shown at the Baronet Theater in Manhattan and the Bruin Theater in Los Angeles.


Mexican Aide Says Peace Talks Will Begin Soon
After weeks of delays that have raised tensions within the Government, officials said today that they had nearly completed preparations for peace talks with peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas.
The Government's negotiator for the conflict, Manuel Camacho Solis, said that on Wednesday rebels of the Zapatista National Liberation Army, in a show of good will, would free Absalon Castellanos Dominguez, the former state Governor they kidnapped last month.


Quick Charge for Batteries Lifts Hope for Electric Cars
Demonstrating the electric-car equivalent of a gas station, with a device that recharges batteries in minutes instead of hours, a small Georgia company has shattered the world record for miles traveled by an electric vehicle in 24 hours.
At an average of 35 miles an hour at the Atlanta Motor Speedway last Friday, it was certainly not the fastest speed ever achieved there.
But the feat, beginning a little after noon, was noteworthy all the same: an electric Chevy S-10 pickup truck, toting in its bed enough batteries to run a whole house for a day and traveling 44 to 45 laps of the 1.477-mile oval between charges, covered 831.8 miles.
That beat by 200 miles the previous 24-hour record, set in Los Angeles on July 12, 1992, with a Geo Storm using the drivetrain and batteries of an Impact.


Bridge
Study the diagramed deal, and consider how South should play in six hearts after an opening trump lead.
If you can solve it, your card play is of a high order, and you do not need lessons, even from Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., often described as the world's leading bridge teacher.
He provided the deal, but it will not be found in his series of bridge videotapes.
The fifth and most recent is on opening suit bids, responses and rebids, and is available for $39.95 from Root-Hahn Enterprises, Box 7205 Heights Station, Concord, N.H. 03301.


Merit Scholarship Program Faces Sex Bias Complaint
The American Civil Liberties Union and the National Center for Fair and Open Testing have filed a Federal civil rights complaint charging that the method of awarding prestigious National Merit Scholarships discriminates against girls and should be changed.
The complaint, filed yesterday with the United States Department of Education, says that each year 60 percent of National Merit Scholarships go to boys because the selection method relies primarily on high school students' scores on a standardized test, the Preliminary Scholastic Assessment Test.


Engel to Face Race for Seat By Legislator
Assemblyman Larry Seabrook, a Bronx Democrat, announced today that he planned to challenge Representative Eliot L. Engel this year in a Democratic primary in the 17th Congressional District, which includes parts of the Bronx and Westchester County.
Mr.
Seabrook's candidacy had been rumored for months, but he made it official today by filing a statement of candidacy and registering his campaign committee with Federal elections officials.


Let's Have a Light-Rail Link for the Entire Midtown Core
To the Editor:
The Regional Plan Association was delighted by "To Test a Trolley," your Feb. 7 editorial endorsement of a light-rail line along Manhattan's 42d Street.
As you note, the proposed trolley would connect major destinations from the United Nations to the Javits Convention Center and would be "faster, cheaper, cleaner" than current transportation options.


William Poll; Grocer, 89
William Poll, who with his wife, Christine, opened one of the first specialty groceries on the Upper East Side more than 50 years ago, died on Friday at his Queens home.
He was 89.
The cause of death was heart failure, said Salvatore Susca of Stamatiades Funeral Home, which is handling the arrangements.


Eating Well
"EAT no evil."
That slogan, appropriate for the nutrition police, can be found on the menus of the Kenny Rogers Rotisserie Chicken chain, a recent addition to the good-for-you dining-out experience.


Cotten Before Welles
To the Editor:
Your obituary of the actor Joseph Cotten (Feb. 7) omitted his early New York radio career.
This was how Mr.
Cotten met Orson Welles.
They were two among many actors in the 1930's who found this new means of income when they could not get enough stage work.
"Cavalcade of America" and "The Goldbergs" were two of Mr.
Cotten's many radio shows.


An Apron for a Squeegee
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that squeegee men should go out and get jobs in restaurants instead of trying to wash car windshields.
"There are plenty of jobs available," he told an interviewer on WBAI radio.
"A person who's a squeegee operator could work in a restaurant." He added, "Maybe the hours are a little longer and then you've got to pay taxes and there are a whole bunch of other things that are involved, but you really shouldn't fuel the impression that the people who are doing squeegees just really don't have a job."


The Pop Life
Impresario Honored
The corner of Second Avenue and Sixth Street in the East Village is getting a new name, Bill Graham's Way, in honor of the legendary rock music impresario who for a quarter of a century was a central figure in the world of rock-and-roll.
The site was the location of the Fillmore East, the theater where in the late 1960's fans packed in sardine-like to hear such bands as the Who, the Jefferson Airplane, the Jimi Hendrix Experience, the Grateful Dead, the Doors and the Allman Brothers.
Graham, who was killed in 1991 in a helicopter crash at the age of 60, also ran the Fillmore West and Winterland in San Francisco.


A Subwaycentric Lens on History
"SEE Spot run" may have been the first words read by lots of children, but not by Paul Fritz.
"Express," "via" and "local" hold that place of honor in his life.


Jailed Scientist Awaits A 2d Trial in Moscow
Vil S. Mirzayanov, a Russian scientist charged in a state secrets case, remained in a Moscow jail today, even after the Prosecutor General called for a new investigation into the charges.
Mr.
Mirzayanov's wife, Nuriya, said today in a telephone interview that she was certain that the new inquiry, approved Tuesday by the Moscow city court, would result in an acquittal.
"The first investigation was carried out to prove his guilt," she said.
"Now this one will prove his innocence."


Metropolitan Diary
CONVERSATION overheard at my Brooklyn Heights barbershop between customer (sitting) and barber (standing):
Customer: What do you do in the Poconos?
Barber: I go there every year.
Customer: Yes, but what do you do in the Poconos?
Barber, astonished: I sit down! DAVID HAWKINS
. . .
Dear Diary:
The other day at lunchtime I popped over to the Jewish Room at the main library at 42d and Fifth where I was researching lists of Middle East peace organizations.
I found the book I wanted, and as I sat down I noticed a man kneeling on a prayer mat, roughly facing east.
Enveloped in both his midday devotion and his astrakhan-collared overcoat, he alternately salaamed and recited his supplications with outstretched hands.
What an omen, I thought.
I was not prepared, however, for his next activity.
Finishing his prayers, he started to do push-ups on the mat.
He then returned to the table facing me.
Before commencing his chanting from the Koran he placed his prayer/ exercise mat in his attache case.
I wanted to ask him if he was praying for strength, or peace in the Middle East.
RICHARD DAVIS
. . .
Scene: A Manhattan movie theater. The film has not yet started.
Cast: Male moviegoer; three women sitting in the row behind him.
Woman 1: Have either of you seen "Shadowlands"?
Woman 2: What's it about?
Woman 3: Isn't it the one where this American woman goes to England and falls in love with Lewis Carroll?
Woman 2: He's the one who wrote "Winnie the Pooh." MARTHA CHAPMAN
. . .
THE CAPTURE OF NEW YORK The first one fell at nine at night unseen
but dawn found window ledges shelved with loaves
of snow. By noon, the bosses said, "Go home!"
and workers spilled outdoors in flurries, tramped
past children skidding down the walks from school.
By night's return, a million folks times twelve
had stamped their boots before the door; our city
overtaken fast as snowflakes fall. TOM FURLONG
. . .
The place is Broadway and 82d Street, outside a travel agency, where Eugene Raskin overhears two women who are gazing at the tour displays.
"Listen, Joyce," one says to the other.
"No matter how attractive the places appear, you have to remember they're out of town."
. . .
Dear Diary:
A couple of Fridays ago, soon after they told us that New York Telephone is now known as Nynex, my phone went dead.
The next afternoon, Nynex sent over a repairman, who swiftly revived the dial tone.
Segue to Monday morning, when I took a call at the rotary phone on my kitchen wall.
"This is Nynex calling," said a female voice quickly identifiable as robot voice mail.
It was checking on my problem.
"If you are speaking from a touch-tone instrument and are no longer experiencing difficulty," the robot instructed, "please press 1 now."
I gazed at the rotary dial waiting for the rest of the menu.
End of menu; no alternative action.
SONI HOLMAN FINK
. . .
Dear Diary:
During winter, for a more immediate reading than weather reports provide, I look out my second-floor window to see how people on the busy sidewalk are dressed.
The elderly are often over-layered, attired more heavily for the cold than I would be.
Oddly, well-dressed businessmen are almost always without scarfs and/or hats.
Carriage-pushing moms going in and out of grocery stores are, I have found, the most reliable indicators of how seriously one should layer up for the day.
If all else fails, I open the window to discover first hand just how cold it really is.
LYNN McGEE
. . .
Dear Diary:
A cold, dreary day (what else?) and with lowered head, gritted teeth and the need for a good laugh, I am headed for my local post office in Yorkville.
Suddenly, from out of the gray mist, I pass a woman who is walking a small, dark something or other.
First I hear a loud uncouth grunt.
This is followed by a silly-sounding squeal.
Turning around, I run back to her and have my longed-for laugh.
I say, "But isn't that a pig?"
Her eyes on the animal, she nods.
What I want to ask is, "So why are you walking a pig?" But I don't have the nerve.
After a silence, she speaks.
"It's not mine. I'm walking it for a friend."
I say, "Oh," as if that explains everything and walk on.
O.K., Geraldo I'm not.
Oprah I'll never be.
But in my heart I know there's a tale behind that pig.
JUNE FOLEY
. . .
A TIP OF THE OL' ICECAP It's only a matter of attitude as to whether you simply see the accumulating piles upon piles upon piles of snow as a scene from a winter wonderland or view it as the polar icecap itself encroaching into your backyard!
PETER PAYACK


Temple Glad to Get Chaney Suspension Over
Temple 65, St. Bonaventure 56
Eddie Jones scored 24 points in Temple's 65-56 victory over St.
Bonaventure in Olean, N.Y., last night, and said he was glad the game was over.
Jones and his teammates were tired of questions about Coach John Chaney, who was serving a one-game suspension imposed by the school after he confronted Massachusetts Coach John Calipari and threatened to kill him following Temple's 56-55 loss Sunday.


With New Republican Allies, Cuomo Pushes Medicaid Plan
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo renewed his push today for a complex plan to ease the large and growing costs of Medicaid on New York City and county governments and offered to sweeten the deal with more money sooner from the state.
Mr.
Cuomo said an improving economy would give the state unexpected revenues, allowing it to give New York City and the 57 other county governments a total of $110 million in the state's fiscal year, which begins on April 1.
That would be a small fraction of the $3.4 billion that those governments are expected to spend on Medicaid in the coming fiscal year.


No Headline
"If you give me a tame elk, I will ride it." -- JOHANN OLAV KOSS, Olympic speed skater.  [ B13:2. ]


R.T.C. Sues Law Firm
A Federal agency filed a $400 million lawsuit today against Streich Lang, a Phoenix law firm that advised a large savings and loan association that failed there in June 1989.
The Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency in charge of disposing of failed savings and loans, accused Streich Lang of negligence and breach of professional responsibility in the failure of the Western Savings and Loan Association.
The failure has cost taxpayers a total of $2.7 billion, Stephen J. Katsanos, a spokesman for the R.T.C., said.


U.S. Says Bar Exam Board Is Biased Against Disabled
The Justice Department has accused a New York State agency of discriminating against disabled people who want to take the bar exam to become lawyers.
In a letter sent last month to the state agency, the New York State Board of Law Examiners, James P. Turner, an acting assistant attorney general, said the agency had "engaged in, and continues to engage in, a number of practices" that violate the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act.
In numerous cases, the letter said, the board had refused to pay for readers for the blind or writers for people with other handicaps, or to allow more than than two days for the bar exam.
The Justice Department threatened to sue the state board unless it agreed to a remedy.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bank of China, owned and controlled by the Chinese Government, filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of $500 million of debt securities.
*
Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, is selling $100 million of step-up notes due in 1999 at 100 to yield 4.5 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The coupon increases to 6 percent if the issue is not called.


Bombing Bosnia Would Pour Oil on Fire
To the Editor:
Re "Clinton Aides Seek Approval by NATO on Bosnia Air Raids" (front page, Feb. 8):


Appeal in Death Sentence of the Killer of 4 Girls
The first death sentence imposed under Connecticut's 1980 capital punishment law was appealed this week before the State Supreme Court, in arguments focusing on whether death is too severe a penalty for a 34-year-old man convicted of kidnapping and killing four teen-age girls in 1983 and 1984.
If his sentence is upheld, the defendant, Michael Ross, could become the first person executed in the Northeast since the United States Supreme Court struck down all state capital-punishment laws in 1973 as "arbitrary and capricious."


First Move by Counsel On Clinton Land Deals
The independent counsel investigating the real estate investments of Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, made his first court appearance today, obtaining an order to convene a grand jury that would be devoted solely to that case.
The counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr., said he had asked that the grand jury be appointed to sit for 18 months to insure that the investigation would be handled "in a prompt and thorough manner." His request was granted in a closed session here with Judge Stephen M. Reasoner of Federal District Court.


New Standards for Drug Cases Anger Prosecutors
Two months after New York State's highest court radically altered the burden of proof in drug possession cases, prosecutors say their worst fears are being realized.
More than a dozen cases have been dismissed, and prosecutors say that thousands of pending cases may be similarly affected.
With prosecutors now clamoring for a legislative remedy in Albany, and defense lawyers countering that drug laws have finally been made more rational, the ruling has provoked a vigorous debate about how to sentence drug offenders.
Opposition From Judges
In December the Court of Appeals surprised law-enforcement officials with a novel interpretation of the state drug laws: To prove that a suspect knowingly possessed a certain amount of drugs, the court ruled, a prosecutor needs to show not only that the suspect carried the drugs, but also that he knew the approximate weight of the drugs.


VIETNAM'S EXODUS IS DECLARED OVER
The era of "boat people" from Vietnam has been declared over, and Vietnamese fleeing their country will no longer be entitled to at least temporary asylum as political refugees.
"A chapter is coming to an end in Indochina and Southeast Asia," Sadako Ogata, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said earlier in the week at the conclusion of a special meeting at the United Nations refugee organization's Geneva headquarters.


Review/Dance; Going Against the Grain, With Stephen Foster in Tow
The opening of the Feld Ballets/NY on Tuesday night with the premiere of "Doo Dah Day," Eliot Feld's sardonic nontribute to Stephen Foster, vividly recalled the unpredictability of the choreographer's career.
Beginning with his work for American Ballet Theater in 1967, Mr.
Feld has consistently moved against the general esthetic current, even when the current may have already passed others by.
The repetitive structures that have dominated his work since the 1980's, for instance, came out of his attraction to the Minimalist composers introduced into modern dance over a decade before.


Brown Reaches Accord
KEVIN BROWN and the Texas Rangers decided yesterday not to play the tie breaker.
Instead of asking an arbitrator to resolve their salary differences for a third consecutive February, they settled the matter themselves, agreeing to a $4,225,000 salary.
Brown won a $1.2 million salary in an arbitration hearing two years ago but lost last year and settled for $2.8 million.
The pitcher, who had a 15-12 record in 1993 after having been a 21-game winner the year before, wound up $50,000 closer to his submitted figure of $4.5 million than the midpoint between that number and the Rangers' $3.85 million.


Alexander Graham Bell Fairchild, 87, Dies
Alexander Graham Bell Fairchild, a research entomologist at the University of Florida and the last living grandson of Alexander Graham Bell, died last Thursday at his home in Gainesville, Fla.
He was 87.
The cause was cancer, the university said.


CANADIAN AND NORWEGIAN FLY THROUGH THE AIR TO GOLD
Jean-Luc Brassard of Canada soared over the moguls course to a freestyle skiing victory.
Stine Lise Hattestad won the women's gold. 2D RECORD FOR SPEED SKATER
Johann Olav Koss of Norway set a world record in the 1,500 meters after breaking the 5,000 mark, then donated his bonus to charity.
HARDING AND KERRIGAN MEET
Tonya Harding arrived in Norway and had a chance encounter with her rival, Nancy Kerrigan.
The two practice together today.
SportsThursday, page B11.


Amid Tears and With Support, Punsalan Reflects on Father
Elizabeth Punsalan, the American ice dancer whose 21-year-old brother, Ricky, stands accused of killing their father, Ernesto, broke down at a news conference today.
Punsalan and Jerod Swallow, her partner and husband, both attended the news conference for the ice dancing competition, which begins Friday night.
Several times, Swallow had to finish Punsalan's sentences when the 23-year-old dancer was overcome by tears.


Sports of The Times; Olympics Should Be Rated 'R'
NOW that Tonya Harding has landed the most difficult jump of her skating life -- the Continental Double Cross -- she ought to finally be appreciated by all, if only because her arrival here yesterday keeps Michelle Kwan down on the Oslo farm.
Kwan is the 4-foot-9-inch, 77-pound, 13-year-old who, in Nancy Kerrigan's absence, finished second at the United States Nationals in Detroit last month.
She subsequently was made the alternate by a United States skating federation that was hopeful Harding, its national champ, would land anywhere -- a Turkish prison? -- but here.
Tuesday, the United States Olympic Committee announced that Kwan would continue training in Oslo, in the event that something goes askew in the Hardigan training circus.


New European Police to Fight Regional Crime
The transition to a Western Europe "without borders" in 1993 was hailed as a great boon for traders and travelers, yet barely a year after internal customs controls ended, there are signs that gangsters are also happy with the arrangement.
Vehicles crisscrossing the 12-nation European Union are no longer checked for illegal drugs, stolen goods, smuggled arms or plutonium.
The old restrictions on moving money within the region have been dropped.


School Like Playground Helps Adults to Learn
It's a playground of sorts with its teeter-totter, snow cone, rolls, bumps, jumps and a ridge.
But it isn't for children.
And only skis and snowboards will get you inside.
The site is a teaching course at Attitash, the ski resort in Bartlett, N.H.
Designed mostly to improve the skills of intermediate and expert skiers, the slope is separated from the rest of the ski area by entrance and exit gates.
Although you can gain entry with a lift ticket, Attitash has created the area specially for its ski classes.


A Twist on Thrift
CAN a thrift shop look expensive and still have bargains? The answer is yes.
At the new Housing Works Thrift Shop East, which is to open today at 202 East 77th Street, customers try on designers' sample clothes in private dressing rooms, pay for their purchases on a marble counter and gaze at vintage movies while lounging on 50's sofas.
Jewelry sparkles in glass vitrines.
The gleaming maple walls and shelves are filled with working televisions that cost $125 each.


Snowed-In Families
To the Editor:
I sat down to read "It May Be Cold Outside, but Inside, It's Crazy" (Feb. 3), expecting to be entertained by accounts of my fellow families housebound by the recent inclement weather.
Instead, I found myself distressed by what most of these families revealed about their lives.


In Bosnia Again, a Grim 'Ethnic Cleansing'
A new Serbian campaign of violence and intimidation is forcing Muslims and Croats from their homes in western Bosnia, United Nations officials and refugees say.
The officials and refugees, who arrived recently at a camp near the village of Gasinci in Croatia, said Serbian nationalists in Banja Luka, where Serbs form the majority, were paying local police officers to drive Muslims and Croats out of their homes so they could take over their property.


It's Terrible, Terrible! (Unless It's Just Great!)
Let's talk perspective.
Let's talk about CBS's lack of perspective during the Winter Olympics.


The Tailhook Fiasco
The new Secretary of Defense, William J. Perry, must have thought he was making the best of a bad situation by crafting a deal to entice Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d into retiring with full rank and pay.
Alas, it was a dishonorable deal announced with language that insults public intelligence.
So in his first weeks in office, Secretary Perry has joined former Defense Secretary Les Aspin, former Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d, the Naval Investigative Service and the Pentagon as shareholders in an episode of utter disgrace.
The current Secretary of the Navy, John H. Dalton, was correct in urging Admiral Kelso's removal as Chief of Naval Operations for failing to show proper leadership at the Tailhook convention.
Former Secretary Aspin was wrong to overrule Mr.
Dalton.


How One Bad Putt Put Rocca On Road
The invitation from the PGA of America to play in the PGA Championship arrived in the mail this morning.
Last month, the treasured envelope came from Augusta National Golf Club, inviting him to the Masters.
For Costantino Rocca, a once obscure professional golfer from Italy whose moment of fame came on a missed 3-foot putt at the Ryder Cup in September, the last few months have been the golf version of hitting the Publishers Clearing House sweepstakes.
Rocca, 37 years old, was not destroyed by that missed putt.
In a strange way, it might have enhanced his appeal.
The agony on his face when it was over, after he had gone from 1 up on Davis Love 3d at the 17th tee to losing the match with bogeys on the final two holes, had a very human quality to it.
And it struck a common chord.


Help the Horses
Every weekday 870,000 vehicles stutter their way through Manhattan traffic: private cars, taxis, trucks, ambulances, fire engines, buses and just about everything else on wheels.
It is a safe bet their drivers are not clamoring for an influx of horse-drawn carriages to add to the melee.
Manhattan is chock full of pedestrians, too, all of whom are coping with the same horrendous traffic and few of whom have ever taken a carriage ride down Fifth Avenue -- or anywhere else, for that matter.
The trip is, after all, pretty pricey.


Fund Industry Sets Up Panel
Under increased scrutiny from the Securities and Exchange Commission, the mutual fund industry set up a panel today to review standards for fund managers who trade for their personal stock accounts.
Critics contend that some mutual fund managers may be earning unethical profits by buying shares for their personal accounts just before they buy large blocks of stock for the funds they manage.
The large purchases tend to push up prices for the shares.


Francois Cardinal Marty Is Dead; Prelate, 89, Was Workers' Ally
Francois Cardinal Marty, the former Archbishop of Paris who led the French Roman Catholic Church after student riots in 1968 provoked unrest and social change, died yesterday when his car was struck by a passenger train in southern France.
He was 89.
The police said Cardinal Marty was driving near his hometown of Villefranche-de-Rouergue when his small car became trapped between the barriers of a grade crossing.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article last Friday about the entry of Tom Hayden into the race for California governor misattributed a quotation about Kathleen Brown, who is also a Democratic candidate.
It was Ms.
Brown's brother, former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. -- not Willie Brown, the state House Speaker -- who said of Mr.
Hayden, "I'm glad he's putting the issue of political reform front and center." Former Governor Brown, who ran for the Democratic nomination for President in 1992, also said: "I'm staying out of the campaign. I'm certainly urging my sister to get out front on political reform."


N.H.L. Suspends Players For Violence With Sticks
Meting out a severe penalty for a serious infraction and a lesser penalty for a milder one, the National Hockey League suspended Tony Granato of the Los Angeles Kings for 15 games without pay yesterday for his stick attack on a Chicago Blackhawk rival last Wednesday.
The league also imposed a two-game suspension on goaltender Mark Fitzpatrick of the Florida Panthers for high-sticking David Maley of the Islanders on Saturday.
Both players were fined $500, the maximum allowed under the collective- bargaining agreement.


Reviews/Music; An Innovator Tries On the Traditional
It's hard to find a thicker, denser sound in jazz than the one used by the baritone saxophonist Hamiet Bluiett.
Mr.
Bluiett's sound is heavy, as if it had been made under compression, and at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night he didn't even bother to use a microphone.
He just let his sound jump out into the room and take over.
Mr.
Bluiett's engagement at the Vanguard, continuing through Sunday, is rare on two counts: he hardly ever leads a band in New York, and he's playing with a rhythm section that, for him, is surprisingly conventional.
Though Mr.
Bluiett has led a big band and worked with Charles Mingus, he is best known for his role in founding the World Saxophone Quartet and for his connections to jazz's avant-garde.
He should use a traditional band more often.
In his first set, on two ballads, "I'll Close My Eyes" and "Sophisticated Lady," Mr.
Bluiett, with his sure command of drama, made a case for himself as one of the better ballad players in jazz.


Laughing Robber Uses Child as Hostage
A laughing gunman held a 2-year-old girl hostage today as her 28-year-old mother obeyed his demands and withdrew money from an automatic teller machine, the Nassau County police said.
The mother, with her child tucked in a stroller, entered what she thought was a deserted vestibule of a Chemical Bank branch here on Merrick Road shortly before 8 A.M. and put her A.T.M. card in the cash machine so she could withdraw money to go shopping, the police said.


Bridge
Nearly all regional championships focus on pairs competition, with a Swiss Team event as a finale.
An exception, concentrating on knockout team play, is the New England Knockout Team Regional, beginning tomorrow at the Radisson Hotel in Cromwell, Conn.
This is the schedule:


Energy Assistance Helps the Needy Now
To the Editor:
"Small Budget Steps, Right Direction" (editorial, Feb. 8) commends the President's budget for redirecting scarce resources away from consumption and toward investment.
I too applaud the President for producing a tough, credible budget.


Hard Times, Not Fraud, Explain Loan Defaults
To the Editor:
Your "Looting Student Aid" series (front page, Feb. 2-4) points out the impossible task for the Department of Education to monitor more than 7,000 higher education institutions adequately with limited staff and an inadequate information system.
We compliment you for recognizing this.


Joining Children to Break a Ramadan Fast
It was dinner time at Al Somoud School and Yasir Arafat, a frequent guest, was eating off a plastic plate surrounded by noisy children.
"This is where I feel most at home," Mr.
Arafat said, as he ate a chicken leg with his fingers.
"This is where I come to escape the pressures and the troubles of the world. When I go back to Palestine, I will take every one of these children with me."


HEWLETT-PACKARD CO. (N)
Shares of the Hewlett-Packard Company soared yesterday after the company reported first-quarter earnings that were higher than Wall Street analysts' estimates.
Hewlett-Packard shares closed at $89.125, up $3.625, on the New York Stock Exchange.
For the quarter that ended Jan. 31, Hewlett-Packard earned $368 million, or $1.42 a share, up 41 percent from $261 million, or $1.03 a share, for the comparable quarter a year earlier.
The consensus of analysts' estimates was about $1.20 a share.


Mexican Negotiator Meets Rebels As Former Governor Is Released
The Government's peace negotiator met face to face for the first time today with members of the Zapatista National Liberation Army as a former governor held hostage since the first full day of the revolt was released.
Five rebels armed with automatic rifles handed over Absalon Castellanos Dominguez, the 70-year-old former Governor of Chiapas, at a demarcation line quickly set up this afternoon just outside this high mountain town, which is the stronghold of the rebel Indian army.


Review/Opera; A Bel Canto Epiphany: 2 Sopranos In Bellini
It promised to be a quiet Tuesday evening with the Opera Orchestra of New York, but singers kept setting off explosions.
Did anyone expect Mariella Devia to have all of her considerable assets together at one time?
She hasn't always in the past.
Did anyone expect a relatively unknown American mezzo-soprano to sing with such a sure sense of bel canto style?
Jennifer Larmore, at any rate, was a pleasant surprise.
By all appearances Eve Queler, who devised and directed the evening at Carnegie Hall, was conducting business as usual: a rare piece of repertory done in concert form and a hot new voice or two corraled for her devoted New York audience.
An interesting few hours, to be sure, but the excitement was not to be predicted.


Democrats Accuse 7 Republican Senators of Violating Mailing Rule
A group of Democratic state Senators released postal documents today that they said showed that seven Republican Senators violated internal Senate rules in 1992 -- when all were facing election challenges -- by far exceeding their allotment of taxpayer-financed mailings.
But a spokesman for the Senate Republicans, John E. McArdle, called the Democrats' numbers "wild fabrications" and said he knew of no Republican who had violated the internal rules.


Accounts
*
Precision Tune, Leesburg, Va., to Bozell Worldwide, Alexandria, Va., to handle its national advertising account, which had been handled on a local and regional basis by J. Walter Thompson Detroit.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Transactions
Baseball American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Ernest Riles, infielder, on a minor-league contract.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Terry Leach, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.


Storming the Snow In a Family Humvee; Gulf War Car Wins Civilian Sales
It may be nearly as wide as a semitrailer truck, as heavy as two ordinary cars and as expensive as a modest home in some parts of the country.
But in a car culture in love with four-wheel-drive vehicles, and in a winter that has often defeated conventional automobiles, it has been embraced by a devoted few as the thing to drive.
"I have five cars in my family," said Audray Baker of Flemington, N.J., "but this winter, it's the only one that can get up my driveway."


A Shelter That Helps Solve Problems
SUNRISE VILLAGE is a homeless shelter designed to solve the problems encountered by the homeless.
The shelter, with 66 beds, in Fremont, Calif., provides privacy, protection from theft, caseworkers on the premises and gardens.
"We wanted a place where people's self-esteem will be enhanced," said Carol Lamont, the director of housing for the City of Fremont Housing Department.


Tunnel to Change Europe, but Maybe Not Britain
Barring planetary death by meteor or the outbreak of war between England and France, the ceremony that will change Europe forever is set for May 6.
The Channel Tunnel, proudly billed as the first land link between Britain and the Continent since the Ice Age, will be officially opened.
France is approaching the day of destiny with the technological maturity of a nation that produced the Minitel computer linked to telephones and the high-speed train called the T.G.V.


At the Mets' Camp, Bring a Compass
There are maps posted in the Mets' locker room.
It is necessary, this February, to give directions to the different fields at the team's spring training complex.
There are 53 players invited to camp -- pitchers and catchers reported this morning -- and the roster itself is so uncertain that Manager Dallas Green breaks out in laughter when asked to name his leadoff man.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
The Small Clematis
Q.
Can you suggest a clematis to cover a rather delicate-looking trellis? -- Joyce T. Kent, Danbury, Conn.


Giants Protect Howard Cross
The Giants yesterday named tight end Howard Cross as their transitional player for 1994.
Cross will become an unrestricted free agent when his contract expires after the 1995 season, but the Giants will be able to match any offer he receives from other National Football League teams.
When Cross's $3.9 million contract is up, the Giants must pay him the average salary of the top 10 players at his position from the previous season even if he does not get any offers from other teams.


HOSOKAWA CLINGS TO REFORM IMAGE
As the Japanese have grown increasingly torn by the confrontation over trade with the United States, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa is defending his stand by depicting it as just one of the sweeping changes that he has sought to bring to the scandal-ridden political system.
He has cast the battle as part of his campaign to bring fundamental reform to Japan.
But for many Japanese who have grown disillusioned by the continuing strife within Mr.
Hosokawa's governing coalition and signs that he is more of a conservative at heart than a reformer, a series of trials in a stark courtroom less than a mile from the parliament may say more about where the real push for change is coming from.


Prudential Image-Mending Stumbles
When Prudential Securities recently began a $22 million advertising campaign to repair its tattered image after its limited partnership scandal, it chose a few employees to star in commercials and give the firm a human face.
But, in picking two brokers for the job of presenting a new, cleaned-up image, the firm apparently chose one who has been touched by allegations of wrongdoing in its past.


REPORT TO CLINTON SEES VAST EXTENT OF HOMELESSNESS
A draft of the Administration's plan to end homelessness says the problem is "far larger than commonly thought" and calls for spending large, though unspecified, new sums on housing, mental health and tax credit programs.
The plan was ordered last spring by President Clinton and drafted by an interagency group headed by three Cabinet Secretaries.
It represents a departure from a 12-year standoff between advocates for the homeless and Government officials about the scope and cause of homelessness.


Wickman Shows Up Early to Find His Place With the Yankees
The new Yankee Bob Ojeda needed to ask where the clubhouse was, Jim Abbott graciously signed autographs and chatted with the few fans in attendance and Manager Buck Showalter actually left Fort Lauderdale Stadium before it turned dark.
Pitchers and catchers trickled into camp today and the pace was relaxing, even restful.
Since players could simply telephone the Yankees to inform them that they had arrived, and since the first organized workout is not until Thursday at 10 A.M., few ventured onto the field or into the batting cages.
Abbott and Bob Wickman graced the outfield grass by running and tossing a baseball, Mike Gallego whacked baseballs and Matt Nokes lifted weights.
Ho-hum.


Cold Curbs A Rebound In Housing
Hampered by the nation's third-coldest January in a century, builders slowed the pace at which they broke ground for homes by 17.6 percent, matching the biggest decline in 10 years, the Commerce Department reported today.
The Northeast was the hardest hit, with housing starts diving 32.8 percent to a pace below that of January 1993.


Taranto Journal; Italy's South Needs Sinews (Steel's Not Enough)
Day and night, the smokestacks at the big Ilva steel mill heave plumes of orange, black and white into the sky, a sight that once inspired Government leaders to praise it as a "cathedral in the desert" that would heal a schism between Italy's prosperous north and undeveloped south.
Built in the early 1960's as part of a drive to develop southern industry, the Ilva mill is still reckoned to be Western Europe's largest steel plant.
But today the mill has become a symbol of southern Italy's crisis, and a challenge to the imagination of the nation as it moves toward electing a national Parliament whose task will be to revive the economy and quell separatist sentiment in the north.


High-Tech Safety: Will Parents Buy It?
LISTEN in on a child by way of a concealed microphone and transmitter!
Push a button and set off a piercing alarm that could frighten away abductors!
Hear a loud beep if a child strays too far or falls into water!
Send messages like "Come home" to a child's watch!
In a time of fear about threats to children, manufacturers are betting that parents will increasingly look to high technology for salvation.


Chaney Apologizes For Angry Comments
Temple Coach JOHN CHANEY, his voice choked with emotion, apologized yesterday to fans, players and all young people for his threatening outburst against Massachusetts Coach JOHN CALIPARI, saying that even his wife, JEANNE, has been unable to forgive him.
Chaney, suspended by Temple for one game, noted with tears in his eyes that last night's conference game at St.
Bonaventure would be the first he had missed as Temple coach.
"I fully accept the actions that the university has taken and I feel they are deserved, well deserved," he said.


Alarms in the Night
To the Editor:
One night last week I lay awake from 1:30 until nearly 4 A.M. waiting for the antitheft alarm in the car parked near our apartment building to run down.
In other big cities -- London, for one -- vehicle alarms ring for only a minute, which surely is the maximum time for any deterrent effect.


Snow's Leaving May Be As Painful as Its Coming
The sun is shining but that does not mean the region's weather troubles are over.
In fact, if the weather gets too warm too fast, the troubles may just be beginning.
The snow is many times normal depth around the metropolitan area; the ground is deep with snow in places that are usually bare.
That could be good news, because New York State is still officially in a drought watch, but the snow could lay the groundwork for flooding.
Experts hope it gets warm slowly, because if all the snow melts fast, people will yearn for the days when all this precipitation was still frozen.


Zenith Wins Competition For HDTV
The industry alliance developing the next generation of television technology chose a Zenith Electronics system yesterday over one by General Instrument for transmitting the signals of future high-definition television.
Seeing the move more as a vote of confidence in Zenith than as a setback for the General Instrument Corporation, investors sent Zenith's stock up about 13 percent in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.
But shares of General Instrument edged up, too.


INSIDE
Grand Jury for Clinton Case
The independent counsel investigating the real estate investments of the Clintons obtained a judge's order to convene a grand jury that would be devoted solely to that case.
Page D22.
Abortion Law Is Delayed
Amid widespread confusion about just how the law should operate, a state judge in Harrisburg delayed the implementation of Pennsylvania's abortion control law.
Page A18.
Most U.S Drugs for Russia
The Clinton Administration announced that Russia had agreed to allow the sale of virtually all drugs made in the United States.
Page A16.
Cable TV Battle in Hartford
In a sign of growing competition in cable television, a start-up company won approval to compete with a cable giant to serve Hartford.
Page B1.


Lauded Sanitation Workers Cite Contract Talks
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani invited a group of sanitation workers and other city workers to City Hall yesterday to commend them for their work in clearing snow from the city's streets, but it didn't take long for more serious matters to emerge.
Billy Putillo, a sanitation worker in Staten Island who was asked to step forward to tell tales from the snowy streets, said, "I just want to say I hope this improves our negotiations with the Mayor."


Scientist Is Named to Head AIDS Research Office
Fulfilling the near-impossible task of pleasing all the various factions in the siege against AIDS, a highly regarded immunologist has been chosen to head the Government's newly restructured and politically thorny Office of AIDS Research.
Dr.
William E. Paul, a scientist at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease in Bethesda, Md., who is known for his studies of how cells of the immune system communicate with one another, will take over the office from Dr.
Anthony S. Fauci, an AIDS researcher who has been in the public spotlight -- and sometimes on the public griddle -- since the epidemic began.


Economic Scene; Needed: fresh ideas on how to dig Russia out of its mess.
BAD economic news dribbles in from Russia almost every day.
The inflation rate nearly doubled in January . . . state enterprises will soon need another seven trillion rubles to cover overdue bills (don't bother to convert that one to dollars) . . . even the Kremlin's ability to collect taxes on vodka is being challenged by smugglers.
And no wonder: Reformers have been routed by the military-industrial complex, whose managers are wishing, hoping, praying they can return to a time when success was measured in how many tons of steel pipe they produced -- not how much it cost to make or who wanted to buy it.
Is there anything outsiders can do to help Russians dig out of this mess?


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl Advances in Philadelphia Event  Ivan Lendl, seeded fifth, defeated Patrick McEnroe, 6-4, 4-6, 6-4, yesterday in Philadelphia in the first round of the United States Indoor.
Lendl, a two-time winner of the tournament and the runner-up last year, used baseline hitting to subdue John McEnroe's younger brother.
Lendl served 18 aces to McEnroe's 6.
Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands reached the quarterfinals by defeating Luiz Mattar of Brazil, 7-6 (7-2), 6-2.
Eltingh upset the world's top-ranked player, Pete Sampras, in the first round Tuesday night, 7-6 (10-8), 6-4, by charging to the net.
Also advancing to the quarterfinals were Jaime Yzaga, Paul Haarhuis and Andrei Chesnokov. (AP) Navratilova and Pierce Triumph: Martina Navratilova and Mary Pierce won their first-round matches in the Paris Women's Open yesterday, while second-seeded Jana Novotna quit the tournament with an injury to her left knee, suffered at the Australian Open last month.
Top-seeded Navratilova easily defeated Germany's Christina Singer, 6-2, 6-2. (AP)


SAUDI AIR TO BUY $6 BILLION IN JETS BUILT IN THE U.S.
After intense lobbying by President Clinton and his top advisers, the Administration announced today that Saudi Arabia had decided to replace its fleet of commercial jets with American planes.
The $6 billion sale should provide jobs for tens of thousands of Americans.
Announcing the decision at the White House with Saudi Arabia's Ambassador, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, by his side, President Clinton said the sale was an example of how his Administration intended to campaign for contracts for United States businesses as ferociously as European and Asian governments have done for theirs.


Critic's Notebook; A Prime-Time Lineup in Its Prime
What does a television reviewer watch just for the fun of it?
More often than not these days, I find myself tuning in to the entire Thursday night lineup on NBC, beginning at 8 with "Mad About You" and continuing to 11 with, in order, "Wings," "Seinfeld," "Frasier" and "L.A. Law." Appealing casts, clever scripts, loopy humor and even a serious issue or two: quality entertainment has its unmistakable upside.
Powerhouse prime-time lineups on a single network don't come along that often.
The all-time champion is still CBS, which back in 1973 turned Saturday night into a stay-at-home festival with "All in the Family," "M*A*S*H," "The Mary Tyler Moore Show," "The Bob Newhart Show" and "The Carol Burnett Show." More recently, CBS nearly did it again with a Monday schedule that included "Murphy Brown" and "Northern Exposure" but then tumbled into weak spots, especially after the departure of Delta Burke from "Designing Women."


U.N. Tells Serbs to Place Arms in Depots
United Nations commanders told Serbian nationalist generals today that they must place any heavy weapons remaining within 12.4 miles of Sarajevo in five compounds guarded by the United Nations by the end of the weekend or face NATO air strikes.
Very few weapons have been handed over by the Serbs besieging the capital since NATO demanded last week that they withdraw the arms or submit them to United Nations "control" by Feb. 21.
One Definition of 'Control'
As two sophisticated French radar systems and 450 more United Nations troops arrived here to help monitor a shaky cease-fire, people close to the negotiations indicated that the United Nations was insisting that "control" means that Serbs surrender physical possession of any artillery and tanks they do not withdraw from the mountains ringing the besieged city.


Judge Holds Up Abortion Rules In Pennsylvania
Amid widespread confusion about just how Pennsylvania's Abortion Control Act should operate, a state judge in Harrisburg yesterday delayed the law's enforcement.
Judge Dante Pellegrini of the Commonwealth Court said the law should not go into effect until 10 days after the state publishes information the law requires about abortion and fetal development.


Viking and Spender Settle Dispute
Formally settling a lawsuit brought by the poet Stephen Spender in England, Viking Books has agreed to stop selling David Leavitt's novel "While England Sleeps" in its current form, the publisher announced yesterday.
In a statement released in London, Viking said "no further sales of the novel in its present form" would be made.
It plans to release a revised version of the book this year in Britain and next year, in paperback, in the United States, Viking said.


Arafat Must Ask Who's a Friend, Who's an Enemy
Dogged by enemies who have vowed to gun him down, a financial crisis so severe he can no longer pay salaries and difficulties in his talks with Israel, Yasir Arafat says he is struggling to keep the rancorous P.L.O. from disintegrating even before it takes control of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
"The Israeli Government is not in a hurry to implement this agreement," he said in an interview today, "but this is a dangerous policy that could backfire."


Checkers
The stock price of Checkers Drive-In Restaurants Inc., a chain of fast-food drive-ins based in Clearwater, Fla., has been heading lower since May.
After the market closed on Tuesday, Checkers reported earnings that were lower than analysts' estimates.
Its stock fell yesterday in Nasdaq trading, where it was the second-most-active stock.


Women Rarely Batter Men Except When Abused Themselves
To the Editor:
Re "Men, Too, Are Victims of Domestic Violence" (letter, Feb. 4):


Peace Pact in Colombia
The Government and about 400 urban rebels in Medellin have signed an agreement that could lead to a peace accord.
The pact, signed on Tuesday, calls on rebels to demobilize.
The Government has promised to negotiate social and political benefits for the rebels and to guarantee their security.
For 10 years the Medellin drug cartel has fought its enemies and the police.
In the early 1990's, rebel militias, many backed by leftist guerrillas, added to the violence by forming commando units to fight injustice.


Bonds Mixed Ahead of Price Data
Bond trading was subdued and prices mixed yesterday as dealers and investors sat on their hands ahead of today's report on January consumer prices.
A report that showed a sharp 17.6 drop in January housing starts lifted prices in early trading, but most market participants had already suspected that severe winter weather would take its toll on home building for the month.


Broadway Pays Big Dividends, Study Says
The Broadway theater contributes $2.3 billion a year to the economy of New York City, or about a fourth of the total economic impact of all of the city's cultural activities, according to a study by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to be released today.
The report is the first comprehensive analysis of Broadway's economic impact by an independent authority.
Port Authority researchers said that during the 1992 season Broadway shows attracted 1.7 million tourists and 782,000 suburbanites, who spent more than $266 million on restaurants and $242 million on hotels and more than $35 million on taxicabs.


U.N. CAN'T DISCOVER WHO FIRED MORTAR
A team of United Nations investigators said today that they had been unable to determine which side fired the mortar round that exploded in a Sarajevo marketplace this month, killing 68 people and leading the United States and its European allies to threaten air strikes against Bosnian Serbs.
While there has been a widespread assumption that Serbian gunners fired the lethal round, a senior official of the United Nations Protection Force here said physical and technical evidence gathered during a nearly weeklong investigation is insufficient to enable them to trace the trajectory of the 120 millimeter mortar round, or pinpoint the location from which the weapon was fired.


John Casey, 75, a Pilot And Airlines Executive
John J. Casey, an executive of commercial and military aviation for more than 50 years who headed both Braniff International Airways and Pan American World Services, died on Tuesday at his home in Port Washington, L.I.
He was 75.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his wife, Dawn Bryan.


Uniworld Is Chosen For A.T.&amp; T. Work
A.T. &amp; T. said yesterday that it had consolidated the media-buying portions of all its accounts aimed at black consumers at the Uniworld Group Inc. in New York.
The agency has handled the creative and media portions of the A.T.&amp; T. corporate division's account aimed at black and Spanish-speaking consumers for the last 18 years.
Billings were not disclosed.


Some Israelis Fret as Congo Hires Ex-Soldiers
It is almost a ritual for young Israelis to travel the world as soon as they complete their compulsory military service.
The more exotic the destination, the better.
But several dozen new army veterans who signed up recently to train Congolese Government troops have raised both eyebrows and questions here about whether they carried the spirit of adventure too far.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section yesterday about the Duchess of York misstated the source of relief supplies she took to Croatia for distribution in Bosnia.
The supplies were donated by the Duchess's foundation, Children in Crisis, and by Americares, not by companies licensed to sell products in America related to Budgie the Little Helicopter, a storybook character created by the Duchess.
Those companies donated $12,250, which the Duchess presented to Hale House.


Siblings of the Disabled
To the Editor:


Back From the Brink Again
Ending yet another bout of brinkmanship, North Korea acceded on Tuesday to international inspections of its declared nuclear sites.
That is a hard-earned victory for U.S. diplomats who are trying to persuade the North to give up any ambition to build bombs.
North Korea agreed to let inspectors into all seven of its declared sites.
They can conduct repeated visits if necessary, but only to assure that nuclear safeguards are intact -- to verify that no nuclear material has been diverted to bomb-making in the year since their last visit and to check seals and replace film in cameras designed to inhibit diversions in the future.


Soccer Deaths Have Sapped Zambia's Spirit
The graves in a semicircle lie lost in the cornfields near the soccer stadium, the wind whipping at the overgrown grass mounds piled with dusty plastic roses.
The rains have torn and faded the large black-and-white portraits on each grave, and the young faces have receded into formless gray.
In April, Zambia fell into seven days of official mourning after a plane crash off the coast of Gabon killed the national soccer team.
The 18 players, coaches and crew members were buried here with official honors as tens of thousands of fans poured into the capital's streets and grieved for what many said was one of Africa's greatest teams.


Liberate Cuba. Liberate Us. Lift the Embargo, Now.; Give Castro A Carrot
As the Clinton Administration lifts the trade embargo against Vietnam and considers easing travel restrictions to Cuba, Libya, Iran and Iraq, its economic embargo against Cuba is being increasingly criticized.
Yesterday, the United Nations released a report concluding that far from encouraging political or economic reform, the embargo is doing the opposite.
Indeed, it is widely recognized that the policy not only flagrantly violates international law, which proscribes trade sanctions based on political ideology, but also is counterproductive.
Two months ago in Mexico, Vice President Al Gore defended the North American Free Trade Agreement by arguing that more open trade would promote the development of democratic institutions in Mexico.
The same argument applied in the former Soviet bloc, China and Vietnam, and would apply, if given a chance, in Cuba.


Review/Pop; Love Songs That End In Distress and Death
It took a perverse sense of humor to book Richard Thompson at the Bottom Line on Valentine's Day.
"Love stories don't always work out," Mr.
Thompson said during Monday's late set, a huge understatement for the songs he sang from his latest album, "Mirror Blue" (Capitol).
"I Can't Wake Up to Save My Life" is a nightmare about a lover transformed into a horror-movie monster; in "Beeswing," a free-spirited woman breaks away when her lover suggests settling down, and both end up miserable.
The most romantic ending was in an older song, "Vincent Black Lightning 1952," in which a dying thief hands his motorcycle keys to his beloved.
Between songs, Mr.
Thompson offered droll banter, but there was little comfort when he sang.
Mr.
Thompson draws his pessimism from a long tradition of bleakly stoic British traditional songs.
His melodies, too, reflect Celtic modal scales and the rhythms of jigs and reels and strathspeys.
But Mr.
Thompson's traditionalism is hot-wired with modern elements: the verse-chorus-bridge structures of pop songs, Chuck Berry guitar licks, harmonies that wander where folk songs never strayed, and lyrics that recognize a modern, urban world.
In "Easy There, Steady Now," the singer sees his love life reflected in a jackknifed tractor-trailer accident.


Goo Is in the Oven, Barbie's at the Gym
IF a creature from another planet were to visit the American International Toy Fair in New York this week, it would see this picture of so-called modern childhood: boys being raised to be warriors who rule the universe, and girls being groomed to be hairdressers.
For boys, manufacturers showed action figures that look like personal trainers on their way to target practice.
These figures, like Batman Legends by Kenner Products, possess Schwarzenegger muscles and carry spring-loaded, missile-firing weapons in not one but two strong fists.


Meeting Macy's Creditors, Federated Is Silent on Plans
Federated Department Stores completed its first formal meetings yesterday with creditors of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, presenting its rationale for merging with Macy but disclosing little else about its plans for a combination.
Creditors who attended the meetings, one with secured creditors on Monday and another with unsecured creditors yesterday, described them as uneventful.
"We listened to them explain again why they believe a merger with Macy is a good thing and then shook hands and thanked them for the coffee and danish," a representative of one creditor group said.


Review/Theater; Joseph Wiseman as Head of a House Divided
As the patriarch in "Unfinished Stories," Joseph Wiseman has a beatific smile, sad eyes and the pale fragility of eggshells.
He has entered the stage where those who have lived a long time begin to resemble those who have barely lived at all.
He is a very old baby chick.
You are apt to find him instantly touching when the lights come up on Sybille Pearson's family drama, which opened last night at the New York Theater Workshop.
There he is, center stage, dreaming faraway dreams in an armchair.
His head lists to one side.
Twitches of memory are all that seem to animate his thin limbs.


AT WORK WITH: Dr. Lori Cupp; Navajo, Surgeon, Pioneer
LIGHTED by the blue and orange glow of a video monitor, Dr.
Lori Cupp watched intently as she supervised another surgeon removing sections of a Navajo patient's diseased gallbladder through a tiny slit in the patient's navel.
In the high-tech world of the operating room, she often meets surgeons who view their skills as akin to auto mechanics: fixing things in need of repair.
But for Dr.
Cupp, who the Association of American Indian Physicians said is the first Navajo woman to become a surgeon, surgery is a powerful, spiritual experience.


2 Are Promoted At Bowes Dentsu
Bowes Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles has named two senior executives to head the direct marketing agency, assuming responsibilities from Murray R. Bowes, the chairman and chief executive, who plans to retire on July 1.


11 in Texas Sect Open Defense With Tape of a Panic Call to 911
Defense lawyers began presenting their case today in the murder and conspiracy trial of 11 Branch Davidians by playing a tape of a phone call from a panicked cult member to a 911 emergency line as Federal agents stormed the sect's compound last Feb. 28.
The tape was introduced by the first defense witness, Lieut.
Larry Lynch of the McLennon County Sheriff's Department, to buttress a major defense argument -- that the Branch Davidians thought they were defending their compound against unknown assailants on the day of the raid.


Drug Makers, Happy, Still Fear Bureaucracy
Officials of American pharmaceutical companies active in Russia today welcomed the pact with the United States on marketing drugs as a way to ease the delays and expenses of obtaining sales approvals from the Russian Government.
But some business people who have run the gantlet of the Health Ministry expressed skepticism that the agreement could cut through a bureaucracy hampered by a lack of computers and the stampede of applicants seeking entry into the Russian market.


Stocks Edge Up on Currency Reassurance
Stock traders nudged up shares across the board yesterday, as the Clinton Administration continued to reassure the currency markets that it was not politicizing the dollar and bond markets were relatively calm.
The best movers were economically sensitive stocks like United Technologies and Alcoa.
Still, bears were turning ever more bearish.
Harrison Roth, a senior options strategist at Cowen &amp; Company, derided the notion that the stock market would get to or near the 4,000 level on the Dow because the market was awash in money.
Last year, individual and other investors poured a record $128 billion into stock mutual funds.


Dell Computer Picks Lowe Direct for Job
The Dell Computer Corporation in Austin, Tex., said yesterday that it had selected Lowe Direct in New York to handle its direct marketing account, which had previously been handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.
Lowe Direct was awarded the account after a review that also included Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct in Los Angeles and J. Walter Thompson in New York.


Essay; True Indy Counsel on The Way
The Government does a lousy job of investigating the Government.
That's why the Independent Counsel Reauthorization Act, passed by the Senate last year, finally was passed by the House last week.
After conferees iron out minor differences in two weeks, the bill that President Clinton promised to sign will be on his desk.
Not a moment too soon.
Consider how abuses of power are probed by insiders versus outsiders.
Last summer, a couple of Clinton State Department appointees wrongfully searched the files of their predecessors in the Bush Administration; the subsequent dishing of dirt was done from the Washington private line of Warren Christopher's top aide, who was off in Singapore.
State's Inspector General sent a report to the Secretary of State, who fired the culpable appointees, and a "prosecutive summary of potential Privacy Act violations" to Justice.
Time-servers there gave the blatant, politically motivated intrusion a desultory look-see and declined to prosecute.


Saudi Sale Should Brighten Aircraft Makers' Dark Days
Saudi Arabia's decision today to purchase $6 billion in commercial aircraft from the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the Boeing Company will temporarily revive an industry facing one of its worst downturns.
The deal is expected to increase sluggish production at McDonnell Douglas and Boeing, the country's two biggest plane builders, and to preserve thousands of jobs at the companies and their subcontractors.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Housing starts fell 17.6 percent in January, matching the biggest decline in 10 years.
Analysts attributed the sharp drop in large part to severe cold in most of the country.  [ Page D1. ]
Companies
Saudi Arabia is buying $6 billion worth of commercial airliners from Boeing and McDonnell Douglas.
The country's state-owned airline is replacing its entire fleet with the purchase.  [  A1. ]


Wang Headquarters Auctioned for $525,000
The sprawling corporate headquarters complex of Wang Laboratories Inc. in Lowell, built at a cost of $50 million to $60 million, was sold at auction on Tuesday for $525,000.
An accountant, Louis Pellegrine, submitted the winning bid for the property, which includes three 12-story towers, two lower buildings, an auditorium that seats 500, two cafeterias, dining rooms and a parking lot with spaces for 600 cars.
The headquarters complex, built in stages since 1980, is on 15 acres in Lowell, about 25 miles northwest of Boston.


CHRONICLE
Forty-three years ago, HERB GARDNER'S first play, a one-act work called "The Elevator," was published by Samuel French, and the 16-year-old author went to the Drama Bookshop in Manhattan to buy the first copy.
Tonight, the playwright, who went on to greater success with such works as "A Thousand Clowns" and "I'm Not Rappaport," will celebrate the Random House publication of his 1992 play "Conversations With My Father," at the same bookstore, at 723 Seventh Avenue near 48th Street.


Reviews/Music; Satanic Messages Redeemed In Delivery
Two longtime brand names in British hard rock blasted into Roseland on Tuesday night.
Black Sabbath, which made its first album in 1969, and Motorhead, formed in 1975, have persevered through the decades.
But on Tuesday night, it was the slightly younger band, Motorhead, that sounded old-fashioned, while Black Sabbath remained streamlined and efficient.
"Here's a song you know very well," Black Sabbath's vocalist, Tommy Martin, kept saying with variations throughout the band's set.
Black Sabbath relies, wisely, on material from its first decade, when Ozzy Osbourne was its lead singer and the band was inventing a school of heavy metal.
Black Sabbath mixed bulldozing, stop-start riffs, histrionic high-tenor singing and lyrics that veered from tortured idealism to visions of Satanic rituals.
By the 1980's, bands like Metallica were citing Black Sabbath as musical forefathers.


Schools Chief Meets the Press -- Reporters From City Schools


In Moscow, High-Tech Access to Hard Currency


CHRONICLE
SUSAN SONTAG will receive the third annual Montblanc de la Culture Award, to be presented Tuesday at a ceremony in the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
The $25,000 prize is meant to give the recipient a chance to further a cause in the cultural arena.
Ms.
Sontag is being honored for her humanitarian work in Sarajevo.
She has gone there four times since April, and oversaw a production of "Waiting for Godot" there on one of her trips.


Siblings of the Disabled
To the Editor:


Nets Goals: Consistency And .500
For Coach Chuck Daly, the Nets are a hard team to figure out.
They are 3-0 against the Knicks and 6-3 against the four division leaders of the National Basketball Association.
Yet against the rest of the league they are 17-21.
No wonder they are struggling to make the playoffs with a 23-24 record.
"Against the Houstons, the San Antonios, the Seattles, the New Yorks, the Atlantas we've played some of our best basketball," said Daly.
"What we need to do is to get some of that involved with the other teams."


Opponents of Police Merger Doubt Savings
Opponents of a proposal by the Giuliani administration to merge the city's three police departments said at a hearing yesterday that such a move would not result in substantial savings and could diminish police protection in the city's subways and public housing projects.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who ran for office on a law-and-order platform, promised to consolidate the New York City Police Department, the housing police and the transit police into one entity that would make the 38,000-member police force more efficient.


Seles Won't Say When But She Will Say Why
Monica Seles announced yesterday that she had no definite return date planned for 1994.
The former No. 1-ranked player has been unable to compete on the tennis circuit since being stabbed by a fanatical follower of the current No. 1 player, Steffi Graf.
After a whirlwind of training sessions in December and January in which Seles struggled to regain her form, the player has emerged physically fit but mentally unprepared to resume her career.


HOUSE PROUD
INDOOR/OUTDOOR living, though dear to the heart of most suburban homeowners, rarely gets its due as a design issue.
The standard suburban architectural formula for connecting the two realms: knock a hole in the wall, add a picture window or sliding doors and hope for the best.
It's like hooking up nature as though it were cable television.
But the standard stuff seldom delivers on its promises -- great views, freedom of access -- or adds anything imaginative to either side of the setup.


Man Beaten By Officers Settles Suit
A man who was beaten by police officers at an Act Up demonstration three years ago, a beating he says left him with severe brain disorders, won a $350,000 settlement yesterday in his lawsuit against New York City.
But Christopher Hennelly remained bitterly dissatisfied with the official handling of his case, particularly the fact that the Police Department did not discipline the officers who beat him with billy clubs and a radio on Feb. 11, 1991.
"This will happen again and again because the city ratifies their conduct," he said.


To Eat, To Drink, To Be Seen
THE snow was slowly falling in plump flakes.
The temperature was 8.
But last week, inside Cafe Architettura, a month-old cafe in SoHo, a group of designers, architects and photographers were merry.
They did what artists have done in cafes since Paris in the 1850's.
They drank wine, dined and held court.
They even looked good.
Their faces glowed, not necessarily from the wine but from the peach walls inside the 800-square-foot cafe -- the newest hangout for architects.
The alabaster bar, which is back-lit, is also in peach, shading to cream.
"The color is very flattering," said Kriz Kizak, a jewelry designer.


Market Place; Embrace Systems acknowledges some improprieties by officers.
THE Embrace Systems Corporation, a plastic molding company with plans to expand in the plastic recycling business, used weak links in securities regulations to sell stock here and abroad without the regulatory scrutiny that normally accompanies a public stock offering.
The company's financing arrangements came to light yesterday when it announced the dismissal of its chief executive, Curtis Appel, and general counsel, David Brule.
In documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Embrace describes a series of improper stock sales and inaccurate descriptions of business prospects.
Its stock fell 62.5 cents, to $1.125 a share, yesterday in small-company Nasdaq trading.
That was its seventh straight decline from $2.875 on Feb. 8 and far below its peak of $15.25 on Aug. 31 last year.


No Asterisk Needed: Italian Wins Luge by a Landslide
The last time an Italian woman won an Olympic gold medal in luge was 1968, and it happened only after officials disqualified the East German winner for illegally heating the runners of her sled.
Twenty-six years later, Gerda Weissensteiner needed no help from anyone to put her nation back atop the Olympic medal stand.


February Brings Frustrating Times for Knicks
When frustration replaces confidence, players make statements like the one Patrick Ewing made Tuesday night.
"We're playing like wimps," Ewing said, although it was difficult to imagine confronting Ewing, Charles Oakley or Anthony Mason at the beach and kicking sand in their faces.


Sidney Wise, 69, College Teacher Who Created Capitol Hill Network
Sidney Wise, who created one of the biggest old-boy networks on Capitol Hill while he was a political science professor at Franklin and Marshall College in Lancaster, Pa., died on Tuesday at Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Sarasota, Fla.
He was 69 and lived in Lancaster.
The cause was a stroke, said Patricia Lawson, a spokeswoman at the college.


A World Record and a Grand Gesture
First Johann Olav Koss set a world record in speed skating.
Then he was awarded his second gold medal of the Winter Olympic Games.
And then he gave his bonus money to charity, 225,000 Norwegian kroner, or roughly $30,000.
It was an absolutely golden day for the Norwegian skater.
A human wave of noise and his own sturdy frame propelled him around the Viking Ship arena in 1 minute 51.29 seconds, fully 31-hundredths of a second faster than any human had ever skated 1,500 meters.


White House Memo; Events Are Outflanking the President
Last week he visited a jail.
On Tuesday he traveled to a police academy in Ohio.
Today it was a jaunt to a community college in New Jersey.
President Clinton has been a busy man on the domestic front.
But on the national stage, his message has been largely drowned out.
For the past two weeks, Mr.
Clinton has tried to press the themes he articulated in his State of the Union Message last month by hitting the road.
But he has been caught at nearly every turn by the travails of a Presidency that is trying to cope with possible military action in Bosnia and a trade war in Japan at the same time that it is under fire from a former Justice Department official over the crime bill, sparring with Congress over the cost of health care and trying to clean up the last bit of mess from the Tailhook scandal.


Hard Times, Not Fraud, Explain Loan Defaults; Rigorous Standards
To the Editor:
Re your "Looting Student Aid" series (Feb. 2-4): Our accrediting commission accredits about 1,000 trade and technical schools throughout the country, and have been recognized and relied upon by the Department of Education as a "gatekeeper" to the student aid programs you discuss.


Guilty Plea Set in Garbage-Collection Killing
A man investigators say is an organized-crime figure who dominated Long Island's private garbage-collection business will plead guilty today to conspiring to murder two men who had fought Mafia influence in the business, a lawyer for the defendant said yesterday.
The lawyer, Larry Bronson, said that his client, Salvatore Avellino Jr., 58, had agreed to plead guilty in Federal District Court in Brooklyn to murder conspiracy and racketeering charges in return for dismissal of additional charges he had faced.


Clintons Asking Elderly To Support Health Plan
President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, began an aggressive effort today to pitch their health-care proposal to older Americans, whose backing of the plan to overhaul the existing system has been more tepid than expected.
Unlike either of its main rival plans, the Clintons' proposal would extend current Medicare coverage to provide long-term care and prescription drugs, and Mr.
Clinton called attention to that distinction today in appealing for support from the elderly.


4 Charged In Tax Plot For Refunds
At first, there were just a few.
Then a lot more, and then thousands and thousands -- all of them low-income tax returns from Hispanic women and all of them seeking refunds under the Federal Government's tax-credit refund program for the working poor.
By the time they reached more than 11,000 a year ago, with claims for refunds of about $13 million, Internal Revenue Service officials knew something was wrong, and yesterday they said that the returns were part of a novel conspiracy to file false income tax returns.
Only about $80,000 was refunded before the I.R.S. detected the pattern of similar claims.


METRO DIGEST
CLINTONS PITCH HEALTH PLAN TO ELDERLY Speaking at a forum in Edison, N.J., President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, began an aggressive effort to pitch their health-care proposal to older Americans, whose backing of the plan has been more tepid than expected.
A20.
NEW YORK CITY  DEFENDANT WAS DUPE, HIS LAWYER SAYS The lawyer for one of the four men on trial in the World Trade Center case admitted for the first time that there was a terrorist bombing plot and that his client was involved in it -- but only as an unwitting dupe.
A1.


McCarron Is Suspended
CHRIS McCARRON, the regular rider on Dehere, was suspended yesterday for five days, starting Saturday, for careless riding at Santa Anita.
The jockey will miss the $200,000 Fountain of Youth Stakes for 3-year-olds at Gulfstream Park on Saturday.
It was the third time in three weeks that McCarron was superseded as rider of Dehere, last year's top 2-year-old.
McCarron drew a five-day penalty before the Hutcheson Stakes on Jan. 30 and was replaced by Jerry Bailey, but Dehere came down with colic and was scratched.
Then McCarron had a commitment at Santa Anita two weeks ago and Mike Smith rode Dehere to a second-place finish in a tuneup allowance race.


Perils of a Nice Jewish Girl In a Colonial Bedroom
DECOR can speak volumes.
Seemingly innocent furnishings, like guest towels, beds, washstands and rockers, can be threads in a web of memories that tie together cultural differences, social divisions and personal identity.
Elaine Reichek, who grew up in Brooklyn in the 50's, remembers her bedroom on the top floor of a pseudo-Dutch Colonial house, with its ersatz colonial canopy bed from Ethan Allen's 1776 Collection, its braided rugs and its faux-Early American fire screen.
Her parents, Hilda and Jack Reichek (he was in the furniture business), were "first-generation Jews." But, she said of her parents, "being Jewish was not discussed." She continued: "There was no Judaica in the house, nothing that remotely suggested Jewish culture."


U.S. Plans to Delay Work Permits For Immigrants Who Seek Asylum
Officials of the Immigration and Naturalization Service say they plan to charge people seeking political asylum a $130 fee and to delay issuing work permits for 150 days to try to to deter new applicants and cut the backlog of asylum claims.
The fees would make the United States the only nation in the world to charge an application fee for people who contend that they are fleeing persecution in their homelands, according to the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees.


Cornell Official Resigns
LAING E. KENNEDY, athletic director at Cornell since 1983, announced yesterday that he was resigning to explore other professional opportunities.
Kennedy, 54, said he would leave the post no later than July 1, 1995. (AP)


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about clashes in the Gaza Strip referred incorrectly in some editions to the site of a Palestinian death.
It was Rafah, not Gaza City.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.49
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.26
2.87
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.41
3.41
2.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.88
5.87
6.14
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.45
6.45
7.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.29
7.28
8.35
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.52
5.54
6.04
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Music; Donath In Recital Of German Songs
Well into her 50's, Helen Donath still possesses a splendid soprano voice, gleamingly clear at the upper end and duskily handsome at the lower.
One dispiriting flaw aside, her Valentine's Day recital of German love songs at the Walter Reade Theater was a thorough pleasure to hear.
Schubert's "Gretchen am Spinnrade," dramatic yet intimate, established this singer's Lieder credentials at once.
The Valentine theme might easily have turned cloying, but Mrs.
Donath's program was offbeat and intelligent.
She drew great intensity from seven of Brahms's "Deutsche Volkslieder," highly characteristic of the composer despite their folk-song roots.
She was similarly adventurous in essaying three songs (including "Hast du von den Fischerkindern") by Hans Pfitzner, who in his own slightly deranged late-Romantic way was a master of the Lied.


Bounces Don't Bring A 2d Gold
Just looking at the course for the freestyle skiing event called moguls can make observers feel fortunate, fortunate that they are not racing down that hill themselves.
It is strewn with bumps and hillocks from top to bottom, a matter of 250 meters, or better than two and a half football fields.
The skiers bounce; they fly through the air; they spin and twist and let out screams.
One way to train for this event would be to ride in the back of a New York City taxicab.


With Spirit Gone, Ad Partners Split
Donny Deutsch and Steve Dworin, who together formed perhaps the most successful advertising agency partnership so far in the 1990's, are suddenly and unexpectedly parting company.
Mr.
Dworin, president of Deutsch/ Dworin Inc. in New York, has left the agency after two and a half years, he said yesterday, because "the spirit was gone" from what had been a "magical" relationship with Mr.
Deutsch.


100 Police Cadets Take Their Oaths


CHRONICLE
How do you invite QUEEN ELIZABETH to visit your country?
Through diplomatic channels at the highest level, and with plenty of notice, of course.
It was reported in Moscow yesterday by the Press Association, the British news agency, that the Queen will almost certainly visit Russia this year, thanks to a conversation between Prime Minister JOHN MAJOR and President BORIS N. YELTSIN of Russia.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MOBIL CORP., Fairfax, Va., formed a joint venture with Indian Oil Corp. to sell Mobil brand automotive lubricants in India.


Review/Music; New Strings on the Block: The Brentano Quartet
First-rate string quartets are hardly in short supply these days, but the crowded market will have to make room for another.
The Brentano String Quartet made an irresistible case for itself at its New York debut on Tuesday evening at Merkin Concert Hall.
Its players -- Mark Steinberg and Serena Canin, violinists; Misha Amory, violist, and Michael Kannen, cellist -- have all attracted attention as soloists in recent seasons.
Together, they produce a magnificently blended sound with a remarkable coloristic range.
The concert was presented by the Guild of Composers, so the focus was on contemporary works, with early Berg and late Beethoven providing depth of perspective.
Seymour Shifrin's Quartet No. 5 (1975) opened the program.
Nearly 20 years after its composition, the work's language -- gracefully angular, scampering, sometimes sensuous, sometimes eerie -- seems quaint and almost nostalgic.
And in this group's vivid account it took on an almost visual quality: if you stopped concentrating on musical syntax, the sounds evoked the seemingly chaotic squiggles, slashing lines and bursts of color of a Jackson Pollock painting.


Connecticut Approves Cable Battle
In a preview of how vigorous the competition in home entertainment may become, state regulators gave approval today for a company with no employees yet to compete directly against the nation's largest cable television operator.
Analysts and industry officials said the decision was one of the first in the nation since Congress encouraged cable television competition in a 1992 law.
It will also make Hartford and its suburbs, with a total of 136,000 homes, one of the largest markets to offer residents a choice not only of what to watch, but also whom to buy it from.


Journal; The Radio Funnies
On an icy night last week, Rudolph Giuliani took the stage at City Center to introduce a warming performance of "Fiorello!" as "my favorite musical about my favorite Mayor." With particular delight, the new Mayor recalled how his predecessor "went on WNYC to read the funnies" during a newspaper strike.
But when that beloved bit of La Guardia lore was re-enacted in "Fiorello!" minutes later, Mr.
Giuliani was gone.
He hadn't stayed to watch his favorite musical.
Nor was he about to match La Guardia's light touch as a radio programmer.
The day before, WNYC had announced its dubious decision to hire Mr.
Giuliani's political crony Curtis Sliwa as a talk-show host.


Olympic Official Visits Site of '84 Winter Games


Trenton's Efforts at Mediation Pay Off
A decade after New Jersey became the first state to create an office that specializes in mediating complex legal disputes, business is expanding.
Recent Federal and state court rules that enable judges to order mediation when they deem it appropriate increased the workload of the 13-member office by 25 percent to 50 cases last year.
The office is considering requests to mediate prisoner lawsuits against corrections officers and to train students to act as mediators for their classmates.


Executive Changes
CENCALL COMMUNICATIONS CORP., Denver, appointed William R. Mansfield executive vice president and chief financial officer.
MERRILL LYNCH &amp; CO., New York, named Barbara Feldman a managing director of the housing finance group.


Russia Allows Sale of Drugs Made in U.S.
The Administration announced today that Russia had agreed to allow the sale of virtually all drugs made in the United States and approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
The agreement, which takes effect immediately, was described by the F.D.A. as the first in which any nation has formally agreed to rely so heavily on another nation to insure that drugs sold are safe and effective.


Glaxo Chief Resigns, Shifting to Policy Role
The chief executive of Glaxo Inc., Charles A. Sanders, retired from that post yesterday, but he will stay on as chairman and assume the new position of health care policy advocate for the pharmaceutical company.
Glaxo, the American subsidiary of Glaxo Holdings P.L.C., is among the companies that would be hardest hit by any move by the Clinton Administration to impose price controls on prescription drugs.
Glaxo has tried to break into the business of nonprescription drugs but so far has failed.


W. B. Doner Wins A Pair of Accounts
W.
B.
Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., was selected yesterday to become the first agency to handle advertising for a national retail chain and a chain of national veterinary hospitals.
F&amp; M Distributors Inc., a discount health and beauty store chain based in Warren, Mich., named Doner to handle its account.
Billings were not disclosed.
Doner was awarded the account after a six-month review that also included Simons Michelson Zieve Inc. in Troy, Mich.


Books of The Times; A Mystery in Key West, Another in the Author
Scavenger Reef  By Laurence Shames 254 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.
There are ways and ways to hype an artist's work, but as Laurence Shames's blackly comic new novel, "Scavenger Reef," reminds us, nothing succeeds like decease.
This old truth is driven home once again as the motley crowd of his Key West friends gather to mourn the passing of Augie Silver, a successful painter who has recently disappeared at sea, apparently in a boating accident.


Ameritech Adds Burnett to Review
The Ameritech Corporation of Hoffman Estates, Ill., has added Leo Burnett U.S.A. of Chicago as a finalist to compete in the review on the creative portion of its consumer telephone services account, with billings estimated at $35 million to $40 million.


Unseated by Term Limits (But It's Musical Chairs)
When Californians voted in 1990 to limit the terms of their state legislators, one goal was to rid the government of the familiar faces who had been running things for years.
The most prominent, and most powerful, target was the Speaker of the Assembly, Willie L. Brown Jr., a 30-year member who has held the leadership job longer than anyone else in state history.
"Just think," exulted a fund-raising letter during the term-limits battle, "when term limits passes it will be, 'So long, Willie Brown.' "


Newsday Imagines an Event, and Sets Off a Debate
The front page of New York Newsday yesterday was filled by an image that many people across the country were waiting for: Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan skating together.
Only in the real world that meeting has not yet happened.
As a caption indicated, the Olympic competitors just "appear to skate together in this New York Newsday composite illustration." A subheading beneath the picture added: "Tonya, Nancy to Meet at Practice," indicating that the meeting had yet to take place.


Could Michelangelo go retail?


Vietnam Refugees Lose Special Status
The era of "boat people" from Vietnam has been declared over.
Those fleeing Vietnam were once assumed to be political refugees and were generally given at least temporary asylum automatically.


Studying the 'White Boxes'
"WE'RE looking for creative thinking about the past and the present, to re-examine old historic types, as well as deal with new building systems," said Anne Van Ingen, the director of the architecture, planning and design program of the New York State Council of the Arts.
To encourage innovative thinking, the program sponsors an annual contest for independent projects and offers a varying number of awards of $10,000 each.
The deadline for this year's contest, the eighth, is March 1.


Sawyer Makes a New Deal With ABC
Diane Sawyer agreed to a new contract with ABC News yesterday, ending as ardent a courting as television news has ever seen, one that involved every network and extravagant offers of both money and programs.
The new ABC deal, for an estimated $5 million a year, will make Ms.
Sawyer a presence on two more prime-time news magazines, in addition to maintaining her anchor position on "Prime Time Live." The details of the ABC deal were apparently influenced by a proposal from NBC, which would have given Ms.
Sawyer four hours of prime-time exposure every week.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  SAUDI ARABIA TO BUYU.S.
PLANES  After an intense lobbying effort by President Clinton and his top economic and foreign policy advisers, Saudi Arabia told the United States that it had decided to replace its fleet of commercial aircraft with American planes that will cost $6 billion and provide jobs for tens of thousands of American workers.
A1


Saints Re-sign Turnbull
RENALDO TURNBULL, who tied REGGIE WHITE for the National Football Conference sack lead with 13 in his first year as a starter, signed a new five-year contract with the New Orleans Saints yesterday.
Terms were not announced.
Turnbull, the Saints' No. 1 draft choice in 1990, would have been an unrestricted free agent tomorrow. (AP)


Skating on Thick Ice


MANDELA SOFTENS STAND ON CHARTER
In a last-ditch bid to head off defiance of South Africa's first free elections, the African National Congress agreed tonight to constitutional concessions aimed at appeasing Zulu and Afrikaner nationalists.
Nelson Mandela, the congress president, told reporters that his organization would support measures to strengthen the powers of provincial governments and open the way for the future creation of enclaves with a strong ethnic identity.


Barkley Is Back
The Phoenix Suns activated the injured CHARLES BARKLEY and DANNY AINGE yesterday, making roster room by placing FRANK JOHNSON and JERROD MUSTAF on the injured list.
Barkley and Mustaf are power forwards, and Ainge and Johnson are guards.


Study of Insurers Sees Decisions As 'Arbitrary'
Insurance companies acted in an "arbitrary and capricious" way in deciding whether to pay for treatment of breast cancer patients in a study of an experimental therapy, researchers say.
Dr.
William P. Peters and Dr.
Mark C. Rogers of Duke University report that about a quarter of insurance companies refused to pay for women to have bone marrow transplants and high-dose chemotherapy as part of a federally sponsored clinical trial.


Hard Times, Not Fraud, Explain Loan Defaults; Heroic Jordan College
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 4 article on the default rates in Federal student loan programs unfairly portrays Jordan College.
You state only that Jordan is not accredited -- true but misleading.
You should also have noted that the college has been granted conditional accreditation by the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools.
Jordan is well on its way toward formal accreditation.


Commuters Pause to Mark the Beginning of Lent


E.M.S. Merger Plan Details Emerge as Dispute Widens
The Giuliani administration's plans to merge the Emergency Medical Service into the city's Fire Department will involve some crews' operating out of city firehouses as a way of reducing the time it takes to respond to emergencies, top city officials said yesterday.
Although officials are still working out the details of the plan, they say they hope to have the merger in effect within the next fiscal year.


Labor Talks to Start. Labor Talks to Start.
Fourteen months after they thought they were starting negotiations for a new labor agreement, representatives of the Players Association and major league club owners will meet March 7 to begin negotiations for a new labor agreement.
Richard Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, and Donald Fehr, head of the players' union, said yesterday that they would meet in Tampa, Fla., a familiar site for negotiating sessions during spring training.
Fehr likes to hold talks near training camps so players can attend them.


Dismantling a Potential Avalanche


Harding Arrives And Greets Kerrigan
Tonya Harding arrived at the Olympics today and, just as officials worried about keeping her and Nancy Kerrigan apart, the two skaters met briefly in the athletes' village before a team picture was taken.
"They came up to each other and said, 'Hi,' and spoke three or four sentences; it was very pleasant, very good," said Gale Tanger, team leader of the United States figure skating team.
"I think Nancy came up first. We didn't know what to expect, but we're glad to get beyond that point."


U.S. Surgical Seeks Cash, Loses Suit
The United States Surgical Corporation said yesterday that it was seeking new sources of cash after posting losses for the last nine months of 1993 and also announced that it had lost a patent infringement lawsuit against its main competitor, Johnson &amp; Johnson.
This bad news hammered the company's stock, which fell $5.625 a share, or 21 percent, to $21.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Trading had been suspended for almost five hours yesterday while the exchange awaited the company's announcement.
The stock had traded at $118 a share in April 1992.


Boitano Draws the Shortest Straw
Brian Boitano may have lost a gold medal before he ever had a chance to win it.
Boitano will skate first among the 25 men in Thursday's Olympic short program.
No skater wants to go first.
Judges withhold higher marks for later, potentially better performances.
If Boitano doesn't finish among the top three in the short program, he has little chance of finishing first after the long program on Saturday.


Covering Environmental Liabilities
Nuclear Support Services wanted to buy a large maintenance and painting contractor last year, but was worried about the potential cost of cleaning up pollution at properties the company owned.
The answer for Nuclear Support -- and a growing number of other companies -- was a new kind of environmental liability insurance that is partly filling the vacuum that was created when most large insurance companies pulled out of the pollution insurance business in the mid-1980's.
Insuring Smaller Problems
Insurance companies, government officials and businesses are still embroiled in knotty legal battles over how to finance the Government-run Superfund for large-scale environmental cleanups.
And insurance to cover corporate liabilities for any future pollution is either unavailable or prohibitively expensive.
But new kinds of environmental or pollution insurance aimed at cleaning up smaller problems are becoming more available, and are helping to keep the wheels of commerce turning.


Events: Shows, Talks
Frank Lloyd Wright Show  Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street; (212) 708-9400.
"Frank Lloyd Wright: Architect," an exhibition of 190 buildings and projects designed by Wright from the 1880's through the 1950's, opens Sunday and continues through May 10.
The show features drawings, models and photographs.


Lawyer in Trade Center Blast Case Contends That Client Was a Dupe
Closing arguments for the defense began in the World Trade Center bombing case yesterday, with the lawyer for one of the four men on trial directly admitting for the first time that there was a terror bombing plot and that his client was involved in it -- but as an unwitting dupe.
The lawyer argued that his client, Mohammad A. Salameh, the lead defendant in the trade center trial, was maneuvered by an "evil genius" who is a fugitive in the bombing case.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many children, the fundamental message deduced from watching the Olympics and other elite athletic competitions has little to do with dedication, grace, sacrifice, talent and sportsmanship.
Rather, they learn that winning is all important.
"We find that children believe that if you win, you're worthy, but if you lose, you're not worthy," said Dr.
Daniel Gould, a professor of exercise and sports science at the University of North Carolina in Greensboro, who works with world-class athletes and children.
"They pick up the subtle message that outcome is the only thing that counts."


Review/Art; Joint Show: May Stevens and Rudolf Baranik
May Stevens and Rudolf Baranik have been married for more than 40 years.
During that time each has produced a significant body of paintings and has been involved in political activism.
Ms.
Stevens, who is also a poet, was a founder of the influential feminist journal Heresies.
Mr.
Baranik is known for his theoretical writing and for work he produced in response to the Vietnam War.
Their joint show at Exit Art, titled "Existential-Political," has more than mere anecdotal logic, though.
Seen together, their paintings ask -- and answer with only partial success -- some of the famously tough-nut questions about political art itself.
Do strong convictions necessarily make strong art?
Can politics and painterly abstraction coexist?


CREDIT MARKETS: New Fears Emerge Amid Low Inflation; Bond Prices Dive After Early Rally; Yields Up Sharply
Bond traders, looking for bad news on inflation, found it yesterday, despite the Government's report that January consumer prices were unchanged.
As a result bond prices fell and the yield on the 30-year bond jumped to 6.54 percent, its highest level since August.


Advocates Cite Cancer Rates In Calling for Pesticide Curbs
Unwilling to await the conclusion of a National Cancer Institute study that they expect will link pesticides to high breast cancer rates on Long Island, cancer-prevention advocates today urged that state laws be enacted to limit pesticide exposure.
"You guys had better get your act together and do what needs to be done," Barbara J. Balaban of Copiague told a panel of the State Legislature holding the first statewide hearing on environmental factors in breast cancer.  'Two Years Behind'
Ms.
Balaban, the director of the New York State Breast Cancer Hot Line, and other cancer-prevention advocates said measures curbing pesticide use in schools and parks and on golf courses and lawns should be enacted promptly as precautions.
They also criticized a two-year reporting lag in a tumor-incidence list compiled by the State Health Department.
"We need accurate local and statewide registries so that we know where we are," said Lorraine Pace of West Islip, who was recently named a breast cancer education specialist at University Hospital Center here.
"It's interesting that our tumor registering is two years behind each diagnosis and yet our state lottery is only seconds behind the picking of the numbers," she said.
The National Cancer Institute announced a five-year, $5 million study of breast cancer on Long Island last fall, the most extensive study of its kind to date.
The breast cancer rate on Long Island is among the highest in the country.
In 1992 a report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta suggested that high incidence of breast cancer on Long Island might be linked to rich diets, affluent life styles, age and ethnic origin.
Long Island groups criticized the report and petitioned the National Cancer Institute for a more comprehensive study.
Cancer prevention advocates said today that evidence shows that some pesticide ingredients mimic estrogen or spur its production in the body.
They said this effect alone was grounds for new restrictions.
Estrogenic chemicals can stimulate the growth of breast cancer cells, some experts say.
Michael Surgan, an environmental scientist in the State Attorney General's office, said that Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell supported a law giving counties and municipalities the power to regulate pesticides.
Currently the State Department of Environmental Conservation regulates pesticides that are labeled safe by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency.
"Long Island should be able to regulate," Mr.
Surgan said.
He said a survey showed that golf course operators on Long Island applied an average of seven times more pesticides an acre than farmers did.
Members of environmental and breast-cancer groups said they also wanted a study of pesticides and other contaminants in water supplies.
"We simply don't think the water is safe," said Karen Wolk of the One in Nine Long Island Breast Cancer Action Coalition.


U.N. REPORTS SERBS ARE PULLING BACK AROUND SARAJEVO
Convoys of Serbian artillery were reported to be pulling back from positions around Sarajevo tonight after the Bosnian Serbs' leader promised Russia that his forces would withdraw, United Nations officials said.
Russia suddenly interposed itself in the standoff today to give the nationalist Serbs besieging the capital a way to comply with a NATO ultimatum without losing face.
NATO has threatened to bomb the Serbs' gun positions if their heavy weapons are not moved outside a 20-kilometer radius of the city, about 12 miles, or turned over to the United Nations by Monday morning.
With Russian at His Side
The political leader of the Serbian nationalists in Bosnia, Radovan Karadzic, flanked by Deputy Foreign Minister Vitaly I. Churkin of Russia, announced tonight that the Serbs had accepted a Russian proposal for a withdrawal.


For Practice, a Two-Ring Circus in One Rink
Round one of Nancy Kerrigan-Tonya Harding appeared as orchestrated as any heavyweight fight.
The only missing element was a ring announcer bellowing "Let's get ready to ruuuuumble."
Their first practice together today at the Olympics crackled with tension in a cramped training rink, the 45-minute workout made compelling by dramatic entrances, calculated avoidance and even a scripted choice of costumes.


Alonzo S. Yerby, 72, Educator and Head Of Hospital Agency
Dr.
Alonzo Smythe Yerby, a former New York City Hospitals Commissioner and a former department head and professor at the Harvard School of Public Health, died on Wednesday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in the Jamaica Plain section of Boston.
He was 72 and lived in Boston.
The cause was not immediately clear, but he had suffered four strokes in the past, said his wife, Monteal.


METRO DIGEST
A CHANGE FROM MAKING TO THINKING
The weight of the New York City metropolitan region has diminished to where it accounts for less than 8 percent of United States economic output.
But as its position in the American economy declines, the region is becoming the global economy's leading marketplace.
A1.


Glitch Makes Teller Machines Take Twice What They Give
In one of the biggest computer errors in banking history, Chemical Bank mistakenly deducted about $15 million from more than 100,000 customers' accounts on Tuesday night, causing consternation among its customers around the New York area.
The problem stemmed from a single line in an updated computer program installed by Chemical on Tuesday in its Somerset, N.J., computer center that caused the bank to process every withdrawal and transfer at its automated teller machines twice.
Thus a person who took $100 from a cash machine had $200 deducted, although the receipt only indicated a withdrawal of $100.
Some Checks Bounced
The mistake affected 150,000 transactions from Tuesday night through Wednesday afternoon.
Some checks were bounced yesterday morning as a result, although the bank said the number was small.


Home Video
At the Las Cumbres Learning Center in Espanola, N.M., parents and children are discovering what videos offer beyond television.
"We're trying to provide alternative scenarios to the violent entertainment the kids and their families ordinarily get on TV," said Deborah Harris-Usner, the director of Las Cumbres Learning Services, which provides counseling and other family-support programs.





In Wake of Storms, Mayor Orders New Spending Cuts
Hard hit by the unexpected costs of cleaning up a relentless series of snowstorms, the Giuliani administration has ordered a new round of spending cuts in New York City's agencies to cut as much as $150 million from this year's budget.
The Mayor's budget director, Abraham M. Lackman, said yesterday that the storms -- the last two dumping nearly two feet of snow on the city -- would cost $30 million to $40 million in overtime, stockpiles of salt and pay for extra day laborers.
His estimate did not include revenue lost from parking meters, tickets and towing as the city suspended enforcement of many parking regulations.


Free Speech Is Worth the Cost
To the Editor:
In "The Cost of Free Speech" (column, Feb. 9), Anna Quindlen laments that her tax dollars help pay for mailings from organizations like Living Truth Ministries, the National Rifle Association and Operation Rescue through discounted third-class postal rates.
She considers the third-class postage available to nonprofit organizations a Government subsidy.


At the Bar; In "Regarding Henry," art imitated life. Or so say a couple who have lived the life.
If there were an Academy Award for lawyer movies, the 1991 film "Regarding Henry," starring Harrison Ford, would garner few votes.
But its premise, at least, was provocative.
It is that an exceedingly obnoxious and dishonest lawyer can suddenly become a nice guy -- that he can stop philandering, swaggering, suppressing evidence, abusing his secretary and neglecting his family -- but only after his brains have been blown out by a robber.
The unconvincing nature of the transformation was only one of the film's many problems.
But to at least one viewer, Joan Cox of Evansville, Ind., the story was all too painfully plausible.
In fact, she had lived through it twice: first when her own husband, a lawyer, suffered brain damage in a traffic accident, and then when she turned their experience into a 325-page manuscript.


SEOUL RECONSIDERS CALL FOR MISSILES
The South Korean Foreign Minister said today that his country was reconsidering whether it still wanted the United States to send it Patriot missiles now that tensions with North Korea have abated as a result of the North's decision to allow inspections of its nuclear installations.
The Foreign Minister, Han Sung Joo, said in an interview that Seoul would have to weigh the military benefits of having such anti-missile batteries against the diplomatic risk that the Patriots might upset North Korea.


Bring Back the Wise Men
Ever since Japan became one of our most important trade partners and competitors, differences in national policies and priorities have threatened to degenerate into a counterproductive trade war.
The current standoff is the most threatening in recent years and could have extremely serious consequences.
Such disputes are hardly unexpected, given the integration of Japan's Government and private sectors and its extreme dependence on exports.
There is little doubt that Japan, a relatively closed society, has alliances among corporations that would violate American antitrust laws as well as safeguarded paths of product delivery from raw-material suppliers through manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers to consumers.


Maria St. Just Is Dead; Stage and Film Actress
Maria St.
Just, an actress and longtime friend of Tennessee Williams, died on Tuesday at her home in London.
She was in her late 60's or early 70's, her family said.
The cause was heart failure brought on by severe rheumatoid arthritis, said her daughter Natasha Grenfell.


Art in Review
Martin Kippenberger
Metro Pictures  150 Greene Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
Martin Kippenberger is very good at what he's good at -- his installation of sculpture at Metro Pictures in 1987 was a knockout -- but his paintings aren't so hot, at least judging by this show of a decade's worth of work.
True, not-so-hot is an important element of Mr.
Kippenberger's style; his career is premised on a bull-in-a-china-shop upset of formal conventions and traditional pieties.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Foul-Prone Tar Heels Fall  Jeff Brown, the best 3-point shooter in the Atlantic Coast Conference, made five long-range shots and finished with 17 points as the Clemson Tigers upset No. 2 North Carolina, 77-69, last night.
Lots of fouls and lots of missed shots did in the favored visitors.
The Tigers (13-11, 4-7 A.C.C.) outshot the Tar Heels (20-5, 8-4) 44 percent to 30 percent.
The Tar Heels led, 35-34, at halftime, but lost three starters in the second half with foul trouble, including center Eric Montross.
Montross had 10 points and a game-high 13 rebounds before fouling out at 5 minutes 4 seconds of the second half.
Derrick Phelps and Brian Reese also fouled out.


Medical Prices Outrun The Rate of Inflation
To the Editor:
Today we hear that sweeping national health care reform may not be necessary because competition has broken the back of health care inflation.
While medical care prices were increasing at 9.1 percent in 1990, they had fallen to 7.2 percent by the end of 1992 and to about 5.9 percent by the end of 1993.
Exactly 10 years ago, the Reagan Administration proudly announced that it had "broken the back of the health care inflation monster that has plagued us for more than two decades." That inflation rate had fallen from 10.8 percent in 1981 to 6.3 percent in 1984.
But then, as now, most of the decline reflected the decline in overall inflation.
Today, medical prices are rising 2.4 times faster than general inflation, considerably higher than in 1990.


I.B.M.'s No-Frills Computer Is Withdrawn From Europe
I.B.M., continuing to realign its products and trim costs, said yesterday that it was withdrawing its no-frills line of Ambra personal computers from Europe.
I.B.M. said that falling prices for its personal computer brands Valuepoint, PS/1 and Thinkpad had made those machines more competitive against the Ambra in Europe and would now become the focus of its sales effort in the lower-end market segment abroad.
I.B.M. had introduced the Ambra PC's in Europe in mid-1992 because it did not have other low-priced brands on the market.


Art in Review
Wilmar Koenig
Janet Borden Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Feb. 28
With stuffed animals and models of people posed in more or less realistic situations, natural-history museums have become popular subjects for photographers concerned with demonstrating the camera's duplicity.
The German photographer Wilmar Koenig presents large color images, taken in various museums in Europe and the United States, that fudge the line between real and fake.


Escapades on Ice: Favorites Go Slip-Sliding Away
It took only 50 seconds tonight for Brian Boitano's Olympic standing to deteriorate from gold-medal favorite to the longest of bronze-medal long shots.
On an artless night when numerous skaters fell and one pair of skates fell apart, Boitano took a bewildering spill on a triple-axel jump early in his short program, left out a mandatory combination jump and received what must have been his lowest score in more than a decade, a 4.8 for required elements from a British judge.


Incentives Can Work for Iraq, Too
What is the best way for America to coax a secretive, unpredictable and sometimes belligerent "rogue regime" to abandon efforts to make prohibited weapons like nuclear bombs or chemical and biological agents?
In the case of North Korea, a deft diplomatic mix of economic incentives and threats of trade and financial sanctions is beginning to yield encouraging results.
Yet in the case of Iraq, the Clinton Administration clings to the purely punitive approach it inherited from George Bush.


On Stage, and Off
Filling a Role
"My Fair Lady," Broadway's biggest success this season, has nonetheless been a pain in the neck for its producers, Fran and Barry Weissler, from the get-go, and things haven't got better lately.
To begin with, Richard Chamberlain, whose relations with the Weisslers have never been exactly amiable ("We could talk for hours about that, but of course I can't," Mr. Chamberlain said this week), is set to leave the show, vacating the role of Henry Higgins, when his contract expires April 3.
And there is, as yet, no one to replace him.
A hunt that could fairly be described as frantic is on, and Ms.
Weissler said that though she's hopeful of landing someone next week -- she wouldn't say who -- it remains a possibility that the show would close while it is still regularly filling the Virginia Theater near to capacity.


Pressure Grows on Croatian Army Troops to Get Out of Bosnia, Too
United Nations observers said today that Croatia appeared to have made little effort to withdraw its regular army troops from Bosnia and Herzegovina despite a sharp warning two weeks ago to start pulling them out or run the risk of economic sanctions.
A senior official at the headquarters of the United Nations Protection Force for the Former Yugoslavia said that rather than withdrawing, regular army troops might be masking their presence by removing their insignia from vehicles and uniforms.


Book on Black History Wins Lincoln Prize
"Free at Last: A Documentary History of Slavery, Freedom and the Civil War" yesterday won the 1994 Lincoln Prize, given annually by Gettysburg College in Pennsylvania to a work about the Civil War.
The book, edited by Ira Berlin, Barbara J. Fields, Steven Miller, Joseph P. Reidy and Leslie Rowland and published by the New Press, is a vast collection of letters, reports and depositions about slavery and emancipation, written by and about blacks during the Civil War.


Miscellany
* Intercom Communications Management, Miami, has been renamed the Jeffrey Group.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Connecticut Supreme Court hearing in a death-penalty case misstated the year that the United States Supreme Court invalidated death penalty laws in 32 states.
It was 1972, not 1973.


MOVE BY RUSSIANS A SURPRISE TO U.S.
The United States was caught by surprise by a Russian announcement that it would send troops to Sarajevo to help the Bosnian Serbs withdraw or surrender control of their heavy weapons, as required by the NATO ultimatum last week, senior Administration officials said today.
The officials welcomed the Russian offer, as well as a Russian-brokered promise by the Bosnian Serbs to comply with the NATO ultimatum, but added that the United States was still wholeheartedly committed to launching air strikes if the Bosnian Serbs defied it.


Par-5's Are No Obstacle As Hoch Shoots a 62
With his crooked smile and mischievous, freckled face, Scott Hoch has been likened to Beaver Cleaver.
Today he did a reasonable impression of Greg Norman.
Overpowering the par-5's on the most difficult of the four courses used in the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic, Hoch (rhymes with smoke) shot a round of 62 that tied the course record at the Palmer Course at PGA West and stands at 16-under-par 128, one stroke off the PGA Tour record for the first two rounds of a tournament.


Arrests in Ticket Fixing
Two Parking Violation Bureau employees were arrested yesterday on bribery charges, accused of erasing more than 3,000 parking tickets worth $173,000 from the agency's computer in exchange for bribes estimated at $80,000, the city Department of Investigation announced.
The employees were William O. Calloway, 35, of Queens and Antoine Collins, 28, of the Bronx.
The authorities said the people who paid the bribes would be required to pay their fines, with an additional penalty.
They said the scheme began last March.


LIFE IMITATES ART
The much-anticipated scene as the Olympic soap opera got under way.
Nancy Kerrigan, left, and Tonya Harding took to the same ice for a 45-minute practice featuring dramatic entrances -- and calculated avoidance.
SPILLS, NOT SKILLS, FROM THE MEN
Stumbles were commonplace as Brian Boitano and Viktor Petrenko, two former winners, finished eighth and ninth, respectively, in the short program.
SOLID GOLD ON SKIS
Lyubov Yegorova of Russia has won two cross-country golds in Norway and five in her career, moving closer to the Winter Games record for gold medals.
SportsFriday, page B11.


Shackled by Past, Racked by Unrest, India Lurches Toward Uncertain Future
A shredded strip of asphalt winds toward this village, passing through mile after mile of wheat and rice fields.
Along the road trudge men and women bearing unruly bundles of wheat stalks on their heads.
An occasional battered bus shudders down the narrow track, a sporadic link with the outside world.
Along one edge of Pawna, where the houses are made of concrete, some with pillared porches, live the higher castes -- the Thakurs, the Brahmins.
Nearby, in adobe huts and small concrete houses, are clusters of a backward or disadvantaged caste known as the Mahto, and segregated in little pockets of worn mud huts and a scattering of rough brick hovels are the untouchables, whose very touch some Hindus regard as polluting.
They are among India's poorest and most despised.


Clinton Aide Hinted for Fed
Alan S. Blinder, one of three members of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers, was reported today to be a likely candidate to become vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
The Washington Post reported in its Friday issue that Mr.
Blinder had expressed interest in replacing David W. Mullins Jr., who left the board a week ago to join a private money-management firm in Connecticut.


Norway Has Its Own Hero And a Good Russian Friend
No wonder the Norwegians have warmed to Vladimir Smirnov.
Not only does he shoot Siberian rapids and swap campfire stories with their beloved Vegard Ulvang, but the rugged man from Kazakhstan also has a habit of losing key races to their other cross-country superstar, Bjorn Daehlie.
Nearly one year after losing to Daehlie in a photo finish at the world championships, Smirnov was upstaged again with even more at stake in today's 10-kilometer classical event.


NEW DOUBTS CAST ON P.O.W. EFFORT
Russian officials reportedly complained last November that State Department officials were discouraging them from releasing documents about prisoners of war in Vietnam.
The report came in a classified cable made available today by Administration officials angry over President Clinton's decision to lift the trade embargo against Vietnam.
According to the cable, the Russians said they were receiving a mixed message from Washington: while many American officials were pressing them to turn over as many documents as possible about the missing, others were saying that releasing such documents would hurt relations.


CREDIT MARKETS: New Fears Emerge Amid Low Inflation; Consumer Index Stable but Survey Foresees Price Rise
Consumer prices were unchanged in January as energy prices fell sharply for the third consecutive month and Florida escaped freeze damage to its fruits and vegetables, Government figures showed today.
The report was better than expected and was seen, at least initially, as more evidence that inflation remains tame.
But a separate report, the February regional outlook survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, raised the specter of rising prices.


He's Not in Philadelphia Anymore
Terry Mulholland was waiting for John Kruk to moan about something.
It never happened.
He wanted to call the clubhouse manager Frank.
His name is Nick.
No, Terry, you are not in Clearwater anymore.
You are not with the Phillies anymore.
One week after the Yankees acquired the left-handed Mulholland for Bobby Munoz and two minor leaguers, the pitcher leaned back in a chair beside his locker and conceded that he felt like a kid whose parents had moved.
Mulholland was in his first day of classes with the Yankees as pitchers and catchers worked out for 90 minutes in a constant rain at Fort Lauderdale Stadium, and it felt strange, very strange, without Kruk and the boys.


J. Vernon Luck Sr., 87, Surgeon; A Pioneer in Limb Reattachments
Dr.
J.
Vernon Luck Sr., an orthopedic surgeon who was one of the first to successfully reattach a severed limb, died on Monday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 87.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Diane Luck Carter of Los Angeles.


Books of The Times; A Captive Black Leopard From Three Perspectives
The Great Divorce
By Valerie Martin
340 pages. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $22.50.
The novelist Valerie Martin seems to have a thing for horror movies.
She also seems to have a thing for stories about the bestial nature of man.
Her last novel, "Mary Reilly," was a retelling of "The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde," Robert Louis Stevenson's classic tale about a Victorian gentleman in thrall to his apelike alter ego.
Her latest novel, "The Great Divorce," turns out to be a kind of improvisation on "Cat People," Val Lewton's eerie 1942 movie (remade by Paul Schrader in 1982) about a woman who believes she's possessed by the soul of a panther.


U.S. Officially Backs Race-Based Scholarships
Formally announcing what it had signaled for the last year, the Clinton Administration said today that college scholarships could be awarded on the basis of race to help "remedy past discrimination" and promote diversity on the campus.
The decision ends years of uncertainty that had arisen during the Bush Administration, which three years ago tried to ban race-based scholarships, arguing that merit should be the determining factor.
But it quickly softened its stance in the face of strong opposition by civil rights leaders and leading academics and put the whole matter under review.
It was still pending when President Clinton took office.


In Haiti, Oil Embargo Increases Suffering
To the Editor:
We recently returned from a medical mission in rural Haiti, where we observed rapidly deteriorating living conditions as a result of the United States-led United Nations oil embargo.
Most of us are veterans of previous medical missions in rural Haiti; some of us have returned annually for more than a decade.


Seagram Products Added by TBWA
The House of Seagram unit of Seagram Ltd. said yesterday that it had expanded its relationship with TBWA Advertising in New York by awarding the agency responsibilities for new products.
Seagram has also placed in review the account of another brand, the Glenlivet Scotch whisky, now at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York.
TBWA's first new product assignments are Godiva liqueur and Coyote tequila, with combined billings estimated at $10 million, both previously at Wells Rich Greene BDDP in New York.
Seagram and TBWA began working together early this month, when Seagram officially assumed the American distribution rights to Absolut vodka.


Art in Review
Fazal Sheikh and Richard Barnes
The Opsis Foundation  561 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Through Feb. 26
For several years, Fazal Sheikh has photographed refugees from Ethiopia, Sudan and Somalia who have been forced by ethnic strife to flee to camps in Kenya.
But his photographs have none of the sensationalism usually found in images from this troubled region.


Art in Review
Corot's 'Arch of Constantine and the Forum, Rome'
The Frick Collection  1 East 70th Street  Manhattan
A small oil sketch by Corot was recently donated to the Frick Collection by the dealer and collector Eugene Thaw.
It is fresh and limpid and, as it happens, one of the few of Corot's Italian paintings in an American public collection.
The subject is an ancient one: a view of the Forum under a bright blue sky, late afternoon light slanting across the Arch of Constantine in the foreground and silhouetting the distant campanile of the Palazzo Senatorio.
Paint is laid on thinly, quickly, surely.


CHRONICLE
ELIZABETH TAYLOR is to enter a hospital early next month for hip replacement surgery, according to a statement issued yesterday by Chen Sam, Miss Taylor's publicity agent.
The actress, who has been hospitalized numerous times over the years, suffers from osteoarthritis of the left hip, according to the statement, which said she will be operated on by Dr.
John Moreland, an orthopedic surgeon.
Ms.
Sam's office would not divulge the name of the hospital or the date of the operation.
Miss Taylor's condition has limited her ability to walk for any distance without pain.
It is expected that she will be hospitalized for five to seven days and will require crutches or a walker during her recuperation, which will last about eight weeks.
Ninety percent recovery is expected within three months, but complete recovery takes a year to two, the statement said.


Limbaugh's Pitch for Juice Roils Critics
The State Citrus Commission is paying the conservative talk show host Rush Limbaugh $1 million to hawk Florida orange juice on his radio program.
But advocacy groups are upset about the decision and are demanding that the contract be rescinded.
Critics of Mr.
Limbaugh's hiring include Gov.
Lawton Chiles, the state chapter of the National Organization for Women, gay rights advocates, environmental groups and the state chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, which hinted that a boycott might be in order.


To Most Americans North Wasn't a Hero
To the Editor:
There is a perception that Oliver North, now a candidate for the Senate, was viewed as a hero during the televised Iran-contra hearings.


Randy Shilts, Author, Dies at 42; One of First to Write About AIDS
Randy Shilts, the author of best-selling books on AIDS and gay issues and a newspaper reporter for The San Francisco Chronicle, died yesterday at his home in Guerneville, Calif.
He was 42 and also had a home in San Francisco.
The cause was AIDS, said Linda Alband, his assistant.


Why Can't Juries Get Tougher?
To the Editor:
In "Convicting the Victim" (Op-Ed, Feb. 7), George Fletcher argues that defense lawyers "have wakened to the potential of putting the victim on trial" and the courts must "rein" them in.
Professor Fletcher cites a few high-profile cases in support of his premise -- the Menendez brothers' murder trial, John and Lorena Bobbitt's interlocking assault trials, the police attack on Rodney King.


Berlin Journal; Dread of Builders in a City Woven With Gardens
This bustling metropolis has more than enough challenges to keep its politicians occupied.
Giant construction projects are under way, the Government plans to move here from Bonn, and Eastern Europe's convulsions are uncomfortably close by.
But for hundreds of thousands of Berlin residents, these challenges pale into insignificance in comparison with new threats to their beloved gardens.
They are threatening to bring down the city government next year, and warn that if established political parties do not listen to them, they will form a new one of their own.


From France, Depardieu as God And Other Joys
MANY in the French film industry think Gerard Depardieu is God, but only Jean-Luc Godard has dared to take the idea literally.
In "Helas Pour Moi" ("Woe Is Me"), the actor plays an ordinary man named Simon whose body is briefly inhabited by God, or so it seems when God's gravelly voice comes out of Simon's mouth, speaking "thine" and "thou," to the astonishment of his wife.
No road company of "The Odd Couple" could have come up with a less likely pair than these two men.
The cerebral and often inaccessible Mr.
Godard, a master of the French New Wave of the 1960's, has been under a critical and commercial cloud for two decades.
Mr.
Depardieu is so popular and lucrative a property that a recent story in Variety practically suggested that the French film business might collapse without him.
But in "Helas Pour Moi," they inspire each other's best tendencies.
Beautifully photographed beside a Swiss lake, the film has a poetry and emotion rarely associated with Mr.
Godard.
Mr.
Depardieu's performance is surprisingly restrained and resonant.


Greece Closes Macedonia's Main Trade Route
Greece forged ahead in its fight with Macedonia today, closing the former Yugoslav republic's main trade route and drawing angry protests from other members of the European Union.
European Union officials criticized Greece for acting without consulting other nations in the organization, which agreed last year to cooperate in developing a common foreign policy.





Planned North Korea Trip Canceled
The chairman of the House Armed Services Committee has canceled his trip to North Korea this week after the Government of Kim Il Sung refused to issue a visa, White House officials said today.
Representative Ronald V. Dellums, Democrat of California, accepted an invitation extended by North Korea last December in the hope that he could help defuse the dispute over international inspection of Pyongyang's nuclear program.
Mr.
Dellums was scheduled to leave on Tuesday and return this weekend.


TV Weekend; A Speech 100 Years Old Examines Life Today
Black History Month on PBS offers one of its more distinguished efforts on tonight's edition of "Bill Moyers's Journal." Mr.
Moyers devotes just about the entire hour to what he calls "a dramatic invocation of the past." It's Fred Morsell's one-man show called "Presenting Mr. Frederick Douglass." Mr.
Morsell delivers Douglass's famous speech, "The Lesson of the Hour," made 100 years ago this month.
Moreover, the performance, taped last month, was given before a congregation at the Metropolitan A.M.E.
Church in Washington, the site, a few blocks from the White House, where Douglass gave the speech, about a year before his death.
(Douglass also appears later this weekend, portrayed by Tim Reid, on "Race to Freedom," a somewhat plodding story about the pre-Civil War underground railroad used by slaves fleeing the South to freedom. It has its premiere tomorrow at 8 P.M. on both the Family Channel and BET.)


Deciding to Escape Los Angeles: The Earthquake Tipped the Scale
Two days after the earthquake, and two decades after he had arrived here from Chicago, Leo Fasciocco, a financial writer, packed up his family and his car and headed for solid ground -- Phoenix.
A week later, Karin Kugel quit her secretarial job and drove cross country, to Tampa, Fla., returning for good 13 years after she had left.


Sports of The Times; Nancy Smiles While Tonya Hits Town
WHY is this woman smiling?
I mean, grinning from ear to ear.
She smiles when she is warming up.
She smiles when she is practicing.
She smiles when her coaches loudly clap their hands after her every move.
Nancy Kerrigan was even smiling when her old friend Tonya Harding went down in a pile against the boards as if she had been forechecked by Bob Probert or Tie Domi or the big bopper from the Portland Kneewhackers, Shane Stant himself.
But there was nobody in sight, just some invisible poltergeist maybe trying to even things up for the ugly event in the nationals in Detroit.


Ruling Allows Police to Sue In Negligence
New York State's highest court ruled today that the widow of a New York City police officer killed in a highly publicized 1984 shootout may sue the state for negligence.
The 5-to-0 decision by the Court of Appeals upheld a 1992 law allowing police officers and their families to reopen cases that they had lost because of a 1988 Court of Appeals ruling that greatly restricted the rights of police officers and their families to sue.


Review/Art; At the Whitney, It's 1952 All Over Again
Where are you now, Herbert Katzman?
Back in 1952, the New York dealer Edith Halpert proclaimed him in Life magazine to be a rising star of American art.
The Whitney Museum has disinterred his "Two Nudes Before Japanese Screen" from the graveyard of storage, giving him another brief shot at the limelight that ultimately eluded him.
The light shone instead on Roy Lichtenstein and Larry Rivers and Alex Katz, his contemporaries, with whom Mr.
Katzman gets to share wall space for the duration of "A Year From the Collection, Circa 1952."
So what if Mr.
Katzman's brightly colored blocks of paint slathered on with a palette knife look today a little too much like the work of the Russian-born French artist Nicolas de Stael, who was also popular back then (and is nearly as forgotten today in America): the Whitney's show isn't so much intent on redeeming reputations like Mr.
Katzman's as it is on reconstructing history.


Coast Guard Icebreakers Work to Make the Hudson Passable
Tom Amidon, as lean and weathered as one would expect from a Coast Guard officer, was stating the obvious as he looked from his ship to the stalled oil barge to the north.
Great chunks of floating ice -- the size of skulls, of card tables, of bandstands -- trapped Barge No. 130 and its tug in a slender track of unfrozen water.
"That is a huge barge," said Chief Amidon, the chief boatswain.
"He's going to have a hell of a time getting down the river."


U.S. Indicts G.E. and De Beers in Diamond Pricing
A Federal grand jury indicted the General Electric Company, De Beers Centenary A.G. and two European businessmen today on a single count of conspiring to raise and fix prices in the half-billion-dollar-a-year worldwide industrial diamond industry.
The two companies control about four-fifths of the international market for industrial diamonds, which are mainly produced synthetically from carbon under extremely high pressure and temperature, and which are embedded in saws and drills for use in cutting stone and concrete.


Japan Looking for Ways To Avert U.S. Trade War
Under growing pressure to prevent the outbreak of a damaging trade war with the United States, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan seems to be hoping that progress, even modest progress, in opening markets will end President Clinton's threats of a trade war.
That strategy became clear today as Mr.
Hosokawa asked his top trade bureaucrats to bring him a plan in the next several days for opening markets in sectors of the Japanese economy in which the Government has the most control.
He is also dropping hints of returning to the bargaining table.


Sounds Around Town
A Dynamic Duo
Joe Henderson and Abbey Lincoln, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
What a double bill!
Joe Henderson, oblique and smooth, is one of jazz's great tenor saxophonists.
He's performing with a trio, which is his best environment; it makes him looser than usual.
Abbey Lincoln is about as bitter a singer as can be found, and about as emotional, as well.
She can be magnificent.
Shows tonight through Sunday night are at 9 and 11:30; there is a $27.50 cover and a $5 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Saxophone With Trio
David Sanchez, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
This is yet another fine young tenor saxophonist, one who has an exceptional control over rhythm, and can make harmony spread apart to show different colors.
David Sanchez knows all the major post-be-bop saxophonists, and he'll use all their angles.
He's backed by a trio that includes the drummer Leon Parker, jazz's own minimalist, who only plays with a few drums but swings with great force.
Shows on Sunday are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
There's a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
P.
W.
Soul From the Quarter
Irma Thomas, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
New Orleans's own soul singer may be one of the greatest living female soul singers, along with Etta James and Aretha Franklin.
The difference between Irma Thomas and the competition is simple: at her best, she is restrained, and her early singles are devoid of gospel inflections and still full of intensity. when she's in the mood, she can also be a great performer, one who can bring New Orleans right into your heart.
Shows on Sunday night are at 8 and 11; there is a $15 cover charge.
P.
W.


Luring Officers to Live Amid Crime; Atlantic City Offers a Plan for Live-In Community Policing
Officer Terry Tillman is a brawny 27-year-old who dabbles as a professional junior middleweight boxer, so he is not easily intimidated by the decaying neighborhoods that lie only a few blocks from the $1,000-a-bet blackjack tables at Atlantic City's casinos.
But would he want to live amid tumbledown town houses scarred by drugs and violence?
Probably, but others in the Atlantic City Police Department are not so sure.
The officers have been considering a proposal that would offer them no-interest mortgages and other incentives to move into crime-ridden areas of the city, essentially putting them on the job 24 hours a day.


Mexican Peace Talks Scheduled
The Mexican Government's peace negotiator said today that talks to formally end the Indian uprising in the state of Chiapas would begin Monday morning in a city in Chiapas that he did not identify.
The negotiator, Manuel Camacho Solis, did not say how long the talks would last or exactly what form they would take.


Getting Out the Message on the President's Health Plan


Art in Review
Stephen Mueller
Annina Nosei Gallery  100 Prince Street  SoHo  Through March 2
Stephen Mueller has long been one of America's best younger abstract painters.
Although he is only in his mid-40's, he has already had a long career -- his first solo show was in 1970 -- and his work has floated outside changes of fashion in the last 20 years.


Winter Takes Its Toll on New York City's Budget


U.S. Treasurer Under Bush Pleads Guilty to 3 Felonies
Catalina V. Villalpando, who was the United States Treasurer in the Bush Administration, pleaded guilty today to three felonies: evasion of $47,000 in Federal income taxes, conspiracy to make false statements to the Government about her finances, and obstruction of a Federal grand jury.
The charges against Ms.
Villalpando did not involve her official actions as Treasurer.
She filled the post from December 1989 until January 1993, heading the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Mint and the United States Savings Bond division.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Jeff Tackett, catcher, on a one-year contract.


N.F.L. Checkbooks Ready for Next Wave
Round two of National Football League free agency begins today as general managers from the 28 teams go shopping for proven players, with both eyes on the diverse talent available and both hands on their wallets.
Meaningful free agency began when the courts gave tight end Keith Jackson and a handful of other plaintiffs immediate freedom to move to new teams early in the 1992 season.
It continued under the new collective bargaining agreement, with defensive end Reggie White leading the first large group of free agents to move to new teams before the 1993 season.


British Offering Abortion Drug To U.S. Women
In a move prompted as much by pressure politics as by practical concerns, a British clinic will begin offering the abortion pill RU-486 to American women -- but only if they are willing to journey to England and pay $500 to terminate their pregnancy.
Helen Axby, the director of the Marie Stopes Health Clinic in London, said yesterday that she had reached an agreement with a representative of the British Government's Department of Health allowing the clinic to offer RU-486 to American women and other nonresidents who prefer to use the drug instead of undergoing a standard abortion.
Until now, British health authorities have forbidden the drug to be dispensed to nonresidents.


Suit Settled On Job Bias For Police
The State of New Jersey agreed today to pay more than $7 million to blacks and women who were denied jobs as law-enforcement officers, settling a six-year-old discrimination lawsuit filed by the Federal Government.
The state also agreed to give priority in job placement to about 450 blacks and women who were previously rejected.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a new evidence requirement in drug-possession cases in New York State referred incorrectly to one recent case in which the defendant, Juan Paulino, was acquitted.
Mr.
Paulino did not admit to having carried 2.2 ounces of cocaine; he agreed that the substance recovered by the police was cocaine, but denied that he had possessed it.


With His Sister in the White House, Another Rodham Can Hear the Call
Once you have flown to Mars in a rocket ship with Hillary Rodham at the controls, maybe it doesn't seem so daunting to run for the Senate without any experience or money.
The First Lady's brother Hugh once scrapped with his older sister about who would be the captain of the basement bench that doubled as their spaceship.
"She would always drive and I would always have to sit in the back," he said.
Now, more than three decades later, the 43-year-old assistant public defender for Dade County is planning what some would call an even more fanciful flight, a bid to win the Democratic nomination to oppose the popular Republican incumbent, Connie Mack, in Florida's Senate race in the fall.


Land Mines Take Their Toll in Georgia


Wasmeier Finally Paints His Masterpiece as Moe Takes the Silver
The 30-year-old Bavarian painter and classical string musician did not come between Tommy Moe and Kjetil Andre Aamodt today.
Markus Wasmeier of Germany exceeded both the American Alpine darling of the Winter Olympics, and the Norwegian World Cup leader and defending Olympic gold medalist in the super-giant slalom.
Neither was about to begrudge Wasmeier, not after 10 years roaming the circuit as a perennial contender who had earned no Olympic medals and survived a back injury that nearly ruined him four years ago.


Accounts
*
Justerini &amp; Brooks Ltd., London, to Bartle Bogle Hegarty, London, as the first agency to handle advertising for Jet, a new luxury brand of Scotch whisky that will be advertised heavily in South America and the Far East.
The agency already handles the company's J &amp; B Scotch brand in Greece.
Billings were estimated at $4 million. *
Nichirei Foods America, Renton, Wash., to the Donaldson Group and its food division, Anderson/Donaldson, both of San Francisco, to handle advertising for the marketer of Passport Cuisine, a line of Asian specialty foods, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.


Critic's Notebook; Surveying the Talk-Show Tunescape
BLUSTERY winds, slippery sidewalks and iceberg-size snowbanks can be powerful deterrents to seeking out live music.
So through this stormy winter, I've been turning, now and then, to where Americans beyond the urban culture meccas get a regular taste of real-time musicianship: the talk shows.
Each has a nightly musical guest, grabbing five minutes of network glory, plugging a hit or hoping to revive a falling album.
But guest musicians come and go: the hippest on David Letterman's "Late Show" (with "The Arsenio Hall Show" outdoing all competition in the realm of hip-hop) and the most unpredictable on Conan O'Brien's "Late Night," which books groups that are still playing clubs.
Yet when viewed on any regular basis, nightly television's real musical offerings are the house bands.
Alongside each genial, shtick-happy host is a combo that greases transitions, introduces chatting celebrities, backs up guest singers (on the rare occasions when they don't bring their own groups), entertains the studio audience during breaks and provides rimshots at punchlines.


Paul Bodin; Artist, 83
Paul Bodin, an abstract painter associated with the New York School, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 83.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Aaron.


Corrections
A dance review yesterday about a performance of "Doo Dah Day" by the Feld Ballets/NY on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater in Chelsea misidentified the site in South Carolina where an accompanying recording of a sermon was made.
It was Johns Island, not St.
Johns Island.


Year's Trade Deficit Widened; December's Shrank
The American trade deficit shrank in December, but the United States still posted its largest deficit ever with Japan last year and its biggest overall trade deficit since 1988, the Commerce Department announced today.
The shrinkage of both deficits in December came as American exports continued their five-month climb.
As a result, Wall Street economists generally welcomed today's announcement as a sign that foreign demand for American goods remained strong and that American economic growth in the fourth quarter might have been even greater than the Commerce Department's initial estimate of 5.9 percent.


Rangers Have Kovalev Back
After serving a two-game suspension for spearing, ALEKSEI KOVALEV is ready to return to the Rangers' lineup for tonight's game against the Ottawa Senators.
And Coach MIKE KEENAN said yesterday that Kovalev's suspension was well deserved, but he understood Kovalev's actions.
Kovalev was suspended for spearing PATRICE BRISEBOIS in a 4-3 loss at Montreal on Feb. 9.
It was Kovalev's third stick-related major penalty this season and his second suspension.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BOMBARDIER INC., Montreal, said it had received an order for five of its Canadair regional jets worth about $80 million from Comair Holdings Inc., Cincinnati.
FIRST INTERSTATE BANK OF CALIFORNIA, Los Angeles, received approval from the Federal Reserve Board to buy San Diego Trust and Savings Bank for $340 million in stock.


G.M. Plant May Reopen
The Saturn division of the General Motors Corporation is considering reopening a shuttered G.M. factory in Michigan to increase its production, according to a published report.
Saturn officials have been preparing to make a case to G.M. to open a second plant, arguing that the capacity at Saturn's Spring Hill, Tenn., plant is insufficient to meet demand.
Originally, Saturn had hoped to open a new factory in Spring Hill, but the United Automobile Workers union resisted that idea, pushing instead for Saturn to use an idled factory.


Review/Design; Fashion With Style: 30 Years of Geoffrey Beene
You don't have to be a dedicated fashion follower, never mind a fashion victim, to enjoy the exhibition of 30 years of clothing designed by Geoffrey Beene at the Fashion Institute of Technology.
All you need is an appreciation of delicacy in line, shape and color: a sense of design.
Although "Beene Unbound," which opened this week, shows the development of one designer's style, it manages to takes a positive position on the age-old question "Is fashion art?" The stylishness of the installation shows off the elegance of the clothes.
Together, they elevate the exhibition to a different plane from a routine fashion show.


Market Place; Flightsafety's stock has soared. Can turbulence be avoided?
FLIGHTSAFETY INTERNATIONAL has some fetching qualities besides a name that suggests a soaring, risk-free investment.
Like an airline, Flightsafety, which mainly provides training on simulators to pilots and operators of ships and utility plants, can generate dizzying profit margins once overhead is covered.
So it is hardly surprising that Flightsafety's stock jumped this month when it reported a 9 percent rise in fourth-quarter profits.
After trading around $35 a share for months, the stock has risen more than 20 percent to close yesterday at $42.75, down 78.5 cents.


Diner's Journal
Newest of the New
The hottest restaurant area in town right now is Park Avenue South around 20th Street.
In the last few months, restaurants have been opening there at a furious pace: Park Avalon, City Crab and Seafood, and Metronome are all newcomers.
But the most exciting new face on the block is Patria, which opened on Monday.
New York has never seen a menu quite like the one being presented at Patria, on the site of the former Positano.
The chef, Douglas Rodriguez, was the owner of the extremely trendy Yuca in Coral Gables, and he has brought what he calls his nuevo Latino cuisine with him.
His food is beautiful and his dishes are filled with flavors so vibrant they almost leap off the plates.


Giants Play Salary Cap Game
With the free-agent signing period beginning today, Giants General Manager George Young is staring at a monumental problem with his roster and the salary cap.
Does he sign his unrestricted free agents before shopping the marketplace?
Or does he wait for other teams to set the market and then try to sign his players?
"The problem is like a 53-piece puzzle," Young said.
"If you start too soon, you might not have enough money to complete the puzzle."


Keeping the Hudson Open: A Herculean Task


Serious Subway Crimes Continued Falling in 1993, Transit Police Say
Serious crime reported in the subways fell by 11.2 percent last year, and has declined by more than one-third since 1990, the transit police announced yesterday.
But the police and various officials, including Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, predicted that few New Yorkers would believe it.
Felonies reported to the police, including homicides, rapes and attempted rapes, robberies, serious assaults, burglaries and grand larcenies, fell to 11,763, from 13,250 in 1992.
The figure equals about 32 felonies a day, down from 50 a day in 1990.


Church on Plantation Is Saved by a Donation
A small black church that faced eviction from the grounds of a plantation where its members had worshiped since before the Civil War will not have to move, church officials said today.
The Rev.
Lafayette Veal Jr. of the 90-member Rosedown Baptist Church in St.
Francisville, La., said an anonymous donor had purchased the church property from the adjacent Rosedown Plantation and donated the land to the church.
The gift gives members ownership of the church property for the first time.


INSIDE
Rock Idols Sue Over Benefits
A group of aging rock legends is accusing record companies of depriving thousands of artists of hundreds of millions of dollars in health and pension benefits.
Law, page B9.
Randy Shilts Dies
Randy Shilts, the journalist and author who was one of the first people to write about the AIDS epidemic, died of AIDS at the age of 42.
Page D17.
U.S.
Case on Diamond Prices
G.E., De Beers and two businessmen were accused of trying to fix prices of industrial diamonds.
Page D1.
A Role Reversal
Glenn Close, instead of Patti Lupone, is to star in the Broadway production of "Sunset Boulevard." Page C3.


CHRONICLE
Gene Kelly's birthday card to MERCE CUNNINGHAM shows an umbrella dripping rain and William Wegman's features a few dogs.
Gianni Versace and Giorgio Armani chose to depict -- what else? -- fashion designs on their cards wishing the modern-dance pioneer a happy 75th birthday.
Actually, Mr.
Cunningham won't get to keep those cards or the ones done by more than 70 other celebrities, including Roy Lichtenstein, Christo, Edward Albee, Leo Castelli, Yoko Ono, Joan Rivers, Tommy Tune and Robert Rauschenberg because the cards will be auctioned on Tuesday.
The sale, to benefit the Cunningham Dance Foundation, will be conducted at a party given by Ralph Destino, chairman of Cartier, and Simon J. Critchell, president and chief executive of the company.


President Criticizes Cost of Special Inquiry
President Clinton said today that the investigation by a special prosecutor into the failed Whitewater land deal would cost taxpayers millions of dollars, even though "most of it has nothing to do with me."
In a radio interview, Mr.
Clinton described his own involvement in the matter as "a simple, straightforward thing." But he said the inquiry by the special counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr., would prove costly because of its scope, which includes the failure of an Arkansas savings and loan whose owner was the partner of the President and his wife, Hillary, in the real-estate venture.


Wells Rich Greene Executive Returns
Wells Rich Greene BDDP said yesterday that Paula Forman had rejoined the agency in the new position of executive vice president, specializing in consumer product accounts.
Her appointment is likely to be the first in a series at the agency; trade publications reported this week that it would soon begin an extensive restructuring.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about defense summations in the World Trade Center bombing case misidentified the site at which the prosecution alleges that the bomb was made.
The Government has said the bomb was built in an apartment rented by Mohammad A. Salameh, not in a storage locker.


Mrs. Clinton's Firm Cleared of Conflict
Federal bank regulators today cleared the Rose law firm -- Hillary Rodham Clinton's former firm in Little Rock, Ark. -- of any conflict of interest in connection with its work involving a failed Arkansas savings and loan institution.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation had been investigating the relationship between the Rose firm and the failed savings and loan, Madison Guaranty.


Little Root Beer for Daly, Big Benchmark (.500) for Nets
Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman wanted to get this done before the All-Star Game break last weekend, but somehow New Jersey's two All-Stars always came up short.
Tonight, however, just two games after the break, they got New Jersey untracked and the Nets roared into the station marked .500 with a 117-98 victory over the Boston Celtics.
Coleman and Anderson took matters into their own hands early, getting double-doubles before intermission at the Hartford Civic Center.
Coleman finished with game highs of 28 points and 17 rebounds.
Anderson scored 17 points and dished out a game-high 16 assists.


Did Clinton Slip on Astroturf?
Bill Clinton had some explaining to do.
Ever since he spoke last week of his fond recollections of his El Camino pickup, his audience at a Louisiana truck plant and those who watched his comments replayed on television have been left in titillated confusion.
Mr.
Clinton confided that he had lined the truck bed with Astroturf, adding with a sly grin, "You don't want to know why, but I did."


Sounds Around Town
Come-On-a-Her-Place
Rosemary Clooney, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
More than 40 years after she became a star singing the sexy-but-silly novelty, "Come-On-a-My House," Ms.
Clooney is finally gaining recognition as bona fide pop-jazz legend.
With her warm salt-of-the earth personality and a sense of swing that is as solid as it is offhanded, the singer is buoyed by a superb all-star jazz sextet.
The material runs from old hits like "Hey, There" to Paul Simon's "Still Crazy After All These Years," a song she makes her own.
Shows are at 8:30 and 11 tonight and tomorrow night, with dinner required for the early show.
There is a $35 cover charge for both shows.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Klezmer Comeback
Brave Old World, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
The closest thing to a klezmer supergroup, Brave Old World brings together four leaders of the booming revival in Eastern European Jewish music.
Michael Alpert, a highly regarded traditional Yiddish singer, also plays violin.
Alan Bern plays accordion and piano.
Kurt Bjorling is considered by many to be the finest klezmer clarinetist, and Stuart Brotman, who plays bass and percussion, comes from a rich folk and blues background.
The program mixes new arrangements of traditional klezmer music with original songs based on traditional forms.
Showtime is 8 P.M tomorrow and tickets are $16.
S.
H.


Consecutive-Shot Goals Confound Brodeur Again
The Devils and the Maple Leafs are almost carbon copies of each other.
They have virtually the same records and have scored and allowed almost the same number of goals.
The two teams nearly offset each other tonight, but two goals on consecutive shots by Wendel Clark, the captain of the Maple Leafs, were the difference as Toronto edged the Devils by 2-1 at Maple Leaf Gardens, extending New Jersey's streak without a victory to three games (0-2-1).


Plots to Kill Castro Preceded Bay of Pigs
To the Editor:
I was dismayed to read in the Feb. 8 obituary on Richard Bissell: "Mr. Bissell was also responsible for the C.I.A.'s creation -- at Kennedy's request after the Bay of Pigs -- of a top-secret assassination project whose target was Fidel Castro." I had thought that that myth had long since been scotched.


China Holds Christian Visitors 4 Days
A delegation of Christians, including three Americans, who came to China this month to visit friends and who passed an evening of fellowship and prayer with a village congregation was detained and held incommunicado for four days, the group's leader said today.
The churchmen's cash and valuables were confiscated by Public Security Bureau agents who said they were enforcing a new ban on foreign religious activities in China.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.34
2.86
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.26
3.26
2.91
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.43
3.41
3.00
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.98
5.88
6.14
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.54
6.45
7.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.37
7.29
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.55
5.52
6.02
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Miles Inc. to Join Growing Generic Drug Market
In an effort to broaden its health care product line, Miles Inc. said yesterday that it would enter the fast-growing generic drug market by buying a 28 percent stake in Schein Pharmaceutical Inc. of Florham Park, N.J., for $310 million.
Drug pricing pressure from the Clinton Administration and private insurers has hooked together brand-name drug makers with their generic rivals.


Gore to Check U.S. Prospects
Vice President AL GORE and his family will be among those checking the progress of the United States' World Cup soccer team this evening at the Joe Robbie Cup in Miami.
The United States, 1-1-3 in World Cup exhibitions this year, plays Bolivia at Joe Robbie Stadium, after a match between Colombia and Sweden.


On My Mind; Clinton And Drugs
Ask anti-narcotics specialists in law enforcement, universities or government how the struggle against drugs stands and they can give you an important answer.
But it will be full of maybes, buts and other hands.
And that is the truth of it.
The shadings are the story: more drug use among schoolchildren, black parents stand firm, White House involvement at last, the fear it may not continue, new interest among politicians, the old lassitude among intellectuals, increased public attention to neighborhood drug horrors, but ignorance or disinterest about drugs as a principal national cause of crime and disease.


Why Northwestern Coach Left
Northwestern Coach RICKY BYRDSONG said yesterday that stress caused him to ask for a leave of absence.
At his first public appearance since leaving the team last week, a news conference held at the Evanston, Ill., university, Byrdsong said he planned to "seek the counsel of friends, colleagues and professionals recommended to me by the university."
Byrdsong, 37, said he expected to return to the team but left the date of his return open.
KEN WILDES, director of university relations, said Byrdsong would return when he and the university agree he is ready.


Defense Rests Without Calling Cultists
After only a day and half of testimony for the defense, lawyers for 11 Branch Davidians accused of killing four Federal agents during a raid last Feb. 28 rested their case today without calling any of the defendants to the stand.
Final arguments in the case, which has drawn international attention because of the different nationalities of the sect's members, will begin on Tuesday.
"That's when the defense really needs to make its case," a member of the defense team said.
The brevity of the defense, which relied on eight witnesses, contrasts sharply with the prosecution, which called 125 witnesses over six weeks.


From Bob Guccione, an Exhibition in Shocking Good Taste
Once again, Bob Guccione, the publisher of Penthouse magazine, was shocking someone with his idea of what constitutes art.
It happened the other day in a ground-floor gallery of the Nassau County Museum of Art, where Lila Walter of Woodbury gazed at a painting, on loan from Mr.
Guccione's private collection, of a young woman drying herself after bathing.


Mr. Cuomo's Medicaid Cure
For years, Gov.
Mario Cuomo has proposed having New York State take over the share paid by local governments for Medicaid -- the program of medical insurance for the poor.
But never did he take the next step of budgeting money to pay for the worthy plan.
That changed this week when the Governor proposed spending $110 million next year as a first installment of a phased Medicaid takeover.
Release of the money is contingent on Albany passing a multi-year takeover plan.
In the past the Republican-led Senate has balked.
But the election of a Republican Mayor in New York City, and dozens of Republican county executives around the state clamoring for Medicaid relief, might wilt that opposition.
That makes Mr.
Cuomo's decision to push his plan forward not only good public policy but also astute election-year campaigning.


No Headline
"I didn't understand what happened. I'm trying to get out some money and I can't. I'm disappointed in the system." RODNEY LOVE, stymied by a cash machine.  [ D16:2. ]


Mayoral Aides and Yankees Meet to Discuss Stadium Plan
After the first face-to-face meeting between officials of the Giuliani administration and the New York Yankees, the team expressed optimism about the city's plans to keep the franchise at Yankee Stadium beyond the end of its lease in 2002.
"It went very well," said David Sussman, the team's general counsel.
"It was very informative, but it'll still very formative."


For Children
Wondercamp
800 Morris Turnpike (near King's supermarket)  Short Hills, N.J.  (201) 564-7529  Recommended ages: 18 months to 12 years
Most parents never had places like this to romp in, but it's too late to complain now.
Indeed, they should be happy that these indoor, gymlike playgrounds exist.


Review/Film; Of Dunkers and Dollars
The writer and director Ron Shelton ("Bull Durham," "White Men Can't Jump") can slam-dunk a sports story with the best of them.
And William Friedkin, who directed "Blue Chips" from Mr.
Shelton's screenplay, obviously loves basketball.
Together, they give "Blue Chips" a vigor that works well even for the sports-impaired, and that keeps the film scrappy and exciting almost all the way through.
Only late in the game do they make an unforgivable mistake.
"Blue Chips" falls apart when the film makers, figuratively speaking, haul their soapbox right onto the court.
Most of the time, "Blue Chips" is too energetic to sound self-righteous.
And indeed, it begins at fever pitch.
Pete Bell (Nick Nolte), one of those fanatically dedicated coaches most often found in the movies, starts off by browbeating his players so savagely that Pete looks ready to burst an artery.
What this is supposed to mean is that Pete really cares about his college athletes.
What it also means is that no matter how much he cares (i.e., screams), he can't make them good enough to win.


U.S. Squad Learns Again That These Are the Times That Tie Men's Souls
The United States Olympic hockey team refuses to be beaten, and refuses to beat.
Tonight in Hakon Hall the Americans scored a goal with just 28 seconds left on a slap shot by Todd Marchant to manage a 3-3 tie against Canada, their third tie in three games.


Lotus Stock Rises on Word Of a Venture With A.T.&amp; T.
Shares of the Lotus Development Corporation surged yesterday on reports that the company is close to a deal in which A.T.&amp; T. would set up a public computer network based on Lotus's popular Notes software.
The network, if it is built, would make it easier for people in different locations to share data and work simultaneously on the same computer file.
Such capabilities are now possible with Notes on private corporate networks, but are not yet easily achieved on networks available to the general public.


Inflation Nervousness Sends Stocks Sliding
The inflation news was so startlingly good yesterday that bond traders did not believe it.
So bond prices tumbled and, after some hesitation, so did stock prices.
A wide range of blue-chip stocks that have benefited in the recent rally dropped in price, including I.B.M., Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, Philip Morris and General Motors.


Review/Film; Coming of Age in Snippets: Life as a Twentysomething
There are many ways to peg the twentysomething generation, but none funnier, more accurate or less pretentious than by using the details that stick to characters like a second skin in "Reality Bites." On their college graduation day, the film's heroes -- Lelaina, Vickie, Troy and Sammy -- gather on a rooftop in Houston to smoke cigarettes, drink beer and sing "Conjunction Junction," a Saturday-morning cartoon snippet that helped educate them.
Higher education is fine, but as a life-shaping experience it's just no match for television.
Lelaina (Winona Ryder) is the center of the film and of its romantic triangle.
An aspiring film maker and her class valedictorian, she is taping a documentary about her friends.
The audience sees snippets of this throughout "Reality Bites," a technique that offers a visual tie to the MTV generation without becoming intrusive.
"I kind of made a promise to myself that I wouldn't think about where it was going to end up," Lelaina says of her film.
"I didn't want to unintentionally commercialize it." That's not a problem "Reality Bites" has, and that mainstream sleekness accounts for a great deal of its charm.
This film is "Slacker" without the slackness, intentionally commercial and breezily entertaining.


Joseph Periconi, 83, A Borough President And a State Senator
Joseph F. Periconi, a Republican political figure in New York for 30 years who served as Bronx Borough President from 1962 to 1966, died on Wednesday in the Morris Park Nursing Home in the Bronx.
He was 83.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said his wife, Rosemary.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "MIKE KELLEY," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Suggested contribution: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.
"GLOBAL FACE OF AIDS: PHOTOGRAPHS OF WOMEN," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
A photography exhibition by Ann Meredith.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
"ASPECTS OF RESISTANCE," Alternative Museum, 594 Broadway, at Houston Street, SoHo.
A retrospective of paintings of Rupert Garcia, founder of the Chicano art movement.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3 suggested donation.
Information: (212) 966-4444.


McRae and Jefferies Win
Brian McRae, whose father and manager picked up $150,000 the other day on a collusion claim from baseball, learned yesterday that he can better afford to pick up the check if the two have dinner together.
Brian, the center fielder for Manager Hal McRae of the Kansas City Royals, won a $1.9 million salary, about five times the $378,500 he earned last year.
Ralph Berger, hearing his first baseball salary arbitration case, chose McRae's figure over the Royals' $1.3 million.
McRae batted .282 last season, a 59-point increase from 1992.
He also raised his slugging percentage 105 points, from .308 to .413.


When a Good Day Is a Bad Day


Washington Talk; Heart of the Health Plan Has an Ever Fainter Beat
Changing the name was not enough.
Trying to explain how it works with analogies to rural food cooperatives or supermarkets was not enough.
Changing the subject to the evils of the insurance industry works, but only in the short term.
The structure at the heart of the Clinton health plan, the regional insurance purchasing pool known as a health alliance, is in trouble.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, said last weekend that the alliance had to go -- an early negotiating position, yes, but a telling one nonetheless.
Representative Pete Stark, the California Democrat who heads the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, declared a few days ago, "There is not one chance in 100 that mandatory alliances will survive."


It's Harper for the Defense as the Knicks Shut Down Price and Cavaliers
The Knicks' formula for victory tonight was simple.
If the Cleveland Cavaliers could not score, they could not win.
Frustrating Cleveland during the final eight minutes, New York captured a much-needed 102-95 victory before a capacity crowd of 20,273 at the Richfield Coliseum.
New York's defensive effort was led by Derek Harper, who throttled Mark Price, Cleveland's All-Star point guard.
Price had 20 points, but he scored only one basket in the fourth quarter, harassed by Harper, who played the game's final 16 minutes 37 seconds.
Harper stuck to Price like Velcro, and the Knicks (35-15) fed off his intensity.


Review/Art; Response to AIDS Gains in Subtlety
As long as AIDS exists, art will be created in response to it, and this art is becoming more subtle and profound all the time.
Such is the inexorable pressure of life on esthetics, and this is one of the points made by "From Media to Metaphor: Art About AIDS," the bittersweet exhibition at the Grey Art Gallery and Study Center of New York University.
The show was organized two years ago as a traveling exhibition for Independent Curators Inc. by Robert Atkins, a columnist for The Village Voice, and Thomas W. Sokolowski, the director of the Grey Art Gallery.
It is an interim report on the pressure AIDS has exerted on the art of the last decade.
It displays the work, from angry posters to documentary photographs to abstract painting, made by 35 artists and collaboratives, and it touches on a dizzying array of approaches, sensibilities and media.


Corrections
The Weather Report yesterday misstated the time the sun set. It was 5:33, not 4:33.


Russia's Balkan Card
In winning a pledge from the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy artillery from the outskirts of Sarajevo, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia scored a badly needed diplomatic triumph today, one that is likely to work for him at home as well as abroad.
The Serbs' commitment, like previous developments that have stirred hope in the brutal two-year Bosnian war, is necessarily tenuous, depending as it does on the compliance of warring parties that have so far found no good reason to lay down their guns.


F.A.A. Approves Satellite Navigational System for Use in Airliners
The Federal Aviation Administration today authorized commercial airlines to begin using a satellite-based navigation system for landing in bad weather.
The Global Positioning System will initially be used at more than 1,000 small American airports where such landings are often prohibited because of low visibility, but it is eventually expected to replace traditional navigational aids throughout the air transportation industry.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 30 about a conference of regional accrediting agencies, and one on Feb. 3 about misuse of Federal student loans and aid, referred incorrectly to a policy decision about certifying colleges for Federal aid.
The conference voted to work with Government officials to develop oversight for such aid; they did not refuse to participate in oversight.


As Prosperity Rises, Past Shackles India
Two years of Government reform have brought economic growth that has mostly benefited the 120 million people of India's educated middle class.
But despite widespread economic and political change, more than 70 percent of the country's people continue to live in villages where sharp divisions in caste and economic status have persisted for centuries.


With High-Rise Under Fire, Police Blame Rooftop Target Shooters
Since June, bullets -- fired from no one knew where -- had entered living rooms and bedrooms of at least four apartments in buildings on East 92d and 93d Streets near Third Avenue.
Then last month, in one week, bullets pierced four windows on the 9th and 10th floors of the Normandie Court luxury high-rise at 225 East 95th Street.
All the apartments faced north, toward a housing project on 97th Street.


Gooden Delivers An Upbeat Pitch
One almost expected Dwight Gooden to be a little cranky, a little frustrated, on the first day of workouts for pitchers and catchers in this brand-new season for the Mets.
Certainly, that is how he left the team last fall, after 103 Mets losses and a 12-15 record.
The winter wasn't much better.
Gooden's beloved pitching coach and personal catcher are both with new teams.
The Mets did not sign any major free agents, opting instead to rebuild.
And management did not sit down and renegotiate his contract -- something Gooden had hoped to accomplish before camp opened this week.


TRANSAMERICA CORP. (N)
The Transamerica Corporation reported record operating results yesterday for both the fourth quarter and the full year 1993, led by strong performances at its life insurance and real estate services operations.
Transamerica said its life insurance, structured settlements, living benefits, group pension and reinsurance divisions all had double-digit operating income increases and solid revenue growth for the year.
Transamerica said its real estate services operations reported record operating income for both the quarter and year.


Restaurants
At this time of year people come clomping into Christer's kicking ice off their boots.
They edge over to the massive stone fireplace holding their hands out to catch its warmth.
They hunker down for drinks in the expensively rustic bar.
If the Winter Olympics make you wish you were visiting a ski lodge in some Alpine village, Christer's is a pretty good substitute.
Christer's grows on you.
On the first visit, it looks like another overdesigned New York City dining room.
On the second, you notice the way the light in the bar is warmed and reflected by the copper fish scales on the ceiling, and you start to appreciate the silvery sheen of the dining room walls.
You become conscious of the whimsical fish sculptures scattered around the rooms.
By the third visit, you are beginning to realize that people feel so comfortable in this high-rent midtown restaurant that they walk in wearing jeans.
By then, you have also become aware that the low-key service is always accommodating.


Yegorova Also Speeding Toward Medal Records
While other cross-country skiers are spending their Olympics chasing Lyubov Yegorova, the Russian is spending hers chasing the ghosts of Olympics past.
After winning her fourth career gold medal on Tuesday in the 5-kilometer classical event, Yegorova held off a late rush today from Manuela Di Centa of Italy to win the fifth gold of her career, in the 10-kilometer pursuit.


Forests May Foretell Warming Trend
Trees in the uncut parts of the world's tropical forests are apparently dying and being replaced more rapidly than in the past, according to a new analysis.
The authors of the study said the most likely cause was a worldwide increase in carbon dioxide spewed into the atmosphere from smokestacks and vehicles.
The faster turnover of trees may in turn cause a further increase in carbon dioxide, which traps heat in the atmosphere and could lead to global warming, the study reported.
The authors said it might also accelerate the loss of tropical species.


Economic Pulse: The New York Region -- A special report; An Economic Evolution From Making to Thinking
The long-evolving shape of the regional economy is now clearly etched.
Mass production, whether in automobiles, chemicals or beer, has mostly disappeared from New York City and its environs.
Only 1 in 16 of the 7.3 million people employed in the region still labors on a factory floor.
At the same time, residents of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut earn nearly 25 percent above the national average.


A campaign for Ladies' Home Journal sings the consumer praises of women ages 30 to 49.
NEVER underestimate the power of a women's service magazine to try to convince advertisers that its readers are vibrant, free-spending consumers who eagerly sample new products -- and not staid, parsimonious shoppers set in their ways.
The Ladies' Home Journal, in advertising that begins next week, will audaciously attempt to lay claim to the bulk of a desirable demographic group.
The 39.8 million American women ages 30 to 49 are being branded "Generation LHJ" in the ads, which will appear in newspapers and trade publications.


Inside Art
Spring Offerings
As the race heats up to secure hot property for the big May auctions in New York, Sotheby's and Christie's are beginning to announce the estates they have secured.
Last week, Sotheby's said it would sell the modern and contemporary artworks that belonged to H. Gates LLoyd, a former deputy director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and his wife, Eleanor, who founded the Washington Gallery of Modern Art.
This week, Christie's countered, announcing it would auction seven works from what it would characterize only as a "European estate." The paintings, by Gauguin, Picasso, Braque, Leger, Cezanne and Vlaminck, are expected to bring more than $15 million.


Probation in Killing Of Robbery Suspects
A Brooklyn man who used an unlicensed gun to kill two teen-agers who he said were robbing him at gunpoint was sentenced yesterday to five years' probation by a judge who said he could "empathize" with the defendant because he himself had once feared for his life while being robbed at gunpoint.
The man, Arthur Boone, a 42-year-old sugar-refinery worker, pleaded guilty last month to a gun-possession charge after a grand jury had rejected possible charges of murder, manslaughter and assault against him after his encounter with the teen-agers on a street near his Bedford-Stuyvesant home early on Nov. 14.


The Road to Louisville Makes Important Stop
Jimmy Jones peered back across the years to the era when he and his father trained eight Kentucky Derby winners and said: "I don't remember a time when we didn't talk Kentucky Derby at the dinner table. To my father, it was an obsession."
It was an obsession because B. A. Jones was the trainer for the Calumet Farm, and his son Jimmy inherited both the tradition and the role as handler of champions: Whirlaway, Citation, Iron Liege and the rest.
And now racing people are starting the countdown to the 120th Kentucky Derby, and they'll be talking about it at the dinner table every night until they load them in the gate at Churchill Downs on May 7.


CHRONICLE
How does a relative of George Washington celebrate the birthday of his country's father?
Without much fanfare, said STEPHEN WASHINGTON, 29, who is eight generations removed from the country's first President.
"I like to take the day off, I enjoy sleeping in and I don't light candles," said Mr.
Washington, a law student at Yeshiva University in New York.
"I certainly don't chop down cherry trees, though if I were not in New York, I might do some yardwork. But I have too much work to do, so I will hole up in the library."


German Speed Skater Loses Medal Chance After Tumble
The slick ice at Olympic Hall in Hamar claimed another favorite today when Gunda Niemann of Germany clipped a lane marker with her left skate and went sprawling during the women's 3,000-meter speed skating race.
The scene was a reminder of Monday's 500-meter men's race, when Dan Jansen of the United States, the world-record holder at the distance, stumbled and touched the ice with a hand in losing a chance at a medal.


Review/Architecture; An Architect From the Ground Up
ABOUT 15 years ago, I was living in the Berkshires, working on a book about Frank Lloyd Wright.
One day, the author of a self-help book was being interviewed on the radio, and she said something that turned out to be just the idea I'd been struggling to express: "Everybody has the right to radiate."
And this still seems to me the most useful idea to take into the Museum of Modern Art's magnificent show on Frank Lloyd Wright, which opens on Sunday.
You will see wonders there: gorgeous drawings, new and painstakingly reconstructed models, full-scale mock-ups of walls from six landmark buildings.
In the show's catalogue, you can read learned tributes to Wright's genius.
But to approach this show on bended knee would be to miss the nature of that genius.
Frank Lloyd Wright was a Mr.
Everybody who gave himself the right to radiate.
He was a genius of the conventional, a supreme artist of everyday living, a person with desires no different from anyone else's, but one who found a way to turn off all the No voices in his head and give bold, persistent voice to a resoundingly radiant American Yes.


L.I.R.R. Vows New Steps To Improve Performance
Without admitting any mistakes, officials of the Long Island Rail Road said yesterday that they had learned numerous lessons from recent storms and that they would now do things differently to prevent thousands of commuters from being stranded as they were last Friday in Jamaica, Queens.
At a meeting of the Long Island committee of the Metropolitan Transit Authority's board in Manhattan, Charles Hoppe, the L.I.R.R. president, said the railroad would be reviewing its storm operations, but had already taken steps to improve performance and communicate better with commuters in emergencies.


Review/Theater; On the Run, Seeking That 'Something'
Audiences who know Regina Taylor only as Lily Harper, the proud, self-contained, black housekeeper in the segregationist South in the television series "I'll Fly Away," may have difficulty recognizing her in her new one-woman show, "Escape From Paradise." Though she retains an indomitable sense of centeredness that compels attention, Ms.
Taylor is anything but serene in this splintered odyssey of a woman in perpetual flight from the mundane, the oppressive, the hurtful in daily life.
As directed by Anne Bogart at the Circle Repertory Company, Ms.
Taylor is an eternally restive kinetic force.
Even seated, her feet tap an anxious tattoo on the floor, and she is forever hurling herself against the confining trapezoid walls of Loy Arcenas's dreamlike minimalist set.


Whitman to Attack Bias With Showings Of 'Schindler's List'
New Jersey will show "Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's film on the Holocaust, to college students and others as part of a months-long campaign against racial intolerance, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said today.
The campaign is aimed at counteracting a scheduled speech by a member of the Nation of Islam whose earlier anti-Catholic and anti-Semitic speech ignited a national protest.


Review/Film; Trying to Turn a Poet Into Cinematic Prose
Having led the most public of private lives, Allen Ginsberg makes a difficult subject for a biographer.
So Jerry Aronson's "Life and Times of Allen Ginsberg" is more dutiful than surprising, with more emphasis on the poet's times than on his life.
Mr.
Ginsberg has written so intimately and eloquently about his own experience that the film is most revealing when it lets him speak (or read his poetry) for himself.
When Mr.
Ginsberg sits at a kitchen table and simply reads "Kaddish," the mournful poem about his mother, Naomi, the words barely require further amplification.
Unlike his more furtive old friend William S. Burroughs, who was the subject of Howard Brookner's inventive 1983 documentary, Mr.
Ginsberg can explain himself freely and is inclined to lay himself bare.
Mr.
Aronson has assembled a helpful array of home movies, brief interviews and wonderful photographs, but beyond that he cannot outdo his subject when it comes to candor or revelation.
As a result, his film displays its seriousness while offering only the occasional surprise.


Review/Dance; A Lively Beat For a New Generation
The program presented on Wednesday night by Feld Ballets/NY at the Joyce Theater will probably turn out to be one of the happiest and most inspiring events of the dance year.
A celebration of the company-affiliated New Ballet School, the evening included a charming new piece by Eliot Feld for the school's advanced students.
It was performed with impressive clarity, spirit and technical expertise.
Most of all, this was a chance to see an ensemble at work whose racial mix was representative of the population of New York City, an extremely rare phenomenon in dance.
The school is devoted to the proposition that the experience of dancing ballet should be available to everyone.
The students, who now number more than 1,200, are enrolled in the city's public schools and are accepted for training at the Feld studios by yearly auditions.
Their classes and ballet clothes are free, and in a particularly ingenious arrangement, the students travel to the studios just north of Union Square by city school buses used earlier and later in the day to transport handicapped pupils.


Raymond Lisle, 83, Dean of Law School
Raymond Everett Lisle, a dean emeritus of the Brooklyn Law School and a former Foreign Service officer, died on Sunday at his home in Freeport, L.I.
He was 83.
Mr.
Lisle, who was born in Brooklyn, graduated Phi Beta Kappa from City College of New York in 1929 and began teaching history there in 1930 after earning a master's degree from Columbia University.
He received a law degree in 1936 from New York University School of Law, where he was editor of The Law Quarterly Review.


Close Is Given LuPone's Place in 'Sunset' Cast for Broadway
Andrew Lloyd Webber's management company, the Really Useful Theater Company, announced yesterday that Glenn Close, and not Patti LuPone, would be coming to Broadway this fall to star as the faded movie queen Norma Desmond in Mr.
Lloyd Webber's latest musical, "Sunset Boulevard."
The company said the reason for the change was that the investors in the Broadway production, which is expected to cost $12 million to put on, had lost confidence in Ms.
LuPone after persistent news-media assertions that Ms.
Close, who is playing the role in Los Angeles, was the stronger performer.


Giuliani Backs Right to Assail Gay Olympics
A member of the Police Civilian Complaint Review Board who is an important supporter of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was sharply criticized yesterday by a City Councilman for a newspaper column he wrote warning that AIDS could be spread during the Gay and Lesbian Olympic Games, which are scheduled for June in the city.
Mr.
Giuliani said yesterday that he disagreed with the supporter, the Rev.
Ruben Diaz, but that Mr.
Diaz had a right to his opinions, which the Mayor said were based on a "moral theology." Mr.
Giuliani said he was reluctant to support the drive by Councilman Thomas K. Duane to remove Mr.
Diaz from the board.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Steven Hoffenberg, the Manhattan bill collector, was charged with securities fraud and obstruction of justice.
The Federal complaint said he had defrauded thousands of investors across the country of $450 million.  [ Page A1. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  BOSNIAN SERBS PULL BACK  The United Nations said Serbian convoys carrying heavy weapons began pulling back from positions ringing Sarajevo after the leader of the Bosnian Serbs promised Russia it would pull all such weapons back.
A1  A TRIUMPH FOR YELTSIN  In winning a pledge from the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy artillery, Boris N. Yeltsin scored a badly needed diplomatic triumph, one that is likely to work for him in Russia as well as abroad.
A10


'Timing' Reopens
"All in the Timing," an evening of six one-act plays by David Ives initially produced at the Primary Stages, has reopened at the John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42d Street, Clinton.


Clinton Tries to Win Over the Elderly With a Warning on Medicare
Toughening his appeal to older Americans, President Clinton said today that critics of his health care plan and supporters of a balanced-budget amendment were trying to rob Medicare to pay for their goals.
At a White House brunch with leaders of groups that represent older Americans, the President took aim at Congress, where critics of his health care plan are flourishing and proponents of a balanced-budget amendment are pushing for a vote.


Truth in Crime Packaging
Given the disorganization in the Justice Department, it is understandable that Philip Heymann, who has just resigned as Deputy Attorney General, would be tempted to vent some of his frustrations as he left.
In doing so, Mr.
Heymann provided a tough critique of the pending crime bill.
He said it was heavy with political grandstanding and delivers less public safety than it promises.
The former and future Harvard law professor, exercising his regained right to speak as a private citizen, attacks its most easily demagogued features.
He was right to say that the "three strikes and you're out" provisions, advertised as putting violent felons away for life, are a costly way to keep prisoners who pose more old-age medical problems than threats to society.
More mandatory minimum sentencing is useless as a crime deterrent, and building more regional prisons will waste money.


Abroad at Home; Political Crime
At the urging of President Clinton and many other politicians of both parties, the United States is about to embark on a remarkable new social program.
It is to house, feed and provide geriatric support services for elderly Americans who have led worthless, harmful lives.
That will be one result of "three strikes, you're out," the much-touted proposal to put criminals away for life after a third violent felony.
It would make state and Federal prisons hold increasing numbers of men past the age of violence, living on into their 80's and 90's.


Sounds Around Town
Come-On-a-Her-Place
Rosemary Clooney, Rainbow and Stars, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, (212) 632-5000.
More than 40 years after she became a star singing the sexy-but-silly novelty, "Come-On-a-My House," Ms.
Clooney is finally gaining recognition as bona fide pop-jazz legend.
With her warm salt-of-the earth personality and a sense of swing that is as solid as it is offhanded, the singer is buoyed by a superb all-star jazz sextet.
The material runs from old hits like "Hey, There" to Paul Simon's "Still Crazy After All These Years," a song she makes her own.
Shows are at 8:30 and 11 tonight and tomorrow night, with dinner required for the early show.
There is a $35 cover charge for both shows.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Klezmer Comeback
Brave Old World, Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-8719.
The closest thing to a klezmer supergroup, Brave Old World brings together four leaders of the booming revival in Eastern European Jewish music.
Michael Alpert, a highly regarded traditional Yiddish singer, also plays violin.
Alan Bern plays accordion and piano.
Kurt Bjorling is considered by many to be the finest klezmer clarinetist, and Stuart Brotman, who plays bass and percussion, comes from a rich folk and blues background.
The program mixes new arrangements of traditional klezmer music with original songs based on traditional forms.
Showtime is 8 P.M tomorrow and tickets are $16.
S.
H.


Former Idols of Rock Now Confront the Blues
Some of them belonged to legendary groups of rock-and-roll, including the Drifters, the Coasters, the Shirelles and the Young Rascals.
The others were among rock's leading solo performers.
A list of the songs they made famous resembles one of those hit parades scrolling up the screen on late-night television: "Under the Boardwalk," "Charlie Brown," "Soul Man," "Sealed With a Kiss," "My Guy."
Now these onetime idols have banded together to form a new group, one that might be called the Plaintiffs.
And the song they are singing, in a Federal court in Atlanta, imparts as much heartbreak and bitterness as any golden oldie.


U.S. Surgical
The United States Surgical Corporation, a large maker of surgical equipment, saw its shares plunge yesterday after it lost an important patent-infringement suit it had brought against Johnson &amp; Johnson.
United States Surgical also warned of an unexpectedly large fourth-quarter loss.
Wall Street analysts rushed to downgrade their assessments of the stock.


A Present for Baltimore
On his 35th birthday, JIM SPEROS gave Baltimore a long-awaited gift yesterday -- a pro football team.
LARRY SMITH, the Canadian Football League commissioner, formally introduced Baltimore as the league's 11th franchise.
Speros, a Virginia businessman who worked nearly a year to land the team, finally saw his effort reach fruition in a ceremony attended by Smith and two of the league's biggest names, quarterbacks DAVID ARCHER and DOUG FLUTIE.


They Didn't Feel Ready to Retire Their Minds
To the Editor:
Times change, and so do institutions, but it is upsetting that the New School for Social Research appears to believe its Institute for Retired Professionals is not in step with traditional degree-granting notions and needs to be curtailed (news article, Feb. 7).


Summaries In Blast Trial Show Tactics
As defense lawyers continued their summations in the World Trade Center trial yesterday, differences in their tactics emerged when the lawyer for one of the four defendants asked for a mistrial, saying that counsel for a different defendant had done more harm to his client than the prosecution had.
Meeting in chambers before the open court session began, the lawyer, Austin Campriello, asked Judge Kevin T. Duffy to declare a mistrial in the case of Ahmad M. Ajaj, a 27-year-old Palestinian refugee accused of bringing bombing manuals and expertise on explosives into the United States with the intention of using them to further the trade center conspiracy.


Macy Seeks Less Time To Draft Revamp Plan
To avert a showdown with its senior creditors, R. H. Macy &amp; Company is telling them that it will ask a bankruptcy court to extend its right to propose a plan of reorganization by four months, not six.
Some secured creditors, whose claims against Macy are collateralized by real estate and other assets, have told the company that they will fight the six-month extension it had sought on Feb. 9.
Macy's current period of exclusivity, during which the company has the sole right to propose a reorganization plan, will expire on March 15.


Equivalency Test Offers a Second Chance
To the Editor:
I read with great interest "High School Equivalency Guarantees Second-Class Status" (letter, Jan. 31) by Steven Cameron and James Heckman, who are with the University of Chicago's Harris School of Public Policy.
They were responding to "High School Equivalency Test Poses a New Question: Will Taking It Matter?" (Education page, Jan. 5), which debated the value of the General Education Development test, a test used by the 50 states as a way for dropouts to earn a high school diploma.


A Top Judge In Connecticut Is Suspended
A justice of the Connecticut Supreme Court will be suspended for six weeks for participating in a murder case argued by a lawyer with whom he had a close personal relationship.
It is the most severe sanction meted out to a Connecticut judge in at least 20 years, and the first time that a member of the state's highest court has ever been disciplined.
In a decision to be released on Monday, the state's judicial review council has concluded that by failing to step aside in the case argued by an assistant public defender named Suzanne Zitser, Justice Flemming L. Norcott Jr., had engaged in conduct "in which his impartiality might reasonably be questioned" and which "brought the judicial office into disrepute." The suspension, which is to last 30 business days, is to begin on March 28, and will be without pay.


I.R.S. Tries On-Line Tax Filing
In a test that glimpses the potential of the emerging national information network, the Internal Revenue Service said yesterday that taxpayers in nine states would be able to file their 1993 Federal tax returns by personal computer over telephone lines.
The test program, which involves Midwestern and Southwestern states, is the latest attempt by the I.R.S. to streamline the tax process and reduce the amount of paper it handles.
In another experiment this year, more than 300,000 single taxpayers in seven test states have already filed Forms 1040 EZ by entering the data on the keypads of their touch-tone telephones, the I.R.S. reported.


Pushing Against Tide at Mexico Border
Even the illegal immigrants who run through the gullies here to cross the border from Mexico have noticed the flurry of activity.
"They've been asking us, 'Hey, what's going on?' " said Joe Ralph, one of the overworked Border Patrol agents who spend the dark nights catching them, sending them back, then catching them when they cross again.
Cameras, television crews, politicians.
New lighting, new tactics, and a 10-foot-high steel wall begun in the Bush Administration and just completed runs 14 miles and extends across the beach and into the surf of the Pacific Ocean.
The strip of land along the border near San Diego has become the symbol of a losing national battle against illegal immigration and the focus of new measures to try to control it.


Landfill Methane Doesn't Always Make Money
To the Editor:
In "How Cities Make Money" (Op-Ed, Feb. 10) Gar Alperovitz, president of the National Center for Economic Alternatives, suggests that a methane recovery system at a landfill may be a "moneymaking venture" for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York City to undertake.


War and Endurance
Even if NATO does not drop a single bomb around Sarajevo next week, diplomats say the allies, especially the United States, have now become militarily involved in the Bosnian conflict in a way they have never been before.
The question is whether they are prepared to stick it out long enough to devise a strategy that will end not just the shelling of Sarajevo but the war itself.


Help Your Heart And Your Planet
To the Editor:
Re "Preaching the Gospel of Healthy Hearts," your Feb. 8 Science Times profile of Dr.
William Castelli: Turning people off to hot dogs is the first step in teaching them how to heal their hearts, but walking them down the supermarket meat aisle is an ironic way to proceed.


No Headline
Finally, I feel like I've made other people happy instead of having them feel sorry for me. - DAN JANSEN, after skating to the gold medal he has chased since 1984.  [ 1:5. ]


Donald Menchel, Television Executive, 61
Donald Menchel, a television business executive and former president of MCA-TV, died on Sunday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles while visiting California.
Mr.
Menchel, who lived in Manhattan, was 61.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his daughter, Terry.


This Time It's Clements Who Outdoes Himself
For the second consecutive day, the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic was the stage for a career performance.
On Thursday, it was Scott Hoch, who came from nowhere with a personal best of 62.
Today, it was Lennie Clements, the quintessential journeyman professional, who rode an emotional high and shot a career low round of 61.
It gave him a one-stroke lead over Hoch and put him two strokes ahead of Jay Delsing and John Huston after three rounds of this 90-hole event.


Hanoi to Discuss Expanding Relations With U.S.
Vietnam says it will open discussions this month with the United States on human rights and other issues with the goal of broadening their relationship.
But an official warned that Hanoi will not accept interference in its internal affairs.
Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai, the chief architect of Vietnam's campaign for full diplomatic relations with Washington, said in an interview on Wednesday that an American negotiating team was expected in Hanoi by the end of the month to begin what he called "technical" discussions on issues like the status of official property seized by each country at the time of the Communist victory in 1975.
Among those assets are the former United States Embassy in Saigon, now called Ho Chi Minh City, and South Vietnamese bank accounts in the United States.


Bulls Are Still Measuring Rod for Knicks
The Knicks spent yesterday enjoying a day off and regrouping for tomorrow afternoon's showdown with the Chicago Bulls.
With Thursday's 102-95 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers, the Knicks (35-15) restored their confidence.
John Starks enjoyed a spectacular 13-for-15 shooting performance, ending a 10-game slump.
Derek Harper used his defensive savvy to contain Mark Price, holding the All-Star guard to one basket in the fourth quarter.
And the Knicks snapped a two-game losing streak with a tough victory on the road.


Reining In Those Mutual Fund Claims With a Few Qualifications
By slicing and dicing numbers the right way, mutual funds of all stripes can claim to be No. 1 in some category.
And they all seem to try.
Concerned that investors may be misled by such claims, industry regulators are creating new guidelines for mutual fund advertising.


11 Months After Heart Surgery, U.S. Biathlete Is Better Than Ever
Joan Guetschow's last visit to this Olympic city did not end happily.
While competing in the women's biathlon event here in March 1993, she began experiencing some disquieting variations in her heart rate.
Shortly after flying home to the United States to consult her doctors, Guetschow spent more than five hours in surgery at Northwestern University Hospital in Evanston, Ill., to repair an abnormal pathway in the upper chamber of her heart.


A Consensus Approach on Land Use
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt has been barnstorming the West, campaigning for a proposal that would give local interests, including ranchers and environmentalists, far more influence over grazing on public land than the Clinton Administration had previously planned.
Mr.
Babbitt is standing firm on his plan to more than double the fees that ranchers pay to have their livestock graze on Federal land.
But in what he calls a move to build consensus in drafting new grazing regulations, Mr.
Babbitt is promising to broaden the public's involvement in grazing decisions.


Magician With an Eye for the Bent Finds Himself Tricked by Fate
Three-card monte is a New York attraction that the city's boosters don't talk about much.
It's a confidence trick that's parted many a gullible tourist from hard-earned money.
Most New Yorkers consider it a blight.
Ricky Jay sees it a little differently.


Review/Music; A Familiar Mussorgsky Work, Renewed by a Russian Hand
The thrill of Valery Gergiyev's interpretation of "Pictures at an Exhibition" on Thursday night at Avery Fisher Hall was the thrill of seeing a familiar painting cleansed of fingerprints and dust.
Nothing new was imposed; no essentials were removed.
The New York Philharmonic's crisp playing was never edgy.
The work was full of coloration and detail, and none of it was merely decorative.
The performance, one of the finest of this war horse that I have heard, was perfectly poised between the broad, startling strokes of Mussorgsky's original piano score and the brilliant, prismatic effects of Ravel's orchestration.
Mr.
Gergiyev, the artistic director of the Kirov Theater in St.
Petersburg, is one of the few Russian musicians who can inspire the sort of enthusiasm in the West that used to greet Soviet performers in their rare visits during the cold war.
At 40, he has become one of the most sought-after young conductors on the musical scene.
He has been conducting this week with the Philharmonic (remaining concerts are tonight and Tuesday).
Next month, he will make his debut with the Metropolitan Opera, conducting a new production of "Otello."


Unwitting Hostages To Currency Risks
BETTING on currency moves is too risky, too hazardous, too akin to gambling for any investor short of George Soros, right?
Maybe, but that hasn't stopped millions of Americans from placing big wagers on currencies -- usually without knowing what they're betting on or, in some cases, without knowing that they are making a bet at all.
These investments may come back to haunt them if, as many pundits predict, the dollar strengthens this year.


Review/Music; Jessye Norman and Rarities
Queenly suicide was a topic taken up by the Boston Symphony this week.
Indeed, had Jessye Norman not withdrawn from her scheduled performance on Wednesday, Carnegie Hall audiences could have witnessed the American soprano taking her own life four times within 24 hours.
Ms.
Norman canceled the first event because of respiratory illness but returned, somewhat bravely, for the second on Thursday.
The program, planned to run two nights in a row, was splendidly inventive, and included Britten's dramatic cantata "Phaedra" and Berlioz's lyric scene "La Mort de Cleopatre."
No two pieces could be more different.
Britten's, the work of a dying man, is an exercise in denial.
The Berlioz is the extravagant outpouring of a 26-year-old.
Both, however, are monologues: summings-up and final thoughts before death.
The Britten has an extraordinary bleakness, like cold stone in winter sunlight.
The instruments, mainly strings and percussion, are systematically drained of color, yet the final moments offer some of the most delicate orchestration ever written.


Jessye Norman Challenges Illness With Virtuosity


North Korea's Master Hand
In the end, North Korea did not blink.
Despite reports this week of its capitulation in the face of economic sanctions, Pyongyang has emerged the victor in its confrontation with the United States over inspections of seven sites where it may or may not be producing nuclear weapons.
The crisis on the Korean peninsula has been defused, but only temporarily.
North Korea has agreed to comply with terms to which, in fact, it had already agreed in 1985.
Meanwhile, there is the strong suspicion that the evidence of weapons production can be found elsewhere, dumped in two nuclear waste sites the North Koreans insist remain off-limits, in the name of national sovereignty.
And of course there is the legitimate fear that the inspections will come too late, that North Korea already has its bomb.


Oregon Starts to Extend Health Care
A woman stood up and asked, If someone makes absolutely no money, how could she possibly prove that her income was below the Federal poverty line to qualify for free medical insurance.
A man wanted to know if the cost of an operation that is not covered by insurance could be covered if the condition is discovered during a surgical procedure that does qualify for reimbursement.


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture of the Fasciocco family, who left California because of a fear of earthquakes, referred incorrectly in some copies to the town where they have moved temporarily.
It is Gilbert, Ariz., not Santa Monica, Calif.


Maas Gaining Cash, Losing a Career
On the surface, the raise Kevin Maas won by losing in salary arbitration seems absurd.
Maas went to bat for the Yankees only 177 times last season and batted .205, but he emerged from his hearing with a $170,000 raise, even though the Yankees' last offer before they submitted that figure represented a $30,000 pay cut.
That's what salary arbitration has done to clubs.
It has made them economic wimps.
For all of their complaining about players' salaries, the clubs approach the arbitration process with cowardice.
Of the 80 players who exchanged salary figures with their clubs for this year's potential hearings, only two faced pay cuts.


Rising Interest Rates Create Predicament For Federal Reserve
Long-term interest rates shot sharply higher yesterday for the second consecutive day, leaving the nation's central bank in a bind that it is probably finding very uncomfortable.
The chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, is likely to face some hard questions -- and criticism -- from Congress on Tuesday when he presents his annual review of the bank's interest-rate policy.


Italy Wins Gold in Men's Doubles in Luge


Aleksandr Chakovsky Dies at 80; Enforcer of Soviet Line on Writers
Aleksandr B. Chakovsky, a hard-line Communist who helped to define and enforce the party line for Soviet writers and intellectuals for a quarter of a century, died Thursday in Moscow.
He was 80.
From 1962 to 1988 Mr.
Chakovsky served as an unofficial cultural arbiter for the Soviet Union through his powerful dual positions as chief editor of Literaturnaya Gazeta, the weekly newspaper that was the principal organ of Soviet literature, and as head of the Union of Soviet Writers.


Russia's Sarajevo Gambit
Russia, after days of pouting over feeling shoved aside by NATO in Sarajevo, has now dramatically and unilaterally rewritten the script by cutting a deal with Bosnian Serbs and moving Russian troops into place around the besieged Bosnian capital.
Taken by surprise, Washington has little immediate choice but to accept Moscow's fait accompli.
But it must not back off from its own principles and policies merely to let Boris Yeltsin please Russian nationalists who want to shift Moscow's policy in the Balkans toward a more partisan and confrontational path.


Pakistan Tries to Mediate as Cease-Fire Ebbs in Afghanistan


Ward May Try Baseball
Move over, MICHAEL JORDAN.
The Heisman Trophy winner CHARLIE WARD may try a third sport before ending his college career at Florida State.
The baseball coach, MIKE MARTIN, invited Ward to join his club for at least one game after Ward finishes basketball.
Ward has never played baseball at the collegiate level, but he was drafted last year by the Milwaukee Brewers based on his play in high school.
"I might just do it for the heck of it," said Ward. (AP)


Shares of Ventritex Drop Sharply
Shares in Ventritex Inc. lost a quarter of their value today after a key medical devices analyst lowered the rating on them from "buy" to "market performer." Investors were also concerned by reports that inspectors from the Food and Drug Administration spent three days this week at the company, which produces an implantable device used to regulate heartbeats.
Ventritex shares closed today at $26.75, down $10.25, in Nasdaq trading.
Vivian Wohl, an analyst with Robertson, Stephens &amp; Company lowered her rating on the stock, citing slower- than- expected sales this quarter, and mentioning the F.D.A. visit.
"A high-priced stock with an earnings estimate coming down is not a stock that's going to go up," she said.
However, she added that after today's drop "there's very little downside in the stock at this price." She said she did not think the F.D.A. visit was cause for concern, but that it was an additional bit of data investors should have.


Subway Train Kills Man
A man walking in a midtown Manhattan subway tunnel was struck and killed by a No. 3 train during the evening rush hour yesterday, the transit police said.
Service was disrupted for more than an hour for thousands of commuters on some of the city's busiest lines.
The man, whom officials would not identify, was hit at 6:06 P.M. by a northbound express train in the tunnel between the 28th Street and 34th Street stations, said Officer Alan Abel, a transit police spokesman.
Electricity and service resumed at 7:30 P.M.


Chinese Trace Claim On Tibet to Mongols
To the Editor:
Pan Xinliang, managing director of China Travel Service, writes (letter, Feb. 5) that Tibet "became part of China during the Tang Dynasty between A.D. 618 and 907." This is incorrect.
Neither the two versions of the official Tang Dynasty history, the "Tangshu," nor available Tibetan histories, nor such surviving documents as the A.D. 821-822 Chinese-Tibetan bilingual treaty refer to relations between the two countries except in terms of mutually recognized independence.
Far from becoming part of China, Tibet even invaded the Tang capital, now Xian, in 763.


Bridge
Far back in the history of the game there was a brief period when the lawmakers, perhaps having a bad day, permitted players to make a bid of eight.
There are certainly times when that would be advantageous, as witness the diagramed deal, played during the Christmas season at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, Manhattan.
Santa Claus decided to give both South and West a hand that might plausibly make a forcing opening.
Just as Duke Usdan as West was preparing to open two clubs, strong and artificial, he heard that bid from Arthur Netter on his right.
The West hand now became a candidate for the title of best hand whose holder hears a game-forcing opening by an opponent.


Marjorie Keller Sitney, Film Maker, Dies at 43
Marjorie Keller Sitney, an independent film maker whose works have been shown at museums, festivals and film institutes around the world, died on Thursday in Winter Haven, Fla.
She was 43 and lived in Wakefield, R.I.
The cause has not been determined, said her family, whom she was visiting.


Review/Film; How to Save the Planet According to a Big-Bang Theory
"I'm a mouse hiding from the hawks in the house of a raven," says Steven Seagal in "On Deadly Ground," the film that marks his directorial debut.
Actually, if you're looking for animal imagery to describe Mr.
Seagal, try 800-pound gorilla.
Clout counted for a lot more than talent in the decision to let this box-office phenomenon take the reins of his own wasteful, explosion-filled movie.
But clout goes only so far.
It took an alchemist like Andrew Davis -- who directed two Seagal films, "Above the Law" and the huge hit "Under Siege," before making "The Fugitive" -- to make Mr.
Seagal look like gold.
Mr.
Seagal's own film is awesomely incoherent, a mixture of poorly executed violence and "Dances With Wolves"-style astral musings.
Nothing about it is first-rate except some of the scenery.
And on the debit side, the editing, writing and occasional slow-motion flourishes are clumsy in the extreme.
The confusion extends all the way to Mr.
Seagal's character, Forrest Taft, who starts out as an Alaskan oil company trouble-shooter before revealing himself fully as a more benign and thoughtful fellow.
Forrest, a blurrier version of Mr.
Seagal's usual image, is a kind of philosopher-thug.


Sports of The Times; Dan Jansen Finally Finds Himself Off 'Hold'
USUALLY the call is an empty ritual, one President or another indulging himself in long-distance glad-handing of a frenzied locker room.
This call was totally appropriate, from the elected leader of a nation that had felt terribly for Dan Jansen for six years, and now, quite unexpectedly, felt wonderful for him.
Bill Clinton's switchboard knew how to reach Dan Jansen, who was sitting in a news conference in an arena they call the Viking Ship.
Dan Jansen had a world record in 1,000-meter speed skating.
He was wearing a gold medal around his neck, his first gold medal, his only gold medal, after six years of tragedy in real life and sorrow on the slick surfaces of Sarajevo and Calgary and Albertville and Hamar.


Government Mortgage Group Looks 'Good'
The 80 government mortgage funds invest mainly in homeowners' mortgages packaged by the Government National Mortgage Association.
Because mortgage holders often refinance their loans when interest rates fall, which forces investors to reinvest the proceeds at lower prevailing rates, the way to succeed over the last three years was to reduce this "prepayment risk."
Some funds did so by accepting lower coupon securities and increasing yields in other ways, sometimes by using leverage.


Torvill and Dean Dance to the Fore, if Not to First Place
Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean -- or Torvill and Dean as they have earned the right to be called -- made their Olympic comeback tonight, merely 10 years after their last appearance in the Winter Games.
Taking advantage of a special reinstatement of professionals to so-called amateur skating, the legendary ice-dance pair earned a third-place ranking after the compulsory portion.


Speculation on Paramount's Future Focuses on Book Unit
What will happen to Paramount Communications' giant book publishing division, Paramount Publishing, now that Viacom Inc. has beaten out QVC Network for control of the company?
Speculation in the book publishing industry has focused on the possibility that Sumner M. Redstone, Viacom's chairman, might find his new $8.7 billion company so larded with debt that he decides to spin off all or parts of the $2 billion publishing property -- including Simon &amp; Schuster, Macmillan and a slew of lucrative textbook and reference lines -- to raise some quick cash.


Innis Plans Primary Bid
Roy E. Innis, the conservative civil rights figure who ran for New York City Mayor last year, plans to challenge Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in the Democratic primary in September.
Mr.
Innis, the chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality, won 25 percent of the vote in the Democratic primary last September against Mayor David N. Dinkins.
His son, Niger Innis, who ran the campaign against Mr.
Dinkins, said today that the results show that his father is a proven vote-getter who will attract the conservative wing of the party.
He also said Mr.
Innis, who is black, will win support from black and Hispanic voters.
But some black politicians said Mr.
Innis alienated the party and many black voters by running against the city's first black Mayor.


Sports of The Times; March Madness Comes Early
Icalled John Chaney at his home Thursday evening.
The call was prompted by something the Temple basketball coach had said a day after his shocking tirade against John Calipari following Temple's loss to the University of Massachusetts.
In issuing an apology, Chaney noted that his daughter hadn't spoken with him since the incident and that his wife had left the house and had not returned.
The thought of a 62-year-old man being abandoned by his wife of more than 40 years conjured up the image of an old, broken-down coach who had finally flipped out.
Now in the twilight of his career he sits alone, with neither dog nor children nor wife.


Nanny Is Sentenced for Killing Infant in Her Care
A nanny who admitted killing a 10-month-old baby in her care was sentenced today to a prison term of 8 1/3 to 25 years after telling a courtroom she was "wholeheartedly sorry" and was not the "cold, heartless murderer" depicted by the baby's parents.
"If I could change places with him, I'd do it in the blink of an eye," the 26-year-old nanny, Ann Franklin, said of the dead baby, Kieran Dunne, as she sobbed for the first time at any of her court appearances.


Poland and the Jews
To the Editor:
"Today's Poland Would Rather Just Ignore Nazi Death Camps" (letter, Jan. 24) implies that Poland is ready to ignore an extremely important and tragic period in its history and to cross out from our memory the millions of Hitler's victims.
To forget about the Jews would be the first step to forget about the Poles and other nations who suffered from the Nazis.


INSIDE
A New Look at Unesco
The United States is considering rejoining the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which it abandoned during the Reagan Administration.
Page 5. 14 Miles of Frustration
A stretch along the Mexico border near San Diego has become a symbol of the losing battle against illegal immigration and the focus of new attempts to control it.
Page 6.
In Moscow, Fight for a Site
As President Yeltsin and lawmakers jostle for power, finding a permanent home for the Parliament has become a major battleground.
Page 2.
Nanny Sentenced in Killing
A Westchester nanny who admitted killing a baby was sentenced to 8 1/3-to-25 years in prison.
Page 21.


Guru's Land Deal Isn't All Bliss
To the Editor:
"Beatles' Guru Offers Nirvana to Mozambique" (news article, Feb. 10) notes with apparent whimsy the grandiose plan of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, the transcendental meditation guru, to purchase one-fourth of all the land in the southern African country of Mozambique for what his prospectus terms his "Heaven on Earth Development Project."


In South Dakota, Mrs. Clinton Predicts Better Medical Care
Hillary Rodham Clinton took her campaign for the Administration's health care plan to the rural Midwest today, arguing that it would give isolated areas more doctors and other medical personnel.
Her appearance in this town of 1,827 people, with senators, representatives and local health officials, doctors and patients, has dominated local newspaper and television coverage in the region, and she received four standing ovations today.


Here Comes the Sun, Thawing Moods and Rekindling Hope
From a sidewalk cafe on Union Square -- yes, people were actually having lunch outdoors -- to the Promenade in Brooklyn Heights, where off-duty grocery store clerks loosened their aprons and caught a few rays, New York took off its winter coat yesterday, emerged from its monthslong hibernation and basked in what seemed like near-blinding sun.
Squinting, people fumbled in pockets and purses for long-lost sunglasses.
They peeled away layers of clothing: off came sweat-inducing sweaters and suddenly superfluous wool leg warmers.
They noticed that long-buried cars were assuming identifiable shapes in curbside snowdrifts that had begun to shrink from mountains to something between a molehill and a foothill.
Then they asked: Could it be spring?


REJOINING UNESCO SUGGESTED TO U.S.
The State Department has recommended to President Clinton that the United States rejoin the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, officials said today.
The Reagan Administration withdrew from Unesco 10 years ago on the ground that it was wasting money and was hostile to free enterprise and a free press.
But the State Department has told the President to wait until late 1995 at the earliest, and more likely until 1997, saying there was no money in the 1995 budget and perhaps not in 1996's, to cover the $65 million in annual dues.


Apartment Dwellers Need Sprinkler Law
To the Editor:
On Feb. 7, an eight-alarm fire that injured 21 firefighters and 8 residents, and left 60 families, about 240 people, homeless occurred in a six-story cooperative apartment building on West 142d Street in Manhattan.
Had this building been equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system, it is likely this tragedy would never have occurred.


At the World Trade Center, a Sign of Optimism


Tollbooths for the Persecuted
The Immigration and Naturalization Service wants potential refugees from political persecution to pay a $130 fee and wait five months before receiving work permits.
That would make the United States the only country to charge a filing fee for political asylum.
It is a poor, hasty response to what is, essentially, a management problem at a chronically understaffed agency.
Last year, more than 150,000 people from 154 countries sought sanctuary here because of a "well-founded fear of persecution" in their homelands.
Most applicants came from countries such as Haiti, Guatemala, El Salvador, China, Cuba, the former Yugoslavia and the former Soviet Union.


The Degrees Of Separation; Seniors Prepare for the Real World
As the college class of 1994 approaches graduation, it is that nervous time when parents who have not nagged once in four long years find themselves blurting out, "Have you found a job?"
Jeremy Palmer, an engineering student at the University of Connecticut here, is one who, somewhat to his surprise, does have a job, at General Electric.
Before his successful internship at G.E. during the semester break, he said, "I had almost been locked into graduate school."


Emphasis on Holocaust Film in Fighting Racism Criticized
A program by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to combat racism drew criticism from some black residents of New Jersey today for its emphasis on screenings of the Holocaust movie "Schindler's List" as a response to an inflammatory speech by a Black Muslim last fall.
Callers to the Governor's office today objected that the movie about Jewish concentration camp victims should be augmented with films about black suffering from injustices as well.


Brooklyn Youth, 14, Is Slain at His Door
Someone went gunning for a 14-year-old Brooklyn boy yesterday, apparently trying twice to lure him from his home, then fatally shooting him when he emerged from the apartment, the police said.
Jessy T. Davis was shot once in the neck and once in the stomach about 7 P.M., as he stepped from his apartment into the ground-floor hallway at 44 Marcus Garvey Boulevard, in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
He died at the scene.


Clinton's Wisdom Questioned In Fighting a Budget Balancer
The easiest way to bring President Clinton's top economic policy makers to the phone these days is to ask whether the Administration is undermining its deficit-cutting credentials by criticizing the balanced-budget amendment so vehemently.
This week the White House released a state-by-state analysis of the effect of the higher taxes and cuts in Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid that it says would be needed to balance the budget by the fiscal year 2000.
The goal was local news coverage.
For example, in New Jersey, the Administration said a balanced budget in six years could mean raising taxes by $952 for each taxpayer and cutting annual social security payments by $665.


60-Day Ban for Trainer
Trainer HORACE ARMSTRONG was suspended for 60 days by stewards at Aqueduct yesterday because a banned substance (Phenylbutazone) was found in a 6-1 winner, King of Kolchis, saddled by the trainer at Aqueduct on Nov. 22.
Armstrong appealed and the suspension has been stayed pending a hearing. (AP)


Brain-Dead Florida Girl Will Be Sent Home on Life Support
A 13-year-old girl who doctors say is brain dead will be sent home on life support in the custody of her parents, who insist that she is alive, hospital officials in Sarasota said today.
The teen-ager, Teresa Hamilton, has been the focus of a conflict between doctors who want to remove life support equipment, as accepted medical practice dictates, and her parents, who contend that she can recover.


Federal Election Omission
President Clinton says he is foursquare for serious campaign finance reform.
But he has a strange way of showing it.
His impassioned speechmaking notwithstanding, Mr.
Clinton silently stood by last year as House Democrats hatched and passed a campaign finance measure designed to keep money from special-interest political action committees flowing to incumbents.
Its weak provisions now pose an obstacle to serious reform as the issue moves to a House-Senate conference committee.


Stakes Field Shrinks in Rain
Traffic on the road to the Kentucky Derby thinned today when two colts dropped out of the Fountain of Youth Stakes at Gulfstream Park, and rainy weather prompted the owner of the champion Dehere to consider scratching him from the race, too.
If all three defect, the field would melt to five, the smallest for the race in 25 years.
And if Dehere's entrymate, Warm Wayne, also skips the race, the field would be the smallest ever.


Summing Up, Defense in Blast Trial Attacks Prosecution
The defense neared the end of its summations in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday as one lawyer accused the prosecution of "deception," "serious fiction," "slick stuff" and "lies" and another declared that his client had "nothing to do with it."
The day saw contrasts in styles and tactics, in part because the evidence against each of the four defendants in the case is so different.
And so, one lawyer, Hassen ibn Abdellah, who represents Mahmud Abouhalima, argued that the Government had fabricated evidence, or had presented it dishonestly to make its case.


CHRONICLE
Imagine 100 soap opera stars in one room, an assemblage that may be the biggest ever of daytime suds people.
Not enough?
Add 120 towering men and women, the men taller than 6 feet 2 inches and the women taller than 5 feet 10.
Put them at the New York Hilton, add casino games, a cabaret, food, drink, a silent auction (anyone for Shirley MacLaine's signed recipe for chicken soup?) and voila, it's a Sunday night benefit called "Daytime's Casino Night."


A Shutout by Rangers, A Punchout by Graves
Perhaps Neil Smith, president and general manager of the Rangers, will accelerate the negotiations for Adam Graves's new contract and send him a pen and pencil set for his early birthday gift.
If Graves continues scoring at this pace, he and his agent may turn down the most recent offer on the table, a five-year proposal averaging between $1.5 million and $2 million per season, according to a person close to the negotiations.


Public &amp; Private; Dance Of Death
She has the posture of a woman far gone with child, shoulders back, pelvis canted sharply forward, although she is not due until the summer.
But there are two babies, the doctors said, and the curve of her belly is already full beneath her plaid shirt.
"Seventy percent in their favor," she says.
"Thirty percent against." You can tell by the way she says it that she has said it before.


New Media Face a Clash of Tastes
One sure bet about the coming new-media industry -- with its murky future and its profusion of nicknames from the information highway to 500-channel television -- is that it will be littered with corporate casualties.
And it may be marketing savvy, as much as technology, that will separate the winners from the losers, according to a new study of American consumer attitudes toward new media.
The survey of more than 4,000 consumers nationwide by Odyssey, a market research firm, found diverse views among Americans toward today's technologies and the promised new ones.
And the differences seem to have less to do with conventional consumer demographics like household income, age and education than with one factor: their attitudes toward technology.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the potential effects of melting snow in the New York region included incorrect figures provided by New York City for the capacity of the city's reservoir system.
The system holds 550 billion gallons, not 648 billion.


Anderson Difference Paces The Nets
After seeing his All-Star teammate Derrick Coleman go down with a twisted ankle in the third quarter and imagining New Jersey's attempt to exceed the .500 mark go up in smoke, Kenny Anderson went on a rampage tonight.
The Nets' All-Star guard scored 19 of his career-high 42 points in the third quarter and helped carry his team to a 113-110 victory over the Washington Bullets.


Hearst On-Line Service
The Hearst Corporation said this week that it would start an interactive multimedia service with programming about the home, like design and decor, maintenance and gardening.
Hearst hopes to make the service, called Homenet, available this year as a computer-based on-line service as well as through a series of CD-ROM products.
Hearst magazines, which include Good Housekeeping, Popular Mechanics, House Beautiful and Country Living, will provide material for Homenet.
The service will also include independently produced material.


Marietta Warns on Acquisition
The Martin Marietta Corporation could jettison its proposed acquisition of the General Dynamics Corporation's space systems division unless the Pentagon agrees to share some of the money the Government is expected to save from the deal, a company spokesman said yesterday.
In arguing its case with the Defense Department, Martin Marietta has also outlined several alternative consolidation plans affecting thousands of employees.
The company says it has not settled on any plan.


Q &amp; A
I.R.A.
Contributions  Q. I will be eligible to join my company's pension plan in October.
Can I make a nontaxable contribution to my individual retirement account now, since I am technically ineligible for employer coverage?
ANDY TUCKER, Manhattan  A. If you are covered at any time during the year, the rules are the same.
The determining factor is how much income you have.
When you or your spouse participate in a company pension plan, you are eligible for a fully deductible I.R.A. contribution if your combined adjusted gross income is no more than $40,000.
For singles, it is $25,000.
The deduction is phased out.
Once your income reaches $50,000 (or $35,000 for singles), no deduction is allowed.


TRIAL IS ORDERED FOR SUICIDE DOCTOR
A Detroit judge today ordered Dr.
Jack Kevorkian to stand trial on the last remaining assisted-suicide charge against him, even though three other judges have declared Michigan's ban on assisted suicide to be unconstitutional.
The judge here, Thomas E. Jackson of Wayne County Recorder's Court, refused a defense motion to dismiss charges against Dr.
Kevorkian for assisting in the death of Thomas W. Hyde Jr., 30.
Mr.
Hyde, who suffered from Lou Gehrig's disease, inhaled carbon monoxide in Dr.
Kevorkian's van on Aug. 4, 1993.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COMMERCE BANCSHARES INC., Kansas City, Mo., signed a definitive agreement to acquire Commercial Bank of Liberty N.A., from Liberty Bancshares Inc., Paris, Tenn., for an undisclosed amount of stock.
CONTINENTAL CORP., New York, a property and casualty insurance concern, expects $73 million in pretax losses resulting from the California earthquake and January winter storms in the East and Midwest.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
3.30
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.27
3.26
2.96
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.47
3.43
3.06
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.07
5.98
6.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.62
6.54
6.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.43
7.37
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.59
5.55
5.99
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Business Digest
Markets
Long-term interest rates shot sharply higher for the second day in a row, leaving the nation's central bank in an uncomfortable situation.
The Federal Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, is likely to face hard questions -- and criticism -- from Congress on what his next move will be when he presents his annual review of the bank's interest-rate policy on Tuesday.  [ Page 1. ]


Islanders Allow Capitals To Get Further Advantage
Forget Pierre Turgeon's imminent return.
Forget Dale Hunter's first game on the ice against the Islanders since his vicious hit on Turgeon in last year's Stanley Cup playoffs.
For the Islanders, tonight's game with the Capitals was about this year's playoffs and New York's fading chances to participate.
With another game against Washington on Monday afternoon at Nassau Coliseum, the Islanders had a chance to put a dent into the 9-point lead the Capitals have for the eighth and final playoff spot in the National Hockey League East.
After Washington's 3-1 victory in front of a sellout crowd of 18,130 at the USAir Arena, though, the Islanders can only hope to break even.


At I.R.S.'s Parking Garage, Cars Zip Around a New Tax
If anyone knows how to take advantage of wrinkles in the tax rules, it is the bean counters at the Internal Revenue Service.
So it should come as no surprise that they have figured out how the top officials at the agency can avoid paying hundreds of dollars in extra taxes this year to cover the value of parking free in the I.R.S. garage.
To do so, the agency had to violate principles it laid down eight years ago on how the value of taxable fringe benefits should be calculated.
It wrote a one-year grace period into the enforcement rules of a new law and then figured the worth of I.R.S. parking in such a favorable way that the executives who use it owe no additional taxes.


Change That Change
In a case of revisionist history in reverse, J. HOWARD (BUMPY) FRAZER, the United States Tennis Association president who last year had DENNIS RALSTON removed as the captain of record for the 1972 Davis Cup championship squad, has reinstated Ralston to his original status.
Frazer removed Ralston's name from the 1972 captaincy at the request of two former U.S.T.A. presidents, ROBERT COLWELL and STAN MALLESS, both of whom waited 20 years to contend that they shared that captaincy.
Frazer did not consult Ralston before stripping him of the 1972 captaincy in last year's U.S.T.A. yearbook.
Ralston responded by threatening legal action.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the changing economy of the New York region misstated the position of Rae D. Rosen of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
She is the bank's regional economist, not the chief economist.


U.S., Citing Loan Bias, Bars 4 S.&amp; L. Charter Changes
The Treasury Department announced late today that it had barred three savings and loans in New Jersey and one in Ohio from changing their charters, saying the institutions had not lent enough money to poor people and minorities.
It is the first time the department has made such a move.


Germany Contributes To Russia's Decline
Germany 4, Russia 2
Russia's fading hockey dynasty took another Olympic pounding yesterday in a 4-2 loss to Germany.
Earlier in the week at the Lillehammer Games, Finland routed the Russians, 5-0.


CHRONICLE
The 50th anniversary of the New York City Opera will be celebrated on Monday, but not by the opera company.
The official festivities will take place this fall, but meantime the Opera Guild alumni will mark the actual anniversary date of the first production ("Tosca") -- Feb. 21, 1944.
Some 215 men and women who have been associated with the opera over the years will gather at the Radisson Empire Hotel at Broadway and 63d Street for a reunion lunch.


Tension on Queens School Board That Fought Fernandez
A year after members of a community school board in Queens rallied citywide opposition to a multicultural curriculum, the board itself has been riven by racial tension and new fighting over how to deal with diversity in the schools.
Community School Board 24, all white since its creation in 1970, elected its first minority board member last May -- even as the proportion of minority students in the district's schools has risen to nearly 80 percent.
That new member, Louisa M. Chan, a Chinese-born nurse, has since become an advocate for multicultural education in the district.


Ah, Revenge: O'Neal Embarrasses Sonics
Magic 124, Sonics 93
Shaquille O'Neal made 16 of 19 shots, scored 38 points and grabbed 20 rebounds last night, leading the Orlando Magic to a 124-93 rout of the visiting Seattle SuperSonics.
The victory was the third straight for the Magic, which was embarrassed by the Sonics in a 24-point loss on Dec. 14 -- a game in which O'Neal was ejected for committing a flagrant foul on the Sonics' Shawn Kemp.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Sigel at Top of Leader Board Jay Sigel, who has two United States Amateur championships and a record nine Walker Cup appearances, found the leader board yesterday in Naples, Fla., in his third tournament as a professional.
Sigel posted a first-round 7-under-par 65 to claim a two-stroke advantage over George Archer's 67 in the IntelliNet Challenge.
Sigel's eight-birdie, one-bogey round equaled the lowest single-round par 72 score of the Senior PGA Tour's season. (AP)


Back Surgery for Calloway
Giants wide receiver CHRIS CALLOWAY had surgery Wednesday to correct a herniated disk in his back at the Hospital for Special Surgery Cornell Medical Center, according to PAT HANLON, the team spokesman.
The surgery was performed by Dr.
FRANK CAMMISA.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Senate aspirations of Hillary Rodham Clinton's brother Hugh Rodham omitted part of a speaker's name in some editions in attributing a quotation about White House silence on the candidacy.
The person quoted was Clayton Kaeiser, a Florida lawyer who is Mr.
Rodham's campaign treasurer.
Also in some editions, because of an editing error, the first reference to a fund-raising event attended by Mr.
Rodham and the identity of the person for whom it was being held were omitted.
The event, at the Port of Miami, was held for Representative Carrie Meek of Florida.


Classical Music in Review
Diamond Concert  92d Street Y


Schourek Doesn't Expect Handouts
They didn't like each other; that much was obvious.
Dallas Green had little patience for Pete Schourek's attitude and even less for his pitching failures.
Schourek had little time for Green's public tirades and his complaints about his game.
For much of last season, the Mets' manager and his young pitcher had a nightmare of a marriage, most of their talking done through the newspapers, and most of it not very nice.
So far this spring, though, there appears to have been a truce.


NEWS SUMMARY
LANDS ON FREE PARKING  The Internal Revenue Service has figured out how its top officials can each avoid paying hundreds of dollars in extra taxes this year to cover the value of parking free in the agency's garage.  1  U.S.
Alonzo (Jake) Gaither, football coach at Florida A &amp; M.
Business Digest 37  Arts/Entertainment 11-15  Fate plays trick on Ricky Jay.  11  Leonard Slatkin to leave St.
Louis Symphony.  12  Film: "On Deadly Ground." 11  Music: Gergiyev's Mussorgsky.  11  Jessye Norman and Boston.  12  Blind Melon.  12  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials  Russia's Sarajevo gambit.
Toll booths for the persecuted.
Federal election omission.
Born female -- and fettered.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Dance of death.
Michael Shapiro: North Korea's master hand.
David Gurevich: The mob -- today's K.G.B.
Josiah Bunting 3d: Code of dishonor.
Bridge 15 Chronicle 20 Crossword 13


City Is Accused of Overfilling a Homeless Shelter
Advocates for the homeless have filed court papers accusing the Giuliani administration of operating a shelter at a Brooklyn armory in violation of a court order that sought to limit the number of people housed there.
In papers filed late Thursday seeking a contempt order against New York City, the advocates argue that the city has been housing two and a half times the 200-person limit set by the court and that it has failed to maintain an adequate fire prevention system.


Meola Helps United States Rally to Tie the Bolivians
Tony Meola discovered only five hours before game time tonight that he would be getting a rare second consecutive start in his bid to be the United States' goalkeeper in this summer's World Cup.
Meola, who has been alternating with Brad Friedel, got the start against Bolivia in the Joe Robbie Cup strictly because Friedel had started against the Bolivians when the teams last met a year and a half ago.


Reno Orders U.S. Mediation In Lesbian Harassment Case
Citing a threat of violence against a lesbian couple, Attorney General Janet Reno today ordered Federal civil rights mediators from the Justice Department to take up their first case involving the harassment of gay people.
Ms.
Reno sent the mediators to Ovett, Miss., a town of 1,200 people in the southeastern part of the state, where some residents have organized to try to force out a lesbian couple who founded a women's camp last summer on 120 acres of a former pig farm.


Moscow Journal; Parliament Feels Yeltsin Tries to Cramp Its Style
First, President Boris N. Yeltsin dissolved the Russian Parliament.
Before the next Parliament was even able to sit in session, he confiscated its building and banished the deputies to a less prestigious address across the street.
Then, he suggested that if lawmakers were dissatisfied with those cramped quarters, they could relocate to a remote edge of Moscow.


Perez Searching For Lost Forkball At a Fork in Road
Melido Perez lost his forkball, his way and his engaging smile last year.
The Yankees lost confidence in him and Perez almost lost his spot in the rotation.
After all that, he underwent shoulder surgery.
Today, Perez began trying to find his pitches and his path again.
He even smiled.
Although Perez missed the opening workout for pitchers and catchers because, he said, he had some personal business in the Dominican Republic, he arrived here Thursday night and was teased by teammates today when he strutted through the clubhouse door and shouted, "Que pasa?" to anyone within listening range.


Reaping Gains of a Businesslike Divorce
Before their divorce in 1987, Dianne and Mark Johnson of Orange, Calif., met over lunch several times to discuss the division of their assets.
Much more than the silverware and the checking account was at stake: after 19 years of marriage, the Johnsons has a prosperous business, ample retirement plans and real estate valued at millions of dollars.
He got the business, a medical supply company he started in 1974, and she took most of the real estate.
And both came away feeling the deal was fair.
"Revenge or vindictiveness never pay," said Ms.
Johnson, who went on to form a real estate company.
"I felt it was our decision to work through this, and I have never regretted any part of my agreement."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  REDESIGN PLANNED FOR CITY HOSPITAL
Two weeks after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani declared a moratorium on the billion-dollar reconstruction of Kings County Hospital, his administration and state officials say they plan a thorough redesign of the project in order to produce a smaller, more efficient institution.
Page 1.


Harding's Talk Is Soft, And So Is Her Skating
Tonya Harding stormed out of a practice session early this afternoon but remained composed later at a news conference where she invoked God, team and country in response to questions about her presence at the Winter Games.
Harding declined to answer questions relating to the clubbing attack on Nancy Kerrigan last month.
Asked why anyone should believe her when her attorney has admitted that she had been untruthful in some responses to the authorities who are investigating the case, Diane Rawlinson, Harding's coach, interceded and said, "I think we're here to talk about Tonya's skating."


Classical Music in Review
Jupiter Symphony  Good Shepherd Presbyterian Church


Israelis Are Rushing to Build a Greater Jerusalem
As far as Mayor Benny Kashriel is concerned, his town of 20,000 is an eastern precinct of Jerusalem.
Never mind that Jerusalem is five miles up the road or that most outsiders call Maale Adumim a settlement, by far the biggest of Israel's 140 outposts in the territories it has held since the 1967 war.
People here, the mayor says, consider themselves Jerusalemites the way many on Long Island define themselves as New Yorkers.


Classical Music in Review
Tokyo String Quartet  With Marilyn Horne Alice Tully Hall


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about the synthesizing of the anticancer drug taxol misstated the sequence in which papers announcing the achievement were accepted for publication.
The first to be accepted was by Dr.
K.
C.
Nicolaou of the Scripps Research Institute and his colleagues; a paper by a group led by Dr.
Robert Holton of Florida State University was the first submitted.


Life, Love, Hair Styles: Musings of Don Luis
FINDING a good barber isn't easy. Finding Luis Velazquez's shop takes some doing.
Hint: His is the one that smells of roast chicken.


Delay on Kings County Hospital Is Said to Cost $100,000 a Day
Delay in the reconstruction of the Kings County Hospital Center because the construction manager cannot begin excavating is adding $100,000 a day to the cost of the billion-dollar project, auditors of the project said in a letter.
The auditors also said the problems of mismanagement and poor coordination that have plagued and delayed the project since it began in 1984 have not improved, despite years of warnings from auditors that the project was out of control.
The report, prepared earlier this month, said that neither the city agency responsible for municipal hospitals nor the construction manager had aggressively overseen the work of dozens of prime contractors.


Bank Says Cash Machine Problems Are Fixed
Chemical Bank said yesterday that it had wiped away the problems for all but a few hundred customers after erroneously deducting about $16 million from more than 100,000 customers' accounts on Thursday.
Chemical said it had bounced 430 checks on Thursday morning before discovering the problem, but had already got in touch with the check writers to alert them, apologize and offer to repair any problems.


Czech Song Recital Delayed
Tomorrow's concert of Czech songs by the mezzo-soprano Emily Golden, the tenor Neil Rosenshein and the pianist Rudolf Firkusny at Alice Tully Hall has been postponed because Mr.
Firkusny is ill.
The new date is June 5, at 7:30 P.M.
Original tickets will be honored, or may be exchanged at the box office for another Great Performers concert at Tully Hall.


Either Way, McDowell Wins
JACK McDOWELL of the Chicago White Sox was one of three players who had salary arbitration hearings yesterday, and win or lose, he will emerge with the highest salary ever gained in an arbitration hearing.
McDowell, a two-time 20-game winner who last year had a $4 million salary, tried for $6.5 million while the White Sox tried to convince ANTHONY SINICROPI, the arbitrator, that the pitcher's salary should be $5.3 million.
Sinicropi is the arbitrator who Thursday awarded GREGG JEFFERIES of St.
Louis a $4.6 million salary, second highest in arbitration hearings.
The highest salary awarded in a hearing was $5 million for RUBEN SIERRA in 1992.
Also heard yesterday were the salary differences of TERRY MULHOLLAND ($4.05 million) and the Yankees ($3.35 million) and BOB TEWKSBURY ($4.5 million) and the Cardinals ($3.5 million).


An Inside Look at Plants


CHRONICLE
EDGAR BRONFMAN JR., the president and chief operating officer of Seagram Company Ltd., and CLARISSA ALCOCK will be married tonight in Caracas, Venezuela.
About 1,000 guests are expected to attend the ceremony.
Miss Alcock's father, Frank Alcock, is an executive of the oil company Petroleos de Venezuela S.A.
ENID NEMY


Malcolm H. Fraser, 91, Retailer of Auto Parts
Malcolm Hough Fraser, a founder of the Genuine Parts Company and of the Stuttering Foundation of America, died on Thursday at his home in Memphis.
He was 91.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his daughter, Jane Fraser Fulcher of Washington.


Tests Are Done On Jets' Jones
Jets linebacker Marvin Jones underwent a series of medical tests on his injured hip Thursday that revealed no signs of avascular necrosis, a condition characterized by the degeneration of tissue near the hip socket, which is what ended the football career of Bo Jackson.
The Jets' spokesman, Frank Ramos, said Jones underwent a bone scan, CAT scan and magnetic resonance imaging on his hip at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.


CHRONICLE
There's an empty space in the ALFRED EISENSTAEDT retrospective exhibition on the walls near the cafeteria at Time Inc.
PETER COSTIGLIO, a Time spokesman, said that after the work of the legendary Life magazine photographer was mounted in December, a few staff members found a 1956 photograph of a Ku Klux Klan meeting offensive and asked that it be removed.
After discussion and opinion sampling, the company decided that the photograph was a historical document, not an affirmation of the Klan's views, and that it would not be removed.
Still, it soon disappeared.


Spy Magazine Can't Find Buyer, and Closes
Spy, the self-styled humor magazine that took aim at the Establishment and skewered many of its members, closed yesterday after months of futile efforts to find a buyer.
Jean Pigozzi, the majority owner, was in Europe and could not be reached for comment.
The final issue of the magazine is expected to go on sale at newsstands on March 1.


Lebow Hospitalized Again
For the second time in four years, FRED LEBOW, founder and director of the New York City Marathon, has brain cancer.
"This is more serious than last time," Lebow said yesterday from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
"They say if it comes back, it's more serious."


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Court of Appeals decision on the right of police officers to sue New York State misstated the party of Assemblyman Eric N. Vitaliano, who sponsored a 1992 law broadening officers' rights to sue.
He is a Democrat.


Teller Machine Robbery Was a Hoax, Police Say
On Wednesday, a woman told the police that a laughing man put a gun to her 2-year-old daughter's head and robbed her at a Valley Stream, L.I., automated teller machine.
Yesterday, the police said it never happened.
Mary Rose Posner, 28, of Valley Stream was arrested yesterday and charged with filing a false police report.
Ms.
Posner, who was released and told to return to court on March 3, faces a maximum sentence of a year in jail and a $1,000 fine.


REDESIGN PLANNED FOR CITY HOSPITAL SERVING BROOKLYN
Two weeks after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani declared a moratorium on the billion-dollar reconstruction of Kings County Hospital, his administration and state officials say they plan a thorough redesign of the project in order to produce a smaller, more efficient institution.
The call for a redesign of the city's largest public hospital, coming after a decade generally acknowledged to have been wasted on delay, mismanagement and poor planning, is certain to postpone the long-awaited project in East Flatbush even further.


Beliefs
Change in the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church is like sex in a Victorian household: every grown-up knows it happens, but no one wants to explain exactly how.
That inhibition has added puzzlement and bitterness to current conflicts over Catholic teachings about contraception, divorce, homosexuality, ordination of women and other issues.
All of which adds to the importance of a recent article in Theological Studies, the leading American Catholic journal of theology.


Born Female -- and Fettered
Female genital mutilation (circumcision), which has been condemned by international health reports as damaging to both physical and psychological health, is commonly inflicted at an early age.
An independent expert in the field estimates that 98 percent of Somali females have undergone the operation.
It is common for procurers to advance the parents of young  [ Thai ]  women a substantial sum against their future earnings. . . .
The women are then obligated to work in a brothel for a fixed period of time in order to work off the loan.


The Costrs of Studying Abroad
Emma Hicks, of Poquott, L.I., became intersted in attending college in Scotland after recruiter from St.
Andrews University, about 50 miles north of Edinburgh, visited her boarding school in New Hampshire.
Before making a decision, her parents did a cost comparison with an American college and agreed it will be feasible.
Based on the first year and a half of costs, including trips home and pricy phone calls, the Hicks say the Scottish education will actually prove less expensive than if her daughter had attended a comparable college in the United States.


Maurice Mound, Lawyer, 86
Maurice Mound, a founding partner of the law firm of Mound, Cotton &amp; Wollan, died in Manhattan last Saturday.
He was 86.
Mr.
Mound was graduated from Columbia College in 1928 and from Columbia Law School in 1930.
He was admitted to the bar the following year and in 1942 joined the law firm of Rein &amp; Cotton.
It became Rein, Mound &amp; Cotton and in 1987 became Mound, Cotton &amp; Wollan.
The firm now has 55 lawyers with offices in New York City, New Jersey, San Francisco and London.


Fearful Urban Neighbors Tell Bradley About Crime
There were balloons tied to the front of the house, and tea, meats and cheese on the sideboard, but the atmosphere in the living room of Antonio and Nevillia Figeroa was anything but festive.
Their neighbors were there to talk about crime -- with a special guest.
Early this month, the Figeroas' 22-year-old son, Jose, was mugged and robbed of $6 by a group of seven teen-agers while waiting for a bus in a downtown shopping mall.
His girlfriend told her brother, who is an aide to United States Senator Bill Bradley.
The aide, Mark Valli, told his boss, and Thursday night, the Senator joined the dozen neighborhood residents invited by the Figeroas to hear their concerns and to tell them what help they could expect from the Federal Government.


If This Is City Hall, That Must Be the Mayor


Holiday on Monday
Washington's Birthday will be observed on Monday.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and city closed.


Classical Music in Review
Musica Viva of New York  Unitarian Church of All Souls


59 Degrees! A Heat Wave!


Stocks Slip Nervously Following Bonds' Lead
In a second straight session of falling prices, the stock market followed the unnerved bond market yesterday, as prices dropped on the leading stock exchanges in moderate trading before the long holiday weekend.
Now, both stock and bond traders will turn their uneasy gaze to Congressional testimony on Tuesday by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve.
Mr.
Greenspan is sure to startle both markets by what he says, or fails to say, about future increases in interest rates.


White House Prepares
Even as the Serbs hurried to pull back heavy weapons, the White House took steps today to prepare Americans for the possibility of NATO air strikes against Serbian gun positions around Sarajevo after an allied deadline expires Sunday night.
The Administration seemed determined to maintain its show of resolve rather than contribute to any premature optimism.
A senior White House official said President Clinton would make a statement to the American people on Saturday morning to explain why the United States might become involved in air attacks.


Belgrade's Serbs Hail Russia For Being Involved in Bosnia
Crowds of cheering Serbs hailed Russia's diplomatic intervention in Bosnia today, praising Boris N. Yeltsin, Russian nationalists -- anything and everything Russian.
"Hooray Mother Russia!" shouted a crowd of about 150 demonstrators in a city park, elated by Moscow's effort to avert NATO air strikes against Serbian guns ringing Sarajevo and to send Russian troops there.


Russia Is Savoring a Triumph In Its Diplomacy With Serbs
Russian Foreign Ministry officials were walking taller today after winning a pledge from the Bosnian Serbs to withdraw their heavy guns from around Sarajevo, and they suggested that it was now Washington's turn to work on the Bosnian Muslims to reach a negotiated peace.
That Russia's diplomatic triumph would have been unlikely without NATO's ultimatum to the Serbs to pull the guns back by Monday or face air strikes seemed less important today than Moscow's ability to recoup some international prestige after failing to block NATO from issuing the threat last week.


Sweet Taste of Redemption: Jansen Finally Wins a Gold
A six-year odyssey that began with a sibling dying and Dan Jansen falling ended today with America's most pitied athlete taking a victory lap in a spotlight around the Viking Ship Olympic Hall, cradling the 9-month-old baby girl he had named for his late sister, Jane.
"The saga ended today," Jansen's wife, Robin, said after he won the Olympic gold medal he has chased around speed-skating ovals worldwide since Sarajevo in 1984.
"We wanted it to end with the new Jane in our lives."


Vote-Fraud Ruling Shifts Pennsylvania Senate
Saying Philadelphia's election system had collapsed under "a massive scheme" by Democrats to steal a State Senate election in November, a Federal judge today took the rare step of invalidating the vote and ordered the seat filled by the Republican candidate.
In making such a sweeping move, the judge, Clarence C. Newcomer of Federal District Court here, did for the Republicans what the election had not: enable them to regain control of the State Senate, which they lost two years ago.


Burmese Lighten Policy on Dissident
In what diplomats described as a significant step toward possible freedom for Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Government-controlled newspapers in Myanmar published a long transcript of remarks today in which an American Congressman described the Burmese opposition leader as "a woman of passion and commitment" who "stands for the best ideals of democracy."
Diplomats said it was the first time since she was placed under house arrest in 1989 that words of praise for Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi had been allowed to appear in any official Myanmar Government publication.


Jake Gaither, 90, Successful And Influential Football Coach
Jake Gaither, the longtime Florida A&amp;M coach who turned a generation of "mo-bile, a-gile and hos-tile," youngsters into some of the National Football League's fiercest competitors from the 1940's to the 1970's, died yesterday at a hospital in Tallahassee, Fla.
He was 90.
A school spokesman said he had been in failing health.
"My boys," as Gaither called them, may have come to him raw, but by the time they graduated to the N.F.L., as more than 40 of them did during his 25-year-run -- including Bob Hayes and Willie Galimore -- they knew how to play football and win.


SERBS WILL GIVE UP BIG GUNS IN BOSNIA BY TODAY, U.N. SAYS
Top United Nations commanders said today that Bosnian Serbs had agreed to pull their heavy weapons away from the city or place them under United Nations control by Saturday night and to allow United Nations patrols unimpeded access within their lines to check on possible violations.
As Serbian units continued to withdraw from a 12-mile exclusion zone around Sarajevo delineated by NATO, there was a widespread conviction here that the Serbs would avert the air strikes that the Western alliance has threatened to start on Monday if the arms are not removed or placed under United Nations control.


Investors Bid for Control of America West
An investment group led by the chairman of Continental Airlines, David Bonderman, has submitted a bid to gain control of America West Airlines and help the nation's ninth-largest carrier emerge from bankruptcy.
In trying to take over America West, based in Phoenix, the group will compete against Michael Steinhardt, a New York money manager, who has said he will invest as much as $250 million in the airline.


Slatkin Is Going, but He Won't Say Where
Leonard Slatkin yesterday added fuel to rumors that he would leave the St.
Louis Symphony Orchestra to become the music director of the National Symphony in Washington.
While insisting that he had made "no commitments to any ensembles," the conductor said that when his St.
Louis contract ended in May 1996 he would become the orchestra's conductor laureate.
Conductor laureate positions are generally given to popular conductors when they leave, to maintain a guest-conductor relationship.
Jim Mann, the general manager of the St.
Louis Symphony, said that Mr.
Slatkin would hold the title at least until 2000 but that the frequency of his visits had not been determined.
Mr.
Slatkin, who is 49, has been with the orchestra for 25 years and has been the music director since 1979.


Review/Pop; Psychedelia Colored By Emotion
Country music and psychedelia aren't exactly twins.
One revels in formal restrictions and control; one seeks freedom in every sphere.
But since the late 1960's, when mind expansion became a new American frontier, psychedelia picked up all it could from country.
A bluegrass bounce carried songs by Grateful Dead; the narrative style of mountain ballads was harnessed to non-linear visions.
The homey feeling of major chords and foursquare rhythms provided something secure in a disorienting new territory.
Blind Melon and the Meat Puppets, two neo-psychedelic bands who shared a sold-out bill at Roseland on Thursday night, ground free-form musings with a rural touch.
But by reveling in adolescent self-pity, Blind Melon has managed to twist received psychedelia into 1990's hits.


A Biathlon First For a Canadian Who Wouldn't Quit
Place an obstacle in Myriam Bedard's path, and the obstacle will usually suffer the consequences.
As a teen-ager, not long after she abandoned competitive figure skating for the more obscure delights of the biathlon, she discovered it was illegal to carry her rifle on the public buses near Quebec.
Bedard simply dismantled her rifle, stuck it in a violin case and rode the bus to practice looking like a model schoolgirl.


Clinton Plan Means New Era of Family Doctor; What the Bill Says
To the Editor:
I would like to correct the two most serious factual errors in Michael Weinstein's Feb. 6 Editorial Notebook, "Fear Mongering on Health Reform," which criticizes "No Exit," my Feb. 7 New Republic article.


In Praise of Judge's Record in Bell Breakup
To the Editor:
In "10 Years After Bell's Breakup" (Viewpoints, Jan. 23), A. Michael Noll asserts that the optimal profits and size of the regional Bell companies were among the issues discussed, though "not enough," at the time of the breakup.
Professor Noll may have been discussing these issues with his students and colleagues, but he wasn't listening to any such discussion by the principal decision maker in the A.T.&amp; T. case, unless Judge Harold Greene's chambers were bugged.
I was there, and I don't think there was any such discussion.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WORLD WAR II  LEFT TO DIE  The Tragedy of the USS Juneau.
By Dan Kurzman.
Pocket Books, $23.


Serendipity Can Be an Important Item on Any Shopping List
WHEN you market with an idea of the kind of meal to make but with no fixed list of ingredients, you can be tempted by lovely surprises.
It can happen at any time of the year.
Last week, for example, on my way to the fish and produce markets to gather essentials for a Saturday lunch, I was vaguely contemplating mussels or littleneck clams, which could be steamed and tossed with pasta and perhaps some shredded broccoli rape.
If decent pears could be had, I thought I would combine them with a wedge of pecorino and serve them drizzled with honey for dessert.


The World; Mutual Need Ties Dictator And Dissident In Myanmar
DAW AUNG SAN SUU KYI, the world's most famous political prisoner, has met her jailer only once.
It was in January 1989, and the setting was the airy colonial-era villa at 56 University Avenue in northern Yangon, the family home of the Burmese opposition leader.
Her mother had died, and Lieut.
General Khin Nyunt, the powerful head of military intelligence, had come to pay his respects on the eve of the Buddhist funeral procession, a event scented with jasmine and joss sticks that would see thousands of Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi's followers line the streets to mourn her famous mother, the widow of Myanmar's independence hero, Aung San.
By all accounts, the meeting was cordial.


Colombians Press for the Legalization of Cocaine
After years of a drug war that barely dented cocaine exports, influential opinion makers in Colombia, the world's largest cocaine producer, are increasingly backing an approach that long was heresy here: legalization.
Declaring the drug war "useless," Gabriel Garcia Marquez, the novelist, said in a recent essay that consuming and producing countries should "grab the bull by the horns and concentrate on the various possible ways of administering legalization."


Six Casinos Afloat In Chicago Area
In less than two years the Chicago area has seen the launching of six riverboat casinos offering Las Vegas-style gaming.
All have blackjack, roulette, craps and slot machines.
The Hollywood Casino-Aurora, which opened last June, is situated 40 miles west of downtown Chicago in suburban Aurora.
The casino comprises two four-story boats, City of Lights I and II, each 145 feet long.


Feb. 13-19; Bill Clinton, Shock Absorber
It was either a tribute to the bully pulpit or a clue to a voyeuristic fascination with rug burn, but somehow a stray remark by the President has managed to get the whole country thinking about pick-up trucks and sex.
Mr.
Clinton just wanted to pass himself off as a good ol' boy when he told workers at a Louisiana truck plant that even he had once rattled around Arkansas in an El Camino with Astroturf in the back.
It was "a real sort of Southern deal," drawled Mr.
Clinton, who said of his decision to tack the synthetic cushioning atop the metal truck bed: "You don't want to know why, but I did."


DRUG CASE DERAILS U.S.-CHINA LAW TIE
The case began with a few dead goldfish, and the bags of heroin sewn inside them, that were shipped from China and intercepted in San Francisco in 1988 by agents of the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration.
It was supposed to be a cornerstone of cooperation between drug enforcement agencies in China and the United States, with the Chinese authorities sending a captured drug smuggler to testify for the prosecution at an American trial for the first time.
Then the witness, Wang Zongxiao, asked for political asylum.
Now "the goldfish case," as it is known among law-enforcement officials, has brought joint drug enforcement efforts to a standstill at a time when China is a major conduit for heroin bound for the United States.
The events have also cast a pall over other Chinese-American criminal justice and diplomatic ventures.


Motivation By Rejection; Howard Johnson Is on a New Mission
Wearing a black shirt with a purple 20 on his back, Howard Johnson doesn't want anyone in New York to forget him.
In fact, he is determined to make some people in New York wish they had been open-minded enough to know the real Howard Johnson.
"Too many people doubted my heart and my desire," Johnson said, discussing the last -- and worst -- of his nine seasons with the Mets.
"That was the most disturbing thing. Some of the people didn't know me. They're all going to regret it."


Snowstorms Underline New York City's Deference to Motorists
To the Editor:
Everywhere in the news media the measure of New York City's success in digging out from the snowy deluge is how clear the roads are.
A commissioner and her troops are worn to the bone to get "down to blacktop." The Mayor's understandable response to having exhausted snow removal funds is: "We'll do what it takes. We'll find the funds somewhere."


In Praise of Judge's Record in Bell Breakup
To the Editor:
The main consequences of the Bell breakup are severalfold.
First, a loss of 250,000 jobs at A.T.&amp; T. and the seven Baby Bells.
Second, the widespread deployment of fiber-optic cable -- a medium as significant to the telephone industry as the microprocessor is to the computer industry.
Third, the emergence of client-server technology in telecommunications -- the technology that downed I.B.M.
Fourth, the new ability to do wireless at frequencies once considered impossible.
The upshot: the cost of installing a mile of long-distance circuit in North America has dropped 98 percent in the last decade.
The cost of wiring a city is about to drop 98 percent.
Switching, based on open client-server technology, is about to drop perhaps 80 to 90 percent.


CRIME
The problem with the good guys is they always leave town.
The latest to hit the trail is Sgt.
Fang Mulheisen, who kept the lid on Detroit's mob operations in four barrel-chested crime novels by Jon A. Jackson before cutting out for Montana in DEADMAN (Atlantic Monthly, $20).
"Butte looked O.K." to Mulheisen, who finds it "kind of a cranky, interesting old industrial town." Something like a bush-league Detroit, in fact.
But before he can consider defection, Mulheisen has to track down Joe Service, the legendary hit man who skipped out on his mob bosses in "Hit on the House" with one of their darling daughters and several million dollars in cash.


Serendipity Can Be an Important Item on Any Shopping List
WHEN you market with an idea of the kind of meal to make but with no fixed list of ingredients, you can be tempted by lovely surprises.
It can happen at any time of the year.
Last week, for example, on my way to the fish and produce markets to gather essentials for a Saturday lunch, I was vaguely contemplating mussels or littleneck clams, which could be steamed and tossed with pasta and perhaps some shredded broccoli rape.
If decent pears could be had, I thought I would combine them with a wedge of pecorino and serve them drizzled with honey for dessert.


Feb. 13-19; Refugees Flee Southern Sudan


Mulholland Loses Arbitration
Terry Mulholland lost his first decision as a Yankee today before he had thrown one pitch in a regular-season game.
Mulholland will receive a salary of $3.35 million after an arbitrator ruled for the Yanks.
Mulholland, who was obtained in a five-player trade on Feb. 10, had requested a salary of $4.05 million.
Before the case, Mulholland said he would not be perturbed if he lost.
He attended the hearing in New York before the arbitrator, Jim Duff, on Friday.
Mulholland was 12-9 with a 3.25 earned run average for the National League champion Philadelpia Phillies last year, when the left-hander was paid $2.65 million.


Lou Bunin, Animator Who Made A Wondrous 'Alice,' Dies at 89
Lou Bunin, a pioneering puppeteer and film maker who worked in New York and Paris for many years, died on Thursday at the Actor's Fund Nursing Home in Englewood, N.J.
He was 89.
The cause was a stroke, said Amy Kaiman, his daughter.


Redefining 'Immigrant' In the Bronx
THE SOUTH BRONX STUDIO OF the Peruvian artist Kukuli Velarde is filled with terra-cotta figures of concupiscent cupids, Indians impaled on crosses, and altars to her own saint: the long-suffering Latin American wife, her heart pierced with nails and her face covered by a smiling mask with the Anglo features that the saint's husband prefers.
"I decided it's better to be dramatic in my work and not in my life," Ms.
Velarde says, pouring mugs of strong coffee in her adjoining apartment.
On this point she is not convincing.
It isn't every artist, after all, who has had her work in clay, the material used by her ancestors, approved by Mother Earth, speaking through an Incan priest. ("Maybe it wasn't true," she says, smiling, "but it was a nice ceremony anyway.")


ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK
What does Edward Keating have against Staten Island?
His picture of people on the boat was a horror.
Why didn't he say something funny so they could smile a little?
They looked as if they were headed for Alcatraz.


Keep Arms Embargo on Balkan Powder Keg
To the Editor:
If one wants a prescription for a nuclear nightmare, one should follow your advice in "NATO's Risky Step" (editorial Feb. 10), as well as the resolution passed by the majority of the United States Senate, and lift the arms embargo on the former Yugoslavia. (It is unfortunate that too many people believe that the United Nations arms embargo is only on the Bosnian Muslims.)


She Married Well-Off Uncle Hugo
DOLLY By Anita Brookner. 260 pp. New York: Random House. $22.


Turn Left at Ailey Place
Here are the 10 streets, corners or squares approved by the City Council in 1993 to pay tribute to certain individuals.
ALVIN AILEY PLACE, West 61st Street between West End and Amsterdam Avenues.
Founded the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in 1968 on West 61st Street.


This Time, Americans Come Up Short of Tie
The United States hockey team, which has lived and tied by the third period in these Olympics, again saved its best for last tonight.
But against Sweden, it was not enough to avert defeat.


Los Angeles Fears A Bad Tourism Year
WITH each new disaster, the tourism and business associations of Los Angeles rush to assure visitors that life goes on here, as indeed it does.
"Neither rain nor Medflys nor 6.6 earthquakes can extinguish L.A.'s spirit," reads the headline on a typical news release from the Central City Association of Los Angeles, which represents the downtown business community.


New Police Force For Miami Visitors
In an effort to cut down on attacks on tourists around Miami International Airport, Dade County authorities have created the Tourist-Oriented Police.
The force, which began 24-hour patrols on Feb. 7, operates in the area surrounding the airport, a place that has long been a target of criminals because it is home to more than 50 car rental companies, hotels and other companies offering services to tourists.
The new force, a branch of the Metro-Dade Police known informally as TOP, consists of 18 uniformed officers and 5 aides in an unspecified number of specially marked police cars, who will be able to provide route information and safety advice to visitors.
In addition, taxi drivers have been enlisted to advise police through their dispatchers whenever they spot a vehicle whose driver appears to be lost or disoriented.


In America; Getting a Perspective on the Olympics
The Winter Olympics have been mesmerizing.
Forget about the low-rent Harding-Kerrigan melodrama and the media's total and embarrassing loss of perspective on that story.
The Olympics have been fabulous in spite of those distractions.
In addition to the excitement generated by the competition of young men and women approaching athletic perfection, the Olympics are loaded with extraordinary individual sagas -- incredible human dramas, both joyous and heartbreakingly tragic.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Arizona Front Sends U.C.L.A. Backward
Arizona 98, U.C.L.A. 74
Arizona's frontcourt, which has played second fiddle to the 15th-ranked Wildcats' touted backcourt this season, came up with a big stop against No. 8 U.C.L.A. yesterday in Tucson.


The Biggest Fiction of All
To the Editor:
In her review of Michael Crichton's new novel, Maureen Dowd states that "it is true that not all men would feel lucky to be harassed" (meaning sexually, at the workplace) "and not all women would feel offended."


An Old Show Kicks Off New Ones
Let the poets pipe of love  In their childish way,  I know ev'ry type of love  Better far than they.
THOUGH lots of new songs will be sung at the Stamford Center for the Arts over the next three months, can there be one to rival -- for the commotion it made -- Cole Porter's "Love for Sale," which was banned from the radio in 1930?


Decisions, Decisions
It's 11 A.M., and Glenn Bernbaum is sitting in the back of his bistro, pushing up his horn-rimmed glasses with his second finger and holding a skinny pencil like a spear about to be launched.
He is contemplating a somewhat tatty-looking scrap of paper, and every so often the pencil descends to cross out a name.
Is the name being upgraded, or is it going into the restaurant version of Elba?
Mr.
Bernbaum is, as usual, arranging the lunch seating at Mortimer's, a restaurant at Lexington Avenue and 75th Street that wouldn't draw a second look from tourists but has been a favorite watering hole of both society and glitz folk and achievers since 1976.
He has been juggling the placements for 20 minutes, and every time he breathes a sigh of relief, the phone rings.
Back goes the pencil to add a name, which signifies that the person at the other end of the line is "someone," which also means that a lesser someone is being relegated to who knows where.


Isles Get Turgeon Back, but Don't Need Him
A 12-game absence, a long-awaited return, and what does he get?
Not even a goal, not even an assist.
No reason for the fans to show their appreciation.
That's O.K.
Center Pierre Turgeon will get his eventually.
He returned to the ice tonight in Nassau Coliseum after fracturing his cheekbone during warm-ups Jan. 26 at Toronto, and he still leads the team in points with 56.


Susan H. Phillips, Harry S. Margolis
Dr.
Susan Halley Phillips, a clinical psychologist in private practice in Brookline, Mass., is to be married today to Harry Sterling Margolis, the founder and managing partner of Elderlaw Services, a Boston law firm that serves older clients and their families.
Rabbi Herman Blumberg will perform the ceremony at Upstairs at the Pudding, a restaurant in Cambridge, Mass.
Dr.
Phillips, 38, is keeping her name.
She is also a clinical psycholgist at the Harvard Community Health Plan in West Roxbury, Mass.
The bride graduated from Yale University and received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Annette and Donald Phillips of Great Neck, L.I.
Her father, now retired, owned Highfield Sales, an appliance distributor in Long Island City, Queens.
Her mother, also retired, was an assistant special-education teacher in the Roslyn, L.I., public schools.


In the Region/Connecticut; Brokers Swing Onto Information Superhighways
WITHIN the last six months Connecticut's residential real estate industry has developed five information superhighways capable of carrying highly detailed multiple listings throughout several counties and past state lines at the touch of a computer keyboard.
Computerized multiple listings have existed for a decade, and are available at most real estate offices by town.
But they are relatively primitive compared to the new regional systems, which offer minutely detailed information and color pictures of homes in dozens of communities.


Liz Zazzi, Michael McGuinness
Six times a week, Liz Zazzi appears in "Tony 'n' Tina's Wedding," the long-running Off Broadway play in which audience members are guests at a ceremony and reception.
"Tony 'n' Tina" spoofs the whole notion of tasteful, beautiful, flawless weddings.
The play shows that a wedding can be the most imperfect day in a bride and bridegroom's life -- and still turn out O.K.
At "Tony 'n' Tina's Wedding" a former boyfriend of the bride shows up, the photographer arrives drunk and the maid of honor (Ms. Zazzi) is visibly pregnant and treats the bride's train as if it were a rug she were shaking out.


Profile; A Hollywood Odd Couple With a One-Two Punch
MENTION the names Bernie and Brad in Hollywood, and just about everyone in the film and television business knows exactly whom you're talking about.
Bernie Brillstein and Brad Grey.
Yin and Yang.
The odd couple in a town with some very odd couples.
"Odd? Not true at all," said Mr.
Brillstein laughing, seated in his cluttered office overlooking Sunset Boulevard, littered with photos of himself with everyone from John Belushi to Princess Di.
Down the hallway, Brad Grey, seated in his spare, meticulous office, replete with Japanese window screens, said tersely: "Well, yes, we are different personalities. But there are plenty of similarities. We get up very early. We work very hard. We're very, very aggressive."


For Suburban Cowpokes, Boots Are Made for Dancin'
BY day he teaches science to fifth and sixth graders in Yonkers. by day, he's a two- steppin', cross-turnin', toe-heel-brushin', hard-stompin' suburban cowboy.
Like many other country-western converts, Gary Travin used to hate to dance.
As for country-western music, he thought it was heavy on the twang, with lyrics laden with plaintive themes like losing your woman, losing your pickup truck, having your dog die and crying in your beer.


On the Drawing Board: Rail Yard to Rail Hub
Just blocks from the planned subway link in Long Island City lie the 200-acre Sunnyside rail yards, a sprawling site that has been the subject of scheme after scheme, including a domed sports stadium, an office skyscraper and a race track, none of which have materialized.
Now a new, grand plan for the yards is slowly taking shape.


Bulgaria Is Slow to Cut Its State Companies Loose
Beneath arcades formed by snow-laden pine trees, skiers moved toward the lifts, speaking Greek, Swedish, English, German.
But this Alpine village has not attracted the one language that many believe this Balkan country most needs: the language of capitalism.
It is not that private investors would not pay for a piece of the business in this idyllic resort, 35 miles south of Sofia, the capital.
Rather it is that the Government has been loath to privatize, so the village's eight hotels are still owned by the state.


Mourning Loss Of Engagements
To the Editor:
Alas!
Styles of the Times will not be the fun it was to scan without the engagement announcements.
Are weddings the next to be deleted?


Where the Wild Things Are, Winter's a Life-and-Death Contest
FOR those concerned about the fate of wildlife this winter, the news is mixed.
Naturalists say that while most animals and non-migrating birds can manage in extremely cold and snowy weather, some species, especially those that forage, are under stress.
By March, wildlife experts predict, many animals -- especially deer -- will die of starvation.
"Last winter, we had a big die-off of deer in March and April," said Beth Herr, curator of the Trailside Museum at the Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Cross River.
"We examined them and found they had starved to death. They had only 1.5 percent body fat."


At Work; The Morning After for Health Care
A FRISSON has been traveling up and down the collective spine of the public policy community for the past year, innervated by the prospect of genuine, planned and, yes, rational reform of the nation's health care delivery system.
One person's frisson is, of course, another's paralysis.
The wizards of compensation and benefits at companies around the country have not been happy for several months, their designs and complications on hold while the Clinton health care task force toiled and spun out a plan -- a plan that might well make moot years of their own work.
Fortunes have flipped since the first of the year, and the wizards are waking as it becomes increasingly clear that whatever reform turns out to be, it will be built on what's already in place and be achieved in the style to which the Beltway is accustomed.
Key provisions, like providing health care payments for early retirees and creating risk-pool alliances, seem to be headed already for extinction or reconstructive surgery.


Sydney Smalley, Geoffrey Sherry
Donna Sydney Smalley, the daughter of Rose Mary Smalley of Modesto, Calif., and the late Donald S. Smalley, was married yesterday to Geoffrey Otis Sherry, the son of Claudia A. Sherry of Valparaiso, Ind., and the late Donald G. Sherry.
The Rev.
Floyd Thompkins Jr., a Baptist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Stanford Memorial Church in Stanford, Calif.
Mrs.
Sherry, 29, is known as Sydney.
She is an assistant product manager at the Colgate-Palmolive Company, the consumer products concern, in New York.
She graduated from Stanford University, and she and her husband received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.


CBS's New Show: You Are Not There
They call it "CBS Morning News," so it seemed fair to think it was a news show.
But while Dan Jansen, the American speed skater, made the climactic race of his career Friday morning, viewers were treated to co-anchor Paula Zahn's riveting observation that her husband was in town and life in Lillehammer was like "winter camp."
The weather person stumbled through what looked to be a pile of giant Lincoln Logs and commented on his propensity for being in shots with the rear ends of animals.
There was also -- believe us -- a shot of soup boiling.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FULTON FERRY Baubles and Bangles And Bright Metal Strips
Day and night, metal strips and drawings on pieces of translucent plastic will sparkle and shimmer under spotlights in an exhibition on the ground floor of One Main Street.
Like all shows at the landmark building, it will be viewable only from outside the hall's 18-foot-high windows, with the Manhattan skyline as backdrop.
The installation, called "Altervista," was created by four Brooklyn artists -- Elizabeth Ierulli, Laura Mc Callum, James Nelson and Nancy Steinson -- and includes a window of photographs (above, one by Dean Brown).
The exhibition, which opens on Saturday, is sponsored by the Brooklyn Waterfront Artists Coalition, which will also sponsor a group show at the Red Hook piers in May and its annual outdoor sculpture show at Empire State Fulton Ferry Park in July.
One Main Street, corner of Water Street; Saturday through April 16; free; (718) 545-7142.
MIDTOWN Commemorating World War II Battles
The Intrepid Sea, Air, Space Museum will open an exhibition called "Air War Over Europe" today, the 50th anniversary of the start of massive bombing raids on German factories by the United States Air Force and Britain's Royal Air Force.
The show includes archival photographs (above, a Thunderbird), air combat footage and more than 100 models of British and American aircraft.
Also on view will be flight gear donated by Allied and Axis crews, including a woman's R.A.F. fatigue hat.
"Any kind of female uniform outfit is very rare," said Severino Mendez, the uniform curator of the show.
"No man collects it."
The show will run through January 1996, when the Intrepid concludes its commemoration of World War II.
Some other shows in the series are "D-Day: Normandy Invasion," which opens in May, and "History's Largest Naval Battle," about the battle for Leyte Gulf, in October.
The Intrepid, 46th Street and 12th Avenue; 10 A.M.-5 P.M.
Wednesday-Sunday; $7, $6 for the elderly, $4 ages 6 to 12, free under 6; (212) 245-2533.
PROSPECT HEIGHTS Growing Plant Life For Growing Children
"Plants and You," an exhibit designed to interest children from 7 to 12 in environmental conservation, is to open on Tuesday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The six-day program includes a walk through a hollow oak tree, dioramas of animals, a cotton gin and an exhibit explaining how plants are used in making medicines.
The Botanic Garden's spring bulb show, "Love Among the Tulips," continues until Feb. 27, as does the Children's Seed Program, which supplies schools and organized groups with gardening supplies and seeds.
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Crown Heights; 10 A.M.-4 P.M.
Tuesday-Sunday; free; (718) 941-4044.
BAYSIDE  A Taste of Nostalgia, Big-Band Style
Nostalgia will reign today when the Queensborough Community College presents a program recalling the big-band era and featuring Guy Lombardo's Royal Canadians, the Pied Pipers and Gary Crosby.
Starting on radio in 1929 and continuing on television, Guy Lombardo and his orchestra ushered in the New Year from the Waldorf Astoria ballroom for generations of Americans, and the band lives on, despite the death of it's eponymous founder in 1977.
Al Pierson (pictured above right, with Guy Lombardo) is today's leader, and he may be persuaded to play "Auld Lang Syne."
The Pied Pipers sang with the Tommy Dorsey Band, and Gary Crosby is carrying on the crooning tradition established by his father, Bing.
The show is part of the college's 1993-94 Professional Performing Arts Series, which includes dance, theater and opera performances.
Queensborough Community College, 222-05 56th Avenue, at Springfield Boulevard; 3 P.M. today; $16 to $22; (718) 631-6311.
ERIN ST.
JOHN KELLY


A Conference Center Expands, Lovingly
SPECTACULARLY situated on 26 acres overlooking the Hudson River in Tarrytown, two splendid 19th-century mansions link past and present.
The large stone Gothic (the Biddle House) and a white columned Greek Revival (the King House) make up the nucleus of Tarrytown House, the first corporate conference center in the country and possibly still the most beautiful.
This year, Tarrytown House is celebrating its 30th anniversary with a $3.5 million expansion of the Biddle mansion, which, when completed, will be equally suited to corporate functions during the week and social events on weekends.
Proceeding on Schedule
"The interiors have been designed to make the transformation from a serious meeting space, with state-of-the-art audio-visual equipment, to a romantic ballroom seamless," said Frank X. Fisher, general partner of the Manhattan-based Fisher Hotels Group, which owns the conference center.
"Despite the bitter weather, thankfully the project is on schedule. We are aiming for a late summer opening, and since we have already accepted bookings for Labor Day weekend -- a meeting for 110 and a wedding for 250 -- in the new wing, we had better be ready."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index, Feb.
83.2
84.0
Thursday
Durable-goods orders, Jan., pct. chg.
2.1
1.0
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
371
375
This Week's Developments
Monday
Washington's Birthday holiday
Tuesday
Alan Greenspan testifies to the House
Two-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
Five-year Treasury note auction
Thursday
Greenspan to testify to the Senate
Saturday
Group of Seven meeting in Frankfurt


Lynn Raymond, Timothy Murphy
Dr.
Lynn Alison Raymond and Dr.
Timothy Hugh Murphy, neuroscience researchers at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore, were married yesterday in Towson, Md.
The Rev.
Robert Grumbine performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Haebler Chapel at Goucher College.
Dr.
Raymond, 35, is keeping her name.
She is also a clinical neurologist at Johns Hopkins.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received both a medical degree and a doctorate in neuroscience from Yeshiva University.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


Democrats Try to Solve The Sharpton Dilemma
In the post-Dinkins era of black politics in New York, the candidacy of Rev.
Al Sharpton raises unsettling questions not only for the incumbent he plans to oppose, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, but also for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and virtually every other Democrat running statewide this year.
The central and immediate issue is whether the state Democratic convention in early June will give Mr.
Sharpton the 25 percent vote he needs to be placed automatically on the September primary ballot.
Without that vote, a candidate can get on the ballot only by conducting an arduous, time-consuming and potentially expensive petition drive.


Where's Poppa?
To the Editor:
In her article "Unwed Mothers: The Scarlet Letter Returns in Pink"  [ Jan. 23 ]  Susan Chira writes: "Although having a child outside of marriage can now be a conscious choice, movies more often than not still brand it a bad one." But Ms.
Chira never mentions one of the key reasons why: namely, that it constitutes a "conscious choice" to deprive a child (who has no choice) of a father.
How many children would so choose?
And when will we begin to put our children first?
DAVID M. BLOOM  Levittown, N. Y.


Q and A
Hut-to-Hut Hiking  Q. My husband and I would like to go hut-to-hut hiking in the Swiss Alps.
Are there tour operators who could book such a trip? -- Lauren J. Lese, New York, N.Y.


Data Bank/February 20, 1994
Data Bank/February 20, 1994
Business Inventories
Dec.
Nov.
Oct.
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.6
0.3
Industrial Production Index
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.9
0.8
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
83.1
82.9
82.2
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.0
0.2
0.3
Weekly Jobless Claims
Feb. 11
Feb. 4
Jan. 28
In thousands
371
366
408
Coal Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
20,078
20,333
21,029
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,805
1,859
1,800
Cash Wheat Price
Feb. 18
Feb. 11
Feb. 4
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.79
$3.83
$3.73


Tender Buttons
Dried beans are the homely little peasants of cuisine, as ornery and unruly as they are solid and reliable, the backbone of such classic dishes as pasta fagiole and Toulousian cassoulet.
Because the cooking time of any dried bean increases in direct proportion to its age, the cook is often soaking and simmering -- hoping to arrive at a tender, silky interior; not mealy or mushy -- with barely a clue.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Deer Park Olympian
TO participate in the Olympics, Scott Rella had to take his sports equipment on a plane to Norway.
That was no easy feat, considering that his equipment consists of a chainsaw and a blowtorch.
Mr.
Rella, formerly of Glen Cove and now of Deer Park, is an ice carver.
And for the first time ice carving was an Olympic event.


Will Art Flower Again?
All last fall, New Yorkers gawked, marveled or cast aspersions at the parade of massive bronze sculptures by Fernando Botero along Park Avenue.
This spring the avenue may go arty again.
Officials have given initial approval to a follow-up, Fernand Leger's monumental "Walking Flower," which has been proposed for the median on Park Avenue immediately north of 57th Street.
The site is "the epicenter of the New York art and antiques world," in the words of Joyce Pomery Schwartz, an art consultant speaking for the Marisa del Re Gallery, which would sponsor the installation in conjunction with its current exhibition of Leger works.


Tower Explosion's Legacy: Security Improves in Year And Is Also Lost Forever; The Returning Worker: 'I Can Still Hear, That Awful Noise'
She typed up memos with enterprising speed, a robust woman with a gentle courtesy and an oblique glint in her eyes.
She appeared to be without anxieties.
This was Jo Ann Hilton, here in her new environment on the ground level of the World Trade Center, near the Chess King apparel store.
Her old basement office was blown apart and never put back together.
A secretary for the Port Authority police, she had worked just a few dozen feet from the center of the blast.
She was at her desk when the bomb exploded with an apocalyptic roar.
Her chair sank through the floor.
The drawers bolted out of her desk.
The walls caved in.
She scrambled over an avalanche of rubble, tearing her ankles.


Williamsburg
Winter in Williamsburg, Va., is not a season that invites lingering on the streets of the carefully preserved and meticulously restored 18th-century capital of the Virginia colony.
But the off-season does have distinct advantages: It is the only time of year when the streets are no busier than they were when the city's population numbered but a few thousand.
Until Virginia's gardens start to bloom there is no need to stand in line to see what is going on beneath the mossy shingled roofs of Colonial Williamsburg, the name given to the historic district by the foundation that John D. and Abby Rockefeller established in 1926 to preserve the town's historic area.


BENEFITS
A Casino Night for AIDS  TODAY -- More than 70 actors who appear in daytime soap operas will gather at the New York Hilton for a casino night to benefit Broadway Cares-Equity Fights AIDS.
The actors will join guests at the gaming tables, which open at 5:30 P.M.
There will be an open bar and a buffet throughout the evening.
Helen Gallagher of "Another World," Michael Zaslow of "Guiding Light" and other actors will perform in a musical revue and there will be a raffle of trips to Australia, St.
Thomas, Jamaica and other destinations.
Tickets, $100 at the door.
Information: (212) 772-9550.
For Film Preservation  TUESDAY-- The Anthology Film Archives is sponsoring its third annual preservation dinner at Tavern on the Green.
The film producer Julian Schlossberg and others will be honored.
The evening will begin with a cocktail party at 6:30.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 505-5181.


MANDELA BACKERS ARE SLAIN IN SLEEP
Gunmen in the polarized Zulu province of Natal surrounded sleeping partisans of the African National Congress early today and killed 15 in what congress leaders feared was the first big blow of a violent anti-election campaign.
Zibuse Mlaba, a Zulu chief who is also a congress leader in the area, said the victims, most of them teen-agers, had put up posters in the nearby town of Creighton on Friday and were preparing for a voter education program today.


Croats and Bosnians Hold Talks in Germany
Facing the threat of economic sanctions for sending troops into neighboring Bosnia, Croatia joined talks in Frankfurt today aimed at stopping fighting between Croats and Muslims in western and central Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Top officials of the Bosnian and Croatian governments took part in talks organized by Charles E. Redman, President Clinton's special envoy for Yugoslavia.
Earlier this week, Croatian officials described the negotiations as an effort toward normalizing relations between the two former Yugoslav republics.


Mutual Funds; Readers' Mail: A Question of Risk
Question: In one of your columns, you wrote that "risk is a matter of personal choice." That suggests a subjective personality quirk called "risk aversion," while I think risk tolerance is more a matter of when the investment is to be liquidated.
Answer: You're partly correct.
Your investment horizon is one important element of risk.
Stocks are normally preferred investments over time because they are the only effective inflation hedge.
In the short run, though, equities are much riskier.


President Bill
First-namism is spreading.
From haircutters to airline attendants to telephone salespeople.
And now to the President -- Bill.
A New York Times columnist, Anthony Lewis, has noticed that when readers forwarded to him letters they had received from President Clinton, the salutations were of the "Dear Joe" variety.
Paula Poundstone, the comedian and erstwhile television host, proudly reprinted in Mother Jones a "Dear Paula" letter from the President.


South Hackensack Journal; County's Takeover of Police Department Angers Residents
THIS tiny town so closely knit that parents know not only the whereabouts of their own children, but also those of their neighbors' children most of the time -- remains in a state of shock over the Bergen County takeover of its Police Department after charges of widespread ticket fixing, favoritism and illegal gambling by police officers.
John J. Fahy, the Bergen County Prosecutor, took over the 17-member Police Department Jan. 31.
The Police Chief, Arthur Montenegro Jr., 44, resigned along with three of his officers.
One officer, Anthony Giaquinto, 29, is charged with illegal gambling.
In addition, a South Hackensack Councilman, Lucien Zeppone, is accused of running a gambling operation in his bar.


Feb. 13-19: A Costly Trip; American Women Can Get The Abortion Pill, in London
For American women, the French abortion pill, RU-486, is no longer impossible to obtain -- just very difficult.
The Marie Stopes Health Clinic in London said last week that it had received British Government approval to offer RU-486 to non-residents, as long as they spend a night at the clinic when the fetus is expelled two days after taking the drug, and then return a week later for a check-up.


Making the Move From Cold to Hot
IF NOT YET CERTIFIABLY MAD about "Mad About You," more and more of the nation's television viewers seem to be interested in going steady with the NBC Thursday-night comedy.
The show, which chronicles the small pleasures, passions and peeves of a newly married Manhattan couple, had a rocky start in September 1992.
Set up by NBC to be the companion comedy to its then-growing Wednesday night hit, "Seinfeld," the new show found itself banished to Siberia -- also known as Saturday night -- because it couldn't hold onto many "Seinfeld" viewers.


Laurel Southworth, Andrew Susser
Laurel Jane Southworth and Andrew Mark Susser, lawyers in New York, were married last evening in Cleveland.
The Rev.
Thomas Elsasser, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Robert Shafran jointly officiated at the Stouffer Tower City Plaza Hotel.
Ms.
Southworth, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Barton Southworth of North Olmsted, Ohio.
The bride is an associate at Brown &amp; Wood, a law firm in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Denison University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, an independent sales representative, sells medical supplies to hospitals and doctors' offices.
Her mother, Nancy O. Southworth, is a supervisor of adult services for the Cuyahoga County Board of Mental Retardation in Rocky River, Ohio.


Pondering the Possibilities With Pasta
PASTA VERA has weathered a fire and a move and is now in new quarters in the heart of things on Greenwich Avenue in Greenwich.
The move has brought a sleek new look to the restaurant.
The glass-front display case with take-out dishes (mostly pasta and salads) is near the entrance.
In the rear is a large dining area, stylishly low-key in charcoal gray and white, with a few touches of black in the bentwood chairs and wire bread baskets.
Architectural drawings of Italian buildings decorate the gray walls, and charcoal gray and white tiles line the floor.


On Sunday; Tell a Lie? No. But Gambling? Count Him In.
IF SUCH a moral giant as George Washington could gamble at whist, losing 2 pounds, 11 shillings in one of his many venturesome evenings at the card table, it seems poetic that the latest attempt at legalizing casino gambling in New York City originates in the family-value, breakaway bastion of Staten Island.
"Jan. 18, 1768. At home all day at cards -- it snowing . . . Cash set aside for card money, five pounds." Washington's serene, avid diary-jotting is noted here mainly as debating fodder for Staten Island's City Councilman Jerome X. O'Donovan in his excitement that after decades of moralistic denunciations of casino gambling, the State Legislature is lately in a mood -- as members openly concede -- to start shifting before New York loses out entirely in the growing national craze for legalized casinos.


Institutional Investments That Grow With Trees
IN a scene reminiscent of the movie "Jurassic Park," a customized bulldozer called a "sawhead feller" moves into the forest here like a mechanized dinosaur.
It grabs a 70-foot pine tree with its steel teeth and, shaking the tree like a little flower, causes it to come thundering to the ground.
The machine then rolls on to take down another tree, and then another.
This is modern forestry courtesy of the John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company, which is busily matching institutional investors and trees to create one of the hottest corners of investing today: timberland.
As traditional owners of forests sell off their lands and as the Government gets out of the tree-cutting business, big pension funds are rushing in and earning returns that have far outpaced stocks, bonds and real estate for several years now.


Shoveling-Out Service Offered to the Aged
IF the recent pileup of snow has left most residents with a bad case of cabin fever, the plight of the elderly and disabled extends beyond mere restlessness and boredom.
Many are literally trapped by the snow, unable to shovel past their own doorways.
To help them, the town of Greenburgh recently began a Snow Angels program, in which volunteers will shovel driveways and walkways for the elderly and disabled.


Marketing the Sex Shop as 'Neighborhood Store'
How do you design a sex shop for the Upper West Side? Very, very carefully.
But to judge by the experience of Jerry Robkoff and Elyse K. Braun, his wife, that may not be enough.
On Feb. 1, the couple opened the doors of Naughty and Nice, a "romance boutique," in a basement at 212 West 80th Street.
With demure window displays, an emphasis on safe sex, promises to donate a share of profits to AIDS groups, a showroom layout that keeps the most explicit products farthest from the street and a virtual corner on the market in their area, they hoped for the best.


At the Intersection Of Obscurity and Pride
Who is Nikola Tesla?
"Some Polish man," suggested Ken Daise, assistant manager of Longacre Copy Center, 80 West 40th Street.


Tower Explosion's Legacy: Security Improves in Year And Is Also Lost Forever; The Security Officer: Scramble to Build Modern Forts
For Capt.
George Coppola of the Metro-North Police Department, the World Trade Center bombing is an almost palpable presence on his rounds in Grand Central Terminal a year later and miles uptown from the blast site.
A 20-year-veteran of the railroad police force, he passes by the terminal's balcony, now protectively shut down on three sides; walks past the empty space where banks of phones were removed to deter loiterers, crosses near the lost and found, which is now staffed by the police and a K-9 dog to intermittently sniff for bombs.
"It really is on your mind, always something to be concerned about," said the 42-year-old captain, who supervises one of the department's three divisions and its 60 officers in and around Grand Central.


The Sad Tale Of a Hustler Is Reissued
THE FILM "MIDNIGHT COWBOY" CAME TO mind recently, with the death two months ago of Harry Nilsson, the singer whose rendition of "Everybody's Talkin' " reverberates throughout the movie.
Rarely has a pop song been better used as a musical accent on film, as Nilsson's sweet, soaring vocal conveys the fragile optimism of Joe Buck, the story's self-styled stud.
The music buoyantly follows Joe to New York City as he dreams of his bright future as a gigolo.
But as the film spirals downward, from high hopes to seedy realities and from Park Avenue to 42d Street, it delivers a stark cross section of Joe's brutalizing new world.
Slapped with an X rating when it opened in 1969, "Midnight Cowboy" was controversial in its day.
That X was later scaled down to an R after the film won three Academy Awards, including the Oscar for best picture. ("Midnight Cowboy" is now being reissued for a 25th-anniversary engagement in New York and Los Angeles. With its vibrant New York scenes, its color and sound now restored to match present-day standards, and such stunningly good performances from Dustin Hoffman and Jon Voight, it's well worth watching on a big screen.)


Margaret I. Cuomo, Howard S. Maier
Dr.
Margaret Immaculata Cuomo, the eldest daughter of Gov. and Mrs.
Mario M. Cuomo of Albany and Holliswood, Queens, is to be married in New York today to Howard Simon Maier, the son of the late Fred and Marianne Maier.
Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye of the New York State Court of Appeals will officiate at the St.
Regis.
Mrs.
Cuomo Maier is a radiologist at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She graduated from St.
John's University and received an M.D. degree from the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.


THE GUIDE
CELEBRATING O'KEEFFE
One of America's legendary 20th-century artists will be celebrated in an exhibition titled "Of, For and By Georgia O'Keeffe," opening Friday at the Whitney Museum of American Art in Stamford, and running through April 20.
In addition to a display of her paintings and drawings, the show explores a broader view of her life with photographs of her and of subjects which were characteristic of her by famous photographers, including Alfred Stieglitz, Arnold Newman, Todd Webb and Eliot Porter.


Holiday Tomorrow
Washington's Birthday will be observed tomorrow.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and city closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Some New Silver Screens To Brighten Times Sq. Area
The Walt Disney Company will give 42d Street a face lift when it revives the New Amsterdam Theater in late 1996, but a sign of life may return to the desolate strip between Seventh and Eighth Avenues sooner than that.
In April, a multiscreen, first-run movie theater is to open on the south side of 42d Street near Eighth Avenue.
Norman Adie, who once operated seven movie houses in the Times Square area, said that the theater, Movieplex 42, would offer six screens and, perhaps, a bit "of the art product."


His Brilliant Career
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT: THE MASTERWORKS By Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer.
Edited by David Larkin and Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer.
Illustrated. 312 pp.
New York: Rizzoli International in association with the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation. $60.
THE FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT COMPANION By William Allin Storrer.
Illustrated. 492 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $75.


MORE AND MORE AND MORE AND MORE
At first, I thought Jack Hitt's essay was tongue-in-cheek ("More and More and More and More," Jan. 23).
He is entitled to his opinions, but to dismiss as the "J. Crew folks" those who oppose Wal-Mart sounds callous to the suffering these superstores inflict on the lives of millions of workers.
Surely, one of the saddest images of contemporary America is a picture of thousands of people lined up for minimium-wage jobs at a Wal-Mart.
The Times owes its readers a serious investigation of what is happening to American retailers and manufacturers LEONA WEISS San Anselmo, Calif.


A Changing Scene For City Hotels
AFTER the wall came down in 1989, exuberant crowds flocked to Berlin to watch history unfold, to bring home even a tiny lump of the concrete that had for decades divided East and West.
The city's hoteliers, flush with wall fever, seemed to enjoy shooing away prospective guests with the gleeful boast that they were fully booked for the next week or month or longer.
Wall fever is over, and visitors no longer need arrive in campers to be assured of a place to sleep.
Not only is lodging available, but it is also sometimes offered at reduced rates.
The options for staying comfortably in the former East Berlin are widening as the heart of the old city, within the former Soviet occupation zone, comes back to life.


Among Lingering Issues: Who Will Save Yanks In Times of Trouble?
Xavier Hernandez has not been told that he owns the closer job with the Yankees.
He has not been told how many saves they expect from him.
He has been told little, except where his locker is located, what time workouts commence and which restaurants to avoid.
The omission regarding Hernandez's responsibilities will change soon.
Maybe it will take a month or maybe it will take until opening day before the Yankees make an official announcement, but they are desperately depending on the 28-year-old right-hander to rescue them in ninth-inning situations this season.
It is apparent the Yankees are seeking 30 saves.


'A Living Tradition'
To the Editor:
In his essay "Lincoln Center and Its Critics Swing Away"  [ Jan. 16 ] , Tom Piazza targets my Nov. 23 article in The Village Voice, which argued for a broader conception of jazz than that espoused by Jazz at Lincoln Center's Wynton Marsalis and Stanley Crouch.
Anyone who knocks Jazz at Lincoln Center braces for negative feedback, but Mr.
Piazza caricatures my views.


In Vail, Apres-Ski Gets a New Taste
JUST five seasons ago dining in Vail and nearby Beaver Creek was about as stimulating as cross-country skiing in the parking lot.
Today, however, with the arrival of cooking talent from top restaurants in California and New York, plus the rapid growth of nearby Beaver Creek, apres-ski enticements are considerable.
Vail, with a year-round population of only 5,000 (25,000 in winter), eschews the glitter and pretense of Aspen.
At the same time, Vail's nascent culinary sophistication is a matter of much local pride.
This April the town will hold its fourth annual Taste of Vail, a wine and food festival that has grown dramatically.
Like many energetic new efforts, some of the restaurants in the region exhibit more enthusiasm than finesse -- overgarnishing, oversaucing and over complicating.
But a visitor cannot help but marvel over the quality of the provender, particularly seafood and vegetables, in this snowbound setting high in the Rockies.


Team's Motto: 'They Call; We Haul'; On the Road With the Crew of an E.M.S. Ambulance
Fifteen minutes after dropping off a man with chest pains at Brookdale Hospital in Brownsville, ambulance 30H is blazing through Brooklyn's rush-hour traffic, its siren an excruciating wail.
The ambulance cuts a tight passage through the streets of Bushwick until it is confronted with a stalled Cadillac on a snowy patch of road.
As it impatiently inches forward, drivers leap from their cars to push the crippled Cadillac out of the way.


Seizinger Gets the Gold, but Street Is Lined With Silver
Although she was raised in the mountain village of Triumph, Idaho (population roughly 350), Picabo Street's second-place finish in the women's downhill today was a more fitting experience than one might have thought.
In the first place, the feisty Tommy Moe-like rebel of the American women's team was beaten by Katja Seizinger of Germany, the 1993 World Cup downhill champion and current rage of the Alpine women's speed society.
Seizinger's performance of 1 minute 35.93 seconds was so powerful, so technically fluid, that the neighborly Street turned to her after the race and exclaimed, "You're the queen!"


Tower Explosion's Legacy: Security Improves in Year And Is Also Lost Forever; The Absentee: Fleeing Death On a Treadmill
Time is running out on Floyd Edwards.
He knows it.
He needs a job, but the only offer he has is at a place he never wants to see again.
He was a World Trade Center mechanic who was blown through a wall and buried in debris, where he saw the face of death.
Only one of his hands protruded.
Someone spotted it and dug him out.


Mark Plaatjes
December in Johannesburg, a place that gives a whole new meaning to white Christmas.
The Plaatjes family gathers in a wide circle around the dining-room table, three dozen relatives holding hands, as grace is said before the homecoming meal.
Mark Plaatjes, the youngest of five sons, has returned to the home he reluctantly left six years ago to escape apartheid and gain the chance to compete against the world's best runners.
In recent months, he has become both an American citizen and the world champion marathon runner.
But apartheid never lets its victims off easily, and Plaatjes is reminded again of how much he has given up to pursue his dreams.


Behind the Scenery
IT'S a department store, sort of.
Just one problem -- it stocks almost a million items, give or take, but rarely is anything for sale.
What's it all about?
Think ephemeral, think make-believe.
Think about the backgrounds in all those magazine ads and commercials and the rooms on stage and screen.
Props for Today, which furnishes many of those sets, doesn't have everything under the sun, it just seems that way -- three floors of sofas, beds, dishes, clocks, pictures, desk sets, perfume bottles, bird cages, hat boxes, signs, teddy bears and on and on, old and new, period and modern, all ready to be shipped or carried away without any lasting commitment.
Everything in this emporium is, with few exceptions, for rent only.


Going by Rail
To the Editor: Your domestic travel articles, like the one on Springfield, Mass. ("Where Basketball Keeps Its Trophies," Jan. 9) often contain a serious omission -- how to get there by train.
Amtrak's s service to Springfield from New York, while not fast, can be comfortable, relaxing and convenient.
This information is all the more vital considering how few Manhattan residents own cars.


'94 Rockies Don't Need Scorecard for Themselves
Don Zimmer quickly acknowledged that life in the Colorado Rockies' second spring camp is much saner than it was the first time around.
"Last year," Don Baylor's ageless lieutenant said today, "I knew one out of every seven guys. Heck, maybe not that many. Bryn Smith had name tags made up. You put your name on and stuck them on."


A Victory Over Illness Plays Well In Politics
Pennsylvania politicians of both parties spent much of last year eulogizing Gov.
Robert P. Casey, who was gravely ill with liver disease.
The prognosis was bad, and few expected the 62-year-old Democrat to return to his office after a heart and liver transplant in June.
Now Mr.
Casey, in the last year of his second and final term, is up and pushing an ambitious agenda of welfare and health care legislation and tax cuts to an unusually receptive Legislature.
In the process, he has become a folk hero in Pennsylvania.


New York Savors Weekend Stolen From a Distant Spring
A little after sunrise, Helene Newmark bounded up onto the Brooklyn Bridge, jogging westward into a gloriously faux spring day that gripped New York City yesterday like a cry from its winter-weary heart.
"Isn't it great to see the pavement?" she asked, thankful for simple things as she smiled and celebrated an urbanscape of ice-dotted rivers and sun-drenched skyscrapers that provided a perfect backdrop for a restorative weekend to be savored.


Planning for Spring! Will It Ever Come?
WHEN the sun comes out and makes the day glorious, all who are winter weary become rejuvenated.
The warm rays help to melt the snow and leave watery puddles.
Green patches show through.
Tree buds glisten.
There is hope once again that just maybe spring will arrive.
If these signs are appearing, gardeners know that they must get ready.
Many will have reviewed the seed catalogues or maybe even sent in their orders.
A few of those who are highly organized might have already started some of the long-season vegetables and annuals indoors.


There id No 'Middle East'
Last July, in the course of a briefing at a policy foundation in Washington, I asked a question about the effect of the Clinton Administration's Balkan policy on the Middle East.
A high-ranking State Department area expert turned to me in derision, and said, in effect, that there was no connection.
After an embarrassed silence the session resumed, concerned entirely with the inside baseball of the Arab-Israeli peace process.
Indeed, the State Department has been trying -- without notable success -- to move the Balkans out of the President's "in" box to make room for the Middle East.
This is less a strategy than a dangerous bureaucratic convenience, for the false borders erected by area experts are fast being superseded by history.
Middle East specialists today are like Sovietologists in the late 1980's -- on the brink of a rude upheaval they can't see coming.
The reason, simply, is that Turkey, the Balkans and the so-called Middle East (and to lesser degrees the Caucasus nations and Central Asia) are re-emerging as one region -- what historically minded Europeans have always referred to as the greater "Near East." The former Ottoman Empire and even the former Byzantine world are fusing back together following the aberration of the cold war.
The implications of this tectonic shift are, needless to say, enormous.


Corrections
The Frugal Traveler column in the Travel section on Jan. 2, about Merida, Mexico, misstated the price of a first-class bus ticket between Cancun and Merida.
A reader's letter, dated Jan. 17 and delayed in transit, points out that the price is not $45; it is about $12.


New Job: Selling Pizza
UNABLE to find work when they were laid off two years ago, Ann Marie Carragher, an architect, became a nanny, and Oscar Aguilar, an electrical engineer, took a job delivering pizza.
One year later, last September, with a loan from her parents, Ms.
Carragher and Mr.
Aguilar bought the pizza shop where he had been employed.
Now the couple, who became engaged on Christmas Eve, work 12 hours a day, seven days a week in their growing takeout business, the Gourmet Pizza Shoppe at 7 Ronald Drive.


World Markets; Strategists Aren't Writing Japan Off Yet
IF the recent collision between Japan and the United States over trade wiped out a bystander this week, it was the Japanese stock market.
The trans-Pacific war of nerves put what had been one of the hottest markets in the world on the skids.
With the yen soaring in value, the prospects for corporate profits looking grimmer and the fear of American trade sanctions spreading, the Nikkei index of 225 stocks lost a little more than 5 percent of its value, closing Friday at 18,959.60.
More than that, it made the market a hostage to the yen, which appears likely to remain strong for now.


An America Story
PARALLEL TIME Growing Up in Black and White.
By Brent Staples. 274 pp.
New York:  Pantheon Books. $23.


Corrections
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about Richard Flanzer, the producer of the "Daltrey Sings Townshend" concerts, refers incorrectly in some copies to the year of the Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
It was 1992, not 1990.


Do Guys Just Want To Have Fun?
To the Editor:
As the publisher of Playboy magazine, I would like to respond to Richard A. Shweder's essay "What Do Men Want? A Reading List for the Male Identity Crisis" (Jan. 9).


Keynes Would Be Horrified
To the Editor:
The headline for Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s review of the second volume of Robert Skidelsky's biography, "John Maynard Keynes" (Jan. 23), was "The Economist of the Century." A more appropriate title would have been "The Economist of the Depression."


ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK
In response to Chip Brown's article "Escape From New York" (Jan. 30), I recall working in the East Village last November for the Board of Elections, as a poll worker.


3 Breast Implant Makers Agree to Pay $3.7 Billion
Three companies agreed last week to pay more than $3.7 billion over 30 years into a fund to compensate women with silicone breast implants who suffered certain ailments.
The agreement is an interim step in a proposed $4.75 billion settlement announced in September.
Some lawyers for women who had the implants said a final settlement might be reached and approved by a Federal judge within a few months.


Downside to Ending of Cold War: Opportunities in Science Dwindle
With the end of the cold war, jobs in mathematics and the physical sciences have sharply dwindled in the United States, spoiling the lifelong dreams of some students, throwing professionals out of work and possibly dulling the cutting edge of research itself.
Although Americans still win Nobel Prizes and publish thousands of papers, some scientists are deeply disturbed by this trend.
They say the lack of jobs, and declining national support of science when the puzzles yet to be solved are more and more difficult, have begun to sap the vigor of American research.


Editorial Notebook; Frank Lloyd Wright's Ungrateful Era
It has taken a while, but the mile-high stature of Frank Lloyd Wright is no longer in dispute.
That judgment is generously confirmed at the Museum of Modern Art, where the most complete exhibition of Wright's drawings and models begins its four-month run today.
Yet the record should be kept straight, especially for the young, to whom Wright inscribed the final words in his autobiography: "Keep the young generation in health, and bequeath to them no tumbled house."


The Price of Progress


Jewish Emigres With High Hopes
RITA and Yuri Shneider left behind their professions, their homeland and an extended family when they and their two sons boarded a flight to Kennedy International Airport in 1991.
On the pretext of taking a vacation, the four Jews from the former Soviet Union disembarked in New York City with only their suitcases and a few photographs from their past to begin the new life they had secretly planned for years.
"For the children, we did this for them," said the 35-year-old mother, who was a doctor in a small town near Riga in Latvia.
"We said we were coming only to visit, but really we never planned to go home."


Individuals Are Buying, but Not Like Old Times
BUY on weakness.
Since the rebound from the 1987 crash made bears look foolish, that has been the slogan of your average individual investor.
When the Dow cracked under the weight of bad news or institutional selling, it was Ma and Pa who rushed in to buy.
But this time, it's different.
In the wake of the Dow's 96-point plunge on Feb. 4, individual investors seem to have been much less eager to buy.
To be sure, there has been no big selling blitz.
But they are buying a lot less.


Stephen Verp and Deborah Rudin
Dr.
Deborah Ellen Rudin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen I. Rudin of Manhasset, L.I., is to be married in Brooklyn today to Stephen Alan Verp, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Verp of Paterson, N.J.
Rabbi Jack Stern, the uncle of the bride, will perform the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 32, is a specialist in infectious diseases at Medical Diagnostic Associates, a group practice in Westfield, N.J.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her medical degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father is the president of the Milton Paper Company, a stationery and fine-stock manufacturer in Long Island City, Queens.
Her mother, Gail G. Rudin, is a sales agent at Harbour Town Realty Ltd. in Port Washington, L.I.
The bride is a granddaughter of the late Rabbi Jacob P. Rudin, who was a president of the Central Conference of American Rabbis.


Mexican Rebel Leader Sees No Quick Settlement
On the eve of talks to resolve the peasant uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, the rebels' military commander discounted Government hopes of a prompt settlement, saying his troops would lay down their arms only after fundamental changes were made to democratize the Mexican political system.
In an interview on Thursday at a safe house in the mountains of Chiapas, the rebel leader, who calls himself Subcommander Marcos, said his Zapatista National Liberation Army would also demand broad autonomy for Indian regions of the country and a reorientation of the Government's economic policies.


Recycled Sob Stories
To the Editor:
As a media critic, Jon Katz should spot hokum when he sees it  [ "The Tales They Tell in Cyber-Space Are a Whole Other Story," Jan. 23 ] .
"My daughter has cancer. . . ." "My daughter has leukemia. . . ." "My daughter has .  . . .": How often has he read this?
The one about the patrolman and the birth was in Reader's Digest in the 1950's as I remember, repeated every three months ("My Most Unforgettable Moment").


Barbra Streisand, Superstar And No Slouch at Collecting
BARBRA STREISAND'S collection of Art Nouveau and Art Deco may topple records when it is auctioned next month.
But investment was far from the superstar's mind when she was acquiring these objects over three decades.
Speaking recently by telephone from her earthquake-damaged home in Beverly Hills, Calif., Ms.
Streisand recalled how her obsessive pursuit of campy Nouveau lamps and Deco vases moved into high gear in the late 1960's, just after her dazzling screen successes in "Funny Girl" and "Hello, Dolly!" A collector of vintage fashions and jewelry since her teens, Ms.
Streisand was a pioneer enthusiast of both decorative-arts styles, beginning in 1964.
The Brooklyn-born performer honed her eye by frequenting the shops of the best dealers and was known as a collector who bargained hard but paid high prices when she had to.


N.A.A.C.P. Invites Farrakhan
Leaders of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People yesterday repeated their intention to invite Louis Farrakhan, minister of the Nation of Islam,
to a meeting of prominent blacks.
Speaking after a meeting of the N.A.A.C.P. board, its leaders said the group would resist any pressure to distance itself from Mr.
Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam, which has recently been criticized for anti-Semitic and anti-white remarks by one of its senior aides.


An Inspiring 'On the Street'
To the Editor:
I was very encouraged by the "On the Street" pictures of the woman who removed her mink coat to use as a cover for an accident victim (Jan. 23).


Children Quickly Break the Ice on the Air
ON a recent, surprisingly sunny Saturday morning, at an hour when most of their peers are still eating breakfast in their suburban kitchens before heading out to basketball practice or a play date, two 10-year-olds, Tara Speisman and Andrew Berger, sat perched on stools in a broadcast booth at the WFAS radio station here, nervously eyeing the microphones that dangled in front of them.
These guest hosts on the "Kids' Power Hour," on the air Saturday mornings from 8 to 9 A.M. on WFAS-AM (1230), quickly surmounted their initial shyness to engage in relaxed banter with the show's adult host, Karl (Quick Karl) Kelemen, and classmates from Dows Lane Elementary School in Irvington who called in to the program.
By the time 9 o'clock arrived and they had to turn over the booth to another show, the youngsters were visibly reluctant to leave.


A Glimpse of Eternity, at Least Until the Thaw


Linguaclips
John Horne Tooke, the radical English politician and cleric of the 18th century, should be a hero to Americans, especially the fast-talking.
With anti-colonist feeling at its height, he tried to raise money for the relief of Americans "murdered by the king's troops at Lexington and Concord"; for this activity he was prosecuted, jailed for a year, forced into retirement in a country house known as Purley.
There, I am informed by Pat Winter of New York, he turned from politics in 1786 to write a treatise on language, "The Diversions of Purley," which offered his world and ours an insight into abbreviations.
"Words have been called winged, and well they deserve that name," Tooke wrote, ". . . but compared with the rapidity of thought, they have not the smallest claim to that title. Philosophers have calculated the difference of velocity between sound and light: But who will attempt to calculate the difference between speech and thought! What wonder then . . . the stretch to add such wings to their conversation as might enable it . . . to keep pace in some measure with their minds."


UConn Shows Off Its Scoring Muscle
An offensive outburst of the kind its fervid fans, and its coach, have come to expect of Connecticut gave the Huskies an important victory, 81-73, over Providence tonight.
A 14-4 run midway through the second half resulted in an 11-point lead for UConn, a lead that was well protected to the end of the game.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
AUTOBIOGRAPHY  ON FAMILIAR TERMS  A Journey Across Cultures.
By Donald Keene.
Kodansha International, $23.


Bruckner Is Focus Of Concerts And Panels
THE Austrian composer Anton Bruckner was a controversial figure even before being embraced by the Nazis.
And few other creative artists have so polarized music lovers in later decades as well.
Even critics can't make up their minds.
"His music so fluctuates between genuine greatness and sheer superficiality that dispassionate evaluation is difficult," David Ewen wrote in his Encyclopedia of Musical Masterworks.
"Few other composers could, with strokes of the same pen, create such fine lines and such scratches."
Part of the problem, a professor at Connecticut College, Timothy Jackson, said, is that "we have not yet escaped from the interpretations of Bruckner that were predominant in the Nazi times. We want to break open those false concepts, to get rid of the cliches about Bruckner." To do so, Mr.
Jackson, and Paul Hawkshaw, associate dean of the Yale School of Music, have organized the first International Conference on Bruckner to be held in the United States, dubbing the two concerts and an international symposium at Connecticut College called "Bruckner for people who think they don't like Bruckner."


Marissa Weinberger, David P. Fuller
Marissa Weinberger, a daughter of Sylvia and Leonard Weinberger of Brooklyn, will be married today to David Paul Fuller, a son of Vivian and Joseph Fuller of Cedarhurst, L.I.
Rabbi Moshe Teitelbaum will officiate at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst.
The bride, 25, graduated from Barnard College and is studying for a master's degree in health science at Johns Hopkins University.
She is a senior research assistant in the health policy studies unit at the National Governors' Association in Washington.
Her father is a lawyer in Kew Gardens, Queens.
Her mother teaches English at Brooklyn Technical High School.


Near Hospitals, a Bypass for Traffic
As if a winter of snowdrifts and potholes wasn't enough, expect more headaches on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, scene of eternal road repair.
Parts -- and perhaps all -- of a 35-block stretch are to be closed sporadically for six months.
The closures, from 61st Street to 96th Street, are planned for early morning hours and weekends.


State Is Playing a Part In Alzheimer's Care
"Innovative Programs Offer Ray of Hope for Alzheimer's Patients" (Jan. 30) offered an excellent summary of some new care-giving techniques for this challenging illness.
And while the long-term-care facilities mentioned in the article are to be commended for their innovative programming, greater acknowledgement should be given to the State Department of Health for exhibiting leadership in allocating substantial grants to study care-giving methods for persons with Alzheimer's.
The Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale, for example, has received state financing for two dementia studies: a light-therapy program, which studies the potentially beneficial effects of exposing dementia patients to greater than average amounts of light, and a depression study that will evaluate the accuracy with which health-care workers diagnose and differentiate depression from dementia in nursing-home residents.
Many other studies, including those described in your article, were financed by the Department of Health throughout the state.


Harvest of Headaches: Cuba's Sugar Crop Woes
AS the chief mechanic of one of Cuba's many antiquated sugar mills, Noel Manuel Lopez Troncoso is a busy man.
At the height of the country's vital sugar cane harvest, Mr.
Lopez's team of repairmen at the mill, the Central Gregorio Manalich, on the outskirts of this town an hour east of Havana, must labor around the clock to keep the century-old plant from grinding to a halt.


Feb. 13-19: Florida and Rush; Come on Down! The Controversy's Fine!
Florida needed a new celebrity to pitch its orange juice after sour experiences with Anita Bryant (who opposed gay rights) and Burt Reynolds (who had a messy split with Loni Anderson).
Rush Limbaugh, it turned out last week, was hardly a safe bet.
No sooner had the conservative talk-show host begun promoting the beverage on his daily radio program than a host of angry advocacy groups rose up to complain that the Florida Citrus Commission had picked a lemon.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the National Organization for Women and gay rights advocates condemned the commission's decision to pay $1 million to Mr.
Limbaugh.
They suggested that a boycott of Florida orange juice or some other "consumer action" might be in the offing if Mr.
Limbaugh is not sent packing.
"Myself, I'm giving up orange juice for Lent," said Siobhan McLaughlin, president of the Florida chapter of NOW.


Thumbing a Sail to Work
A high-speed ferry line to connect Sunset Park to lower Manhattan and midtown is being planned, officials at the City Planning Department say, in part to offset the traffic congestion that is expected to accompany a planned overhaul of the Gowanus Expressway.
The ferry would dock at 58th Street and Second Avenue in the Brooklyn Army Terminal, but the Manhattan stops have not yet been announced.
The Scandinavian Marine Corporation, which runs ferries in Connecticut, Florida and Scandinavia, has been chosen to run the service, said Ann Buttenwieser, vice president of waterfront development for the Economic Development Corporation.


Hall Adds to Miami's Woes
Dwight Brown, starting for just the second time in the past 11 games, erupted for five 3-pointers in the second half tonight as Seton Hall defeated woeful Miami by 85-63 at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Brown, starting for freshman Andre Brown (who suffered a partially separated right shoulder suffered in practice Friday) in an already depleted backcourt, nailed four 3-pointers in 7 1/2 minutes to open the second half as the Pirates opened an 8-point halftime advantage to 17, 55-38.
He finished with a career-high 28 points on 10-for-14 shooting, with 20 of the points coming in the final 20 minutes.


Correction
An essay on Jan. 30, about the marketing of a first novel, misidentified the current publisher of the novelist Stanley Elkin.
It is Hyperion, not Dutton.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Briarcliff Manor; Sweeping Vistas and Subdivided Estates
FROM the top of Scarborough Ridge, sweeping views of the Hudson River take in the broad expanse of Haverstraw Bay to the north and the skyscrapers of Manhattan 23 miles to the south.
That vista -- without the skyscrapers -- attracted Sint Sinck Indians, Dutch and English farmers and 19th-century estate owners with names like Vanderbilt and Webb.
Modern-day landowners have included Brooke Astor and, until about 10 years ago, Queen Elizabeth of England.


Renewing Spiritual Symbols
TWO extraordinary buildings in Berlin -- the Protestant cathedral, built as the court church of the German Kaisers, and the gold-domed New Synagogue, which the Nazis set ablaze during Kristallnacht -- have risen from the ashes to bear spiritual witness to the German past.
The restoration of both structures, in the center of the city on what used to be the Communist side of the Berlin wall, symbolizes Berlin's hope to be restored as the cultural and political capital of free Germany when the Government moves here at the end of the century.
Yet both places, within a short walk of each other, are poignant reminders of how badly wrong things went the last time Berlin was the capital.


On Reducing Employee Commuting
Re: "New Rules Nudging Companies to Reduce Employee Commuting," Jan. 16:
The Department of Transportation tells us that the High Occupancy Vehicle (H.O.V.) lanes that are opening in March will reduce traffic congestion.
They hope to entice people into car pools by giving them a special lane in rush hours, thus reducing the number of cars on the road.
I have my doubts.


Skating's Old Guard Gives Way to New
A gold medal for Aleksei Urmanov?
Not likely.
Never had he finished higher than third at an important figure skating competition.
He was one-dimensional, a jumper who broke his ankle in April 1992 and struggled through most of 1993.
What good is a jumper who can't always count on his jumps?
Brian Boitano, the 1988 champion, would win at these Olympics.
Or Viktor Petrenko of Ukraine, the 1992 champion.
They were professionals, with style and artistry.
Kurt Browning of Canada was a four-time world champion.
Surely, they would finish ahead of the callow Urmanov.


Icons From 'The Land Where God Dwells'
THE COUNTRY WITH THE MOST beautiful name, Ethiopia, once Abyssinia, has a history as harsh as it is brilliant.
According to legend, it was to this land south of Egypt that a son of King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba carried the Ark of the Covenant from Jerusalem.
It is here that the oldest branch of African Christianity still flourishes, its hymns resounding in churches carved from living rock in the holy city of Lalibala.
And for many people of African heritage across the world, it is here that the biblical Zion is located, making Ethiopia the land where God dwells.
It is also a land repeatedly visited by natural catastrophe and political turbulence, as the numbing photographs of famished families and the constant reports of near civil war over the last two decades painfully confirm.
A hint of the country's volatile political temperament surfaced in America last fall when the ground-breaking exhibition titled "African Zion: The Sacred Art of Ethiopia," began its American tour at the Walters Art Gallery in Baltimore.


Pan Am Logo On the Way Back
Pan American World Airways stopped flying in 1991 after 64 years in business, but its name and familiar blue-globe logo may have a new life.
A Florida property developer who bought the trademark in late December for $1.32 million plans to license it for a number of travel-related businesses, including possibly a new airline.
The developer is Charles Cobb, a former ambassador to Iceland and a former Under Secretary of Commerce for travel and tourism, who runs Cobb Partners, an investment group in Coral Gables, Fla.
He said his goal was to entice companies to pay to use the name, and invest in those companies himself and sit on their board of directors.
According to Mr.
Cobb, businesses considering using the name include charter carriers to Europe, South America and the Far East, as well as an airline that would offer domestic service.
Mr.
Cobb said he is also talking with a tour operator and a travel agency about using the name, as well as with companies in the travel-apparel industry.


Word For Word/North Korea's Press Agency; Mouthpiece of the 'Great Leader': Bombast, Bile and Bowling News
NORTH KOREA may be the Hermit Kingdom, but some of the hermits labor long and hard at the typewriter.
Every day, all across Northeast Asia, antiquated teletypes clatter out the official line of the Korean Central News Agency, a mix of bombast, threats, denouncements and, on occasion, quirky glimpses of life in one of the world's most closed nations.
Last week, when the North reversed itself and said the International Atomic Energy Agency would finally be permitted to resume inspections of the country's suspected nuclear arms installations, the press agency barely mentioned it.
But there was other big news: the Democratic People's Republic of Korea now has its own bowling alley, a 40-lane extravaganza in Pyongyang for the benefit of the followers of the "Great Leader," Kim Il Sung, and his 52-year-old son, the "Dear Leader," Kim Jong Il.
Now the faithful can share a passion for tenpins after a hard day's work up at the reactor.


School Safety Zone in the Bronx: Grudging Progress
As one of his first acts in office, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani ordered the police to beef up their presence around William H. Taft High School in the South Bronx as a model for the "safety zones" he wants to create around the city's toughest schools.
Six weeks later, the results of the experiment are favorable, if modest.
Neighborhood shopkeepers expressed relief that they no longer heard gunfire during the day.
Several students said they felt more secure heading to class and going home, although others criticized the police for sometimes treating them harshly, like truants or worse.
And local residents complained that students could easily evade the watchful eyes of the 10 police officers who patrol the school's perimeter, by moving their marijuana smoking and dice playing from the streets to the corridors of their buildings.


Edwards Doesn't Require Back Patting From the Nets
Sometimes when a player is starting in the same backcourt with a point guard as spectacular as Kenny Anderson, he can get lost in the shuffle, feel unappreciated and crave attention.
That is not the case with Nets shooting guard Kevin Edwards.
Edwards had 19 points Friday night in the Nets' 113-110 victory over the Washington Bullets, but he was overshadowed by Anderson's career-high 42, including a game-winning layup over the 7-foot-7-inch Gheorghe Muresan.


Superior Sister


ESCAPE FROM NEW YORK
One area that your article did not cover was the effect secession would have had on women.
Because of the overly anti-choice beliefs of the majority of Staten Island's politicians, but not population, the borough has no community family planning facilities.
People who need low-cost reproductive-rights services get city referrals to other boroughs.
JAY BOCCHICCHIO HOPE BLUMENTAL Co-Presidents, Staten Island Chapter of the National Organization for Women


Tracking Consumption Can Cut Water Bill
The article "New Castle Debates High Cost of Water" (Feb. 6) was much appreciated because it shed some necessary light on a murky -- no pun intended -- situation.
I'm not at all convinced that everyone in my town understands what was done -- but they surely will when the next bill arrives.
By coincidence, I spent much time recently developing a computer program to track my family's water consumption.
By making all family members aware of our daily usage, it has trained us to conserve a precious natural resource and -- more to the point -- I know it will save us a lot of money.
The program is called "WateRat."


IN SHORT: FICTION
GLAMOUR INTRIGUE  MY SISTER'S KEEPER  By Shirley Lord. Crown, $22.


Feb. 13-19; Fill 'er Up With Juice, and Make It Fast
Every few weeks, it seems, someone implants a computer chip in something and induces magical improvements.
Clothes irons turn themselves off if left unattended.
Ovens practically become digital cooks.
Last weekend, the chip came to the battery charger and gave a big boost to the viability of electric cars.
In a field test, a computer-driven charger was applied to a pick-up truck at a racetrack near Atlanta.
The truck -- which began life as a Chevy S-10 but was converted to electricity by Solectria Inc. of Arlington, Mass. -- was charged up in minutes instead of hours, and covered more than 800 miles in 24 hours, setting a new record for electrics.


Virus Damaged Lewis's Heart, Autopsy Finds
A viral infection severely damaged the heart of Reggie Lewis, the Boston Celtics' captain, leaving him vulnerable to the abnormal heart rhythm that killed him on July 27, according to his death certificate.
Dr.
Stanton C. Kessler, the associate chief medical examiner of Massachusetts who signed the death certificate, said in interviews on Friday that a virus was found in Lewis's heart and that it caused myocarditis, an inflammation that scars and enlarges the heart.
Kessler said that Lewis's myocarditis had healed but that his heart remained scarred and enlarged when he collapsed and died while shooting baskets at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass.


Advocacy Group Says U.S. Plan To House Homeless Lags Badly
A Federal program to turn over vacant Government property to groups helping homeless people has fallen well short of its potential, according to an advocacy group for the homeless.
The group, the National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty, released a report on Friday saying that only 800 of the 13,000 properties available to the program have been put to use to help the homeless since the plan was established by Congress in 1987.


Clinton Plan Means New Era of Family Doctor; Tax Burden for Poor
To the Editor:
"Jim Cooper's Pointless Plan," by Henry J. Aaron (Op-Ed, Feb. 13), is right.
The Cooper plan will, at the margin, leave low-income workers facing confiscatory taxes because of phase-out of its low-income subsidy.


For Nike, Charity Should Begin Abroad
To the Editor:
Regarding Richard J. Barnet and John Cavanagh's article "Just Undo It: Nike's Exploited Workers" (Viewpoints, Feb. 13), it was Nike's chief executive, Philip H. Knight, who was so taken by the plight of figure skater Tonya Harding that he kicked in $25,000 to her legal defense.
Mr.
Knight, however, seems aloof to the plight of the young Indonesian women who produce Nike shoes at a sweatshop unit cost of $5.60 a pair, which in turn fetch as much as $80 retail in the United States.
If Mr.
Knight is so outraged by the ordeal of a celebrity figure skater, surely he can muster some chagrin over the spectacle of young Indonesian women working for $1.35 a day to make him a billionaire.
PAT MURPHY  Paradise Valley, Ariz., Feb. 13  The writer is a journalist and a radio talk-show host in Phoenix.


This Is the Army, Mr. Ting
HONOR &amp; DUTY By Gus Lee. 425 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Globe-Trotting By Tricycle
WHAT: The dreamy video for the song "Sweet Lullaby" by Deep Forest, the French-Belgian recording group.
Four minutes of ambitious globe-roaming, the video first appeared last month and is in rotation on MTV.
It has reawakened interest in the album "Deep Forest," which was released in Europe in late 1992 and has been nominated for the 1993 Best World Music Grammy.
The British pop-music weekly Melody Maker has called the album eco-techno.
THE SONG: "Sweet Lullaby" is a lilting contemporary dance track wrapped around timeless vocals -- by a chorus of Pygmy women, a Solomon Islands girl and others.


Clinton Plan Means New Era of Family Doctor; Worse Than Medicare
To the Editor:
Michael Weinstein in "Fear-Mongering on Health Reform" (Editorial Notebook, Feb., 6), accuses Elizabeth McCaughey of misrepresenting the Clinton health care plan in her New Republic article.
We need only to look at our Medicare payment system to realize that Ms.
McCaughey's predictions exist now for the elderly, notwithstanding Mr.
Weinstein's attempts to temper the similar restrictions that will apply to all of us should the plan be passed as it stands.


DEALS &amp; DISCOUNTS
RENTAL CARS IN EUROPE The Kemwel Group has special rates on car rentals between April 1 and Oct. 31 for those who make reservations and pay by April 2.
Rates for a three-day rental of a subcompact car with manual transmission, such as a Fiat Panda, including unlimited mileage, are: Switzerland, $45; Britain and Germany, $49; Italy, $59; Spain, $59 or $69, depending on the date, and France, $69.
Rates include unlimited mileage. value added tax and optional collision damage waiver are extra, as is the theft waiver where it applies.
Kemwel has rentals available in more than two dozen countries.
The company may be reached at (800) 678-0678.
RESORT DISCOUNTS Two groups of all-inclusive Caribbean resorts have announced discounts for upcoming months.
Sandals Resorts, which has six properties in Jamaica, one in Antigua and one in St.
Lucia, is offering $415 a couple off the published rate for guests who book a minimum six-night stay.
The offer is good for new bookings made before Feb. 28; there is a blackout period through Feb. 24 at most of the resorts.
A six-night stay at Sandals St.
Lucia starts at $2,670 a couple from April 1 to Dec. 22 without the discount; the price includes room, food, drinks and activities.
More information is available from (800) 726-3257.


Corrections
The Mutual Funds column, about investment strategies in periods of rising interest rates, misspelled the surname of an investment adviser.
He is Bob Markman.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE SEVEN MOUNTAINS OF THOMAS MERTON By Michael Mott.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $17.95.
As a Trappist monk, Thomas Merton led a frequently silent life, yet he was very voluble on paper.
This official biography shows how he progressed from youthful rakishness to a religious but still questioning existence.
In 1984 our reviewer, Robert Coles, praised the book's "clear and unpretentious and vigorous prose."  THE GEOGRAPHY OF DESIRE By Robert Boswell.
Harper Perennial, $12.
This 1989 novel by the author of "Mystery Ride" concerns the life of Leon Green, a Californian who at 32 already has a complicated and criminal past.
He retreats to Central America, where he finds himself re-enacting former mistakes, including simultaneous affairs with two women.
"Among Mr. Boswell's many gifts as a novelist is the essential one for providing the thoroughness of detail that will seduce the reader into engagement and belief," Richard P. Brickner said here.
Harper Perennial has also reissued Mr.
Boswell's first novel, CROOKED HEARTS ($12), about a desperate but loving family trying to take the sting out of life's disappointments by celebrating them.
In 1987 our reviewer, Sharon Sheehe Stark, called it "rich and vivid, an intriguingly busy view of the human adventure." DANCING IN THE MOVIES (Plume, $8.95), Mr.
Boswell's first book, won the Iowa School of Letters Award for Short Fiction.
The six stories, about characters whose present lives are ineluctably colored by their pasts, "add up to a stunning performance," one critic said in 1986.


Serendipity Can Be an Important Item on Any Shopping List
WHEN you market with an idea of the kind of meal to make but with no fixed list of ingredients, you can be tempted by lovely surprises.
It can happen at any time of the year.
Last week, for example, on my way to the fish and produce markets to gather essentials for a Saturday lunch, I was vaguely contemplating mussels or littleneck clams, which could be steamed and tossed with pasta and perhaps some shredded broccoli rape.
If decent pears could be had, I thought I would combine them with a wedge of pecorino and serve them drizzled with honey for dessert.


The Nation; It's Back! The Idea That Senators Hate to Love
Amending the Constitution used to rank with going to war as an occasion for congressional solemnity.
But in the next few weeks Congress may vote to require itself to balance the Federal budget -- a sort of "stop me before I spend again" injunction -- with less gravity, and less public attention than when it debates a crime bill or considers tinkering with campaign finance laws.
Last week, Democratic Senators Paul Simon of Illinois and Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the proposal's leading advocate and its signal enemy, conducted competing public hearings with little company other than their witnesses and C-SPAN camera crews.


NEW CALLS TO LIFT EMBARGO ON CUBA
Now that the United States trade embargo on Vietnam has been lifted, a growing number of Cuban-Americans and members of Congress are pushing President Clinton to ease the embargo on Cuba.
But because of domestic political pressures, the Administration seems unwilling to budge.
Though still a minority among Cuban-Americans and on Capitol Hill, these voices are telling the Administration that the best way to undermine Fidel Castro is to increase Western involvement in Cuba.
In their view, that means easing or ending the embargo.


Tuscan Villa
To the Editor: I read with mixed feelings Mary-Lou Weisman's "Welcome to Our Rented Nightmare." I began a Tuscan rental agency 10 years ago after a somewhat unsuccessful rental in Tuscany.
Determined not to reproduce the problems I encountered, I encourage clients to ask questions like these:


Planning for Spring! Will It Ever Come?
WHEN the sun comes out and makes the day glorious, all who are winter weary become rejuvenated.
The warm rays help to melt the snow and leave watery puddles.
Green patches show through.
Tree buds glisten.
There is hope once again that just maybe spring will arrive.
If these signs are appearing, gardeners know that they must get ready.
Many will have reviewed the seed catalogues or maybe even sent in their orders.
A few of those who are highly organized might have already started some of the long-season vegetables and annuals indoors.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Corrections
Because of the illness of the pianist Rudolf Firkusny, and a resulting schedule change, an article on page 23 of the Arts and Leisure section today carries an outdated reference to his concert at Alice Tully Hall, as does a music listing on page 35 of that section.
The concert, originally scheduled for today, has been delayed to June 5.


Long Island City Is More Than 'Drab Neighborhood'
To the Editor:
I was startled to read in the Feb. 6 article "Citicorp's Tower: Still a Majestic Misfit" that the bank's skyscraper in Long Island City looms over "a drab neighborhood of squat warehouses, factory lofts and row houses."


The Biggest Fiction of All
To the Editor:
On page 7 of the Jan. 23 issue, Maureen Dowd concludes her review of Michael Crichton's novel "Disclosure" by commenting on this remark by the hero's lawyer: "On the basis of facts, I don't see much difference in the behavior of men and women." Ms.
Dowd says, "And those facts represent the biggest fiction of all."


MORE AND MORE AND MORE AND MORE
Jack Hitt writes that "today's customers are knowledgeable consumers" and enter these mammoth stores knowing about the products they want to buy.
I have always entered most stores seeking knowledge about what I think I might what to buy.


Deserted Sidewalks? Not Here
Lunchtime customers pack the counter four deep in the Golden Krust Caribbean Bakery on South Fourth Avenue, where the specials of the day include oxtail, curried goat and cow foot.
Outside, in the heart of the city's downtown, shoppers hustle from store to store, seemingly oblivious to the five gutted storefronts left by a four-alarm fire of undetermined cause on New Year's Eve.
The blaze was the third to hit the shopping district in a year, although the authorities say they have no evidence to connect them.


Dog Shows: None Dare Call Them Tranquil
For two days last week, Madison Square Garden was alive with the sounds of intense competition at the highest level of sport.
The sounds were not those of hockey pucks or basketballs but of hair dryers.
The dryers, buzzing backstage at the 118th annual Westminster Kennel Club show, were caressing the coats of the most pampered dogs in the universe.
Some 2,600 -- champions all -- competed for various prizes, and one, aptly named Ch.
Willum the Conqueror, was named Best in Show.
The 12-pound, black-and-tan Norwich terrier thus captured the dog-show equivalent of the World Series or Super Bowl.


An Ice Skater Is Embarrassed, and Haytaian Takes Offense
Just when it seemed the spotlight on the Tonya Harding saga had moved to the Olympics in Norway, fallout from the controversy has drifted into a new arena: New Jersey politics.
At issue is a home videotape of Ms.
Harding that shows her disrobing on her wedding night.
The tape, which made the circuit of tabloid-TV shows and newscasts last week, was first shown on the television show "A Current Affair," which said it had received the tape from Ms.
Harding's former husband, Jeff Gillooly.


Safety for Drivers Is Concern in Daytona Event Today
The way Rusty Wallace saw it, the world's best stock-car racers needed a refresher course in driver's education, and he was ready to give the lecture.
"I was responding to a problem that's been ongoing, but after the two deaths, that was a little extra that shoved me over the side," Wallace said Friday.


King of the 5.9's: Urmanov Earns The Gold Medal
Aleksei Urmanov, a 20-year-old from Russia and part of the new guard in men's figure skating, captured the gold medal yesterday at the XVII Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway.
The athletic Elvis Stojko of Canada took the silver, and the artistic Philippe Candeloro of France earned the bronze. (Barton Silverman/The New York Times) ONE MORE FOR BLAIR
Bonnie Blair, left, earned her fourth career gold medal yesterday, winning the 500-meter speed skating event.
Blair, who turns 30 next month, joins swimmer Janet Evans, diver Pat McCormick and sprinter Evelyn Ashford as the American women with the most gold medals. (G. Paul Burnett/The New York Times) A SILVER FOR STREET
Picabo Street, the 23-year-old from Triumph, Idaho, finished second in the women's downhill, winning the fourth medal for the American team in the Alpine skiing events.
Street's time of 1:36.59 was 66 hundredths of a second behind Germany's Katja Seizinger.


Planning for Spring! Will It Ever Come?
WHEN the sun comes out and makes the day glorious, all who are winter weary become rejuvenated.
The warm rays help to melt the snow and leave watery puddles.
Green patches show through.
Tree buds glisten.
There is hope once again that just maybe spring will arrive.
If these signs are appearing, gardeners know that they must get ready.
Many will have reviewed the seed catalogues or maybe even sent in their orders.
A few of those who are highly organized might have already started some of the long-season vegetables and annuals indoors.


A Cut Above
Lately it seems that every time I take a taxi, the radio is tuned to a call-in show, with ordinary people from all walks of life proclaiming their views on health care, taxes, foreign policy -- you name it.
Sometimes they strike me as intelligent and reasonable; other times, as simple-minded, or worse.
I do not dispute their right to their opinions.
But almost invariably I resent their editorializing because, whether what they're saying makes sense to me or not, one thing is clear: they know no more about the subject at hand than I do.
In fashion, as in so many other fields today, we have witnessed the abdication of the experts.
Everyone's opinion matters now, and no one's opinion matters any more than anyone else's.
This has come about in the name of democracy, after a long campaign to make the world safe for whatever women want to wear, whenever they want to wear it.
For those who subscribe to what I call the conspiracy theory -- the notion of fashion as a dictatorship ruled by a band of capricious designers -- this change constitutes an improvement.
But for some of the rest of us, it's a mixed blessing.


Corrections
A caption and credit in the Times Book Review on Feb. 6, with a picture of the jazz trumpeter Miles Davis, included an erroneous attribution taken from the book "Miles Davis: The Man in the Green Shirt." The photographer was Dennis Stock; the credit should have read, "Dennis Stock/Magnum."


Reverberations: Aftermath of a Bombing -- A special report.; Trade Center Blast's Legacy: Security Improved, and Lost
Almost everyone retains some defining image of the day.
It might be the pregnant woman plucked off the roof by a wavering helicopter.
Or the Secret Service agent blown out of her shoes.
Or the people scribbling their wills on tatters of paper in smoky stairwells.
Or the kindergarten class trapped for five hours in the inky darkness of a broken elevator, singing silly songs to keep the evil away.
On Saturday, at 18 minutes past noon, a year will have passed since lower Manhattan trembled from the bomb that exploded in the entrails of the World Trade Center, opening a jagged cavern five stories deep.
Terrorism had landed on American soil as never before.
The bomb left six dead, a thousand injured and millions shaken to the marrow.


The Sighted Aren't Always Insightful
To the Editor:
Michele Willens is right when she says that in Hollywood movies blind females are always victims and blind men are allowed superhuman powers  [ "Hollywood Isn't Blind to the Possibilities . . . for Men," Jan. 23 ] .


Sinewy Sweetness From Mali
THE WEST AFRICAN country of Mali is justly renowned for its griots, itinerant troubadours whose songs preserve oral history, praise luminaries and offer social commentary.
Centuries of tradition, however, cannot keep a healthy folk music from changing.
The griot's usual accompaniment consisted of little more than harplike instruments like the kora or gourd xylophones.
During the 1960's and 70's, rock and rhythm-and-blues joined an invasion of Cuban pop throughout Africa, and the cities of Mali bristled with electric guitars and large amplified bands.
The wildest music has faded now, but a new generation of griots retains elements of the brash sound and sleek drive of Western pop.
The neo-traditional sound of Mali is nowhere more potent than in the southern district of Wassoulou, for which the music is named.
Its most penetrating, dramatic performer is a 26-year-old woman named Oumou Sangare.
Unlike many regional styles in Africa, Wassoulou comes in a concise anthology, "Women of Mali: The Wassoulou Sound," which includes all the major performers and not a single drab track.


Sports of The Times; Keney M. Applies For Commissioner
"PLEASE sit down. On behalf of the baseball search committee interviewing candidates for commissioner, we're delighted you're here. You certainly have the look we're looking for. Your name again?"
"Keney M."


Indian Immigrant's Face Burned
Three Queens teen-agers beat an Indian immigrant and burned his face with a cigarette early yesterday in Astoria, Queens, the police said.
They said the assault is being investigated as a possible bias incident.
The man, whose name was withheld by the police, was identified as a 25-year-old Indian.
The names of victims of bias incidents are not revealed.


INSIDE
Congresswoman's Quandary
Lynn Schenk would like to support the Clinton health plan.
But in a district with 14 hospitals, there are many experts to tell her what to do.
Page 20. 15 Slain in South Africa
Gunmen killed 15 voter education workers for the African National Congress, raising fears of a violent election campaign in April.
Page 9.
Alarm Over Life Support
A ruling that a hospital must provide life support for a baby without a brain has alarmed hospital administrators and medical ethicists.
Page 20.
New York Democrats' Unrest
The Rev.
Al Sharpton's candidacy for the Senate raises questions for virtually every other Democrat running in New York this year.
Page 39.


America's Best Buildings
I COME FROM A SMALL COUNTRY WHERE THE BEST buildings are schools," observed Fatma Cole, a woman from Tunisia who found herself serving as head of the parents association at a New York City public school last fall. "Here the best buildings are jails."
She couldn't have said that 15 years ago, when states and the Federal Government simply jammed the expanding prison population into aging jails and prisons.
But during the 1980's, reacting to rising impatience with crime, Congress and state legislatures passed bundles of new laws -- mandatory minimum terms for drug crimes and recidivists as well as sentence guidelines that abolished parole.
The prison population shot up, from 315,974 at the end of 1980 to more than 925,000 today.


A Journey Home to Any February in the 50's
DAVE RUBIN was standing on the stoop of the apartment house across the street from the apartment house in which I was raised, complaining about his neighbors.
"Animals, what can I say?" he said.
"Three, four families to an apartment, communal living to the extreme. They'll take the light bulbs from the hall, they'll take half your wash if you leave it alone in the laundry room. Noise at night you wouldn't believe."


Berlin's Vital Cafe Culture
PRENZLAUER BERG -- at last -- is living up to its reputation.
Since the fall of the wall, this former working-class district in the north of eastern Berlin has invariably been described as an island of trendiness in the persistently dreary, still Communist-looking East.
Until recently, though, visitors from the West tended to be disappointed.
Aside from choosing among a small number of restaurants, bars and live-music venues, many of which opened in the chaotic months of 1990, there was not a whole lot to do except walk around and marvel at the relative intactness of the buildings. (Compared with other parts of Berlin, the neighborhood sustained only moderate damage in World War II, and the Communists did not have enough money after the war to do much tearing down and rebuilding.)
In the past six months, however, the pace of change there has speeded up dramatically.
Streets that seemed hopelessly deserted a year ago are now full of new businesses.
The turn-of-the-century underground railway line that connected Prenzlauer Berg to western Berlin before the building of the wall was finally reconnected last November, making the rest of the city feel much closer.
Dozens of new cafes, restaurants and bars -- or places calling themselves cafes but really combining features of all three -- are regularly attracting people from both halves of Berlin.
The best of these places are strikingly designed and offer excellent food, yet somehow manage to maintain an intimate, accommodating atmosphere quite different from their more severe counterparts in western Berlin.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  John Bess's title is chief executive officer.
For hundreds of teen-agers, he is mentor, fund-raiser, role model, hell-raiser.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Rent a clock, a bed, a stone dog with a bow.
Behind these warehouse doors are the building blocks of a thousand scenes.


How We Inherit
SIGNS OF LIFE The Language and Meanings of DNA.
By Robert Pollack. 212 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.


State Visitor


It's Got a Nice Beat, You Can Torture to It
THIRTY-FOUR YEARS ago, in "Psycho," Alfred Hitchcock jolted audiences by killing off his leading lady in the shower.
Bernard Herrmann's rhythmic, piercing, high-pitched soundtrack -- EEEE-EEEE-EEEE-EEEE -- contributed to the scene's shock value.
But if Hitchcock were alive and working on a similar scene today, he might opt instead for Handel's "Water Music" or possibly a tune by the Mothers of Invention.
Faced with the task of differentiating their scenes of brutality and mayhem from all the other scenes of brutality and mayhem, film makers are using music to distance the viewer from violence -- or to comment ironically on it.
As the images get more explicit, the accompanying tunes seem to be getting more frothy.


One Swiss Brother Tops Other in Bobsled
Reto Goetschi and Guido Acklin upstaged their fellow Swiss team of Gustav Weder and Donat Acklin today to take the lead after the first two runs of the two-man bobsled competition at the Winter Olympic Games.
Goetschi and Guido Acklin, who is the younger brother of Donat Acklin, had a combined time of 1 minute 45.14 seconds for the first two runs down the Hunderfossen course, a tenth of a second faster than the Weder team.
The Italian sled of Gunther Hubber and Stefano Ticci was third, 27 hundredths of a second behind the leaders.


What Price History? $9.5 Million
For a century, Luchow's fed barrels of beer and platters of schnitzel and wurst to celebrated patrons like Theodore Roosevelt, Diamond Jim Brady, Lillian Russell and Enrico Caruso.
The pianist Ignace Paderewski and the violinist Fritz Kreisler performed there.
At a table in 1914, Victor Herbert, Irving Berlin and John Philip Sousa helped form the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers.
Legend has it that Gus Kahn used a tablecloth to write "Yes, Sir, That's My Baby."
But the lederhosen-clad brass band boomed its last oompah-pah in 1982.
Except for a brief stint as a disco and some intrusions by squatters, the building, at 106-112 East 14th Street, has been silent since.


Tower Explosion's Legacy: Security Improves in Year And Is Also Lost Forever; The Outsider: 'Now I'm Seen As a Terrorist'
Since coming to the United States from Egypt nine years ago, Ehab Hassan has learned English doing odd jobs, worked his way through college, married and started a bustling livery cab business in downtown Brooklyn.
The road to becoming an American has been full of hurdles, he says, and the last year has been no exception.
"I thought I had paid my dues already," he says with frustration.
"I thought I was a New Yorker. But now I feel separated again. Now I'm seen as a terrorist."


A Spaniard Films a Song to Life and Sex
TO THIS DAY, FERNANDO Trueba remembers sitting in a crowded movie theater, closing his eyes and listening to the laughter of the audience enjoying his first feature film.
"This is a miracle, I thought: all these different lives and situations coming together to laugh," he said.
"I was 24 years old, and I decided then and there to try to provoke this laughter as much as possible."
Now, 15 years later, an established writer, director and producer of Spanish movies, Mr.
Trueba has been true to his word.
"Most of the films I have made are comedies," he noted.
"For me, cinema has to be entertaining. I think of cinema as something people see on a Saturday or a Sunday after a week of work, so its first job is to entertain. I distrust films of ideas. I've always preferred a comedy to a film by Ingmar Bergman."


Everyone's A Coach
Young Japanese tourists are being seen in Manhattan this winter wearing a type of soccer coach's field coat that is not available in the United States.
It is a nylon coat with a curly, fake-fur lining and, emblazoned across the back, logos for Adidas or Nike, which produce the coat for the supporters of teams in Japan's year-and-a-half-old professional soccer league, the J-League.
Much of current fashion among the young is being fueled by the logos and racing stripes of functional sports clothing.
So it is no surprise that the fashion crowd quickly adopted the $150 coach's coats, which are available in department stores in Japan.


Other Voices Against The Regulators
My ego, perhaps, should be flattered and pleased with your portrayal of me ("Fighting Power Lines and Saving Trees," Feb. 6) as something of a heroic activist, battling Northeast Utilities over its excessive cutting of roadside trees.
But honesty requires me to point out that in the struggle to stop the Connecticut Chainsaw Massacre I am far from alone.


Late Donations Shore Up the Neediest
As its 82d annual appeal draws to a close, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund is in danger of ending the campaign with a decrease in contributions for a second straight year, jeopardizing services for thousands of the city's poor.
The amount collected so far this year, $4,135,714.05, represents a drop of $91,106 from collections at this time last year and a drop of more than $600,000 from the 1991-92 campaign, the most successful in the fund's history.
Every dollar donated is used for direct services for the needy because The Times pays the campaign's overhead.


Holding True To the Idealism Of the New Wave
BACK IN 1982, WHEN THE guitarists Richard Barone and James Mastro were members of the new-wave group the Bongos, they took a busman's holiday and recorded "Nuts and Bolts," a delightfully unassuming album that encapsulated the do-it-yourself spirit and eclectic esthetic of the time.
Split evenly between Mr.
Barone's taut, hook-driven power pop and Mr.
Mastro's frisky, open-ended amalgams of rock, folk and soul, "Nuts and Bolts" made little impression in the marketplace.
By the time it was released on the independent Passport label in 1983, the Bongos had landed a contract with RCA, and were playing for bigger stakes.
A decade later, the Bongos are a distant memory; after failing commercially, the band broke up in the mid-80's) Yet one is reminded of the clear vision of "Nuts and Bolts" as Mr. Barone and Mr. Mastro have each recently produced sparkling albums that hold true to the pop idealism that once informed their shared work.


Gail Bernstein, Wayne Bennett
Gail Dina Bernstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen L. Bernstein of Woodmere, L.I., is to be married today to Wayne Bennett, a son of Elaine H. Bennett of Douglaston, Queens, and William Bennett of North Miami Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Ralph Kingsley is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride, 29, graduated from the University of Maryland.
She is the manager of local cable and national media buying at Horizon Media, an advertising service in New York.
Her father is the house counsel for the First Republic Corporation of America, a real estate, hotel and textile conglomerate in New York.
Her mother, Phyllis R. Bernstein, is a designer and a sales representative for Lois B., a women's clothing manufacturer in Hewlett, L.I.


Q and A
Homeowners And Home Seekers  Q. I have often heard about organizations that profess to match home seekers with homeowners and that cater mainly to retirees.
I am a retiree looking to share a home that's now too big for its present owner, another retiree.
Is there any organization or service that I can contact? . . .
Harold Blau, Glen Oaks, Queens


Irving Newhouse; Printing Specialist, 70
Irving Newhouse, a newspaper and magazine production specialist in the New York area for 30 years, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 70.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Carole.


Nasdaq Defends Its Trading Practices
To the Editor:
In "A Timely Call for Reform in Nasdaq Trading" (Market Watch, Jan. 30), Floyd Norris offers several opinions about practices in the Nasdaq market with which we take issue.
There is nothing inherently wrong with market makers' earning the spread for risk positions they take in bringing immediacy and liquidity to the market.
Exchange specialists and "upstairs" traders also earn the spread when they participate in investor transactions and, according to the April 1993 edition of the NYSE Fact Book, they do so in 45.3 percent of New York Stock Exchange share volume.
This number also means that less than 55 percent of the volume on the Big Board involves customer orders meeting customer orders.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 30 about the Friday Evening Club, a presenter of cultural events in Morris County, referred incorrectly to Ignace Paderewski.
His instrument was the piano, not the violin.


Puerto Rican Institution Moving; Some Say Its Flavor May Not
They look like wooden shanties, and there are perhaps 50 of them scattered on what would otherwise be trash-strewn lots in the South Bronx, East Harlem and the Lower East Side.
On summer nights many are filled with dancers and with the thunderous sounds of plena and bomba, Puerto Rican music that relies on handmade drums.
The shacks are known as casitas, Spanish for "little houses," and have served as unofficial repositories of Puerto Rican culture in New York for more than 10 years.
Most of them sprang up after a city program began in 1978 to rent vacant lots to community groups for $1 a year.


Fare Card Plan In the Subways Exceeds Goals
The Transit Authority has put nearly 40,000 fare cards, worth over $500,000, into circulation in six weeks with no major technical problems and, believe it or not, no evidence of "skimming," "buffering" or other kinds of fraud, officials say.
Sales are slightly ahead of projections, as New Yorkers move from a 40-year-old system of tokens into the computer age with less hesitation than marketing experts had predicted.


Feb. 13-19: Tailhook Departure; Kelso Doesn't Exactly Go Down With the Ship
The decision by the Navy's top admiral last week to retire two months early may write the final chapter in the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal.
But with no convictions for misconduct arising from the debacle, many critics of the armed services' attitudes toward women are determined to keep the book open.
The officer, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, agreed to retire early, at the end of April, in exchange for a tribute from Defense Secretary William J. Perry that would clear his name.


Broadway Lures (and Hooks) an English Producer
WHEN BILL KENWRIGHT calls to settle on an interview date, the first thing you hear is his schedule.
The Society of London Theater needs him to discuss the forthcoming Olivier Awards, which he is producing for the first time.
He is directing a provincial run of "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" even as he plans a New York transfer of Diana Rigg in "Medea." His hometown football team, Everton, is up for grabs in Liverpool and the producer can think of no greater personal triumph than to buy it.
Mr.
Kenwright has at least one more thing on his mind: keeping Willy Russell's "Blood Brothers," a musical export about the British class system, running on Broadway.


Queens's Spanish-Language Theater Is Squeezed by Government Cuts
As the Hispanic population of Queens has grown over the last two decades, the Thalia Spanish Theater has carved out a special cultural niche as the borough's only Spanish legitimate theater.
Its productions have drawn playwrights from Spain for opening nights, and since 1986 it has performed in the annual international festival of zarzuela -- Spanish operetta -- in El Paso.
But now many of the city, state and Federal grants that have nourished the theater's growth are shrinking as a result of relentless government budget cuts.


Mentor, Hell-Raiser. . .
JOHN H. BESS, sitting in his cave of an office in the basement of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, had no time to mince words.
The telephone was ringing, his schedule went on for pages and all this talking put him two beats behind his fast-forward rhythm as head of the youth agency called the Valley.
"We are a society that is manufacturing monsters," Mr.
Bess said.
"I call this the microwave generation. Everything is resolved to the extreme and quickly. These young people have plenty to be legitimately angry about, but often it's not a rational anger, it's an explosive anger.


On Behalf Of the Children
The third annual Mother Hale Awards for Caring, to benefit Hale House, honor care givers, at the Plaza, Feb. 13.


POSTINGS: Office Leasing; Big Spaces Find New Users
Here are some of last year's big real estate questions:
Where would Deloitte &amp; Touche, the only major World Trade Center tenant that never moved back after last year's bombing, end up?


The Eye of the Needle
Aspects of the spring '94 haute couture: 1,461 outfits produced by


A Painter Who Patiently Tried to Explain What He Did
ROBERT MOTHERWELL died in 1991, having lived the last 20 of his 76 years in Greenwich.
Most of the writers marking his departure saw him primarily as a painter and a founder of Abstract Expressionism.
But a few emphasized his accomplishments as both a man of letters and a chronicler of Modernism, lamenting that his collected works had yet to see the light of day.
The omission has since been rectified by "The Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell," edited by Stephanie Terenzio and published by Oxford University Press in 1992.
Come spring, the volume, revised to include a much-needed index, will reappear in paperback.


A la Carte; For a First on L.I., One of the Grand Cuisines of Europe, Belgian
ALTHOUGH Belgian cuisine is highly respected in Europe, where Brussles is regarded as one of the world's great restaurant cities, Americans rarely have an opportunity to sample it.
Typical Belgian dishes that imaginatively combine ingredients like mussels, eels, rabbit, ale, beer and chocolate are largely unknown here.
There are no Belgian restaurants on the Island, and just one in Manhattan.


County's Children, by the Numbers
BETWEEN the covers of the recently published "Westchester Children's Databook, Volume 1" can be found 246 pages of narrative, statistics, charts and diagrams describing how the county's under-20 population is faring.
Overall, the document shows that while 90.6 percent of children in the county are faring well economically, the other 9.4 percent live below the poverty level.
And while 77 percent live in family households with a mother and father present, 20.7 percent live with other family or relatives, nine-tenths of 1 percent live with nonrelatives and 1.4 percent live in group quarters.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HUMOR  RUSSELL BAKER'S BOOK  OF AMERICAN HUMOR  Edited by Russell Baker. Norton, $30.


BLUE NOSES: GREENSLEEVES!
It is useful to note the similar violent content of folk music and rap (Sunday: "Blue Noses: Greensleeves!" Jan. 30).
However, focusing only on lyrics misses an essential point about music and the soul that writers as far back as Plato have understood.
The power of music lies more in the feelings rhythm and harmony produce than in the words alone.
The lyrics of "Tom Dooley" are accompanied by a melancholic and plaintive melody that is quite different from the pounding, mechanical rhythm of much rap.
As Shakespeare put this point: "Music hath such a charm to make bad good, and good provoke to harm." MELVIN A. KULBICKI York, Pa.


Serendipity Can Be an Important Item on Any Shopping List
WHEN you market with an idea of the kind of meal to make but with no fixed list of ingredients, you can be tempted by lovely surprises.
It can happen at any time of the year.
Last week, for example, on my way to the fish and produce markets to gather essentials for a Saturday lunch, I was vaguely contemplating mussels or littleneck clams, which could be steamed and tossed with pasta and perhaps some shredded broccoli rape.
If decent pears could be had, I thought I would combine them with a wedge of pecorino and serve them drizzled with honey for dessert.


The Nation; Tides That Brought Democrats to G.O.P. Have Turned
THE Republican bumper stickers that proliferated after the 1992 election read: "Don't Blame Me. I Voted For Bush." The Democrats have finally come up with a rejoinder: "Thank Me. . . I Voted Clinton-Gore!"
The market for these newly minted red, white and blue stickers may be bigger than once thought.
For all of President Clinton's troubles, for all the conflicting ideological messages and for all the flaws in the Democratic political operation, for all the noise from Senator Bob Dole, the language from the White House seems to be catching on.
It is meant to hold on to the liberal camp while building a bridge to more centrist terrain.


Manager's Profile
Catherine Dudley  Fund: Phoenix Growth, $2.5 billion in assets.
Co-manager since 1990; manager since 1993. (Sponsor: Phoenix Investment Counsel, Greenfield, Mass.)


Harrington Down Low Leaves Redmen Lower
The biggest question facing St.
John's last night was how it would fare against Georgetown's 6-foot-10-inch center, Othella Harrington, without the Redmen's 6-11 Shawnelle Scott, who is out for the season after tearing a tendon in his right hand.
For a little more than 30 minutes, the Redmen supplied some positive answers, but when Georgetown stopped bumbling around with the ball, turned up the heat on defense and discovered a way to feed Harrington underneath the basket, the Redmen found themselves completely clueless.
And with that, Georgetown (15-6) rolled to a 74-61 Big East victory over St.
John's (11-12) before 13,378 fans at Madison Square Garden.
Lapse in Last 10 Minutes
"The last 10 minutes of the game we had problems against their pressure and turning the ball over," said St.
John's Coach Brian Mahoney.
"We didn't have any answers for Othella Harrington down low."


A Hard Lesson on Trade for Mondale
To understand how deeply President Clinton was seeking to change the tone of trade diplomacy with Japan last year, it took only a few minutes with his Ambassador to Tokyo, Walter F. Mondale.
Mr.
Mondale spoke not in the negotiator's patois of tariffs, import barriers and market-share targets but of his confidence that if Washington eased some of the public pressure on Japan's new reform-minded Prime Minister, he would open the country without the need for threats.


Susanne M. Yardney; Arts Patron, 84
Susanne M. Yardney, a Russian emigre and a patron of the arts died on Friday in her home in Manhattan.
She was 84.
The cause was heart disease, said Dr. Jon Yardney, her son.


Wall Street; Intel Is No Longer Having It All
HAS the world's most dominant maker of microprocessor chips hit the wall?
After a string of adverse court rulings and other setbacks in recent weeks, Intel's virtual monopoly in the market for the chips that run desktop computers now seems more in question than at any time in the last five years.


Planning for Spring! Will It Ever Come?
WHEN the sun comes out and makes the day glorious, all who are winter weary become rejuvenated.
The warm rays help to melt the snow and leave watery puddles.
Green patches show through.
Tree buds glisten.
There is hope once again that just maybe spring will arrive.
If these signs are appearing, gardeners know that they must get ready.
Many will have reviewed the seed catalogues or maybe even sent in their orders.
A few of those who are highly organized might have already started some of the long-season vegetables and annuals indoors.


Over There, and There, and There
A WORLD AT ARMS A Global History of World War II.
By Gerhard L. Weinberg.
Maps. 1,178 pp.
New York: Cambridge University Press.


Harding's Tough Day Ends Amid a Rumor
Nancy Kerrigan took the day off today, and Tonya Harding probably wished she had.
For the second consecutive day, Harding left the ice before her practice was scheduled to end.
On Friday, she never came back.
Today, she appeared to be in tears after struggling through another rehearsal on a chronically sore right ankle.


The Neighbors Attack Housing for Prostitutes
To the Editor:
We are the couple who own the backyard described in Robert Lipsyte's Feb. 6 column, "The 'Nimby' Wars: View From a Backyard" -- a discussion of Dr.
Joyce Wallace's proposal to turn her West 12th Street town house into a residence for former prostitutes.
The column raises two issues that need amplification.


Board Opposes Plan to House Ex-Prostitutes
While Dr.
Joyce I. Wallace was being honored by the National Organization for Women on Thursday night for aiding street prostitutes, Community Board 2 was overwhelmingly voting down her plan to convert her Greenwich Village home into a residence for 12 former prostitutes.
The 29-to-9 decision was a major setback to her project, which drew highly organized neighborhood opposition, including a 600-name petition.


Baiting Couple in 'A Critic and His Wife'
THAT'S no musical at the George Street Playhouse, but what an overture!
Hear a hit parade of classic get-even songs: "Would I Leave You?" "I'm Gonna Wash That Man Right Outa My Hair," "Just You Wait" -- all in original cast recordings.
The play ("A Critic and His Wife" by John Ford Noonan) has yet to begin, but already a message is piped in.
Never mind the critic; watch out for his wife.
Even though Mr.
Noonan appears to have in mind something more than a feminist vendetta, or a relationship that's merely retaliatory and competitive, Len and Rebecca Oppenheim, married 12 years, are still playing the baiting game.
How else to get the creative juices flowing?


CLINTON SAYS SERBS MUST FULLY COMPLY ON ARMS DEADLINE
In a sober address from the Oval Office, President Clinton said today that the United States and its allies were determined to carry out air strikes against Bosnian Serbs around Sarajevo unless they "fully comply" with a NATO ultimatum to withdraw heavy weapons by 7 P.M.
Eastern time Sunday night.
As Serbian trucks continued to withdraw big guns from around the Bosnian capital, Mr.
Clinton spoke of "some encouraging signs" that the threat of action might compel the Serbs to meet the allies' demands.
By this afternoon, American officials said, it appeared that fewer than 100 Serbian mortars, artillery pieces and other heavy weapons remained in place.


From Fiddle to Yodel


Frequent Fliers
To the Editor: I read with great interest Flora Khermouch's tale of woe (Letters, Nov. 28), in which she complained of not being able to have her Qantas miles credited with American.
I am a member of United's Mileage Plus.
I usually fly 60,000 to 70,000 miles a year, and I am always booked on one of United's European partners in Mileage Plus (KLM, Air France or Swissair).
Despite following the regulations, I have discovered that I usually cannot get credit for flying on partner airlines unless I fight for it.


In This Little Opera, of Sorts, The Piano Is a Hero, of Sorts
It may seem odd to think of Janacek's "Diary of One Who Vanished" -- a song cycle for tenor, alto, female chorus and piano -- in terms of keyboard mastery.
But the pianist Rudolf Firkusny, who will perform the work this afternoon at Alice Tully Hall with Neil Rosenshein and Emily Golden, says it contains the composer's greatest writing for the piano.
"This is the really large-scale style which he used in the Piano Sonata of 1905," Mr.
Firkusny says in his apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
"Even though the tenor is the hero, this composition is a very important part of Janacek's piano output."


Community Groups Join Hands to Battle Street Crime
With the announcement of a coalition called West Side Community and Neighborhoods (West Side CAN), residents of the Upper West Side have achieved a new level of coordination in their fight against crime.
The growing number of block associations and community groups that have worked in isolation over the years are banding together with the 20th and 24th Precincts and several elected officials to streamline crimefighting.


Cowboy Angst


Maura A. McGloin, John F. R. Melia
Maura Ann McGloin, a film and video producer in Brooklyn, was married yesterday to John Francis Regis Melia, an assistant commissioner of the New York City Department of Environmental Protection.
Judge William L. Maher of the municipal court in Peekskill, N.Y., officiated at the James Burden Mansion in New York.
Ms.
McGloin is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from Boston University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maxwell A. McGloin of Rocky Hill, Conn.


Swirling Guilt
To the Sports Editor:
Must Tonya Harding be proven guilty beyond a reasonable doubt?
Yes, of course, in a criminal trial.
But does the same rule hold for selecting her for a place on our Olympic team?
Not while many of us believe she had a part in the vile attempt to injure Nancy Kerrigan.


Oil Leak Being Cleaned at Con Ed Plant
A fuel tank at a Consolidated Edison power plant in Queens leaked at least 8,000 gallons of oil on Tuesday, requiring a cleanup effort that was still under way yesterday.
Mike Spall, a Con Ed spokesman, said the spill was contained within the grounds of the Ravenswood plant in Long Island City, next to the East River.
Neither the river nor any source of ground water was contaminated, and the cleanup is nearly complete, he said.


Pamela Chasek, L. J. Goree 6th
Pamela Sue Chasek, a daughter of Arlene and Marvin Chasek of New Providence, N.J., is to be married today to Langston James Goree 6th, the son of Doris J. Schulze of Walnut Creek, Calif., and the late Mr.
Goree 5th.
Rabbi Alfred A. Landsberg is to perform the ceremony at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.
Ms.
Chasek, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in Middle East studies from the University of Miami.
She also received a master's degree in African Studies from Johns Hopkins University, where she is a doctoral candidate in international relations.


Where Mothers Matter
It was a muggy Washington day, and my daughter and I were in the midst of our daily rounds: the bank, the dry cleaners, the Italian deli.
She drifted off to sleep, and I wheeled the stroller into a crowded cafe for an iced tea.
Finally, I could read my newspaper.
The only empty chair was opposite another woman, young and red-haired, absently guarding a dozing infant.
Would she mind if I sat with her, I asked.
She gestured to the table, patting the seat beside her.
We chatted; she seemed, as I often am during the day, eager for adult conversation.
My daughter woke, and I leaned over to stroke her plump cheek.
Finished with my tea, I kissed her neck to elicit a stream of giggles as we prepared to go.
Curious, the woman mused: "She really likes you."


Nancy J. Klauber, Marc B. Forest
Nancy Jane Klauber, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur S. Klauber of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to Marc Bruce Forest, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Shep Forest of New York.
Rabbi Mark Winer officiated at the Hyatt Regency in Old Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Forest, 29, is an account supervisor at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, a direct-response advertising agency in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.


Rhonda Ergas, David Seitzman
Rhonda Lynn Ergas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Ergas of Whitestone, Queens, was married last evening to David Bradley Seitzman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Steven Seitzman of East Brunswick, N.J.
Rabbi Eric Milgrim performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 26, graduated from the State University at Albany.
She is a financial analyst at the McCall Pattern Company, which makes home-sewing patterns, in New York.


The World; Freedom Frays South Africa's Racial Tapestry
ALMOST as powerful as the fright, what sophisticated South Africans feel about their breast-beating Afrikaner and Zulu nationalists is a sense of embarrassment.
Finally South Africa is off the international troglodyte list and grooming itself for full membership in the modern world.
The police state has given way to the multi-party forum, the transitional executive council, the joint peacekeeping force.
The Constitution promises of "non-racial" democracy.
Now, on the civilized threshold of the 21st century, here are these obstreperous voices calling South Africa back to the 19th.
The Zulu monarch claims to want back the kingdom his ancestors lost to the British.
Afrikaners are waving the flags of their old Boer republics and demanding a "volkstaat" of their own.
They reject the country's first free elections in the language of holy war.


Up Past Bedtime?
Family Benefit, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Feb. 9.


Change Turns a Neighborhood's Eyes Toward the Past
For Decades, Bensonhurst has been a predominantly Italian and Jewish neighborhood of one- and two-family homes.
Today, many of the streets and buildings look the same, but the faces have changed with new comers including immigrants from Sicily, Russia, China and Pakistan.
"We have a huge influx of new residents to this community," said Assemblyman Frank J. Barbaro, a Brooklyn Democrat.
"It's important that they know some of the history of Bensonhurst, so that they can link themselves up with it." So Mr.
Barbaro founded the Bensonhurst Historical Society last month, along with the Bensonhurst West End Community Council.
The organization, will be based at the Bensonhurst School, or Public School 128, at 84th Street and 20th Avenue, in the heart of Bensonhurst.
"We've been kicking this idea around for years," said Carmine Santa Maria, executive director of the Community Council and a member of School Board 21.
"I'm pleased that we were finally able to do something about it because our history is rich. This community has produced many great athletes, entertainers, doctors and business owners." Sandy Koufax, the baseball pitcher, Larry King, the talk-show host, and Robert Merrill, the singer, are three prominent examples of residents who went on to fame.
LYNETTE HOLLOWAY 1643: Anthony Jansen van Salee, the first European settler, arrives from Holland in what is now known as Bensonhurst. 1652: Cornelius van Wekhoven, a functionary for the Dutch West India Company from Utrecht, Holland, acquired the land from a tribe of Indians.
For the property, he traded six shirts, two pairs of shoes, six pairs of socks, six hatchets, six knives, two scissors and six combs. 1657: The property was divided into 21 50-acre plots and granted to 19 settlers.
Two of the plots were reserved for the poor.
The settlers named it New Utrecht. 1783: Rebellious Americans erected a liberty pole with a flag at what is now 83d Street and 18th Avenue.
It was later attended by Sandy Koufax, who became a pitcher for the Brooklyn and L.A.
Dodgers, and Fred Wilpon, president of the New York Mets. 1964: 1964--The Varrazano-Narrows Bridge opened, establishing a pathway to a more rural area for many Brooklynites. 1975: "Welcome Back Kotter," first aired on ABC.
Gabe Kaplan played a remedial student who returned to teach at his alma mater, New Utrecht High School in Bensonhurst. 1979: When the Soviet Union began easing Jewish emigration, many of the newcomers settled in this community. 1989: Yusuf Hawkins, a 16-year-old black youth from East New York, was shot twice in the chest as he was surrounded by a gang of 30 white youths. 1994: Assemblyman Frank J. Barbaro and the Bensonhurst West End Community Council join forces to form the Bensonhurst Historical Society.
Source: Brooklyn Borough Historian John B. Manbeck


Tower Explosion's Legacy: Security Improves in Year And Is Also Lost Forever; The Manager: A Changed World Is Oddly Normal
Telephone calls pour into Charles Maikish's 35th-floor office at the World Trade Center constantly, sending him running to hear tenants' complaints, answer contractors' questions and attend the myriad meetings resulting from the explosion a year ago.
Since the moment of the blast, when he was rocked in his chair while signing a lease, Mr.
Maikish, the director of the trade center, has seen his world change.
He is now on a first-name basis with construction workers and engineers and secretaries and executives he scarcely knew before.
As he walks the corridors of the concourse, he seems to marvel at the fact that on its face, the trade center


Corrections
A chart with the At Work column last Sunday, about how women can evaluate their pension and retirement income, misstated the telephone number for the Social Security Administration.
It is (800) 772-1213.


The Workd; Kafka Would Be Proud. Hitchcock Isn't Here to Complain
JAPANESE advertisers entertain, set a mood, grab attention.
But they don't talk much about the product.
Here are some techniques:
Foreign celebrities.
Even a dead celebrity attracts attention.
In the newspaper ad (left), Alfred Hitchcock says: "As you can see, I'm not very good at scary things." The ad then describes the Toyota Mark II as safe and reliable. (This ad is unusually direct, in that it calls attention to the car).
Television commercials also use images of Mr.
Hitchcock, dubbing a voice that sounds like his -- in Japanese.


Harvest of Headaches: Cuba's Sugar Crop Woes
AS the chief mechanic of one of Cuba's many antiquated sugar mills, Noel Manuel Lopez Troncoso is a busy man.
At the height of the country's vital sugar cane harvest, Mr.
Lopez's team of repairmen at the mill, the Central Gregorio Manalich, on the outskirts of this town an hour east of Havana, must labor around the clock to keep the century-old plant from grinding to a halt.


The Good Son
Al Gore, at least, had some good news to offer.
It was one of the President's darkest days.
Bill Clinton was at his mother's house in Arkansas preparing for her funeral, yet there was little time to mourn; he was leaving the next day for Europe.
If that were not enough, word had come that the President's nomination of Bobby Ray Inman as Secretary of Defense would soon implode.
Clinton was at his gloomiest during a conference call with his closest aides at the White House when the Vice President spoke up with words to raise the Presidential spirits.
After weeks of secret communications with President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine, Gore and other officials had virtually completed a historic agreement under which Ukraine would surrender its nuclear warheads.
"I think we've got the deal," Gore told the red-eyed President on that January afternoon.
Two days later, in a Sunday television interview, the Vice President denied reports of an impending accord, leaving the grand announcement for Clinton to make the next day in Brussels.
Gore's voice is often there at the right moment.
In what has long been largely an ornamental office, he has become the President's most influential adviser, excepting, of course, Hillary Rodham Clinton.
He challenged Ross Perot to debate, against the advice of others in the White House, and won.
He has moved in to share the spotlight on foreign affairs with the Secretary of State.
He has become a recognized authority on a range of 21st-century issues like electronic information and global warming.
He has taken on pious projects of doubtful potential like remodeling the Federal Government and has sought to give them substance.
And he doesn't do funerals.


MANHATTAN UPDATE
UNION SQUARE: The New York State Court of Appeals has agreed to hear a case that challenges the construction of a 12-story apartment building for homeless families and a commercial complex on East 13th and 14th Streets between Third and Fourth Avenues.
The project, Genesis II, is sponsored by Housing Enterprise for the Less Privileged, a nonprofit organization founded by Andrew M. Cuomo, the son of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, and now run by his sister Maria Cuomo Cole.
It has been financed by the state and city from money earmarked for permanent housing for the homeless.


Chicago's Changing of the Guard Isn't Changing Balance of Power
Two dismal performances since the All-Star break have not flustered the Chicago Bulls.
They have not called Michael Jordan in Florida, begging him to pack his baseball gear and come home.
In fact, the Bulls' recent troubles illustrate how resourceful and resilient they have been to remain a contender.
As they enter Sunday afternoon's game against the Knicks at Madison Square Garden, the Bulls are 34-15, only a half game behind New York and Atlanta (both 35-15) in the battle for the best record in the Eastern Conference.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 20, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
2
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era Minnesota.
3
4
RUBY, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in New Orleans.
4
5
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The policeman Jack McGarvey on the trail of a serial killer in Los Angeles.
5
7
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
6
4
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
7
8
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
8
53
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
9
1
JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star Wars" saga.
10
3
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a nurse's pursuit of him.
11
4
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
12
3
SUDDENLY, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) A pediatrician finds romance after the death of her dear friend.
13
4
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
14
97
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
15
2
THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P.D.
James. (Warner, $6.50.) In 2021, when Britain is a police state, the human race approaches its end.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
6
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
537
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
53
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
4
6
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
23
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
6
123
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7*
3
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.
8*
38
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
9*
16
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
10
137
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) Communicating.
11*
12
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Southern murders.
12*
10
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
13*
12
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
14*
12
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
15
15
RARE AIR, by Michael Jordan. (Collins, $25.) Photos (by Walter Iooss Jr.) and observations.
16*
43
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
17*
1
BITTER BLOOD, by Jerry Bledsoe. (Onyx, $5.99.) The grisly murders of members of two wealthy Kentucky and North Carolina families.
18*
26
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
19*
15
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) A forest fire.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
153
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
160
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
10
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
4
4
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Ways to replace feelings of fear with feelings of love in daily life.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


G.O.P. Council Members Feeling More Expansive
In almost four years as the Republican minority leader on New York's overwhelmingly Democratic City Council and in four years before that as counsel to the previous leader, Alfred C. Cerullo 3d never once stepped into the room at City Hall where the deals are done, the office of the first deputy mayor.
Then in January, only days after the city's first Republican Mayor in a generation took office, Mr.
Cerullo passed by and the new senior deputy, Peter J. Powers, swung open the door.


Who's Hot on Campus
Khalid Abdul Muhammad, Louis Farrakhan's suspended aide, is not the only speaker on the college lecture circuit, although it may seem that way, given the turmoil caused by his talk insulting just about everybody, at Kean College in Union, N.J.
But race is indeed a hot topic in the lucrative speaking business, as are gender, drugs and rock-and-roll.
An informal survey of colleges and speaker agencies puts Maya Angelou at the top of the heap.
She does close to 100 talks a year at a fee rumored to be $20,000 or more per talk.
Other popular speakers do from 30 to more than 100 appearances in a year, and, although few pull down the fees that Angelou does (William F. Buckley Jr. may come close), $5,000 is not uncommon, and $1,500 is at the low end.


Corrections
The front-page index in the Long Island Weekly today reverses the page numbers for two articles.
"On Location," about a baker who runs children's birthday parties, is on page 23; the article about the designation of a historic district in Port Washington is on page 12.


Change Turns a Neighborhood's Eyes Toward the Past
For Decades, Bensonhurst has been a predominantly Italian and Jewish neighborhood of one- and two-family homes.
Today, many of the streets and buildings look the same, but the faces have changed with new comers including immigrants from Sicily, Russia, China and Pakistan.
"We have a huge influx of new residents to this community," said Assemblyman Frank J. Barbaro, a Brooklyn Democrat.
"It's important that they know some of the history of Bensonhurst, so that they can link themselves up with it." So Mr.
Barbaro founded the Bensonhurst Historical Society last month, along with the Bensonhurst West End Community Council.
The organization, will be based at the Bensonhurst School, or Public School 128, at 84th Street and 20th Avenue, in the heart of Bensonhurst.
"We've been kicking this idea around for years," said Carmine Santa Maria, executive director of the Community Council and a member of School Board 21.
"I'm pleased that we were finally able to do something about it because our history is rich. This community has produced many great athletes, entertainers, doctors and business owners." Sandy Koufax, the baseball pitcher, Larry King, the talk-show host, and Robert Merrill, the singer, are three prominent examples of residents who went on to fame.
LYNETTE HOLLOWAY 1643: Anthony Jansen van Salee, the first European settler, arrives from Holland in what is now known as Bensonhurst. 1652: Cornelius van Wekhoven, a functionary for the Dutch West India Company from Utrecht, Holland, acquired the land from a tribe of Indians.
For the property, he traded six shirts, two pairs of shoes, six pairs of socks, six hatchets, six knives, two scissors and six combs. 1657: The property was divided into 21 50-acre plots and granted to 19 settlers.
Two of the plots were reserved for the poor.
The settlers named it New Utrecht. 1783: Rebellious Americans erected a liberty pole with a flag at what is now 83d Street and 18th Avenue.
It was later attended by Sandy Koufax, who became a pitcher for the Brooklyn and L.A.
Dodgers, and Fred Wilpon, president of the New York Mets. 1964: 1964--The Varrazano-Narrows Bridge opened, establishing a pathway to a more rural area for many Brooklynites. 1975: "Welcome Back Kotter," first aired on ABC.
Gabe Kaplan played a remedial student who returned to teach at his alma mater, New Utrecht High School in Bensonhurst. 1979: When the Soviet Union began easing Jewish emigration, many of the newcomers settled in this community. 1989: Yusuf Hawkins, a 16-year-old black youth from East New York, was shot twice in the chest as he was surrounded by a gang of 30 white youths. 1994: Assemblyman Frank J. Barbaro and the Bensonhurst West End Community Council join forces to form the Bensonhurst Historical Society.
Source: Brooklyn Borough Historian John B. Manbeck


SURFACING
INSULTS  Snapping: An African-American tradition of roughhouse repartee, in which people duel with insults, has made its way from the streets into venues like comedy clubs and books ("Snaps," Morrow).
JEWELRY  Message bracelets: The style of wearing one's beliefs has extended from T-shirts to accessories like stainless steel bracelets ($100), above, from Vass Ludacer, that feature oxymoronic phrases like "Create Destruction."
CELEBRITY  Peggy Lipton: Forever mod, first in the "Mod Squad" itself, and now in an advertisement in Mirabella magazine.


Friends Like These
DIARY OF A LOST BOY By Harry Kondoleon. 183 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


Dehere Runs to Front Of the Derby Rankings
Remember Dehere, the champion who seemed to be avoiding the crowded road to the Kentucky Derby?
Well, he finally joined the pack today and reasserted himself with a rousing run through the homestretch that won the Fountain of Youth Stakes and restored his luster for the racing classics.
The 3-year-old colt, after losing three of his last four starts, almost skipped the race because of recent rains.
And that was two weeks after he had skipped the Hutcheson Stakes because of a stomach ache.
And that was three months after he had run eighth in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile.
So, racing people were wondering and whispering.


Rangers Can't Keep Up Pace in Last Minute
If you can't manage more than 17 shots against the Hartford Whalers, you don't deserve to beat them.
So the Rangers didn't, and their three-game winning streak ended with a 4-2 defeat here tonight before a capacity crowd of 15,635 at the Civic Center.
There were plenty of reasons for this result.
One of them occurred in the neutral zone, in the final minute, before the winning goal, when Brian Propp of the Whalers outscrapped Mark Messier of the Rangers for the puck.


Blessed Are The Sledless
After managing to get out of Sarajevo to compete in the Winter Olympics, Bosnia's bobsledders were faced with yet another problem: They had no four-man bobsled.
On Friday night, two Dutch bobsledders came to their rescue, arriving with a truck carrying a sled.


The Plunk, Plunk of Sap Dripping


Muslim Militants Open Fire on an Egyptian Train
Muslim militants opened fire on the night train from Cairo to Luxor with automatic weapons early today, slightly wounding a Polish architect, a student from Taiwan and two Egyptians in another blow to Egypt's tourist industry.
Interior Ministry officials said an "unknown gunman" hiding near the rail tracks had raked the sleeper train with automatic fire at 1:45 A.M. as it headed for Luxor and Thebes, the ancient capital of the pharoahs.
But a Ministry official said security forces were sent to the scene, near the village of Baqour, about 200 miles south of Cairo, to search for several assailants.


When Gym Class Becomes History
JOLINE and David DeBoer thought it was more than just a coincidence last fall when parents of students at the Kendall elementary school in Norwalk began to tell them how they could not understand why their children were so filled with energy after most school days.
"They were telling us how their kids were running around the house like crazy," Mrs.
DeBoer said.
"Then we realized that our son Marc, who is in the third grade at Kendall, had been more aggressive and rambunctious this year after school."


The Prize
Old John D. would have been proud.
Faced with the problem of how to stimulate research into a neglected medical problem, the Rockefeller Foundation came up with a startling idea: cash.
Not cash up front.
Cash on delivery.
This is not a traditional grant, but more the sort of thing you see on the wall of the Post Office.


Do Guys Just Want To Have Fun?
To the Editor:
As the publisher of Playboy magazine, I would like to respond to Richard A. Shweder's essay "What Do Men Want? A Reading List for the Male Identity Crisis" (Jan. 9).


Business Diary: February 13-18
COMPANIES Redstone Stands Victorious on a Littered Battleground  Well, it's over -- the Super Bowl of corporate soap operas.
After five months, the winning bidder for Paramount is . . .
Viacom.
The price: $9.7 billion in cash and stock.
The loser: Barry Diller and his QVC Network Inc. (which, in grief or relief, quickly downsized itself to QVC Inc.).
Standing alone amid the rubble is Sumner Redstone, Viacom's chairman.
And rubble it is: Viacom stock fell so far during the fray that Mr.
Redstone's stake fell by $3.1 billion, and the merged company will have $10 billion in debt -- a time bomb if interest rates rise.
Shareholders of Blockbuster, which Viacom agreed to buy to help cover that debt, aren't too happy with Viacom's stock slide.
And Martin Davis, Paramount chairman, got left by the wayside as the battle raged.
So it's up to Mr.
Redstone to make it work.
And though there's been talk of spinning off properties like Simon &amp; Schuster, he hopes to avoid selling anything.


A Surprise, Even for O. Henry
To the Editor:
Guy Garcia's article about the made-for-cable film "The Cisco Kid," "Burying the Frito Bandito Once and for All"  [ Jan. 30 ]  prompts me to suggest: Read it again, Guy.


Down by the Corral


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  12 Straight for Spurs  J. R. Reid scored a season-high 22 points and Dennis Rodman had 26 rebounds to lead the Spurs to their 12th straight victory, 100-96 over the Miami Heat, last night in San Antonio.
The Spurs pulled away late in the first half, but Miami caught up by late in the fourth quarter.
The Heat's Grant Long hit a 3-pointer with 37 seconds left to make it 95-90, but Sleepy Floyd made three free throws to keep Miami at bay. (AP)


Shouldn't Skate
To the Sports Editor:
I disagree with George Vecsey's conclusion that Tonya Harding be allowed to skate in the Winter Olympics regardless of whether or not she is criminally culpable ("Tonya Still Uncharged, Unconvicted," The Times, Feb. 2).
It is true that in matters of criminal law one is innocent until proven guilty and that guilt must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
That is so because of the severe penalty for guilt: incarceration.


Illegal Emissions Add Fuel To Battle Over Incinerator
A campaign by a coalition of Mott Haven residents to shut down a medical-waste incinerator has regained some momentum after state inspectors reported that its smokestacks emitted illegal levels of carbon monoxide 86 times over the last six months.
The three-story incinerator, at 138th Street and Locust Avenue, was built in 1991 by Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center and a private company to burn bandages, syringes and other infectious waste from 14 city hospitals after stricter emission standards forced the closing of the hospitals' own incinerators.


Commercial Property/City-Owned Office Buildings; New Commissioner Says Conditions Are 'Atrocious'
THERE are "primary" office buildings and "secondary" office buildings.
But buildings owned by New York City are something else.
"Atrocious" is the word that comes to William J. Diamond's mind.
As the city's new Commissioner of General Services, Mr.
Diamond oversees 42 city-owned buildings with some 10 million square feet of space, as well as the 22 million square feet that New York City leases in privately owned buildings.


Pursuing a Sterling Serve in the Desert
FOR a northeastern city dweller conditioned to booking a tennis court weeks in advance and then either freezing or sweltering on it, the experience was eerie.
At 3 P.M. on a cloudless, windless, humidityless -- in other words, perfect -- day, there I was, surrounded by 24 elegantly pristine courts and not one of them was in use.
Welcome to the John Gardiner Tennis Ranch in early January.


WHOSE LIFE IS IT?
Nora Johnson peels back the layers of nonsense and gets to the nub of the abortion issue: abortion is essential to women's lives (Hers: "Whose Life Is It?" Jan. 23).
For most women who choose abortion to resolve unwanted pregnancy, it is neither guilt-racked nor morally ambiguous; it is the only choice that makes sense.
For that, women must never apologize.
An entire generation has grown up without memories of unsafe, illegal abortion.
This and the outrageous self-righteousness of anti-abortion zealots have contributed to the current confusion in our public discourse.


Schools Try to Make Up For The Lost Snow Days
MANY school districts have used more snow days than designated in their school calendars -- and it is still February.
Facing an additional six weeks with the potential for winter storms, Long Island school administrators are exploring how to eke out the mandated 180 school days.


Classics With Style and Efficiency
A DECADE ago, Italian restaurant meant suave tuxedoed waiters, white tablecloths, fresh flowers and elegant Northern Italian food.
That is still true at Bevanda, the newest Italian restaurant in Great Neck.
That trendy team of young servers in bistro aprons, individual designer pizzas from a wood-burning oven and pastas created with ingredients from a myriad of cuisines is nowhere to be found.


Habitats/A Happy Homeowner; The Catch? Maybe the Vu
PATRICK ABARTA opened the front door of his new co-op and began a long and fascinating tour of what he gleefully called "the cheapest and best apartment" in Manhattan.
"Sixty-two thousand dollars for one living room, one bedroom, one bathroom, one kitchen and one fireplace," he said.
"Isn't that the best deal you've ever heard of?"


Turn Left at Ailey Place
Here are the 10 streets, corners or squares approved by the City Council in 1993 to pay tribute to certain individuals.
ALVIN AILEY PLACE, West 61st Street between West End and Amsterdam Avenues.
Founded the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in 1968 on West 61st Street.


Out of Chaos and Suffering, a Spiritual and Communal Order
Climbing Jacob's Ladder" is not the Hudson River Museum's main attraction: that slot is reserved for an investigation into the acquisitive impulse titled "Why Collect?" Nor is it an exhibition in the best sense, being but a series of storyboards illustrated by photographic reproductions.
All the same, this is a visual essay and, subtitled "The Rise of Black Churches in Eastern American Cities, 1740-1877," it celebrates Black History Month in a way that should interest everyone, regardless of race or religion.


Dry Weather Can Wreak Havoc on Furniture
DRY indoor air can shrink wood furniture, cause cracks, break glue seams and loosen parts.
Minor repairs can be easy.
But take antiques or fine furniture to a professional restorer.
To repair veneer cracks, try filling them with waxy touch-up sticks that resemble large crayons.
They are easier to use than shellac sticks, which have to be melted and applied quickly.
Choose a touch-up stick having a slightly lighter color than the area to be repaired.
Rub the stick several times along the crack to fill it, and then polish the area vigorously with clean cheesecloth wrapped around a fingertip.
Polishing heats the filler and helps it to penetrate the crack.


One Health Care Vote: A periodic look at a lawmaker; For Freshman in Congress, Finding Opinions on Clinton Plan Is the Easy Part
Lynn Schenk is a freshman Democrat in Congress who would like to support President Clinton in his efforts to change the health care system.
But in a district with 14 major hospitals and nearly 100 biotechnology companies, where one of her Republican opponents is a doctor, there are plenty of experts to tell her what to do.
So many, in fact, it's almost paralyzing.


Metaphysical Mileage
To the Editor:
Anthony Gottlieb's review of Kate and Edward Fullbrook's "Simone de Beauvoir and Jean-Paul Sartre: The Remaking of a Twentieth-Century Legend" (Jan. 23) exhibits a superficial awareness of what phenomenological existentialism in general and the phenomenological ontology of Sartre in particular are all about.


SUNY Offers 3 Orchestras in 3 Days
THE Performing Arts Center at Purchase College has a full schedule next weekend.
The Orpheus Chamber Orchestra will play there on Friday at 8 P.M.
The Westchester Symphony arrives on Saturday at 8 P.M., and Philharmonia Virtuosi resumes its "Mainstage" series next Sunday at 3 P.M.
The conductorless Orpheus Chamber Orchestra, acclaimed by one critic for "playing with polish, spirit and perfect unanimity," tackles a Handel Concerto Grosso, Mozart's Symphony No. 25, some Dvorak waltzes and Honegger's Concerto da Camera for Flute, English Horn and Strings.


Sound Bytes; The Envoy From Microsoft
AT any computer industry gathering, if you bump into Bill Gates, the Microsoft chairman, usually not far away you will also find Jonathan Lazarus, the company's vice president for systems strategy.
In the intensely political personal computer industry, Mr.
Lazarus is seen as the secretary of state for the software industry's most influential company.
It is a position that is not without its knocks.
Competitors are intensely jealous of Microsoft's success and often accuse the software publisher of acting as a monopolist.


Feb. 13-19: $6 Billion in Jetliners; Cash-Strapped Saudi Arabia Still Flies First-Class, For Clinton's Sake
Even though slumping oil prices have forced Saudi Arabia to slash its domestic budget and stretch out military purchases, its appetite for big-ticket purchases lingers.
It announced last week that it would spend $6 billion on new jetliners, with the business divided between the American aerospace giants Boeing and McDonnell Douglas.
President Clinton presented the deal as a triumph of his Administration's foreign policy, which has set export growth as a central goal.
In fact, it is not yet clear how many jobs the deal will generate.


Hunting for Love
D oes the spouse bounty qualify as a genuine trend in New York?
For now, I can't say with absolute certainty.
The traditional rule among Zeitgeist-monitoring journalists is that three points make a trend, meaning that, on the basis of three anecdotes and no statistics whatsoever, I am allowed to declare, "Increasingly, Americans are taking up a new. . . ." So far I have found just two cases of unmarried Manhattanites who offered their friends a spouse bounty, which is a reward, payable at the time of the wedding, to whoever introduced you to your spouse.
And only one of the two actually paid up.


Scottish Treasures
A benefit for a new National Museum in Scotland, aboard the Britannia, Feb. 12.


Trapped in A Nostalgic Rundown
It might as well be spring.
Pitchers and catchers reported this week, and the first good baseball book of the season has landed on the desk -- thwack! -- a boy-man memoir reeking of egg creams and neat's-foot oil and testosterone.
Not a moment too soon.
The true believers, those Rotisserie Leaguers, are loading their spread sheets, and it is not clear whether Michael Jordan or Bud Selig is the greatest menace to the Game since 1919.
"Baseball, for those who inhabit it fully, is no mere game," writes Robert Mayer in "Baseball and Men's Lives" (Delta), "it is an alternate reality parallel to the 'real' world.  . . it is the touch of the ball itself, usually at age 7, that opens through the palm of the hand the magic entry into this enclosed tunnel of time and history."


Sports of The Times; Blair Holds Her Emotion For a Fifth
ALL day long, American sportswriters kept coming up to each other and saying, "Wasn't that lovely?" or "I had tears in my eyes" or "I've never seen anything nicer in all the years I've been working."
We are not a sentimental bunch these days.
The ancient practice of slobbering over sports champions ("godding them up," as Red Smith described it) is long past.
Nowadays we chase figure-skating companions of confessed knee-whackers into courts of law.
We follow them through airports.
We camp outside their residences.
We would sift through their garbage if we could find it.
But on Friday we shifted back into a kinder, gentler Grantland Rice gear to shed an unexpected tear for Dan Jansen.


Operatic Italian
ASTI + (212) 741-9105; 13 East 12th Street; $$$; all major cards


'I've Been Had!'
NEW YORKERS, who like to think they don't scam easily, have been known to snicker at the tourists meekly following unlicensed cabbies to their unmetered rent-a-wrecks outside La Guardia.
They don't believe in $100 Rolexes, give only droll looks to strangers who claim they were just robbed and need $18 to get to Florida, and walk right on by the often ersatz nuns who panhandle in Grand Central.
But even the most sophisticated urban paranoiac can be snookered -- and is, with some regularity, according to the city's Department of Consumer Affairs, which received more than 200,000 such complaints last year.


The Perfect Painting
IMAGINE AN ART WORLD GOVERNED NOT BY HAUGHTY CURAtors and filthy-rich collectors but as a democracy -- of, by and for the people.
What would a genuine people's art look like?
Should majority rule, the principle at the core of our political process, settle esthetic arguments or determine the art that we see?
And could artists make paintings that truly reflect the tastes of the American public?
To find out, the Russian-emigre art team of Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid, who specialize in taking benign concepts to provocative extremes, adopted the techniques of politicians and manufacturers.
With financing from the Nation Institute, they held focus groups and conducted a public opinion poll, producing the first nationwide survey on people's attitudes toward the visual arts.


The Executive Life; When Taking a Job Requires a Gumshoe
PHILIP MARLOWE might have spared John Sculley a few lawsuits and one big headache.
Just some basic sleuthing should have turned up the problems that Mr.
Sculley says were concealed by Spectrum Information Technologies when he took the job as its chairman last fall and that led him to quit two weeks ago.
Monday morning quarterbacks are still wondering how such a seasoned businessman could have neglected the basic due diligence homework.
But what happened to Mr.
Sculley could happen to any executive.
As more managers leave big corporations, small companies are stepping up recruiting and anyone could be taken in, whether by trickery, the ups and downs of young companies or plain old entrepreneurial optimism.


Front to the Kitchen
The apron dress that appeared in abundance on couture runways last year is now in Gap display windows.
In previous eras when decorative aprons were popular (18th-century Europe, for example), they were worn only by upper-class women who had servants to wear the real thing.
But these days, what with the shortage of help, any woman may find herself at the stove frying up the bacon or omelette aux fines herbes.
So, is this fashion trend just a last-ditch attempt by threatened males determined to make women look as if they're in the kitchen even when they're in the office?
Or is the working woman, who still does most of the cooking and cleaning, ready to make this emblem of domesticity part of her street persona?
Would someone who has to scrape real macaroni and cheese off the microwave by day want to wear, say, Anne Klein's pinstripe georgette apron dress to a cocktail party?
These questions were posed to:


Journal; The Girl Next Door
Now that the Tailhook scandal has been swept under the Navy's rug -- 140 marauding Navy and Marine pilots, 83 assaulted women, 0 courts-martial -- connoisseurs of poolside sex can turn to happier pursuits.
The day after the Clinton Administration cut off further inquiries into Tailhook, Sports Illustrated officially kicked off its publicity push for its annual swimsuit issue.
Tailhook came to its unsavory end with the resignation of Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the officer who saw no evil as men wearing "Women Are Property" T-shirts went on their rampage close by.
While the Navy's own judge concluded that the admiral was a liar who manipulated the investigation, Mr.
Clinton's new Secretary of Defense exonerated him as a man of the "highest integrity and honor," then let him slip into early retirement.


King Is Punished by Army
Akili King, Army's leading rusher last season, will miss spring football practice for violating academy rules after being stabbed last month during a brawl outside a bar near West Point, N.Y.
King and three other cadets received what is considered severe punishment in disciplinary action announced Friday.
"This is harsh, no question," said Lt.
Col.
Don McGrath of the academy's public information office.
"But it is consistent with the punishment given in the past for similar violations."


Missionary for Toad Venom Is Facing Charges
In this corner of the Sierra foothills immortalized by Mark Twain's "Notorious Jumping Frog of Calaveras County," four toads named Hanz, Franz, Peter and Brian are being held as evidence in a narcotics case.
The wart-covered quartet of Colorado River toads, or Bufo alvarius, began stealing the limelight from their larger, greener cousins on Jan. 3, when the police accused Bob Shepard, a 41-year-old teacher at a local nature center, of possession of bufotenine, an illegal hallucinogenic chemical found in the venom of these toads.


Dr. Chabner And Mr. Corn
Dr.
Elizabeth Sarah Chabner, a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the University of California San Diego Medical Center, and Jonathan Charles Corn, a lawyer in San Diego, were married last evening at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington.
Rabbi Avis Miller officiated.
The bride, 26, is the daughter of Dr.
Bruce and Davi-Ellen Chabner of Potomac, Md.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received her medical degree from Johns Hopkins University.
Her father, an oncologist, is the director of the division of cancer treatment at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.
Her mother, a textbook writer, teaches medical terminology at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda.


2 Late Free Throws Send Indiana by Rallying Purdue
Indiana 82, Purdue 80
Todd Lindeman gave Bob Knight plenty to cheer about.
The 7-foot Indiana sophomore, who sat on the bench for 13 minutes in the second half in foul trouble, hit two free throws with seven seconds to go last night as the 16th-ranked Hoosiers beat No. 9 Purdue, 82-80.
The Hoosiers (16-5, 9-3 in the Big Ten) stretched the nation's longest home winning streak to 42 games.
Knight, who ran off the court pumping his fist to the cheering crowd, refused to talk to the news media after the game.


Lane Closings On F.D.R. Drive
Advisories on the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive are being issued regularly to radio stations to alert drivers to traffic problems.
Here is the latest schedule for lane closings.
WHEN: Thursday, Feb. 24, and Friday, Feb. 25, 12:01 A.M. to 5 A.M.
Saturday, Feb. 26, 1 A.M. to 6 A.M.
Sunday, Feb. 27, 12:01 A.M. to 8 A.M.
Monday, Feb. 28, and Tuesday, March 1, 12:01 A.M. to 5 A.M.
WHERE: All northbound lanes between the 61st Street exit and the 96th Street entrance; all southbound lanes between the 71st Street exit and the 62d Street entrance.


MacLean Helps Devils Hold Off Lightning
The Devils became lackadaisical after building a three-goal lead in the last period, but managed to come away with a 5-4 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning today.
John MacLean gave New Jersey an early boost with the first two goals in the afternoon game, played before a rare sellout crowd of 19,040 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Black Perspectives
In 1965, when the Museum of Modern Art asked Romare Bearden to speak on the history of black artists in the United States, the painter was disturbed to discover how little relevant material was available.
With his friend the journalist Harry Henderson, Bearden began working on A HISTORY OF AFRICAN-AMERICAN ARTISTS: From 1792 to the Present (Pantheon, $65).
The book, completed by Mr.
Henderson after Bearden's death in 1988, is the first in-depth reference work on the history and development of art by black Americans.
Beginning in 1792 with the portraitist Joshua Johnston and ending with the contemporary landscape painter Richard Mayhew, the authors concentrate on significant painters and sculptors in specific historical periods; they provide a wealth of detail on the lives and achievements of more than 50 artists.
Excellent reproductions, both in color and in black and white, of famous, lesser-known and rediscovered works illustrate the diversity of interests and styles in black American art.
A few of the artists included here, like Henry Ossawa Tanner, Robert S. Duncanson, William H. Johnson and Jacob Lawrence, have been the subjects of recent scholarly attention; Romare Bearden and Harry Henderson give powerful evidence that many other black artists are equally deserving of attention.
VALERIE MERCER


Cabdriver Killed In Robbery Attempt
The robbery and violence that have made cab driving one of New York City's most dangerous professions claimed yet another life last night in Brooklyn, the police said.
Dominico Silverio, 39, was found slumped in his livery cab, with a gunshot wound in the upper torso, at the corner of Euclid Avenue and Linden Boulevard in East New York, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a spokeswoman for the Police Department.


Could We Tell Tchaikovsky This News?
Moscow has rapidly become a city where almost anything is possible if you are rich or crafty enough.
Feel like gambling till dawn?
Easy, casinos are everywhere.
Hungry?
Fine, delis deliver.
Need a videophone, a car alarm system or the latest fragrance from Estee Lauder?
It's all a phone call -- or a credit card slip -- away.


Anastasia Vournas and Bill Uhrig
Anastasia Petrow Vournas, the president of Telmarc Telecommunications in Boston, was married last Sunday to John William Uhrig, a partner in Three Cities Research, a private merchant bank in New York.
Judge Stella Schindler of Family Court in Queens performed the ceremony at the bride's apartment in New York.
Ms.
Vournas is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Vournas of Washington.
She graduated from the University of Denver, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer in Washington.


Horace J. McAfee; Lawyer, 88
Horace J. McAfee, a retired lawyer who had practiced in Manhattan for more than 40 years, died on Friday at Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 88.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Christine.


BEST SELLERS: February 20, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
5
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
2
1
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
3
2
80
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
4
3
16
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
5
4
4
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
6
8
2
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
7
5
45
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
8
6
5
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
9
7
4
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in Buenos Aires in 1942.
10
11
26
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
11
9
9
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
12
1
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers a string of surprises.
13
12
3
VOYAGER, by Diana Gabaldon. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman finds love while commuting between 18th- and 20th-century Scotland.
14
13
3
GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A romantic encounter between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a large hotel chain.
15
1
PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA, by Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) The travails of a boy growing up in 1960's Dublin.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
41
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
9
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
3
6
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
4
4
26
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
5
20
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6
6
12
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
7
7
24
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
8
8
14
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
9
1
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
10
12
29
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
11
9
20
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
12
11
80
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
13
10
18
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
14
10
LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Villard, $24.) The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.
15
14
6
A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Knopf, $27.50.) The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
5
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
39
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
17
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
4
30
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear In Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest) BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth, by Aharon Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of spiritual apprehension.
THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.
BRAZIL, by John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) In the vast, trackless wilds of a Brazil the author freely admits making up out of whole cloth, a tragicomic knight-errant and his dolly, madly in love, break all the rules of class and race.
THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $19.95.) Romulus Ledbetter, Mr.
Green's protagonist, is a homeless, black, paranoid private eye who can be roused to propriety only by a case as interesting as the one Mr.
Green has dreamed up for his first novel.
EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs, by William Trevor. (Knopf, $23.) Not an autobiography but a series of sketches from the life of the marvelous Irish short-story writer; well mannered, persuasive, showing exceptional powers both of re-creation and forgiveness.
GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A road novel that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.
HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life, by Joan D. Hedrick. (Oxford University, $35.) A substantive, scrupulously researched life of the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," with cogent analyses of the book and the moral universe that gave rise to it and to other controversial works by Stowe.
HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise, humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die, omitting none of the clinical detail.
IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.
JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart, by Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. (Random House, $27.50.) Prodigious research and outstanding narrative fluency mark this biography of Josephine Baker (1906-75), the irresistible American institution of French revues, cabaret and film.
QUICKSAND, by Junichiro Tanizaki. (Knopf, $22.) A novel about a woman who casts such a spell on her lesbian lover and the lover's husband that they long to die for her, by a writer whose constant themes were self-destructive sexuality and the double image of woman as goddess and demon; first published in Japan in 1928-30.


Tuscan Villa
To the Editor: Poor Mary-Lou Weisman and her unhappy stay in the villa in Tuscany ("Welcome to Our Rented Nightmare," Jan. 16).
Lucky us and our rental heaven in nearby Umbria.
Rainy season? One day out of two weeks last October.


Wall Street; In Paramount Battle, the Winners Lost $4.1 Billion
"ANOTHER such victory," as Pyrrhus once said, "and we are undone."
Viacom shareholders saw much of their investment wiped out as a result of a successful bid to take over Paramount Communications.
On Sept. 10, just before the original merger deal was announced, Viacom stock was worth $7.5 billion.
Now the value is $3.4 billion.
That loss compares with a gain of just $1.7 billion for Paramount holders.


A Blunder, A Backlash, Now What?
THE AMERICAN SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA League probably did not expect the outrage that greeted its report "Americanizing the American Orchestra" last summer.
After all, the call for multicultural programming, including jazz and music from other cultures, is now commonplace in the visual arts and in educational curricula.
The recommendations that orchestras reach out for new audiences by programming pop, using video and hiring interior decorators are no different from what has already been done in the entertainment business.
Even the call for orchestras to hire consultants to begin "diversity sensitivity training" is just an attempt to catch up to other institutions.
But the outrage was significant.
And the league, shaken by widespread objections, is trying to figure out where it went wrong.
Recently some of the league's most important members have been registering their objections as well.
Their resolution criticizing the report was presented to the league and obtained by the New York Times.
These managers of some of the largest American orchestras objected to the way the report was prepared and released, and they argued that some of its conclusions were "seriously flawed."


A Peace of Sorts Sets the Sarajevans to Musing
"I am more afraid of this peace than the shelling," Fuad Gadzo said gloomily over his coffee at the milk bar the other day.
"When it's shelling, I know I have to hide," he explained.
But now, "people are already relaxed -- and they can start shooting anytime."


Serbian Pullout Mired in Snow And Confusion
In chaos compounded by heavy snow, Serbian forces ringing Sarajevo stepped up efforts today to place their heavy weapons under United Nations guard or pull them back from the besieged capital in compliance with a NATO ultimatum.
With the deadline less than 30 hours away, United Nations troops seemed to be scrambling to keep track of the operation, and it was by no means clear in the snow-covered hills whether the peacekeepers could control the arms that were handed over.


The World; Myths Aside, Japanese Do Look for Bargains
AS the first-ever shipment of California rice was going on sale in Tokyo this month, 50 people lined up outside a Seiyu supermarket here before the doors opened.
The entire load of 5,500 pounds, which would normally take three days to sell, was gone in two and a half hours.
Maybe it was just curiosity.
Maybe it was the price -- half that of high-grade Japanese rice.
Maybe it was the shortage of domestic rice, which is why the foreign stuff is being allowed in.
In any event, it was the shattering of another myth about Japanese consumers.
Who said they would never eat foreign rice?


Clinton Plan Means New Era of Family Doctor
To the Editor:
"Fond Memory: The Family Doctor Is Rarely In" (The Week in Review, Feb. 6) is welcome for its acknowledgement of the importance of family medicine in the debate over health care reform.
But you perpetuate two myths about the specialty of family medicine that bias the debate.


Ideas &amp; Trends; When the Geneticists' Fingers Get in the Food
THE scientific arguments in favor of the bovine growth hormone, which makes dairy cows into veritable milk machines, could hardly seem more logical: The hormone does not change the milk itself.
It acts on the cow's brain, telling it to signal the mammary glands to go into overdrive, making them produce abundant quantities of milk.
In fact, the scientists insist, atom for atom the hormone is nearly identical to that already produced naturally in the cow's body.
Earlier this month, however, when the first milk from cows treated with the genetically engineered hormone went on sale, many consumers demanded that their grocery stores ban the product.
While scientists keep insisting that there is nothing to be concerned about -- that people should worry about the fat in ice cream, not whether the milk came from hormone-injected cows -- many parents are saying that they will not stand for having their milk tampered with.


A 'Freshened' Jaguar Adds V12 Power
ALL right, enough about snow and ice and antilock brakes and skids and winter.
Let's talk about something less mundane.
Let's think sun and clear roads and let's talk Jaguars.
True, there is a certain silliness in it all.
The basic car costs $51,750, and if you think that is expensive then you may think the rest of the line exorbitant.
Also true, the car is English and has spent years honing a reputation for frequent vacations at the repair shop.
But there is a mystique that is equally well earned.


After Desperately Seeking Someone, She Found Luck
To the Editor:
I have lived in New York City since graduating from college in 1973 and have experienced the gamut of dating alternatives set forth in your Feb. 13 article "Desperately Seeking Someone?" They included subscribing to overpriced and overrated dating services and feeling a sense of inferiority after receiving only 10 responses to a personal ad while friends boasted of receiving 50, 80, 100!


Let It Snow!
Some of the intrepid souls who braved the weather for three benefits and the preview of an art exhibition.


Libby Bassett and Robert Richter
Elizabeth Ewing Bassett, a writer, is to be married today to Robert Richter, a film producer.
Eugene N. Aleinikoff, a retired Ancram, N.Y., town justice, will officiate in Larchmont, N.Y., at the home of the bride's mother, Eileen Grace Bassett.
Ms.
Bassett, who is 56 and is known as Libby, will be keeping her name.
She is a New York-based writer, editor and editorial designer for a number of environmental, economic development and human rights organizations and is a founder of the Women's Environment and Development Organization, a private international advocacy group.
She graduated from Bradford College.
Her father, the late Ben Bassett, was the foreign news editor of The Associated Press in New York.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
STEEL BAND CONCERT
Nine boys and girls, age 12 to 19, who make up the Steel Band of Youth Theater Interactions of Yonkers, will perform today at 3 P.M. in the Hudson River Museum.
Among the calypso, pop and jazz numbers are "Brown Skin Girl," "Jamaica Farewell" and George Benson's "On Broadway."


Bumpy Road To Easy Rides On Subways
The completion of a new subway link will make mean marked improvements in commuting for multitudes of Queens riders, with more trains, faster trips and less crowding, transit officials say.
But between now and the end of the construction -- planned for the year 2001 -- the picture will get much worse before it gets better.
Subway riders face up to six years of curtailed or suspended service nights and weekends on the E, F, G and R lines, with diversions to the 7 train as an alternate west of Roosevelt Avenue.
At street level, traffic will be delayed by lane closings on a crucial stretch of Northern Boulevard near the merger with Queens Boulevard at the approach to the Queensborough Bridge, already notorious as having one of the borough's worst rush-hour snarls.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
MANHATTAN BEACH: Hundreds of geese driven from their shore homes by the unremitting cold returned to Kingsborough Community College at dawn Tuesday to feed on cracked wheat and corn.


Namesakes
The talent agency founder William Morris . . . and the Victorian poet and artist William Morris.
The illusionist David Copperfield . . . and the Dickens hero David Copperfield.
The male porn rag Blueboy . . .  and the Thomas Gainsborough painting "The Blue Boy."


Molly Ward and John J. Grillos
Molly Jane Ward, an employee benefits consultant, is to be married today to John Joseph Grillos, a lawyer.
Msgr.
Philip D. Morris will perform the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Chapel at Seton Hall University in South Orange, N.J.
Ms.
Ward, 38, is keeping keep her name.
She is an assistant vice president at Johnson &amp; Higgins, an insurance brokerage in Parsippany, N.J.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.


Airlines Douse More Cigarettes
THE United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand are moving toward a nonsmoking agreement for airline flights linking their countries.
The talks are going on in several places, particularly Washington and Montreal, headquarters of the International Civil Aviation Organization, the United Nations affiliate that deals with international air standards.
Typically, negotiators are leery about going into detail, but Don M. Newman, the United States delegate to I.C.A.O., and Jim Weber, the Australian delegate, are optimistic about an agreement in the next six months, and Mr.
Weber said Australia might complete the follow-up legislation before the end of the year.


Blair Wins 4th Gold and Shows No Sign of Slowing
She is as dependable as a light switch, flipping on her power at every Winter Olympics, skating with such aggressiveness and impeccable technique that her victories have become devoid of suspense.
Bonnie Blair won her fourth gold medal today, skating the 500 meters at the Viking Ship arena in 39.25 seconds, her third fastest time ever.
Only swimmer Janet Evans, diver Pat McCormick and sprinter Evelyn Ashford have won as many Olympic gold medals among American women.
If, a month short of her 30th birthday, Blair wins gold at 1,500 meters, or, more likely, at 1,000 meters at these Games, she will stand on her own pedestal: the most decorated American woman in Olympic history.


Emerging From the Darkness, The Pain of a Life in Hiding
The pain of the telling.
And the healing involved in the telling.
The feeling, that they must know, so that this may not happen again . . .
I first saw Ruth Jacobsen as she sat half in light, half in darkness, on the steps between a raised living room and a lower-level den where a videotape of her life as a "hidden child" in Holland was being shown.
As I sat in the sunken room with 20 or so strangers, I was conscious of the enormous conflict between hiding and telling, both in the Ruth who spoke with faltering rhythms yet with a rare poetic lucidity upon the screen and in the Ruth who watched us watch, her eyes sometimes so still and wide that it was hard to look back into them, yet simultaneously hidden by carved lids, even as her whole body was enveloped in that stillness that was at the same time a flitting away.


Destination Albany: The Newest Faces
ON Tuesday, five special elections were held in the city for seats in the State Legislature.
Here are profiles of the winners. 28TH ASSEMBLY DISTRICT


Ann M. Beltrani, Patrick M. Hance
Ann Marie Beltrani, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Beltrani of Farmingville, L.I., is to be married there today to Patrick Michael Hance, the son of E. Gary Hance of Avon, Conn., and Sally Finnegan of Glastonbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Simon Fernando will perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
The bride graduated from Boston University, as did the bridegroom.
She is a vice president of Abernathy MacGregor Scanlon, a financial communications firm in New York.
Her father is a principal in Beltrani &amp; Smiarowski Associates, an insurance concern in Smithtown, L.I.
Her mother, Mary Louise Beltrani, is the circulation manager at The Smithtown Messenger, a weekly newspaper.


Dry Weather Can Wreak Havoc on Furniture
DRY indoor air can shrink wood furniture, cause cracks, break glue seams and loosen parts.
Minor repairs can be easy.
But take antiques or fine furniture to a professional restorer.
To repair veneer cracks, try filling them with waxy touch-up sticks that resemble large crayons.
They are easier to use than shellac sticks, which have to be melted and applied quickly.
Choose a touch-up stick having a slightly lighter color than the area to be repaired.
Rub the stick several times along the crack to fill it, and then polish the area vigorously with clean cheesecloth wrapped around a fingertip.
Polishing heats the filler and helps it to penetrate the crack.


It's Official: Dig Out Now
As the temperature climbed to a sunny 61 degrees in New York yesterday, Sanitation Commissioner Emily Lloyd asked residents to take advantage of the balmy weekend and dig out snow-covered cars and garbage bags to hasten melting at clogged curbs and speed up refuse collections.
After the recent storms, New Yorkers were asked not to dig cars out because doing so only added to snow piles impeding traffic in the streets.
But warmer days have changed that, and residents were urged to shovel out cars early in the day and to spread the snow around so the sun could more readily melt it.


Head Them Off at the Public Offering
To the Editor:
One factor Floyd Norris did not mention in "Northwest Saga: Getting Rich by Losing a Billion" (Market Watch, Jan. 23) was that if prudent investment guidelines were adhered to, many initial public offerings would never have a chance.
The majority of these turkeys would never get off the ground if it was not for the dispensation of those professional money managers who deem it prudent and proper to make such investments for the retirees of Corporate America.
C.
DEREK ANDERSON  San Francisco, Feb. 1  The writer is chairman of Anderson Capital Management in San Francisco.


Where the Wild Things Are, Winter's a Life-and-Death Contest
FOR those concerned about the fate of wildlife this winter, the news is mixed.
Naturalists say that while most animals and non-migrating birds can manage in extremely cold and snowy weather, some species, especially those that forage, are under stress.
By March, wildlife experts predict, many animals -- especially deer -- will die of starvation.
"Last winter, we had a big die-off of deer in March and April," said Beth Herr, curator of the Trailside Museum at the Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Cross River.
"We examined them and found they had starved to death. They had only 1.5 percent body fat."


Christian Radio And the Message
I enjoyed the Jan. 23 article on New Jersey's many Christian radio stations ("Christian Radio Experiences Growth").
The article contained speculation about what these stations will do to maintain or expand their audiences into the next century.


Feb. 13-19: Immigration Woes; Your Tired, Your Poor, Your $130 Application Fee
The United States is about to become the only nation in the world to charge an application fee to people who say they are fleeing political terror.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service disclosed last week that beginning Oct. 1 it will impose a $130 fee on immigrants seeking political asylum.
The charge is intended both as a deterrent and a fund-raiser for the overwhelmed corps of officers weighing asylum applications.
Last year, 150,386 people sought political asylum in the United States.
Only 150 asylum officers exist to hear their claims; 364,000 applicants are waiting in line.


Tim Hardin Defied Convention
LIKE A GHOST HAUNTING AN old folk club, the spirit of Tim Hardin lingers around pop's fringes.
Best known for "If I Were a Carpenter," "Misty Roses," "Reason to Believe" and other 60's coffeehouse favorites, Mr.
Hardin overdosed on heroin and morphine in 1980 -- just another singer-songwriter continuing the self-destructive tradition that doomed Mr.
Hardin's peers like Phil Ochs and Tim Buckley.
Every so often, though, one of Mr.
Hardin's songs resurfaces.
In the last few years, Robert Plant, Wilson Phillips, and the exhumed Emerson, Lake and Palmer have resurrected them.
Last fall, Rod Stewart's second recording of the plaintive "Reason to Believe," on his "Unplugged . . . and Seated" album, brought the song back to the pop charts.


Peter T. Siesel, Nikki S. Adamo
Nikki Sue Adamo, the daughter of Frank and Susan Adamo of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married last evening to Peter Todd Siesel, a son of Fred and Ruth Siesel of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert J. Verrigni, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Davenport Country Club in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Abraham Krantz took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Siesel, 26, is an associate at the law office of James J. Killerlane in White Plains.
The bride and her husband graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received graduate degrees from Pace University, she in law and he in business administration.
Her father is an accountant in Mamaroneck.
Her mother is a legal assistant at the law office of Francis A. Auleta in Mamaroneck.


Corrections
An author's identification note on Jan. 30 with an article about the movie "Philadelphia" included an erroneous credit for Ron Nyswaner.
While he worked on several script drafts of "Swing Shift," the sole writing credit on the film was that of Rob Morton, a pseudonym for Nancy Dowd.


Something Can Be Done To Help Schools: Volunteer
To the Editor:
In regard to the Jan. 23 article, "$7,512 per Pupil: Where Does It Go?": While the legal authority to bring about much-needed change in education financing rests with government officials, individual citizens can insure that students immediately receive more of the educational support they desperately require.


No Headline
"This century teaches us that America cannot afford to ignore conflicts in Europe." PRESIDENT CLINTON.  [ 1:6. ]


New Job: Selling Pizza
UNABLE to find work when they were laid off two years ago, Ann Marie Carragher, an architect, became a nanny, and Oscar Aguilar, an electrical engineer, took a job delivering pizza.
One year later, last September, with a loan from her parents, Ms.
Carragher and Mr.
Aguilar bought the pizza shop where he had been employed.
Now the couple, who became engaged on Christmas Eve, work 12 hours a day, seven days a week in their growing takeout business, the Gourmet Pizza Shoppe at 7 Ronald Drive.


City Ballet Swings the Spotlight Onto Its Dancers
THE NEW YORK CITY BALLET season has been a dazzling showcase for dancers, and young talent, especially, has come to the fore.
It might be tempting, in this light, to envisage the troupe as a dancers' collective rather than the choreographers' company it has always been.
Excellent as the performers have been over the decades, they were -- particularly during the lifetime of George Balanchine, City Ballet's founding artistic director -- defined primarily as creative instruments.


WHOSE LIFE IS IT?
If Nora Johnson's generation is responsible for giving mine a voice, it now seems to be angry that we have something to say.
The philosophical simplicity of abortion in the 1950's might find an excuse in the absence of technology or the presence of a society reluctant to focus on the act -- only on its social implications.
But this is the 1990's.
We have the technology to enable pregnant women to see life as it develops in the womb.


Bangkok by Rail
To the Editor: My wife, my daughter and I returned in December from a trip to Southeast Asia that included the Eastern &amp; Oriental Express from Singapore to Bangkok (for which, incidentally, I paid full fare).
We found the accommodations attractive and comfortable, the ride reasonable, the staff attentive and the food excellent.
In sum, a different impression from that of your correspondent, Philip Shenon ("Bangkok to Singapore, Bumps and All," Oct. 31).
I cannot speak to the ride in September when Mr.
Shenon made his trip; however, in November the ride was no bumpier than Amtrak in the Northeast corridor.
Perhaps they have slowed the train.
We left Singapore at 3 in the afternoon and arrived in Bangkok at 9:20 in the morning, including a two-hour stop at Penang so the trip appears on roughly the same schedule.


Co-op Policies Limiting Sublets
To the Editor:
Joshua Stein's statement in his letter on Feb. 6 that the co-op has become "just another place to live" is precisely why co-op boards have insisted on limiting sublets.


Is It Time To Buy A Co-op?
AFTER suffering nearly four years of widespread financial instability, a credit famine and tumbling values, the co-op apartment market in New York City may now offer some of the most affordable housing in the entire metropolitan region.
Though not all buildings were affected, co-ops in general became difficult to sell in recent years.
Studio and one-bedroom apartments, especially those with shaky financial underpinnings, were particularly hard-hit.
In the last year, median prices for all co-ops in Manhattan fell by 9.8 percent, according to the Real Estate Board of New York, with the prices of units of one bedroom or less falling by 12.1 percent.


The 49th State
To the Editor:
Orlando Figes's review of "The Conquest of a Continent: Siberia and the Russians," by W. Bruce Lincoln (Jan. 16), has an error that residents of Alaska and Hawaii might notice.
Mr.
Figes refers to Alaska as "the 50th state," but it was the 49th state.
Hawaii followed by becoming the 50th state in 1959.
FRANKLIN NG  Fresno, Calif.


Court Order to Treat Baby With Partial Brain Prompts Debate on Costs and Ethics
A recent Federal appeals court ruling that a Virginia hospital must provide life-sustaining treatment for a baby born missing most of her brain has alarmed hospital administrators and specialists in medical ethics.
They say there is little hope for holding down health care costs if family members have a legal right to insist on treatments that doctors consider inappropriate.
Fairfax Hospital, a regional medical center in Falls Church, Va., is appealing the decision, which was issued earlier this month by a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond.
The panel ruled, 2 to 1, that a Federal law enacted eight years ago to prevent hospitals from turning indigent patients away from emergency rooms applies much more broadly, requiring hospitals to treat or stabilize all emergency conditions, even when doctors believe that no treatment is warranted.


Tax Law Drives Country Clubs to Recruit
TAX-law changes that eliminate or reduce deductions for corporate and individual memberships at private country clubs are making many clubs on Long Island more competitive in recruiting.
Although club officials say they do not expect the effects of the changes to be great, many clubs have already seen declines in membership over the last few years.
As a result, a number have lowered their initiation fees and are offering social and recreational features to appeal to young families.


A Scenic Rail Trip Across Mexico
The dream of a shorter rail route from the Midwest to the Pacific Ocean, and thus to the Orient, than by way of Los Angeles led to what is called the Copper Canyon route, a scenic journey through the Sierra Madre Occidental of northern Mexico, offering views of the Copper Canyon region, which is about four times the size of the Grand Canyon.
The trip can be taken on regular Mexican passenger trains from Juarez across the border from El Paso, with a change of trains in Chihuahua, but this month and next the route will also be served by restored 1940's and 1950's coaches with no change of train and with a staff of chefs serving elegant meals.


Russia Lurches Into Reform, But Old Ways Are Tenacious
Mikhail Zhvanetsky, Russia's most popular comedian, was recently asked about reform.
"Much has changed, but nothing has happened," he began, but then paused in feigned confusion.
"Or is it that much has happened, and nothing has changed?"


Dry Weather Can Wreak Havoc on Furniture
DRY indoor air can shrink wood furniture, cause cracks, break glue seams and loosen parts.
Minor repairs can be easy.
But take antiques or fine furniture to a professional restorer.
To repair veneer cracks, try filling them with waxy touch-up sticks that resemble large crayons.
They are easier to use than shellac sticks, which have to be melted and applied quickly.
Choose a touch-up stick having a slightly lighter color than the area to be repaired.
Rub the stick several times along the crack to fill it, and then polish the area vigorously with clean cheesecloth wrapped around a fingertip.
Polishing heats the filler and helps it to penetrate the crack.


The Graying Factory
AT the age of 61, when many assembly line workers have retired to Florida or Arizona to pass their time playing cards or golf, James Langell rises almost every morning at 4:30 to prepare for his day at the Chrysler Corporation's Jefferson North plant here, where workers are scrambling to keep dealers stocked with the hot-selling Jeep Grand Cherokee.
Fifty-six times an hour, nine and a half hours a day, six days a week -- including Saturdays -- he installs the rear windshield washer hose and attaches front and rear bumpers, using a special screw gun that makes it easy on his arms and back to tighten screws.
He has less than 90 seconds to do it and if he loses his rhythm he falls behind.


How the West Was Fed
HOME ON THE RANGE A Culinary History of the American West.
By Cathy Luchetti.
Illustrated. 238 pp.
New York: Villard Books.
Paper, $25.
WAGON WHEEL KITCHENS Food on the Oregon Trail.
By Jacqueline Williams.
Illustrated. 222 pp.
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
Cloth, $29.95.
Paper, $14.95.


A Localized Look at the Cali Drug Cartel
On the night of March 11, 1992, a hooded gunman walked into a Queens restaurant and fired two bullets into the head of a patron, Manuel de Dios Unanue, a muckraking journalist whose exposes were aimed at the top ranks of Colombian drug traffickers.
On Wednesday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn an 18-year-old illegal immigrant from Colombia, Wilson Alejandro Mejia Velez, is to go on trial, charged as the hired hit man who carried out orders to kill Mr. de Dios.
United States authorities say the orders were relayed from a leader of a Colombian cocaine cartel angered by Mr. de Dios's writings.


Oil Barge Is Stuck in Sand But Refloated Without Spill
An 8,000-ton barge carrying a million gallons of home heating oil from New Jersey to Port Jefferson, L.I., ran aground yesterday about half a mile off Manhasset Neck, Coast Guard officials said.
No oil spilled, however, and the barge, which was being pushed through Long Island Sound by a tugboat, was back afloat by midafternoon.
The barge, owned by the Bouchard Corporation, a Long Island oil transport company, and registered in New York City, had moved slightly off course because of fog and ice in the sound yesterday morning, said John Johnson, vice president of environmental marine affairs for Bouchard.


It's the Last Call For Seeds and Such
GETTING panicky yet?
Filled with I-should-have-ordered-my-seeds-trees-flowering-shrubs-by-now anxiety?
If you're not, you should be -- because if you don't get down to some serious ordering, all the good stuff will be gone.
For instance, the New England Wild Flower Society's 1994 Seed and Book Catalogue offers seeds or spores of more than 175 varieties of wildflowers and ferns, most of which were collected from plants in the society's Garden in the Woods in 1993.
But you must write for a catalogue by March 1, because seed sales close on March 15, and though there are still many seeds left, the rarest have been snatched up. (So include substitutions when you order.)


Arrest in Strangulation
A Bronx man was charged yesterday with second-degree murder in the strangulation death of his female roommate, who the police said was found in a basement trash container at a high-rise apartment building in Riverdale.
The man, Charles Michael Maldonado, 19, and the victim, Linda Padilla, 30, had a long-simmering dispute, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.
Ms.
Padilla's clothed body was found Friday at 8:09 A.M. by the superintendent of the building, the Whitehall Apartments, a 23-story complex at 3333 Henry Hudson Parkway.
The accused and the victim lived on the 22d floor, with two other roommates, the police said.


The Executive Computer; For Companies, Open System Freedom Brings Challenges
THE promoters of the computing philosophy known as open systems often compare the old world order epitomized by I.B.M. to the former Soviet Union: a totalitarian bureaucracy that stifled innovation, competition and personal freedom.
What they fail to say is that the alternative they offer bears more than a passing resemblance to the newly independent republics: chaotic, confusing, full of tough choices.
In the old days, corporations purchased -- or often, leased -- entire computer systems from one vendor, whether it was the International Business Machines Corporation, Burroughs, Sperry, Data General or Honeywell.
The vendor supplied not only the mainframe computer but also the "dumb" terminals used to enter and retrieve data, the operating system software and the data-base management programs.
Service, too, was a telephone call away, no matter where in the system the problem lay.


View on Epilepsy Sparks a Controversy
DR.
BARBARA COVEN is a pediatrician with a playful smile for babies and a reassuring manner with parents.
In her work as director of pediatrics at Kaiser Permanente, the health-maintenance organization here, she spends nearly as much time fending off illness as treating it, placing prevention at the top of her priorities.
Knowledgeable, upbeat and expecting her second child, she is not the type one usually connects with controversy.
Yet she has found herself in an unexpected spotlight, all because of a letter she wrote last year to The New York Times concerning the linkage of video games with epilepsy.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
107.00
107.00
120.65
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7545
1.7545
1.6580
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3435
1.3435
1.2545
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4620
1.4620
1.4220
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$380.50
$380.50
$328.80
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


A Prince Eschews Royal Digs While Seeking Olympic Crown
When looking in the 1994 Winter Olympic athletes register for His Serene Highness, the Heir to the Throne of Monaco, Prince Albert Alexandre Louis Pierre, Marquis des Baux, referred to in most cases as simply, "Your Highness," you have to go to "G" for "Grimaldi," the old family name and the surname, of course, of his father, Prince Ranier.
When his mother married his father, in fact, she not only became Princess Grace, but also Grace Kelly Grimaldi.
In recent days, Prince Albert, 35 years old, with a receding hair line and a dignified, but invariably friendly and gentle manner, has forsaken his royal digs in the palace at Monte Carlo for a small room here in temporary housing with a single bed, chair and wardrobe.
"The bed's a little narrow," he said, "but I've adjusted." The room is located in the athletes village, and he must also share a bathroom with other athletes in his house, and eats with them in the cafeteria.


The Neighbors Attack Housing for Prostitutes
To the Editor:
The moral high ground from which Francesca Patai preaches to the unenlightened of West 12th Street about Dr.
Joyce Wallace's proposal (Letters, Feb. 13) must truly be a rarified place.
And a lonely one.


California Dreaming; Once More, With Feeling: L.A. Tries to Do the Right Thing
IN what passes for bold social engineering in this city, there are now two detours around the Santa Monica Freeway section that collapsed in the earthquake last month: one for car pools, one for single drivers.
Almost 20 years ago, there was -- briefly -- a car pool lane on this, the nation's busiest freeway.
But it was abandoned after too many complaints about restrictions on personal freedom.


Keep Your Mind Open
THE PROTEAN SELF Human Resilience in an Age of Fragmentation.
By Robert Jay Lifton. 262 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $25.


Say "Da Da Da Dum!"
All electronic gadgets seem to be converging into one.
The telephone, fax and computer have already merged.
Now the cameras are playing classical music.
A timer on the EOS Rebel from Canon produces a variety of sound effects while the seconds tick off.
The photographer can choose from : "1. Electronic beeper; 2. Vivaldi's 'Four Seasons -- Spring; 3. Beethoven's 'Turkish March'; 4. Bach's 'Minuet.' " These are, of course, the short versions of these famous compositions, as the instruction booklet makes clear: "During self-timer operation when 2, 3 or 4 is selected, the tune plays for 9 seconds and then the beeper beeps rapidly for 1 second before the picture is taken."


Some Doghouse
It has a playroom, a kitchen, sleeping areas, an air-exchange system and a grooming area, but it is not the ideal Manhattan apartment.
In fact, this domicile also includes an apartment -- for a veterinary student.
The student will take care of Spot for the rest of his natural life when you die.
Just make a bequest of $25,000 to Texas A &amp; M's veterinary school and enroll your pet in the brand-new Companion Animal Life-Care Center.


'Save the Y' Campaign Saves the Y
The Emanu-El Midtown Y, teetering financially since 1991, has been rescued by an infusion of donations, say officials, who are giving significant credit to the community.
The Y, with its community programs, exercise room and pool, has been a fixture on East 14th Street for many since it opened in 1965.
Three years ago, when told that the Y might have to be closed, residents of the area organized a "Save the Y" campaign.
They peppered the neighborhood with leaflets, staged demonstrations, spoke up at community board meetings and pressured the owners, the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies, to keep it open.


POSTINGS: Children's TV Workshop Extends Astoria Lease; 'S' as in Sesame Street and 'Q' as in Queens
Van Wyck Expressway. Utopia Parkway. Queens Boulevard. Jamaica Avenue. Sesame Street.
Perhaps it is not quite as closely identified with Queens as the other thoroughfares, but "Sesame Street" will be part of the landscape at least through January 1997, now that Children's Television Workshop has extended its lease at Kaufman Astoria Studios, where the show has been produced for the last year.


Skateless Skating
The 10th annual Winter Ball for the Museum of the City of New York, Feb. 10.


Lower Fifth Ave., and Thereabouts
BOOK-FRIENDS CAFE


F.Y.I.
Picking Verses
Q.
The poetry that festoons the subways and buses these days sweetens my daily commute.
Please tell me how the poems are chosen.


Cyberfakes
WHEN detectives from the Queens District Attorney's office burst through the doors of Korman Sportswear in late December, they expected to arrest a handful of illegal immigrants for gluing fake designer labels onto a few bins of designer clothing a day.
Instead, they found what they called an increasingly potent threat to the fashion industry: a counterfeiter's factory with an elaborate network of computerized machinery that quickly turned run-of-the-mill shirts, jeans and sweatshirts into tens of thousands of brand-name fakes.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Who Owns a Life? Asks a Poet, When His Is Turned Into Fiction
When David Leavitt set out to write "While England Sleeps," his new novel about literary London in the 1930's, he made no secret of his debt to the poet Stephen Spender's classic memoir of the period, "World Within World." "I'm perfectly willing to admit the fact that this novel uses his life as a springboard," Mr.
Leavitt said in an interview just before the book was published last fall.
"I'd never deny it."
Not that it would have made any difference if he had.
Having learned of the striking resemblances between the two books, Mr.
Spender sued Mr.
Leavitt's British publisher, Viking Penguin, which was forced to withdraw the book.
In an out-of-court settlement reached last week, Viking agreed not to continue selling the novel in its present form anywhere in the world.
Future editions will appear with the offending passages deleted.


FOR HEALTH INSURANCE, WITH NO FRILLS
I essentially agree with Peter G. Peterson's approach to a very difficult and controversial issue ("For Health Insurance, With No Frills," Jan. 16).
However, I take great exception to his implication that mental-health care is a "frill" and should not be included in basic health insurance plans.


Snowiest Winter of All Was 1947-48: 63.2 Inches
To the Editor:
The Dec. 26 article "Taming the Mean Season" was underinformative on the snowfall record front, a topic of considerable interest given our more recent snowy weather.
The 51.1 inches in the 1966-67 winter, which was described as the city's record, was only the greatest amount in the 30-year period from 1962-92.


Where Mothers Matter
It was a muggy Washington day, and my daughter and I were in the midst of our daily rounds: the bank, the dry cleaners, the Italian deli.
She drifted off to sleep, and I wheeled the stroller into a crowded cafe for an iced tea.
Finally, I could read my newspaper.
The only empty chair was opposite another woman, young and red-haired, absently guarding a dozing infant.
Would she mind if I sat with her, I asked.
She gestured to the table, patting the seat beside her.
We chatted; she seemed, as I often am during the day, eager for adult conversation.
My daughter woke, and I leaned over to stroke her plump cheek.
Finished with my tea, I kissed her neck to elicit a stream of giggles as we prepared to go.
Curious, the woman mused: "She really likes you."


The Invisible Parade
For over a decade, the homeless have been parading, shivering, ranting, eating, drinking, sleeping and occasionally dying within view of the north-facing windows of the family quarters of the White House.
At last, perhaps, we have a President who can see them.
It is about time.
Homelessness in America is a spectacle to crack any caring heart.
The scores of homeless who shuffle among the springtime tulips and winter snowbanks of Lafayette Park in Washington are the unelected representatives of a far-flung constituency.
During the Reagan and Bush Administrations, neither these Washington representatives of the homeless nor the Congress itself could get the residents of the White House to open their eyes.


Hoch Takes 4-Stroke Lead Over Glasson and Huston
If the boxing impresario Don King were promoting Sunday's final round of the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic, he would call it something like "Doomsday in the Desert." He would go heavy on the differences between the principals, Scott Hoch (short hitter) and Bill Glasson (bomber), and then hope the thing wasn't over by early knockout before the last sun-tanned spectator had stepped out of a Jaguar XJS.
But the final 18 holes of this annual five-round Palm Springs carnival are likely to be more like a battle royal than a civilized punch-out between two parties.
Hoch shot a round of 66 today to take back the lead he had relinquished Friday, and at 24-under-par 264 he holds a four-stroke lead over Glasson (66-268) and John Huston (68-268).


Community Board Meetings in Queens:
DISTRICT 1: Astoria, Long Island City; third Tuesday of the month; next March 15, 7 P.M., place to be announced; (718) 786-3335.
DISTRICT 2: Sunnyside, Woodside; first Thursday of the month; next March 3, 7 P.M., 43-31 39th Street; (718) 361-0750.


TYING EDUCATION TO THE ECONOMY
As the television camera lights glared, 17-year-old Kevin Weismann made his plea to the educators and politicians assembled in a conference hall here.
"All students should have the opportunity to explore the work world while they are still in high school," the high school senior said.
"Sooner or later, everyone is going to be out in the workplace."


Robert Moses Canceled Bike Paths on Verrazano
To the Editor:
The Jan. 16 article "Bike Lanes on the Verrazano?" raises an ancient issue.
Bicycle-pedestrian pathways were part of the original design of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge back in the 1960's but were canceled by Robert Moses to forestall suicides.
I was leading bike tours with American Youth Hostels at the time, and we campaigned unsuccessfully to restore the pathways.
Of course, people bent on suicide continued to drive up, abandon their cars mid-span and jump.


Rutgers Seems to Like Its Stately, Stateless Image
Proud, put-upon New Jersey, the butt of endless jokes, is also the only state in the country without a university to bear its name, exclusively speaking.
Oh sure, the system's official name is Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey.
But during casual conversation, and more importantly it seems, during televised sports events, what is highlighted is Rutgers, while everything after the comma tends to be lost.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-16  A WARNING FROM CLINTON  President Clinton, in an address to the nation, warned that air strikes would be carried out unless Bosnian Serbs complied fully with the ultimatum from NATO.  1  SERBS WITHDRAWING ARMS  The Bosnian Serbs were withdrawing their heavy weapons yesterday from around Sarajevo, but bad weather and disorganization slowed the operations.  1


Growing Up Apart
INNOCENTS IN AFRICA An American Family's Story.
By Drury Pifer.
Illustrated. 338 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $24.95.


Reverberations: Aftermath of a Bombing -- A special report.; Trade Center Blast's Legacy: Security Improved, and Lost
Almost everyone retains some defining image of the day.
It might be the pregnant woman plucked off the roof by a wavering helicopter.
Or the Secret Service agent blown out of her shoes.
Or the people scribbling their wills on tatters of paper in smoky stairwells.
Or the kindergarten class trapped for five hours in the inky darkness of a broken elevator, singing silly songs to keep the evil away.
On Saturday, at 18 minutes past noon, a year will have passed since lower Manhattan trembled from the bomb that exploded in the entrails of the World Trade Center, opening a jagged cavern five stories deep.
Terrorism had landed on American soil as never before.
The bomb left six dead, a thousand injured and millions shaken to the marrow.


Amy C. Hersh and Daniel B. Rubock
Amy Carol Hersh, a flutist, and Daniel Benjamin Rubock, a lawyer, are to be married today at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
Rabbi David Lincoln will officiate.
The bride, 33, who is keeping her name, received her undergraduate and master's degrees in music performance from the Manhattan School of Music.
She performs with the Hudson Valley Philharmonic and the Venus Trio.
She is a daughter of Michael and Marilyn Hersh of Melville, L.I.


Telling a Tale of Urban Survival
CUSTOMARILY, Crossroads Theater Company has acknowledged Black History Month by producing plays about black history, with an accent on inspiration.
Not this year.
"And the World Laughs With You"' is the underside of inspiration; it deals with history's real and present threat.
In her first play, Karimah, who is being announced by the theater as an emerging playwright, is calling attention to what looks like every catastrophic component of contemporary urban shame, from crack and guns out of control to a welfare system that encourages young women to have babies, guaranteeing them, a 30ish mother of four says, coverage from conception to delivery.


Fatal Beating Fuels Concern About Hazing on Campuses
Last Monday night, members of a fraternity repeatedly kicked and hit a pledge named Michael Davis, according to the police here.
Then the fraternity members took the slightly built young man to his student apartment and left him there, his family says.
On Tuesday afternoon, a neighbor found the body; it was so bruised that the county coroner advised the family not to look.
Officials here say the 25-year-old Mr.
Davis was beaten to death in an episode of hazing, and experts say it was one of the most brutal such incidents of recent years.


Streetscapes/The American Radiator Building; A 1924 Precursor of Art Deco
THE American Radiator Building, at 40 West 40th Street, is now just extra inventory in a recession-bloated sea of empty space.
But it was once a dazzling new idea that promised to remake the city.
The owner of the striking black-and-gold, 23-story mid-block office tower, which has been vacant for four years, is getting restless and expects this spring either to convert the building to residential use or to sell it to a developer for the same purpose.


Political Fanatics Find Pastime That Can Pay
The raucous United States Senate race in Virginia has a new side show: cash wagering.
Befitting the age, the gaming takes place on computers in the form of a political stock market.
It is the latest offering of a 6-year-old experiment at the business school of the University of Iowa, in Iowa City, which has offered ventures resembling futures markets in 13 elections in seven countries.


Curley Sparks a Late Spurt as B.C. Surprises Syracuse
Boston College 89, Syracuse 83
Bill Curley scored 23 points and keyed a decisive 9-0 run last night as Boston College beat No. 14 Syracuse, 89-83, in Boston.


Hotels in West 30's Recover Their Aplomb
THE tourist was succinct: "It's good. It's simple." Hege Flatas of Trondheim, Norway, offered this judgment on a $65-a-night room she chose at the Wolcott Hotel on West 31st Street early this month for her four-day visit to New York City.
She shared the room with her traveling companion and fellow-Trondheimite, Lill Schumann.
The two 23-year-olds had spent a year working at Disneyworld in Orlando, Fla.
Then they went on a one-month travel spree, ending in New York for sightseeing and theater.
They used a tourist pamphlet at Penn Station to pick a hotel.


An Extraordinary Mortal
To the Editor:
In his favorable review of "Henry James: Collected Travel Writings" (Dec. 12), William F. Buckley Jr. warns that no ordinary mortal will be able to accomplish the reading of the entire work.
All the more reason, then, to acknowledge the efforts of the volumes' editor, who has obviously done that and more in providing extensive notes that reflect a mastery of the entire work of Henry James.


A Film Scholar Conjures Up A Hit Machine
WHEN THE SUNDANCE Film Festival adjourned last month, the producer James Schamus found himself in a familiar position: biting his lip to keep from saying, "I told you so." This time it was over a film called "What Happened Was . . .," the directorial debut of the playwright and actor Tom Noonan, which Mr.
Schamus had produced with his partner, Ted Hope.
"It was another one of our typical, nobody-would-touch-it projects," says Mr.
Schamus of the film, which depicts a couple conversing in one room on a first date.
"It had the worst write-up in the Sundance catalogue," he says, "and it sounded so boring. But I kept saying, 'Hold on,' because no matter how hesitant people were to go into the theater, once they went in, kaboom."
"What Happened Was . . ." took the festival's award for best screenplay, as well as its grand jury prize and was sold to the Samuel Goldwyn Company for six figures.


Squawk! Life's a Snack Under a Sunny Blue Sky


Different From You and Me
DOWNTOWN -- "Pool," Ajay Sahgal's first novel, published this month, is about the emptiness of celebrity.
"I don't think of myself as a celebrity," the much-celebrated actress Sarah Jessica Parker, 29, was saying at the "Pool" party at the Mercbar in SoHo on Feb. 9.
While she was sitting on a couch not thinking of herself as a celebrity, admiring faces and eager cameras encircled her.


Anatomy Issue
To the Sports Editor:
Thank heavens for big, strong sportswriters like Robert Lipsyte.
Without them, where would all the "wide-bottomed, thin-lipped working girls" turn for protection?


A Season of Albee, Obsessions Safely Intact
IT'S EDWARD ALBEE TIME AGAIN, at least Off and Off Off Broadway.
The nonprofit Signature Theater Company, where Mr.
Albee is the artist-in-residence this season, has just opened the third of its four Albee programs at the Kampo Cultural Center in the East Village.
"Sand," the title of the current bill, directed by the playwright himself, is made up of three short representative pieces: "Box" (1968), "The Sandbox" (1960), and "Finding the Sun" (1983), which is having its first New York production.
Meanwhile, just a few blocks north, the Vineyard Theater is presenting the New York premiere of his full-length "Three Tall Women," first done in 1991 at the English Theater in Vienna under his direction.
This is an excellent opportunity to meet Mr.
Albee for the first time, to catch up with him after a long absence, or simply to reassess the work of a major American playwright who helped to change the shape of contemporary drama here and abroad.
As much as anyone else, he was a bridge between the poetic theater of Tennessee Williams and William Inge in the post-World War II era and the new tragicomic theater-of-language pioneered by David Mamet and Sam Shepard.
His obsessions and voice endure.
Since January 1960, when his "Zoo Story," presented on a bill with Samuel Beckett's "Krapp's Last Tape," opened in New York, Mr.
Albee has never been long off a stage somewhere in the world.


You're Ugly! You're Ugly! Let's Drink
FOR 500 years, the citizens of Basel, Switzerland, have celebrated the Monday after Ash Wednesday with Fasnacht, a four-day carnival of parades, an exchange of insults, and the sharing of wine and traditional foods.
Tonight for the first time, the Swiss Institute will bring an abbreviated Fasnacht to New York.
Members of social clubs, known as cliques, are planning on marching around the Lincoln Center area in costume led by a fife-and-drum corps.
Soup and onion-and-cheese pie will be served after the parade.


Harlem Was on Their Mind
FOR THOSE WHO GREW UP in New York's teeming working-class neighborhoods, there are memories of a gentler age when the roof was a magical place.
With the sky overhead and the squishy tar underfoot, it could be a beach, a garden or a balcony overlooking a vista of the taunting, hazy outlines of downtown's skyscrapers.
A New Yorker at heart, the director Leon Ichaso knows the evocative lure of city rooftops and has used them effectively in his previous films, "El Super" (1979) and "Crossover Dreams" (1985).
But in his latest film, "Sugar Hill," which opens on Friday, he has one shot that is, at least figuratively, over the top.


Corrections
A chart on Jan. 30 listing the most popular American musicians in foreign countries misstated the nationalities of several bands or performers.
Def Leppard is British, Air Supply is Australian and Ace of Base is Swedish; Eric Clapton is British.
None of those named are American.


Top Lifter
To the Sports Editor:
I am the New York State chairman for the Natural Athletes Strength Association and have been a power lifter for many years and I know Ted Sobel personally.
No one in the sport of power lifting deserves publicity more than Ted.
He spoke out against drugs in muscle magazines for years because he had the integrity and courage to stand up for what is right.


Airlines Douse More Cigarettes
THE United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand are moving toward a nonsmoking agreement for airline flights linking their countries.
The talks are going on in several places, particularly Washington and Montreal, headquarters of the International Civil Aviation Organization, the United Nations affiliate that deals with international air standards.
Typically, negotiators are leery about going into detail, but Don M. Newman, the United States delegate to I.C.A.O., and Jim Weber, the Australian delegate, are optimistic about an agreement in the next six months, and Mr.
Weber said Australia might complete the follow-up legislation before the end of the year.


Snowstorms Underline New York City's Deference to Motorists; Schools Stayed Open
To the Editor:
The Feb. 11 snowstorm proved how much we value our children.
With a full snow emergency declared in New York City the night before -- the first in many years -- the city school system remained open.
This means that close to a million children were expected to make the treacherous trek to school, while adults were asked to stay off the roads.


A Crusader for Shareholders' Rights
To the Editor:
Lost in the article about the status of the shareholder rights movement ("Have Shareholders Lost Their Edge?," Jan. 30), was the name Lewis Gilbert, a crusader for shareholder rights since the 1930's.
It is significant that his death last December at age 86 came at a time when many considered the battle for shareholder rights to have finally been won.
WILLIAM M. PHILLIAN  West Paterson, N.J., Feb. 1


Corrections
The World Markets column last Sunday about the Bombay Stock Exchange misstated the rules for banks' providing custodial services for foreign investment institutions.
The United States Securities and Exchange Commission requires that any bank providing such services for investment firms and mutual funds have at least $200 million in capital.
Under that guideline, several banks qualify, including Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank, Citibank and Standard Chartered Bank.


Dry Weather Can Wreak Havoc on Furniture
DRY indoor air can shrink wood furniture, cause cracks, break glue seams and loosen parts.
Minor repairs can be easy.
But take antiques or fine furniture to a professional restorer.
To repair veneer cracks, try filling them with waxy touch-up sticks that resemble large crayons.
They are easier to use than shellac sticks, which have to be melted and applied quickly.
Choose a touch-up stick having a slightly lighter color than the area to be repaired.
Rub the stick several times along the crack to fill it, and then polish the area vigorously with clean cheesecloth wrapped around a fingertip.
Polishing heats the filler and helps it to penetrate the crack.


The World; Contain Your Joy: Russia's Back on the World Stage
YOU could see it clearly in Bosnia last week.
After two and a half years of quiescence, the Russians are lurching toward a more assertive foreign policy, and the West is going to have to adjust to that fact.
Sometimes the West will be happy to have Russia at its side, and sometimes it will find Russia's actions disturbing.
The consensus in Washington is not that Russia, now stripped of empire, is intent on recreating past glories.
Rather, it is that the country is finally shaking off an imperial hangover that left it without a sense of place in the world, and is struggling to recover some of its influence in its own backyard.


Marc R. Daniel and Suzanne K. Herz
Suzanne Karen Herz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Marvin I. Herz of Fairport, N.Y., was married last evening to Marc Robert Daniel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan L. Daniel of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Dr.
David M. Posner, a rabbi, officiated at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
The bride, 32, is the director of publicity at Pantheon Books in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father is a professor of psychiatry at the University of Rochester School of Medicine.


Margo Grant, John P. Walsh
Marjolaine Grant, an interior architect in New York, and John Perry Walsh, a private investor in Groton Long Point, Conn., were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
John Cleremont performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Mrs.
Walsh, who is known as Margo, is a managing principal of the New York office of Gensler &amp; Associates, an architecture firm.
She graduated from the University of Oregon.
She is the daughter of the late Alfred and Ann Grant.
Her father was a painting contractor in Portland, Ore.
Her mother was an elementary school teacher in the Clackamas County, Ore., public schools.


A Message For Young and Old
To the Editor:
While I applaud the mostly youth-oriented Styles for its interest in exploring the issues presented in "Age, Beauty and Truth" (Jan. 23), some of my remarks to Lynn Darling were taken totally out of context.
The results demeaned and insulted all women, especially the model Patti Hansen.


Fitness Evolving
TIn biological evolution there are certain species that have a knack for speciating, or giving rise to new species.
The same is true in cultural evolution, and few forms of art or entertainment have spawned more varieties than the exercise video.
Once there were Babes (Jane), Hunks (Arnold) and Metallica ("Buns of Steel," "Abs of Steel," other body parts of steel).
Now, to name a few new genera, there are: Babes of a Certain Age (Cher, Raquel Welch, Angela Lansbury and Debbie Reynolds); Country and Western (Tanya Tucker and Irlene Mandrell, whose "Texercise" features "Thighs of Texas" and "The Big Bend"); Adult/Fitness Hybrids ("The Da Vinci Body Series," a nude exercise tape for the "renaissance man of the 90's"), and Geriatric ("Young at Heart: Body Conditioning with Estelle Getty").


A Fan of One President Pays Homage to Another


Golf; Hoch Ends 5 Lean Years With Victory in Classic
Scott Hoch emerged from the shadows today, throwing off five years without a victory, subduing his personal demons and beating back the competition in the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.
It was not a classic victory, but it was a cathartic one for Hoch, 38, who has been haunted for five years by the short putt he missed in the 1989 Masters playoff loss to Nick Faldo.


Grand Central To Get Exits To North End
Eighty years after Grand Central Terminal opened its front doors to New York City, workers are about to begin adding something the designers never thought necessary: back entrances.
Construction will begin within weeks on a $70 million network of elevators, escalators, stairs and crosswalks that will allow passengers heading uptown to go directly north for the first time, exiting as far away as 48th Street.


Gumbel: Less Than Just a Pretty Face
Where is Greg Gumbel?
What has CBS done to him?
A man posing as the prime-time host of the Winter Olympics has been dressed up in fine threads, placed behind a desk in a studio filled with Norwegian wood.
But he's no more than a video traffic cop, hardly more than the guy telling us what comes next.
Is this the same Greg Gumbel from the now-defunct "N.F.L. Today"?


Computers and Telephones Pave A New Path to a College Degree
On the second floor of an 83-year-old brick building just doors from the State Capitol, one of the brighter stars of higher learning tirelessly helps to issue reading assignments, conduct class discussions and schedule midterm exams.
Not much to look at, and a compact 3 feet by 2, this newest addition to teaching at Thomas Edison State College manages to win over students who depend on it but never see it.


Knicks Hold Bulls at Point-Blank Range
Facing the Chicago Bulls, their most bitter rival, inspired the Knicks to turn in a superlative defensive effort yesterday afternoon.
Dominating the action after the first quarter, New York hammered the Bulls, 86-68, in a playoff-like atmosphere at Madison Square Garden.


Overheard at the Mall: You Shop, I'll Wait Here
To Leo Concannon, it was the only way to shop.
Parked in a comfy chair, the sound of show tunes from a baby grand falling lightly on his ears, Mr.
Concannon flipped the pages of a newspaper, oblivious to the cacophony at the cosmetics counters and the clicking of the register in women's shoes.
From the serene look of him, he might have been relaxing in the lobby of a Ritz-Carlton, or biding his time in a first-class departure lounge before a flight to Paris.
But no.
It was merely an armchair by a bank of escalators on the ground floor of Nordstrom in the Menlo Park Mall, where his wife, Mary, had left him before heading off to browse on her own.


Inquiry On A.T.M. Networks
The Justice Department is investigating whether any of the networks that link automated teller machines have been putting pressure on banks to buy other services from them as a condition of participating in the network.
Justice Department spokesmen in Washington confirmed yesterday that an antitrust investigation was under way and said that some action would be announced soon.


New York's Information Underclass
Child number one owns a fancy computer setup that taps into electronic libraries all over the country.
Child number two is computerless and poor in a rural area where the library is a single cramped room above the local gas station.
The first child is already primed for the Information Superhighway.
The second child is stuck on what can only be called an Information Dirt Road.
If Albany continues to starve the state library system, the gap between these information haves and have-nots will continue to grow, creating an information underclass that the state can ill afford.


'Hoop Dreams' Team May See Some Fulfilled
As a rule, movie distributors have had an abiding aversion to documentaries, especially long ones.
So the makers of "Hoop Dreams," a three-hour epic about the lives of playground basketball players in the projects of Chicago, were surprised -- ecstatic, actually -- when Film Forum in Manhattan scheduled the world theatrical premiere of their movie for March 2.
The film makers, Peter Gilbert, Steve James and Frederick Marx, were just as pleased when PBS decided to televise "Hoop Dreams" this spring to coincide with the N.C.A.A.'s "Final Four" tournament.
Perhaps, they thought, a distributor might take a chance on their movie.
They needn't have worried.
There are now so many distributors stalking "Hoop Dreams" that the two coming bookings have been called off -- at the film makers' request -- for fear they might damage the movie's marketability.
At last count, six companies were reportedly seeking the distribution rights, and 10 more have expressed an interest in buying the rights to remake the film as a fictional commercial feature.


In Egypt, the Intellectuals Fight Back
To the Editor:
While no one can deny that the rise in militancy among the extremists of some Islamic movements in Egypt has disrupted the promising momentum of the Egyptian economy and attempts at privatization, as well as the lucrative tourist industry, it is disconcerting and dismaying to be bombarded by inflammatory and alarmist news reports from Egypt.


I.R.S. Finds Fraud Grows As More File by Computer
The Internal Revenue Service, trying to cut down on paperwork by encouraging the electronic filing of tax returns, faces a costly threat from thieves using the technology to get fraudulent refunds.
Officials say the electronic filing system is coming under increasingly bold and sophisticated attack.
More than 25,000 fraudulent electronic returns were detected in the first 10 months of 1993, more than double the number in the corresponding period of 1992, as electronic filing grew last year to account for about 40 percent of all detected frauds.


Business Chiefs Praise Clinton for Stand on Japan
Business executives are praising President Clinton's decision to take a tougher stance with Japan over trade but are divided about how much the Administration can improve the situation.
"It's time the Japanese understood that this chronic deficit is intolerable," said George Fisher, chairman and chief executive of the Eastman Kodak Company.


Essay; Lessons Of Bosnia
The siege of Sarajevo is being lifted by one new fact on the ground: the fear in the hearts of Serbian gunners that they will be be killed by NATO bombs.
As this is written, the anti-war alliance has not had to carry out its threat; Serbian guns are being moved elsewhere.
But as the same coercion is applied to attackers surrounding other Muslim enclaves, they, too, will be affected by the new balance of firepower.
Thanks to the West's belated determination to intervene, we have come to the beginning of the end of the umpteenth Balkan war.


Review/Television; Con Artists Cashing In On the Maternal Instinct
"Baby Brokers," tonight's NBC movie, is about a baby-adoption scam.
That's pretty standard based-on-fact stuff for prime time.
But keep your eye and ear on the subtext.
It has to do with class in America, tapping into the kinds of lowlifes who figure prominently in the current media obsession with a certain figure skater.
The nation's underbelly isn't a pretty sight.
The middle-class centerpiece of "Baby Brokers" is Debbie, a single woman in her early 40's who has been pregnant twice but not successfully.
Debbie is blunt: "I can live without a man but I can't live without a child." She's played by Cybill Shepherd who, even with stories of being difficult abounding, can deliver classily when the occasion is right.
It was in "Moonlighting," and it is here.
She's thoroughly persuasive as she puts her faith and money in a couple of con artists seemingly willing to sell their baby to a single mother.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
Feb.
Federal Budget . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  None  Thursday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
Jan.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


In Major Finding, Drug Curbs H.I.V. Infection in Newborns
A federally financed study has found that the drug AZT drastically reduces transmission of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, from infected mothers to their newborns, Government health officials said today.
The findings were considered so significant that the study, which began in April 1991, was ordered stopped on Friday, and officials are spending the holiday weekend notifying the 59 medical centers in the United States and France taking part in the study to offer AZT to the pregnant women who had been receiving a placebo.


Winter Olympics; Good Jump Isn't Good Enough for Norway
Jens Weissflog of Germany had just finished pumping his small fists at the bottom of the large hill.
Far up the snow-covered ramp, Espen Bredesen moved his wide skis into place and, amid the din, readied himself for the jump of his life.
From his precarious perch, Bredesen appeared to have the undivided attention of the entire Gudbrands valley.
In the stadium below, nearly 40,000 impatient Norwegians and their King were waving their flags and stomping their boots with the Olympic flame for a backdrop.
In the distance, thousands more without tickets strained for a glimpse of their latest local hero from atop roofs, tree limbs and snow sculptures.


Margaret Lane, 86, British Writer On Beatrix Potter and the Brontes
Margaret Lane, the Dowager Countess of Huntingdon, a British author whose works included books about Peter Rabbit's creator, Beatrix Potter, died last Monday in Southampton, England.
She was 86 and lived outside Southampton.
Miss Lane's two biographies of Miss Potter were the basis of "The Tale of Beatrix Potter," a two-part BBC dramatization shown on "Masterpiece Theater" on WNET in 1984 that was praised as a simple yet intense story with just the right touches of unflinching reserve.


Review/City Ballet; A Sun God Emerges In 'Apollo'
Nikolaj Hubbe's triumphal debut in the title role of "Apollo" at the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night was an obvious focus of interest.
But the entire program -- devoted to Balanchine and Stravinsky -- was a highlight of the season.
"Apollo" (1928), "Orpheus" (1948) and "Agon" (1957) have been seen together before.
But rarely have these three entries in the company's Greek trilogy (agon means contest in Greek) look so integrated.


Garbage In, Garbage Out
In the floor debate scheduled to begin in the next few days on the proposed constitutional amendment to balance the budget, Senate proponents will deliver impassioned speeches.
As an antidote, a reading of the Senate Judiciary Committee's report favoring the amendment would be useful -- because it makes some of the best arguments against it.
Many foes of the amendment, including President Clinton, believe as strongly as its supporters that the deficit should be reduced and the budget balanced.
But this proposed fiscal sleight-of-hand amendment doesn't do the job.


Review/City Ballet; A Sun God Emerges In 'Apollo'
Nikolaj Hubbe's triumphal debut in the title role of "Apollo" at the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night was an obvious focus of interest.
But the entire program -- devoted to Balanchine and Stravinsky -- was a highlight of the season.
"Apollo" (1928), "Orpheus" (1948) and "Agon" (1957) have been seen together before.
But rarely have these three entries in the company's Greek trilogy (agon means contest in Greek) look so integrated.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8  SERB GUNS WITHDRAWN, U.N.
SAYS  United Nations officials said that nearly all of the Serb guns around Sarajevo were out of action as the deadline set by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization arrived.
A1


Transit Fares


A New Combat Zone For Stars and Stripes
World War II veterans of the military newspaper Stars and Stripes reminisce about filing stories as shells exploded overhead.
Although today's staff members do not have to worry as much about life and limb, Stars and Stripes itself seems under siege.
By the time of the Persian Gulf war in 1991, more than half of the newspaper's correspondents were civilians, and many American soldiers no longer saw the daily Stars and Stripes as a primary source of news.


Corrections
An article and a chart in Business Day on Friday, about consumer prices in January and the prospects for inflation, described a statistical index incorrectly.
The index, based on a regional survey conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, measures the difference between the percentage of manufacturers in the Philadelphia area who said the prices they paid for raw materials and parts had risen from the previous month and the percentage who said prices had fallen.
The index does not measure the prices themselves.


Israel Tempers Response to a Killing
Despite protests set off by the killing of a pregnant Jewish settler Saturday in the West Bank, the Government steered clear of punitive action today against Palestinians in the occupied territories.
After their weekly meeting, Cabinet ministers said they had not decided to seal off the territories, a common response to Arab attacks.
Such an action could unsettle talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization on an Israeli pullback and Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.


Students Plan Ways for Colleges to Act on Environmentalism
Yale University's switch to fluorescent lighting in its library is expected to save $3.5 million over the next 10 years.
Connecticut College's reduction of room temperatures by 1 degree Fahrenheit has saved $8,000 a year.
Putting energy-efficient lights in 2,200 exit signs will save Brown University $65,000, it estimates.
Universities have found that environmentalism may be good for their budgets.
At a planning conference this weekend, campus environmentalists from around the world focused on specific proposals for improving campus environmental programs.


Winter Olympics; Just a Few Triple Axels And Suddenly Harding Is Seen in Golden Light
Tonya Harding put her foot down to all the questions about her sprained right ankle today.
And when she put her foot down on four consecutive triple axels, the talk at the Winter Olympics switched from "will she withdraw?" to "will she win?"
Such is the relentless interest and speculation surrounding the women's figure skating competition, particularly the drama playing out between Harding and Nancy Kerrigan.
Every jump is scrutinized, every spin examined, every flaw magnified, every injury portentous.


Satellite Service Will Extend the Reach of Bloomberg Radio
His all-business-news radio station in New York had barely turned one year old when Michael Bloomberg decided to celebrate by going national with it.
The decision was easy, because the radio station, WBBR-AM, can tag along at no additional expense on the satellite service that Mr.
Bloomberg is leasing to start a 13-hour-a-day television service of business news.


BASEBALL;
Jack McDowell has been a 20-game winner for the Chicago White Sox the past two seasons, but for the second time in the past three off seasons, he has become a loser -- to them.
Anthony Sinicropi, an arbitrator, awarded McDowell a $5.3 million salary yesterday instead of the $6 million he sought in the hearing last Friday.
The pitcher nevertheless emerged with the highest salary ever awarded in the 19-year history of salary arbitration, eclipsing Ruben Sierra's $5 million in 1992.


Market Place; The Spectrum Tale Continues
Will John's company-paid limo driver turn on him and tell all to Peter?
Can Heiko heal the rift between Peter and John?
Like sands through the hourglass, so run the intriguing events of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc.
"Days of Our Lives" wouldn't have dreamed of writing this particular script, because, frankly, nobody would have believed it.


Teen-Ager Is Killed In Restaurant Fight
A verbal confrontation between two groups of a teen-agers in an Upper Manhattan McDonald's restaurant culminated in the fatal stabbing of a 16-year-old youth yesterday, the police said.
The youth, Jason Morales, was stabbed in the chest three times in the McDonald's at 4640 Broadway at Dyckman Street in Inwood at 7:20 P.M., the police said.
He was taken to Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, where he died later in the evening.


Dividend Meetings


Bridge
A simple pre-emptive opening can often pose a problem to which there is no good answer.
What should North do, for example, on the diagramed deal when West opens three clubs?
As it happens a bold bid of three hearts would hit the jackpot, but a vulnerable overcall at the three-level with a weak five-card suit could lead to disaster.
Neither North player chose to take this risk when the deal occurred in the Reisinger Knockout Teams in Manhattan in June.
One cautiously passed, and collected a beggarly 100 points by defeating the contract by two tricks.
The other tried three diamonds, impressed by the relative strength of that suit, and South played three no-trump.


Abroad at Home; Principle Or Pose?
Listening to President Clinton's talk on Bosnia, one had the eerie feeling that truths long known to anyone interested -- screaming truths -- had somehow just penetrated the walls of the White House.
"Now a prolonged siege of the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo has brought us to an important moment," the President said, explaining the ultimatum to the Serbs to withdraw their heavy weapons or have them targeted in NATO air strikes.
But the siege has been on for more than 18 months.
Nothing is different now except that television pictures of a single devastating shell aroused American public opinion.


Did Anybody Check Out Economic Wisdom of Hiring Sliwa?; He Deserves the Job
To the Editor:
It's puzzling to me why there is such a negative uproar in the potential hiring of Curtis Sliwa, founder of the Guardian Angels, as host of a daily talk program on WNYC-AM (news article, Feb. 9).


Navy Women Bringing New Era on Carriers
When Lieut.
Sally Fountain telephoned a repair office aboard this aircraft carrier the other day, a male sailor answered and called to his boss, "Hey, there's a lieutenant chick on the phone for you."
Minutes later, the sailor's angry supervisor hauled the young man before Lieutenant Fountain, a 31-year-old electronic warfare officer on EA-6B radar-jamming planes, to apologize formally for his remark.
"It showed me that men on board are trying to nip that stuff in the bud," Lieutenant Fountain said.


Books of The Times; One Man's Infatuation With Things Japanese
On Familiar Terms A Journey Across Cultures By Donald Keene Illustrated. 292 pages.
Kodansha International. $23.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a lawsuit against American Airlines over the death of a pet dog in a cargo hold misidentified the court in which it was heard.
It was United States District Court, not the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.


Review/Music; Boston Symphony Explores Nature From Two Vantages
The Boston Symphony's second program at Carnegie Hall on Friday offered two forms of nature worship.
Mahler's First Symphony, in a touching, beautifully calculated performance led by Seiji Ozawa, showed itself a very human activity.
Its bird calls are long and leisurely, syntheses of the human voice.
Indeed, the piece is less about nature than about a man's response to it.
It also speaks of a Romantic era in which people were still custodians of creation and its principal spokesmen.
Written in 1955, Messiaen's "Oiseaux Exotiques" came before the Mahler symphony on Friday's program but postdates it by 50 years.
It is a creature of a different world.
These are nature pictures that man merely observes.
The orchestration is for piano, winds and percussion.
There are no strings to purvey the peculiar human sensibility.
The bird calls are shrilly accurate, or at least reasonable approximations.
They are laid one over the other in a general forest din.
There is no hand of man to arrange them into sonata form.
The movement does not breathe; it is abstracted, unforgiving symmetry.
It pays no heed to human needs at all.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  UNIONS FACE FIGHT WITH GIULIANI
The municipal unions are facing the twin challenges posed by the city's worst financial difficulties since the 1970's and by the new Republican Mayor's pledges to reduce the size of the city government.
The leaders and tactics that emerge over the next few months -- and in contract negotiations this year and next -- could not only decide the short-term success of Mayor Giuliani's fiscal strategy but could also be crucial to the long-term power of the unions.
A1.


CHRONICLE
HENRY R. KRAVIS, the financier and leveraged buyout specialist, and MARIE-JOSEE DROUIN, a Canadian economist and business consultant, were married Saturday night in a ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
The marriage was announced later at a dinner at the club attended by 200 friends.
Engraved invitations to the dinner had listed Mr.
Kravis and Ms.
Drouin as co-hosts, causing speculation that the couple, who had been seen together about town and in the Hamptons since last summer, would be announcing an engagement or wedding plans.
Instead, to cheers and applause, they said they had been married earlier in the evening.


Winter Olympics; Harding Walks Out of Interview
Tonya Harding was asked one question too many yesterday -- then abruptly ended an interview with CBS's Connie Chung.
"Two Czech judges," Chung said to Harding in an interview scheduled to run tonight on "The CBS Evening News," "said that they will be influenced by the fact that you failed to report what you knew about the attack."


Million Fish Are Missing. F.B.I. on Case.
Like many fish stories, this is a tale about the ones that got away.
So many, in fact, that the F.B.I. is investigating.
Sometime in December or January, about a million fingerling catfish worth about $100,000 were stolen from spawning ponds near Danbury, a small town on the upper Texas coast about 50 miles southwest of here.


Patents
THE United States spends hundreds of millions of dollars a year to sustain low-birthweight infants with incubators and other sophisticated equipment.
Yet until now medical wizards have not come up with a successful low-birthweight version of something that long has been a source of daily comfort for normal-size babies: the decidedly low-technology pacifier.
Maternal-child nurses at the University of Texas Health Science Center in Houston last month received a patent for a tiny pacifier designed specially for low-birthweight babies.


Back to the Future: Hundley Tries to Regain His Promise
Practice had wound to a near close, and the fields were empty when Todd Hundley finally got his chance to step into a batting cage.
Only pitchers, catchers and a handful of others had reported to the Mets' camp, but during the course of the day the cages were too full and Hundley was too busy to squeeze in his batting practice.
But this didn't bother him.
Yes, his batting average was .228 last season and just .209 in 1992.
And, yes, he would like to do something about that.
But Hundley's main concern this spring isn't his hitting.
He has to worry about defense, about getting back his throw, about perfecting his responses in game situations and getting comfortable with the Mets' pitching staff.


Reflections of Seasons to Come


When Going Gets Tough, Palermo Refuses to Take a Strike 3 Call
For Steve Palermo, the American League umpire, the tough choices life presents have always come with blatantly obvious answers.
Maybe not for others, but always for Palermo.
To stop a robbery, even if it means stopping a bullet, is something Palermo says he would do again, just as he did in one wrenching moment on a Dallas street in July 1991.


Koss Wins 3d Gold Medal in No Time at All
For his final, most dramatic feat of superhero quality, Johann Olav Koss, the Norwegian speed skating rage, attempted to fly today, and he did.
The 25-year-old medical student and poster boy made a mockery of his own, and everyone else's, prior performances in the men's 10,000 meters.
He shattered the world record he set in October 1991 by 12.99 seconds, turning the speed skating world, like the configuration of the Viking Ship Olympic Hall, upside down.


SERBS' COMPLIANCE CHEERS U.S. AIDES
Even with some Serbian artillery sites near Sarajevo beyond United Nations control, the White House said tonight that it had no evidence that Bosnian Serb forces were flouting the NATO ultimatum.
As many as 10 heavy weapons sites remained unguarded by United Nations troops as the deadline passed at 1 A.M. local time Monday, senior White House officials said.
But the official blamed bad weather and snowy, impassable roads -- not Serbian instransigence -- for the fact that the sites were unsecured.


2 Different Directions For 2 Great Players
Connecticut's Donyell Marshall and Glenn Robinson of Purdue have been widely acclaimed as college basketball's two best players this season.
One difference is that Marshall's team has been winning its key conference contests while the Boilermakers have not, in spite of Robinson's best efforts.
This was evident again Saturday night when Robinson, the nation's leading scorer, had 39 points against Indiana but the Hoosiers won, 82-80, at Bloomington, Ind.
Meanwhile, UConn defeated Providence, 81-73, in Storrs, Conn., with a second-half spurt as Marshall scored 27 points.


Sarajevo Solution: Is It a Model for Peace Throughout Bosnia?
As Bosnian Serbs pulled back their guns and tanks around Sarajevo under threat of NATO air strikes, officials at the United Nations headquarters here and in the Bosnian capital wondered if they had at last found the right balance of menace and diplomacy to break Bosnia's brutal cycle of violence.
Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the British officer who commands United Nations peacekeeping troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina, went so far as to say the operation in Sarajevo could be a model for other parts of the country, as long as more United Nations peacekeepers are sent to his command.


Corrections
An article last Monday about the Union, N.J., school district misstated the location of two nearby communities where the demographic makeup was contrasted with Union's.
Far Hills, a more affluent area, is west of Union, not east; Newark, which has many poorer sections, is northeast, not northwest.


Roadway or Obstacle Course?


Zaire's Rich Mines Are Abandoned to Scavengers
By the time the steel gate opened at dawn, the line of Zairians stretched around the corner and down a street.
Some were as young as 8 or 10, some still teen-agers, and not a few were young mothers with babies strapped tightly to their backs.
Soon they were attacking the huge black mounds of slag heap with crude shovels and pickaxes, scavenging what few scraps they could from what is left of one of the world's largest copper mining operations.


Mediators Taking Role In Dispute on Lesbians
Hank Carde, a retired naval commander who is active on AIDS issues, came here expecting to find the world of "Mississippi Burning." What he found may have bothered him more.
"I went to the First Baptist Church expecting an extremely rigid Klan-country type of mentality," said Mr.
Carde, who drove from Washington last week to help a lesbian couple who want to start a women's retreat here and have been threatened with violence.
"Instead, I found what seemed like a genuinely caring congregation. They just seem to have a blind spot on this issue that's really sad and disturbing."


Serbs Welcome Russian Troops With Jubilation
About 400 Russian soldiers arrived today under a United Nations flag in this Serbian stronghold and were greeted with liquor and song as the Serbs' brothers and protectors.
Heralded by the Bosnian Serb nationalists as their safeguard against a threatened NATO air attack, the Russians abandoned all pretense of United Nations impartiality before an explosion of local joy as they were greeted by a crowd of at least 300 people with their three-fingered Serbian salute.
The Russians allowed children to board their trucks and armored personnel carriers while accepting gifts of the local plum brandy and a red rose.


CHRONICLE
It was nostalgic, and more, when Dr.
IRA BERLIN received an award Thursday night at the New York Public Library.
Dr.
Berlin, a former New Yorker who is a professor of history at the University of Maryland at College Park, said the event brought back memories of studying there years ago and waiting for his number to be posted on the board when his research materials were ready.
Still, nostalgia took a back seat to a $40,000 check that Dr.
Berlin and four colleagues also received for "Free at Last: A Documentary History of Slavery, Freedom and the Civil War." The 500-page book won the 1994 Lincoln prize, given by Gettysburg College in Gettysburg, Pa., for excellence in Civil War studies.
The book is an abridged version of the first four volumes (each about 800 pages) in a projected eight-volume series documenting the history of emancipation.
It was edited by Dr.
Berlin, the founder of the project, and Barbara J. Fields, Steven Miller, Joseph P. Reidy and Leslie Rowland.


Yes, Ask Why We Need This Stuff in Our Milk
To the Editor:
"The Milk Brouhaha" (editorial, Feb. 10) seems typical of an insidious and myopic variety of thought in our economy: If a company (in this case, Monsanto) is capable of producing something (in this case, a genetically engineered drug that boosts milk production) and spending millions of dollars creating a need for it, let's use it.


Review/City Ballet; A Sun God Emerges In 'Apollo'
Nikolaj Hubbe's triumphal debut in the title role of "Apollo" at the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night was an obvious focus of interest.
But the entire program -- devoted to Balanchine and Stravinsky -- was a highlight of the season.
"Apollo" (1928), "Orpheus" (1948) and "Agon" (1957) have been seen together before.
But rarely have these three entries in the company's Greek trilogy (agon means contest in Greek) look so integrated.


Coghlan Over 40, Under 4 Minutes
After months of painful therapy, weeks of speed training and several near misses, Eamonn Coghlan of Ireland yesterday achieved his yearlong quest to become the first runner 40 or older to break the 4-minute mile.
Forty years after Roger Bannister first broke the 4-minute barrier, Coghlan, 41, ran 3 minutes 58.15 seconds, a world record for a master's runner.


Review/City Ballet; A Sun God Emerges In 'Apollo'
Nikolaj Hubbe's triumphal debut in the title role of "Apollo" at the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night was an obvious focus of interest.
But the entire program -- devoted to Balanchine and Stravinsky -- was a highlight of the season.
"Apollo" (1928), "Orpheus" (1948) and "Agon" (1957) have been seen together before.
But rarely have these three entries in the company's Greek trilogy (agon means contest in Greek) look so integrated.


INSIDE
Downward Spiral in Zaire The collapse of Zaire's mining industry, resulting from poor economic policies and unrest, has not only created economic hardship for the country but has also increased the danger of political instability.
Page A3.
Echoes of Rodney King
The videotaped arrest of a black man who scuffled with two white police officers and was shot in the backside as he fled has created outrage and dismay in Athens, Tex.
Page A10.
Back Doors for Terminal
Eighty years after Grand Central Terminal opened its front doors, it will be getting something the designers never thought necessary: back entrances.
Page B1.


There's a Speedy New Traveler On the Road to Churchill Downs
While Dehere and Go for Gin rested for their next tests on the road to the Kentucky Derby, a strong new challenge was mounted at Gulfstream Park today when the colt Patton outran other 3-year-old contenders by eight-and-a-half lengths and took dead aim at the racing classics.
Patton, a son of Lord At War and a grandson of Seattle Slew, led all the way in an allowance race for colts who skipped Saturday's Fountain of Youth Stakes.
At the wire, he was drawing far in front of Nick Zito's Crary, the stablemate of Go for Gin, who had three-quarters of a length on Line Dance.
The winner ran the mile and a sixteenth in 1:432/5 and paid $3.20 for a $2 wager as the 3-5 favorite.
He has won three of five starts and has run in the money all five times.


Winter Olympics; Even With Defeat, Armenian-American Bobsled Is a Success
Somewhere in Armenia, where there might be armed conflict with its neighbor and warring rival, Azerbaijan; where the electricity and gas aren't working and people are cold in their homes and food is scarce; somewhere over there, hoped Joe Almasian and Ken Topalian, people would learn about them and feel proud.
Somewhere in Armenia, where the national flag is flying, the flag that is blue, orange and red -- blue, the Armenians say, for the beautiful sky above, orange for the wheat fields and red for the Armenian blood that has been spilled historically, and which continues to spill -- Almasian and Topalian hoped people would take some satisfaction in their accomplishment, even if they finished 37th out of 43 entrants in the two-man bobsled.


Subway Car Hits Woman After Robber Pushes Her
A woman who chased a purse-snatcher through a moving subway train was pushed onto the tracks by her assailant in a Brooklyn station on Saturday, the transit police said.
She was then struck by the train as it pulled out of the station and was critically injured.
The woman, Sonia Hernandez, 32, of Brooklyn, suffered a broken pelvis and underwent surgery twice yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Greenwich Village, said Dina Gabriel, a hospital spokeswoman.
Her assailant escaped, and the transit police canvassed the station, at Bergen Street and Flatbush Avenue on the No. 2 line, in search of witnesses.


Trial to Start in Abortion Doctor's Death
The man accused of killing a doctor in a protest outside a Florida abortion clinic nearly a year ago is scheduled to go on trial on Monday, planning to plead temporary insanity and placing the burden of guilt for the crime on the shoulders of his former comrades.
The man, Michael F. Griffin, a 32-year-old former chemical plant worker, is charged with first-degree murder in the shooting of Dr.
David Gunn on March 10, 1993, outside the Pensacola Women's Medical Services clinic.


Winter Olympics; For Torvill And Dean, A Rumba Into Lead
They sat in third place, wondering whether the ice-dancing comeback had been worth it, wondering whether they were, as one headline chided, Torvill and Has-Been.
"It surprised us how difficult and how mentally straining it has been for us," Christopher Dean said.
"If we had a glass ball and saw everything, would we come back? We'd have to think about it."


Clinton Embraces Crime Measure, Ever So Vaguely
After President Clinton invited Congressional leaders into the Rose Garden last August for a brief statement of support for anti-crime legislation, he generally washed his hands of the matter.
Although he delivered a speech on crime in Memphis in November, it was not until the end of the year that Mr.
Clinton hit on the perfect way to leap back onto an anti-crime bandwagon that had hurtled past him as he focused on health care and trade policy.


Clinton and Unions, Burying Hatchets, Focus on Common Interests
Their name-calling, saber-rattling ruckus over the trade agreement with Mexico and Canada aside, the Clinton Administration and labor unions are natural allies on many issues and are now devising strategy on several matters of mutual interest.
In testimony to the effort to mend fences, the largest delegation of Administration officials and Congressional Democrats that labor leaders can remember is descending on the week-long annual winter meeting here of the 35-member executive council of the American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations.


Books of The Times; One Man's Infatuation With Things Japanese
On Familiar Terms A Journey Across Cultures By Donald Keene Illustrated. 292 pages.
Kodansha International. $23.


Jewish Militants Hope to Block Israel-P.L.O. Plans
David Axelrod, a Jewish militant leader here, tools around in a car with a bumper sticker that says, "The laws of the Scripture come before the laws of Man."
An American-born disciple of Meir Kahane, the slain militant rabbi, Mr.
Axelrod believes that Arabs should be expelled from Israel and the occupied territories, that Israel is wallowing in decadent Western culture and that it should be transformed into a state governed by Jewish law.


Business War Chest Would Fix Superfund
To the Editor:
I agree with "Not So Super Superfund" (editorial, Feb. 7) that the Superfund program is a monumental disaster.
However, I believe that for the overwhelming majority of those affected by Superfund -- including people of color, cities, small businesses and others -- the proposal recently introduced by the Clinton Administration is not the solution.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater
Illnesses and injuries at the New York City Ballet caused program changes on Saturday.
Yet the company coped gallantly with these disruptions of its announced schedule.


U.N. Says Serbs Are Complying With Arms Ultimatum
Nearly all the Serbian guns ringing the Bosnian capital are out of action, United Nations officials said early this morning after a frantic day of diplomatic meetings, maneuvering behind the scenes and hoisting rusty cannons out of snowbanks.
The United Nations envoy to the former Yugoslavia, Yasushi Akashi, said that the work accomplished by the United Nations peacekeepers "up to this point assures us there is no need for air strikes." He spoke in Zagreb, the Croatian capital, after conferring by phone with the NATO command.


World Economies


WINTER OLYMPICs; An Individual Celebration After a Soaring Solo Flight


The Jackson Family Reunited, Sort Of
Family reunions are often strange affairs.
But the public reunion of the performing Jackson clan on Saturday night was, even by Las Vegas standards, one of the strangest spectacles in theatrical history.
Part soap opera, part tragedy and part weird comedy, the Jackson family epic took another turn in a reunion (minus one outcast daughter) before 15,000 people at an arena in the huge MGM Grand Hotel.
The show is to be televised on NBC on Tuesday at 9 P.M. (Channel 4 in New York).
But most of the real-life drama actually took place offstage.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Navratilova Holds On  Top-seeded Martina Navratilova added another triumph to her record 167 titles by defeating Julie Halard, 7-5, 6-3, yesterday in the final of the Paris Women's Open.
The eighth-seeded Halard broke serve in the fifth game and was leading by 5-4 when Navratilova broke her and saved the set.
In the second set, both players broke each other's serve repeatedly before Navratilova, the defending champion, prevailed. (AP) Chang Wins an Indoor Event: Michael Chang defeated Paul Haarhuis of the Netherlands, 6-3, 6-2, at the Comcast U.S.
Indoor final in Philadelphia.
Haarhuis broke Chang's service in the second game of the second set, but lost his three times in the final set. (AP) Edberg Survives: Capitalizing on his steady serve-and-volley game, Stefan Edberg overcame the powerful serves of Goran Ivanisevic and won the Eurocard Open, 4-6, 6-4, 6-2, 6-2, in Stuttgart, Germany. (AP) P.S.A.L.
Title to Boys and Girls  Boys and Girls of Brooklyn won the Public Schools Athletic League boys' indoor track and field championship yesterday for the first time in six years.
Jim Jackson's squad, scoring 37 points in the final four events, finished with 57.
DeWitt Clinton of the Bronx, leading until the final three events, was runner-up with 38 points at the West 168th Street Armory.
Rohan Hepburn, the most valuable boys' performer, led Boys and Girls.
He finished first in the 1,000 (2 minutes 31.31 seconds) and the 1,600 (4:27.79) then ran a fast third 800-leg of 1:57.4 that enabled the Brooklyn school to win the 3,200 relay in 8:01.00.
In the girls' competition, Jamaica of Queens won its third P.S.A.L. indoor title in the last four years, edging Tottenville of Staten Island, the 1993 winner, 60 points to 56.
Tameika Grizzel of George Washington posted the nation's leading time in winning the girls 1,000 in 2:54.13.


Holiday Today
Washington's Birthday will be observed today. Here are the holiday schedules. NEW YORK


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States will be closed today in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Government offices, banks and many businesses will also be closed.


Frustration Over Haiti
It is not the business of the United States to forcibly reimpose democracy on Haiti.
But neither is it the business of the United States to twist the arms of Haiti's democratically elected President.
If he refuses to endorse proposals for political compromise or cabinet appointments urged on him by American and international mediators, it is wrong to ignore him.
In its double frustration with murderous and unyielding generals and a messianic and unbending President, that is just what the Clinton Administration has begun to do.
It would do better to stick to democratic principles and learn to live with some of the resulting frustrations.
It is for Haitians, and their elected leader, to decide if and when to yield.


Koss Captures 3d Gold And 3d World Record
Johann Olav Koss is a man of gold medals and world records, a 25-year-old speed skater his Norwegian countrymen already plan to immortalize in bronze.


Matinee Time for Rangers and Islanders
Holiday hockey matinees highlight the local sports scene this afternoon with both the Rangers and Islanders serving as hosts to significant Eastern Conference rivals.
Both visitors bring individual stars whose presence should enhance the story lines with added drama.
At Madison Square Garden, beginning at 1:30 P.M., the Rangers play the Pittsburgh Penguins and, possibly, Mario Lemieux, the superstar center who returned to uniform Saturday night in Montreal after missing two games with renewed back pain.
Lemieux, who has had two recent cortisone injections, has been idle most of the season, missing 52 of the 59 games the Penguins have played.
He first returned to action on Feb. 12, played two games and then missed the next two before going pointless against the Canadiens.


Term Limits Under Judicial Fire
A Federal judge's recent ruling that a state may not impose term limits on members of Congress will not settle this contentious issue.
Its popular appeal is so strong -- and so wrong -- that it needs an opinion from the highest court.
In 1992, voters in the state of Washington voted to cut their senators off after two six-year terms, and representatives after three two-year terms.
One of that state's representatives is House Speaker Thomas Foley, who would be barred from the ballot after his current term and two more.
He joined the League of Women Voters and others in bringing the challenge on which U.S.
District Judge William Dwyer has now ruled.


No Headline
"We've all had so much of this sensitivity training crammed down our throats people are afraid to be  themselves. People can't walk into an organization that is  designed to fight wars and not expect to find a few rough edges." -- JANET MARNANE, a lieutenant commander, one of the first women aboard the aircraft carrier Eisenhower.  [ A14:5. ]


Malcolm X Remembered


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The I.R.S. faces a costly threat from thieves using electronic filing technology to receive fraudulent refunds.
More than 25,000 fraudulent electronic returns were detected in the first 10 months of 1993, more than double the number a year earlier.  [ Page A1. ]


Panama Journal; Democracy at Work, Under Shadow of Dictators
Between appointments in the headquarters of his well-oiled presidential campaign, Ernesto Perez Balladares paused to issue appraisals of this country's past leaders.
For Omar Torrijos Herrera, the military strongman with a progressive bent who founded Mr.
Perez Balladares's Revolutionary Democratic Party, the judgment was warm.
"He was a hero, and a great innovator" the front-running candidate said.


Winter Olympics: Sports of the Times; Comforting to Know Standards Still Exist
WELCOME to the Rink of Dreams.
If you build it, they will come.
Welcome to the very temporary home of the world's greatest collection of masters figure skaters.
Back from the mists come the hallowed names from those distant days of the Eighties, when yuppies were young: Torvill and Dean, Witt and Boitano.
But the Old Boys and the Old Girls are finding it not so easy to waltz back into the Olympic movement and collect the medals and the standing ovations that used to belong to them.


Woman Says Police Forced Her to Deny Holdup Report
First a woman said she had been robbed at an automatic teller machine by a gunman who threatened her child.
Then the police said she had admitted making up the story.
Now she and her husband have declared that the police coerced her into recanting and that the robbery did, in fact, happen.
The woman, Maryrose Posner, with the support of her husband, Joel, insisted in an interview published today in Newsday that she was telling the truth on Wednesday when she said a laughing man put a gun to her 2-year-old daughter's head and threatened to shoot her unless she gave him $200 from the teller machine.


Brodeur Draws Raves Despite Tie
Martin Brodeur put on the most brilliant performance of his rookie season today, stealing a point for the Devils in a 1-1 deadlock with the Blackhawks.
The 21-year-old Brodeur had 42 saves, including five in overtime, and afterward, Jacques Caron, the goaltending coach of the Devils, called it "his best game of the year."


Sharpton May Drop Bid For Automatic Ballot Spot
The Rev.
Al Sharpton, who plans to challenge Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan this year in a Democratic primary, said today he would most likely drop his insistence that party leaders guarantee him an automatic spot on the primary ballot.
Instead, he said in an interview, he intends to seek a spot on the September ballot by collecting signatures on nominating petitions around the state, a tactic that he said would energize his constituents and demonstrate black political power.


Winter Olympics; It's Do or Die as U.S. Squad Stares Down End of the Barrel
The Italian team that faces the United States here Monday night in a game for the final spot in the Olympic hockey quarterfinals will not exactly be filled with strangers.
The Italian roster includes 14 Canadians and 2 Americans, including one named Philip De Gaetano whose father operates a coffee shop at 32d Street and Park Avenue in Manhattan.
So how does a kid who grew up in Roslyn, L.I., and went to college at Northern Michigan wind up playing Olympic hockey for Italy?


If at First You're a Loser, Avoid Daytona Pit Stops
The Daytona 500 continues to run counter to form, to the ongoing frustration of Dale Earnhardt, and to the joy of Sterling Marlin, whose first victory in 279 races came today in the sport's biggest event.
Marlin, who had shared in a legacy of futility that dated to a previous generation (his father, Coo Coo, never won in 165 starts from 1966 to 1980), won $253,275 with his victory today, after establishing a Nascar record for the most starts by a driver before his first victory.


Next After Vietnam, Let's Lift Cuba Embargo
To the Editor:
In your Playa Giron Journal (news article, Feb. 11) residents of the Bay of Pigs scratch their heads and wonder why the United States continues to blockade Cuba.
Since the Clinton Administration lifted the embargo against Vietnam, many United States citizens ask the same question.


Dance in Review
Juilliard Dance Ensemble  Juilliard Theater
The Juilliard Dance Ensemble celebrated the past and leaped into the present on Thursday night.
The program began with "Commemoration of Martha Graham" for the 100th anniversary of the modern dance pioneer's birth.
Donlin Foreman, a soloist in Graham's company, read from poems he had written as a tribute.


Review/Theater; In Search of the Past, Its Wrong Turns And Lost Moments
Beware.
For the first hour, you could mistake "A Small World," Mustapha Matura's newest drama, for one of those bar plays about two lonely souls passing in the night, although not before they've exchanged a few confidences and perhaps even gone to bed.
It takes place in a sleazy dive that aspires to be a little bit of the Caribbean in Brooklyn.
Outside, the snow is falling.
The only two characters in sight are the hard-bitten proprietress, wearing a tight leather skirt and too much gold jewelry, and a well-dressed businessman from Trinidad, who's downing $5 shots of rum and growing more forward with each swig.


Did Anybody Check Out Economic Wisdom of Hiring Sliwa?
To the Editor:
As a daily listener of WNYC, New York City's public radio station, and a contributor to it for more than 10 years, I am one of many upset at the appearance of interference leading to the hiring of Curtis Sliwa, Guardian Angel turned radio personality, despite statements alleging Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's nonintervention.


Dance in Review
Neodanza  La Mama
Neodanza, an experimental dance company founded in Caracas, Venezuela, in 1987, mixes the dramatic power of political dance theater with an astonishing expressiveness that derives from pure physical movement.


Magazine Circulation: A Mixed Bag in '93
Like Olympic athletes gazing intently at the scoreboard at the end of their run, magazine publishers are scrutinizing newly released 1993 circulation figures to check out the winners, the losers and the competition.
One of the most closely watched races has been in the fashion category, where the three main players, Vogue, Elle and Harper's Bazaar, saw newsstand sales decline precipitously in 1993.
The upstart Allure, a beauty magazine that includes some fashion, pulled ahead of Harper's Bazaar on the newsstand.


Bobbies and Billy Clubs: Time to Consider Guns
The stabbing death of a London patrolman on a routine robbery call this month has provoked debate over one of Britain's most familiar traditions: has the time come for police officers to scrap the venerable image of the unarmed bobby on the beat and to carry better weapons, even guns, to defend themselves?
Although a British officer is much less likely to be killed on duty than an American officer, the risk of assault is growing because of the stronger links between crime, drugs and weapons, police officials say.
In England and Wales, 10 officers have been killed in criminal attacks in the past five years, compared with 328 in the United States.


Sports of The Times: Basketball; Can 2 Point Guards Equal 1 N.B.A. Title?
POINT guard is usually too important a position to be shared successfully, although it has been done.
The previous three seasons, the Bulls won the National Basketball Association championship while rotating two point guards, John Paxson and B. J. Armstrong, but those Bulls had Michael Jordan riding shotgun whenever 2 (or 3) points were needed.
In other recent years, the Pistons won with only Isiah Thomas at point guard, the Lakers won with only Magic Johnson there and the Boston Celtics won with primarily Dennis Johnson there.


The Earth Moves, Again, in California


Winter Olympics; Swiss Teams Go 1-2 in Two-Man Bobsled and (Whew!) It Was Close
It was the second-closest two-man bobsled finish in Olympics history, and Gustav Weder of Switzerland, who won the gold medal in the 1992 Olympics, won it again.
Weder and his brakeman, Donat Acklin, beat their teammates, Reto Goetschi and Guido Acklin, who were the leaders after Saturday's first two runs.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing; At bookstores this year, the selling of Valentine's Day became a many-splendored thing.
MAYBE you spent Valentine's Day gorging on chocolate, waiting in dark distemper for someone to send flowers, or treating your romantic interest to dinner at a place more significant than the Chirpin' Chicken.
Or maybe -- this is what book publishers hoped -- you went to the store and bought some books about sex, love and romance.
Book publishers traditionally use any holiday they can as a vehicle to promote their books.
The practice has increased over the years as marketers have become at once wiser and a bit more desperate, and Valentine's Day has metamorphosed in their minds from a greeting-card holiday to a major marketing opportunity, a time to put out much of the year's selection of books that are even tenuously connected to romance.


How a Revolution Survived: A Mexican Chronicle
As the Soviet bloc crumbled, the Sandinista Government fell from power in Nicaragua and Marxist rebels made peace in El Salvador, the tiny guerrilla movement that would one day convulse Mexico as the Zapatista National Liberation Army braced for its own collapse.
"Everything we had prepared came crashing down," recalled the military commander of the army, who calls himself Subcommander Marcos.
"When we heard that all of this was happening, we said to ourselves: 'We are going to lose people. They are going to start to leave.' "


Donor to Neediest Cases Honors Mother's Memory
Monica S. P. Yu, a retired teacher who lives in Princeton, N.J., has given to dozens of charities throughout the years.
She said she believes it is her duty to give back to the city and the country that has given her and her husband such an abundant life as educators.
Late last year, however, as she glanced over a Chinese calendar and thought of her late mother, who would have celebrated her 93d birthday in Taipei, Taiwan, Mrs.
Yu decided to make a change.


Winter Olympics: Notebook; Street Seeks 2d Medal Against Odds
The mountain was the same, the results were the same but the prospects for medals were entirely different today when Katja Seizinger, Picabo Street and Isolde Kostner finished 1-2-3 in a downhill run on the Kvitfjell course in Ringebu.
On Saturday, they captured medals in the women's downhill, but this time the event was the women's combined, where the slalom specialists will have a distinct advantage when the final positions are determined with two slalom runs Tuesday at Hafjell.


Man's Shooting By Texas Police Provokes Anger
The 22-minute videotape, taken from a camera mounted on the dashboard of a Texas state trooper's car, is a bit grainy.
But the scuffle it depicts one night last fall between a black man and two white police officers comes across clearly enough, especially the bullets hitting the black man as he is running away.
The footage of what began as a routine traffic stop emerged recently in a courtroom in this small city in rural East Texas.
The tape, and the legal proceedings surrounding it, have outraged many black people here and even caused some whites to express anger and dismay.


Unions Faltering in Reprisals Against Trade Pact Backers
Three months ago, Congress heeded President Clinton's wishes, ignored those of organized labor and narrowly approved the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The unions, outraged, vowed to retaliate against the Democratic members of Congress who supported Mr.
Clinton.
Since then, relations between the White House and the unions have been patched up a bit, enough so that Lane Kirkland, the President of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., sat next to Hillary Rodham Clinton as the President delivered his State of the Union Message last month.


Perez Excels But U.S. Does Not in Robbie Cup
A month ago, the combination of an injured left ankle and a "devastating" game against Switzerland had the United States midfielder Hugo Perez on the verge of quitting.
"I've been playing a long time," said Perez, 23, of Poway, Calif.
"When I come to play, I want to play my best. When I don't, I feel I'm cheating, not just me but whoever would be playing in my spot. I didn't want to do that."


Koppell Seeks Wider Authority For Bringing Civil Rights Cases
State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell called today for stiffer civil penalties for violators of the state's civil rights laws and said he would also seek greater authority to conduct criminal prosecution in discrimination cases.
Mr.
Koppell spoke at a news conference on the last day of the annual conference of the New York State Association of Black and Puerto Rican Legislators and was flanked by several black state legislators and New York City Council members.


Canadian Developer in Mexican Deal
The largest construction company in Mexico has joined with the biggest development company in Canada to build a housing, office and entertainment complex on the outskirts of Mexico City.
Empresas ICA Sociedad Controladora, a company with annual revenues of more than $2 billion that has been listed on the New York Stock Exchange since 1992, and Reichmann International Mexico, a holding of the Reichmann family of Toronto, will jointly develop about 30 buildings in a portion of the Santa Fe complex in the southwestern part of Mexico City, an area that until recently had been a garbage dump.


Yes, Ask Why We Need This Stuff in Our Milk; Make Them Label It
To the Editor:
"The Milk Brouhaha" (editorial, Feb. 10) continues to boil in part because consumers have a better grasp of cost benefit analysis than many people think.
Recombinant bovine growth hormone (rbGH) offers no benefits to consumers, which is the very reason all milk from hormone-treated cows should be labeled.


With No Clear Leader or Strategy, Unions Prepare to Face Giuliani
For decades, New York's mayors shared the public stage with a well-known cast of irascible, flamboyant leaders of municipal labor.
There were the titans who could welcome a new mayor into office with a strike on Inauguration Day, and later the labor statesmen who worked with the city in the fiscal crisis of the 1970's.
Now the last of the union leaders who catapulted to prominence in the fiscal crisis has left the stage, clearing the way for less visible, less bombastic and, in some cases, less tested successors.
And the change has come as the municipal unions face the twin challenges posed by the city's worst financial difficulties since the 1970's and by the new Republican Mayor's pledges to reduce the size of the city government.
Test for Unions
The leaders and tactics that emerge over the next few months -- and in contract negotiations this year and next -- could not only decide the short-term success of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's fiscal strategy but also be crucial to the long-term power of the unions.


The Right Address Is Gettysburg PA
Abraham Lincoln wrote five drafts in his own hand of his historic address at the cemetery in Gettysburg -- the original, a copy after he returned to Washington and three more for Civil War fund-raising causes.
The Library of Congress has custody of the original and the first copy.
The others are in the Illinois State Historical Library, an underground vault at Cornell University, and the Lincoln bedroom at the White House.
Since 1979, the Library of Congress has lent one draft to the national park at the Gettysburg battlefield in the spring and summer tourist season.
It wants to stop, citing the risks of repeated handling and exposure to light.
But the National Park Service wants one of the drafts in Gettysburg full time.
One Congressional committee supports the library, another the park.
Now the General Accounting Office has weighed in tentatively on the park's side, "provided sufficient funding is available" to sustain state-of-the-art preservation techniques.


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 28 about Patricia Simon, a freelance writer, misstated her relationship to a survivor, Mike Sletson.
Mr.
Sletson was her companion for a number of years in Philadelphia.
A family member has notified The Times belatedly that the couple were not married.


Vittorio Rieti, Prolific Composer In Neo-Classical Style, Dies at 96
Vittorio Rieti, a prolific American composer who fashioned bright, elegant Neo-Classical scores for the ballets of Serge Diaghilev and George Balanchine, died on Saturday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 96 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was not immediately clear, said his son, Fabio, but Mr.
Rieti had suffered a bad fall at his home, breaking several ribs.


Derrick Who? Nets Now 4-0 With Gilliam
Derrick Coleman was on the sideline nursing a sprained ankle and Kenny Anderson didn't come close to scoring 42 points as he did Friday night.
But the Nets still matched their longest winning streak of the season, five games, by knocking off the Washington Bullets, 122-101, before a sellout crowd at Byrne Meadowlands Arena today.
Armon Gilliam improved to 4-0 as a starter in place of Coleman at the strong forward slot, scoring a game-high 24 points and adding 10 rebounds, 2 blocked shots and a steal.
In the four games Coleman has been sidelined by injury, Gilliam has averaged 17.8 points and 11.7 rebounds.


Polish Investors Rush In As Others Fear to Tread
For most first-time investors in Poland, price-to-earnings ratios are an abstract concept.
All they know is that their neighbor or friend just bought a new Japanese car with profits from the stock market.
The rush of small investors can easily be seen in the lines waiting outside brokers' offices.
Such demand has created jobs ranging from paid stand-ins to line-busters, who take advantage of staged diversions to cut in front of people who have been waiting.
In one case, a near-riot resulted when 60 people forced their way to the front of a line on the opening day of an initial public offering and snapped up all the available shares.


Minsk Journal; Belarus's Master Shopkeeper Sells a Vision, Too
This fragile, semidependent country can seem like the Soviet Union in aspic.
But the only place you would be able to buy aspic is at Vladimir S. Nerozya's Universal Jubilee Shop, an island of capitalist practice in a hyperinflationary sea.
Mr.
Nerozya, a 41-year-old whose balding head is set off by a lush mustache, is the boss of this extraordinary emporium, which stocks normally unimaginable goods ranging from fresh-frozen sole (by special contract from Murmansk) to German sparkling wine, Bordeaux and -- just in! -- Kiwi shoe polish.


Walk Switches to Talk
BOB WALK is staying with the Pittsburgh Pirates, but his pitching career is over.
The veteran of 14 major league seasons has agreed to join the Pirates' revamped broadcast team for this season.


A.T.&amp; T. Pulls Plug On Selleck's Voice
The voice of Tom Selleck has been consigned to A.T.&amp; T.'s version of oblivion.
For the last several months, the actor's voice has been heard in television commercials by Ayer Inc. in New York for two campaigns for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.
One was for the "i plan," a much-derided long-distance calling plan that was quickly discontinued.
The other was for a series of spots, carrying the theme "You will," describing coming A.T.&amp; T. technologies like voice-activated door locks.


South African Troops Find New Role: Peacemaker
By the faint light of a half moon, four army foot soldiers advanced along streets scarred by urban combat.
They passed a ghostly no man's land of scorched houses and entered a lane of matchbox bungalows.
Suddenly, they came upon their first battle of the night.
They tensed and moved in.


Editorial Notebook; On Jury Duty No Judging, Much Eating
There is a room at 80 Centre Street in Manhattan that I know very well.
I know it well because I sat there for five days a few weeks ago, doing the crossword, reading back issues of news magazines and perfecting the shape of my fingernails.
So were at least 100 other New Yorkers, with whom I shared the distinction of being excused from one jury after another.
Together, we constituted a kind of salon des refuses, continually pronounced unfit to serve for reasons that were occasionally obvious and more often opaque.
"Do you think it was my job?" we asked one another.
"My brother-in-law, the lawyer?" "My sister, the mental health professional?" And, from a man in black leather, "My earring?"
In the end, there was little to think about but lunch.
Actually, it is difficult not to think about lunch when one is closeted with people who arrive for their civic duty armed with a list of dim sum parlors.
My list, however, had no dim sum parlors (I was open to suggestion), but it did have a Thai restaurant remembered for its squid, and an Italian restaurant remembered for its linguine with clam sauce.
They, along with most of the restaurants around City Hall, have another distinction as well.
The listening is even better than the eating.


Hunyady Wins for Austria, and Hungary, Too
Emese Hunyady, an Austrian from an old Hungarian family, won the gold medal in the women's 1,500-meter speed skating race today while Bonnie Blair of the United States just missed in a gallant attempt to win a sixth career medal in the Winter Games.
Hunyady's time was 2 minutes 2.19 seconds while Svetlana Fedotkina of Russia finished second, a half-second back in 2:02.69.
Gunda Niemann of Germany was third in 2:03.41.


Sports of The Times; Coleman? Anderson Is No. 1 Net
AS the days dwindled down to Thursday's trade deadline in the National Basketball Association, Derrick Coleman had a sprained ankle as well as a strained contract negotiation.
When the 6-foot-10-inch power forward drove off from the Nets' practice after a medical treatment yesterday, he had three words for anyone interested in his future.
"Call my lawyer," he suggested.


U.S. Squad Now Looks For Miracle
Dan Jansen's how-to video helped the United States Olympic hockey team into the medal round tonight.
Next up, possibly, for the Americans: "Miracle on Ice."
The video, and the mission.


Schools for All, or Separate but Equal?; An Interpreter Isn't Enough
It's a few minutes before the class will start.
Everyone's fishing notebooks from knapsacks and sharpening pencils, and it's all "What did you put for the last answer on the algebra?" and "Tomorrow's the last day for yearbook money, right?" and "If we want to stay for the game, Toni says she can give us a ride." All of the eleventh-graders are speaking or listening, directly or indirectly.
Except for one student, sitting down front.
She is neither speaking nor listening; she is not involved; she is deaf.
I am her sign-language interpreter.
I stand at the front of the class, poised to begin signing whenever she looks at me, but she doesn't; she is resting her eyes on the sky outside the window.
When at last she does turn her face, it is not to see what her classmates are saying but to chat with me about her weekend, about the book I am reading, about her dog, my sweater, anything.
She is hungry for communication and chooses me -- an adult satellite paid to follow her through the school day -- rather than her peers, who do not speak her language.


Publishing Deal Rouses Ire in Canada
Many Canadian book publishers are outraged that the new Liberal Government is allowing Paramount Communications Inc. to acquire two Canadian educational publishers, giving the New York-based entertainment and publishing giant a dominant role in the textbook industry.
In its first major decision involving sensitive cultural policy, the nearly four-month-old administration of Prime Minister Jean Chretien said it was selling a 51 percent stake in Ginn Publishing Canada Inc. to Paramount for $10.3 million in Canadian currency, or about $7.6 million American.


RESULTS PLUS
CUNY TOURNAMENT Baruch Faces Staten Island Point guard Jimmy Resvanis scored 19 points, including the 1,000th of his career, and a backcourt mate, Gerald Thomas, added 17 points and 7 assists as Baruch (9-14) beat Medgar Evers (8-15) and advanced to the semifinals of the 29th annual CUNY/Con Edison tournament at Lehman College in Manhattan yesterday.
Baruch, which tomorrow night will oppose Staten Island (13-10), a 75-64 victor over City College, led by 34-30 at the half and then hit four 3-pointers for a 46-36 advantage that was never squandered.
In its game, Staten Island led throughout, although it was close.
Kirk Staine led the Dolphins with 21 points and Rommel Santos added 15.
City's Earl Hernandez led all scorers with 26 points.
The Beavers finished 7-17.


School Prayer Gaining Ground in South
In the latest example of a slow but unmistakable return of prayer to public schools in the South, Georgia's Senate has passed legislation that would allow "a moment of quiet reflection" by students.
When the measure was approved on Feb. 14 by a vote of 51 to 2, the dissenters were two strongly conservative lawmakers who argued that the bill did not go far enough -- that it should have flatly stated that the quiet moment was for prayer.
The legislation is expected to pass the Georgia House in the next few weeks and be signed by Governor Zell Miller.


Bridge
One of the great players in the early years of contract bridge, Theodore Lightner, had a brilliant thought when he suggested that a double of a slam contract should ask for an unusual lead.
His first test of the idea more than 60 years ago was a failure, causing Ely Culbertson, his partner, to impose a veto, but other experts have been using the Lightner double ever since.
It can, however, be a double-edged sword.
The doubler must be certain that the lead he is directing, usually a suit bid by dummy, is the one he really wants.
There is a danger that the double will guide the declarer to the winning play, or cause him to retreat to a different slam that will succeed.
And if the double fails the declarer's score is bigger -- perhaps much bigger, for he can redouble.


Democrats Face Hard Choices in Welfare Overhaul
Something strange happened last week in the office of Leon E. Panetta, the White House budget director, and it illustrates the topsy-turvy forces now shaping the Administration's welfare plan.
Desperately seeking ways to pay for it, Democrats began talking about cuts in the food stamp program.
Big cuts.
Cuts as large as the ones Ronald Reagan proposed.


Treasury Sales This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week begins today with the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
The sale, usually on Mondays, was delayed this week because of the Washington's Birthday observance yesterday.
Tomorrow there will be an auction of two-year notes, and on Thursday, the Government will sell five-year notes.


Review/Pop; Catching the 70's Crest, And Fitting In at Last
Rock grew brash and overbearing in the 1970's; it also realized that instead of overthrowing pop, it had become pop.
That's the way Redd Kross likes it.
At Irving Plaza on Friday night, the band's guitars blared out big major chords, the drums crashed and Jeffrey McDonald, the band's main songwriter, belted out one triumphant song after another.
Redd Kross, which is from Southern California, has been making music for 16 years, since Mr.
McDonald was 14 years old and his brother Steve, the band's bassist, was 11.
But their band's fondness for jubilantly catchy tunes and 1970's pop-culture references didn't fit in with either underground or mainstream attitudes until the recent 1970's revival.
With its new album, "Phaseshifter" (Mercury), Redd Kross suddenly seems to have good timing.
The McDonalds have put together a new band, and a decade on the alternative circuit has only increased their exuberance onstage.


3 Afghan Kidnappers Of Children Are Killed


AIDS Plan for Poor Seen as a Model for Other Ills
For Gilbert Washington, a man disabled by AIDS, making ends meet is a daily struggle.
Money is so tight that at the end of the month there is seldom enough left even to catch a movie.
But when Mr.
Washington gets sick, his care is first class.
At New York Hospital in Manhattan he has a team of doctors, social workers and psychologists who worry not only about his disease but whether he has adequate housing, gets depressed or has written a will.
And whether he is having his blood checked at the outpatient clinic or is battling an infection in the hospital, the same familiar faces take care of him.


Chess
The up-and-coming player usually learns first how to attack and how to maneuver when he has the initiative.
Later he grasps how to resist the opponent's attack.
In general it is harder to learn how to defend because one cannot map out a longterm strategy or pattern but must anticipate or react to whatever threat the opponent poses next.
Yet the 14-year-old Peter Leko of Hungary, who has just become the youngest grandmaster ever, has already mastered the difficult skill needed to impede the enemy's attacking chances and to throw him back.


Chancellor's Unusual Financial Pact With CUNY
Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds has an unusual financial arrangement with her employer, the City University of New York.
The university pays her personal American Express bill every month, and leaves it up to her to reimburse the university for personal or corporate board expenses.
It is usually the other way around, said Cynthia Munk, a spokeswoman in the New York State Comptroller's office.
Other state executives must pay for travel expenses out of pocket and then file claims for reimbursement, she said.


Remaking the Wheel: Evolution of the Chariot
IN ancient graves on the steppes of Russia and Kazakhstan, archeologists have uncovered skulls and bones of sacrificed horses and, perhaps most significantly, traces of spoked wheels.
These appear to be the wheels of chariots, the earliest direct evidence for the existence of the two-wheeled high-performance vehicles that transformed the technology of transport and warfare.
The discovery sheds new light on the contributions to world history by the vigorous pastoral people who lived in the broad northern grasslands, dismissed as barbarians by their southern neighbors.
From these burial customs, archeologists surmise that this culture bore a remarkable resemblance to the people who a few hundred years later called themselves Aryans and would spread their power, religion and language, with everlasting consequence, into the region of present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan and northern India.


Review/Theater; Brooklyn in the 60's: Race, Stress, Doo-Wop
Those "oldies but goodies" days when teen-age doo-wop groups combed New York City's bridges and tunnels in search of the perfect echo were less than idyllic for the singers who hung out on the street corners of the Gravesend section of Brooklyn.
The way "Avenue X," the new a cappella musical at Playwrights Horizons, remembers things, the same tensions between blacks and Italian-Americans that have spawned incidents of violence in Bensonhurst and Howard Beach in recent years were already simmering in 1963.
The show, which has a book and lyrics by John Jiler and music and lyrics by Ray Leslee, describes the strife that erupts when two youthful singers, one Italian-American, the other black, try to put together an interracial act for a talent show at the Brooklyn Fox Theater.
Although only one busy street separates their neighborhoods, Pasquale (Ted Brunetti) and Milton (Harold Perrineau) live in worlds that go to great lengths to avoid contact.
They meet by accident when Pasquale hears Milton's voice rising from a sewer grate.


Deceptions Hinder Waste-Dump Debate
To the Editor:
In "Not a Federal Report" (letter, Feb. 1), on California's proposed Ward Valley nuclear-waste dump, Robert M. Hirsch, acting director of the United States Geological Survey, attempts to discredit three of his own agency's most senior scientists.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony  92d Street Y
The musical climate has shifted around the German Bach specialist Helmuth Rilling to the extent that his interpretations, at one time fairly advanced, are now considered stodgy and old-fashioned in doctrinaire circles.
But Mr.
Rilling has always followed his own best lights, and as he showed on Saturday evening in a Bach program with the New York Chamber Symphony, the results can be just as satisfying as ever to open-minded listeners.


Essex County Executive Is Convicted of Extortion
The Essex County Executive, Thomas J. D'Alessio, was found guilty today on Federal charges that he extorted more than $58,000 from a solid-waste company to help it obtain a state environmental permit.
After deliberating for more than six days, a six-woman, six-man jury in United States District Court convicted Mr.
D'Alessio, 59, and his campaign treasurer, Joseph Thor, 51, on 12 counts of a 19-count felony indictment.
They were acquitted of mail fraud charges.


Defendant in Bombing Trial Denounces Lawyer
The lead defendant in the World Trade Center trial denounced his lawyer over the weekend for admitting that there had been a terrorist bombing plot and for portraying him as a participant who had been duped into a role by a fugitive alleged to be the mastermind in the case.
The Reuters news agency and a friend of the defendant, Mohammad A. Salameh, quoted him as saying on Sunday that his court-appointed lawyer, Robert E. Precht, had not consulted him about those assertions in his summation last week and that the assertions did not represent his views or the strategy they had agreed upon.


Review/Fashion; For Fall, Muted Colors and Lots of Plaid
On the one side, there is the smooth tailoring of Giorgio Armani, with slick jackets, now moving closer to the body, muted coloring and an air of aloof perfection.
On the other, the staccato patterns, inventive shapes and multiple colors of Christian Lacroix.
Together, the two collections pretty much establish the parameters of the Italian and French fashion establishment as it anticipates fall.
Along with the snappy plaid styles of Yves Saint Laurent and the sultry clothes of Emanuel Ungaro, they give a fair idea of the direction fashion is taking for the last half of this year.


U.N. and NATO Plan to Present New Ultimatums to the Serbs
With nearly all Serbian guns removed from the hills around Sarajevo, United Nations and NATO commanders are planning to impose ultimatums swiftly on forces encircling other Bosnian cities, probably starting with Mostar, Western and Bosnian officials said today.
Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the United Nations commander on the ground here, and Adm.
Jeremy M. Boorda, the NATO commander whose air power enforces the existing ultimatum to the Serbs who have besieged Sarajevo for 22 months, began discussing the plans this morning.


From Ivan Klima, A Look at Prague Before and After
For American readers of Eastern European literature, the arrival of a new novel by the Czech dissident writer Ivan Klima is a noteworthy and anticipated event.
Mr.
Klima's "Judge on Trial," a many-layered story of a Communist judge who compromised his way through life, was hailed by Western critics last year as a landmark work about the mentality of the apparatchiks who ran the Czech dictatorship.
But the publication here of Mr.
Klima's latest work, "Waiting for Dark, Waiting for Light," has passed almost without notice.
Reviews have been sparse, there are no displays in Prague's bookstore windows and sales clerks respond with blank stares when they are asked for a copy.
Yet the novel, a look at Czechoslovakia both before and after the end of Communist rule in 1989, is to be published with considerable fanfare by Granta in England in August and several American publishers are vying for it.


Ted Williams Suffers Stroke
Ted Williams suffered a slight stroke at his home in Florida on Saturday and was listed in fair condition yesterday at Shands Hospital in Gainesville, where he was being treated in the intensive care unit.
"He's conscious, clear-headed and talking," said Ralph Ives, a hospital spokesman, who could give no detailed account of Williams's condition but said the Hall of Fame outfielder was experiencing "some weakness on the left side."


CHRONICLE
There probably aren't a whole lot of people who know that there is an official National Tap Dance Day, designated by Congress in 1989.
Well, no matter.
There is indeed one, and it falls on May 25, the birthday of the legendary tapper Bill (Bojangles) Robinson.
This year's observance, billed as "Tap Dance Extravaganza '94," will actually take place on May 29, and awards will be given for advancing the art of tap.
They will go to MACEO ANDERSON, one of the original Four Step Brothers, and ANN MILLER and GENE KELLY of movie fame. (Past recipients include the Copasetics, the Original Hoofers and Peg Leg Bates).


SCIENTIST AT WORK: J. Craig Venter; A Bold Short Cut To Human Genes
IN a former ceramics factory on the outskirts of the nation's capital, Dr.
J.
Craig Venter has created a biologist's dream: a high-technology laboratory dedicated to the sequencing of DNA.
Out of it is flowing a rich torrent of new information, chemical sequences from many of the 75,000 or so genes that specify a human.
"I don't see how this cannot revolutionize biology," Dr.
Venter said.
His delight is in generating and analyzing the raw text in which the story of human evolution is written.
But this affable, soft-spoken man harbors a barely veiled ambition to slay giants.
He intends to execute a quick end run around the Government's $3 billion Human Genome Project.


Don't Label All Young Germans as Neo-Nazis; Home-Grown Variety
To the Editor:
Re Stephen Silver's "Music of Hate" (Op-Ed, Feb. 8): Germany is not the only country in which neo-Nazi rock music has flourished.
It can be found in many other countries, including the United States.
Neo-Nazi or "white power" rock, as it is sometimes called, has inspired countless violent crimes in this country.


Rangers Leave Penguins One Short
Sure it would have been a better hockey game with Mario Lemieux.
Any game would be.
But the sport's best player took off his uniform shortly before the Rangers played host to his Pittsburgh Penguins yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden.
Pain from his career-threatening back injury has kept him out of all but 7 of Pittsburgh's 60 games this season.
Those able to play put on a rousing show, won by the Rangers, 4-3, on Tony Amonte's goal after only 8 seconds of overtime.
This wasn't Olympic hockey, with fancy stylists darting to and fro on the bigger sheet of ice, avoiding contact as much as seeking it.
This was more like watching dodge-'em cars at the carnival, with big, skilled people on a small playing surface, bashing one another along the walls, in the corners and in front of both nets.


Classical Music in Review
State Symphony of Russia  With Vladimiar Ovchinikov Pianist Avery Fisher Hall
What sticks in the mind from Sunday's concert by the State Symphony of Russia is the colossal crescendo that Yevgeny Svetlanov obtained at the end of Scriabin's "Poem of Ecstasy." Loud to begin with, the orchestra just got louder, and louder still.
The strings became one quivering mass of tremolo.
It is the sort of effect that has made Mr.
Svetlanov an unquestioned master of overpowering orchestral spectacle, the Oliver Stone of conductors.


Finding, Not Paying, Doctors Is Top Health Care Concern in Rural Midwest
The big problems of health care sound very different in small farming towns from the way they do in Washington.
The issues that Congressional subcommittees will begin voting on in a few days are remote, often irrelevant and frequently unknown in the rural Midwest.
Several days of conversations here made it clear that the big problem is less how to pay for health care than to make sure that there is health care to pay for.


On Hilltop Outside Sarajevo, A Serbian Battery Defies U.N.
On Tilava Hill, in the Serb-held mountains ringing Sarajevo, eight 120-millimeter mortars today stood in open defiance of NATO threats, flanked by multiple-rocket launchers, anti-aircraft guns and other Serbian weapons used in the 22-month siege of the Bosnian capital.
About half a mile away, Sgt.
Robert Monneret, a French member of the United Nations peacekeeping force, stood in a snow-covered field and peered grimly at the weapons through binoculars.


Health Tinkering Is Not Reform
Representative Pete Stark, the California Democrat who heads a House subcommittee on health policy, says that Congress ought to scrap the purchasing cooperatives, or alliances, that lie at the core of the Administration's health care bill.
The Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, and another Republican Senator, Phil Gramm of Texas, say that Congress ought to gut the other institutional reforms proposed by the President as well -- and stick to small fixes.
In the next few weeks Congress will decide whether it will overhaul or merely tinker with health care.
Tinkering is not enough.
To see why, imagine that Congress takes the go-slow approach and does little more than require insurance companies to make their policies portable (workers can keep the policy when they leave their current employer), community rated (the chronically ill pay the same premiums as the healthy) and guaranteed (insurers are required to sell to applicants regardless of preexisting medical conditions).


Reviews/Music; Art? Commodity? Both? Reflections on a Recital
There is, and perhaps always has been, a distinction between music as a marketable commodity and music as an expressive art form.
This is not a "high art versus low art" polemic.
Both kinds of music exist within the classical music world, just as they do in rock and jazz.
Now and then these approaches intersect, as when, for example, Luciano Pavarotti is at his best, when he is in good voice and when his heart is in the music.
When he is not -- as was the case on Sunday afternoon, when he sang a recital at the Metropolitan Opera House -- his performances are a measure of the gulf between showmanship and artistry, and an enlightening look at the artistic placebo effect.


9 Peruvian Military Men Are Sentenced in Killings
Hoping to get past the most troublesome human rights case faced by President Alberto K. Fujimori, a military court in Lima, Peru, today sentenced nine army officers and enlisted men to military prison for the July 1992 killing of nine students and a lecturer at a university.
The court sentenced Maj.
Martin Rivas and Maj.
Carlos Pichilingue, the two leaders of the military assassination squad, to 20 years.
Gen.
Juan Rivero, head of army intelligence planning, got five years.
Six others were sentenced to 4 to 15 years.
Corpses Discovered
The killings, at the Enrique Valle Guzman University, known as La Cantuta, have dogged the Government, particularly since last summer, when the weekly Lima magazine Si reported the location near Lima where the bodies of some of the students had been buried.
They had been shot in the head at close range and their bodies had been burned.


Disney Drums Its Fingers as Virginia Debates the Worth of a Theme Park
The Walt Disney Company's plan to build a huge American history theme park next to this northern Virginia village 35 miles west of Washington is suddenly taking more political and economic twists and turns than a roller coaster ride.
The state's new Republican Governor, George F. Allen, is squabbling with the Democrat-controlled Legislature over whether to try to entice Disney by subsidizing some of the park's development costs, like highway construction and staff training.


PEACE DISCUSSIONS START IN MEXICO
Less than two months after they astonished Mexicans by seizing this colonial city and declaring war against the state, masked leaders of the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army sat down with Government envoys here today and began to negotiate for peace.
"The dialogue has begun," the mediator in the talks, Bishop Samuel Ruiz Garcia, said tonight as he sat surrounded by the Government's chief negotiator and 18 rebel representatives in the ornate 16th-century cathedral where the talks are being held.


Gilbert H. King, 88, Justice Who Heard Attica Murder Case
Gilbert H. King, a former New York State Supreme Court justice who broadened representation on local juries and presided over a murder trial stemming from the 1971 Attica prison uprising, died on Feb. 11 at a hospice in Grand Rapids, Mich.
He was 88.
Justice King of Erie County retired in 1977 after 15 years on the bench.
He was a native of Buffalo and a former resident of Phoenix, N.Y.
He had moved to Michigan to be closer to a daughter after he learned that he had cancer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The F.C.C. is preparing to order a further reduction in cable television rates of 6 to 10 percent, a high-ranking agency official said.
Last April, the agency adopoted rules intended to cut rates by 10 percent across the board, but angry customers have protested that their bills went up rather than down.  [ Page D1. ]


Review/Pop; Queen Latifah, Tough but Kind
At a time when hip-hop's commercial successes have exploited the genre's worst impulses, Queen Latifah sounded better than ever when she performed late Sunday night at the Palladium.
This rapper from New Jersey, who is also the star of the sitcom "Living Single" and the president of the Flavor Unit management company and record label, defies the stereotypes that have been attached to hip-hop from both inside and outside the music.
While market leaders like Dr.
Dre and Snoop Doggy Dog spout unthinking misogyny and revel in tales of random violence, Queen Latifah continues to rap about lives in which intelligence and affection count for more than munitions and machismo.
When she boasts, her self-affirmation extends to women in general; when she puts someone down, she's instructive as well as nasty.


FUMES AT HOSPITAL BAFFLE OFFICIALS
A doctor and two nurses who were apparently poisoned by fumes from a dying woman in a strange medical episode on Saturday night are recovering, but no one knows yet what caused their symptoms.
The doctor and nurses became ill while treating a patient in the emergency room of Riverside General Hospital in Riverside, Calif.
Medical experts were at a loss to explain how the patient, Gloria Ramirez of Riverside, could have emitted toxic fumes as hospital officials have suggested.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
AES China Generating Co., Hong Kong, an initial public offering of 10 million class A shares.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.


Time to Take a Cook's Tour of Your Hardware
THE Sony clock radio, which cost about $16, has this warning embossed on its plastic case: "Caution! Do not open. No user-serviceable parts inside. Refer servicing to qualified service personnel." The television, the telephone answering machine and the air-conditioners all carry similar messages.
Not so the computer, which cost more than all those other devices combined.
The introduction to the owner's manual says, "Your computer was designed to be 'worked on' by you, its owner," adding, "You can open the case without fear of reprisal from the gods of warranty."


Executive on Hot Seat In Tokyo Trade Dispute
Depending on one's point of view, Takeo Tsukada is either the culprit responsible for an escalating trade crisis between the United States and Japan or an innocent bystander caught in the crossfire.
Mr.
Tsukada, who prefers the latter description, is president of the Nippon Idou Tsushin Corporation, known as IDO, a provider of mobile telephone service that the United States Government accuses of failing to provide adequate access to Japan's cellular telephone market for equipment made by Motorola Inc.


Minus Clark, Baker Juggles Lineup
A sign of spring -- a team media guide -- greeted the San Francisco Giants' manager when he arrived for work this morning.
"It's weird," Dusty Baker said with a suspicious smile.
"The first media guide on my desk is the Texas Rangers. I know who sent it."
All right, so Will Clark didn't personally put the media guide in an envelope, affix a stamp and drop it into a mailbox.
Its arrival served as a figurative message nonetheless.


The Boat People: A Chapter Closes
They first floated into the world's consciousness in 1977, fishing boats crammed with desperate men, women and children fleeing the hardships and persecutions of a newly united Communist Vietnam.
They encountered pirate attacks at sea and hostile receptions on nearby Asian shores.
Still, nearly a million of these "boat people" eventually set sail, most in the late 1970's and early 1980's.
That chapter of history has now been officially closed by the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees.
The U.N.'s refugee arm declared last week that fleeing Vietnamese would no longer be automatically eligible for consideration as political refugees; they will be judged on an individual basis like other applicants.
Most of the 60,000 boat people remaining in Asian refugee camps can now be legally sent back home.


Nokes Still Has Bite, but Less of the Bark
He once suggested that the Yankees could trade him even up for California's ace pitcher, Mark Langston.
He has received fitness advice from the wrestler Hulk Hogan.
He guzzles 700-calorie protein drinks.
He is the highest-paid catcher in Yankee history.
He cannot wait to leave New York.
Introducing Matt Nokes.
Although Nokes remains confident in his abilities, his role with the Yankees has been reduced since Manager Buck Showalter made the bold switch of inserting a career backup, Mike Stanley, as the starter last May.


Ross Roy Venture With Ian Roberts
Ross Roy Communications Inc. in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., has formed a joint venture with Ian Roberts Advertising Inc. in Toronto.
Ross Roy's Toronto office and Roberts will combine forces and operate as Ian Roberts/Ross Roy, in the current office of Ian Roberts, effective next Tuesday.
Ross Roy will have a minority interest in the venture.


Japan, Bowing to Pressure, Defers Plutonium Projects
Bowing to international pressure, Japan has decided to postpone, for as long as 20 years, a series of multibillion-dollar nuclear power projects that would add tremendously to the world oversupply of plutonium, Japanese and American officials say.
The decision, to be announced in the next few months, came after a yearlong reassessment of Japan's ambitious but politically troublesome nuclear energy program and stemmed largely from the international outcry last year over Japan's sea shipment from Europe of more than a ton of plutonium, a highly toxic and radioactive material that is a fuel for nuclear weapons.
Several of Japan's Asian neighbors banned the shipment from passing through their waters, fearing an accident or terrorist incident.


Columbia Journal; Prison Lures Them In (as Tourists)
South Carolina's state penitentiary has been both an eyesore and a curiosity on the riverside in this stately capital city since shortly after the Civil War.
The subject of a Federal court order for overcrowding, and with a section condemned by the city government, the prison was closed by the South Carolina Department of Corrections last month.


Pitcher's Neck a Concern
SCOTT RADINSKY , a relief pitcher with the Chicago White Sox, has a growth in the left side of his neck and has undergone tests both in California and Florida to determine its nature, the team said yesterday.
"Further details regarding Scott's condition will be released in the next few days," the statement said.
Radinsky, 25, made a career-high 73 appearances last season, going 8-2 with a 4.28 e.r.a. and four saves. (AP)


CUNY Chancellor's Time Spent With Corporate Boards at Issue
Seven years ago, the City University of New York's trustees struck a deal with the state Legislature on a raise for the CUNY Chancellor.
The salary was not competitive with other institutions, the trustees argued.
So the Legislature approved a 50 percent raise, but only after the trustees pledged more accountability, including restrictions on the Chancellor's unrelated corporate or professional work.
Today, four years into the job, CUNY Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds is paid $158,000 a year, more than the Governor or Mayor.
But the second part of the agreement appears to have eroded.
An examination of her personal calendars and travel records shows that Dr.
Reynolds takes a trip out of town almost every week.


On My Mind; Bosnia: The Real Lessons
How did it happen that the West finds itself politically, militarily and economically at war against one side in a three-sided war in the Balkans?
In the breathing space that came with the NATO ultimatum and the decision of the Serbs to pull artillery back from range of Sarajevo, that is the most important question the U.S. and its allies can ask themselves.
With luck, the answers could help prevent the war spreading wider and keep the U.S. out of the civil, religious and ethnic wars now breeding.


Classical Music in Review


CLINTON NOW HOPES CALM IN SARAJEVO CAN BE BROADENED
As the United Nations sought control of the remaining Serbian guns around Sarajevo, President Clinton called today for a broader use of power and diplomacy to extend the quiet in the Bosnian capital to other beseiged cities.
In Washington and in Sarajevo, attention among diplomats and military commanders turned from the tracking of artillery pieces and other heavy weapons to talk of the next steps.


Classical Music in Review
Kyoko Takezawa  Violinist Washington Irving High School
In her concert appearances and in her growing catalogue of recordings, Kyoko Takezawa has shown an affinity for the Romantic violin style.
Her sound is large and velvety, and she rarely passes up a chance to linger over a pretty melody.
But she also has a powerful technique that lets her burn her way through showpieces like Tartini's "Devil's Trill" Sonata and Sarasate's "Carmen Fantasy," the first and last works on her program on Saturday night.


Harding Draws No. 8 Gate; Only 19 Others Have Better
Twenty-four women had drawn their skating order for Wednesday's short program.
Then it was Tonya Harding's turn.
Only three positions remained.
She would either skate first, eighth or 13th.
No figure skater wants to go first, especially at the Olympics.
Judges traditionally reserve higher marks for later skaters.
And the audience has no energy.
In fact, the audience might still be at dinner.
Harding did not show up for today's draw.
Gale Tanger, the team leader for the American skaters, stood in her place.
Three chips remained in a hat.
First, eighth or 13th.
The room, crowded with skaters, coaches, judges and journalists, went silent.


Hextall and Isles Zero In on the Playoffs
Dale Hunter was making his first appearance at Nassau Coliseum since his vicious hit of Pierre Turgeon during last season's Stanley Cup playoffs.
But it was Ron Hextall who stole the spotlight today.
The Islander goaltender made 26 saves for his second consecutive shutout as New York rolled over the Capitals, 4-0, ending Washington's seven-game unbeaten streak.


Don't Get Excited for McReynolds's Sake
The personality hasn't changed.
Kevin McReynolds is still laid-back.
He is still wary of the New York news media.
Two seasons in Kansas City did not teach him how to punch a clubhouse wall, or argue a call, or make any similar display of emotion.
This time, though, McReynolds insists that he knows what to expect in New York.
Traded to the Mets for Vince Coleman in January, McReynolds arrived at the spring-training complex today and will be on the field Tuesday when the full 53-man squad holds its first workout.


Disappointing Year for Mexican Economy
Contrary to recent Government projections showing a moderate rebound, Mexico's economy grew only four-tenths of 1 percent last year, the weakest performance in the five years of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's administration.
In November, Mexico's Finance Minister had projected that the economy would increase 1.1 percent in 1993.


Steam Pipe Explodes on a Manhattan Street


Patterns
E-Mail on Underwear
Maybe it was when fashion editors started babbling about information superhighways.
Or maybe it was when Conde Nast invested in Wired, the glossy techies' magazine.
Or maybe it was when Details, the only Conde Nast magazine to offer digital-age news regularly, to have its own Internet address and to publish E-mail, lost its editor, James Truman.
He was made editorial director of the company.


Unions Plan to Spend $10 Million To Promote Clinton Health Plan
Organized labor announced today that it would spend at least $10 million, the most ever on a single cause, to promote President Clinton's overhaul of the nation's health care system and beat back alternatives in Congress and efforts to compromise away its basic features.
The only other issue to generate spending approaching that magnitude was the unions' unsuccessful campaign last fall to stop the North American Free Trade Agreement, which the President supported.
That long-open wound in labor's hide has suddenly healed as the two sides turn to an issue on which they agree.


Books of The Times; How Letterman (and CBS) Won
The Late Shift  Letterman, Leno and the Network Battle for the Night  By Bill Carter  Illustrated. 299 pages.
Hyperion. $24.95.
Outside of professional sports, the most visible and regular display of talent in all of American culture may be David Letterman's comedy mind at work.
How, then, could NBC allow him to escape to CBS last year, where he now demolishes the "Tonight" show with Jay Leno in the late-night ratings?
Bill Carter's absorbing book shows exactly how.


Renaissance on 42d St.
To the Editor:
Can it be?
Will 42d Street come into its own again at last and become its old self and more?
When Richard Ziegfeld, my cousin, was researching "The Ziegfeld Touch," we had several conversations about the theater and the sad condition it is in today.


Robinson's N.B.A.-High 50 Has Assist From Laettner
Spurs 114, Timberwolves 89
David Robinson took advantage of the absence of Christian Laettner to score 50 points, the highest total in the National Basketball Association this season, as San Antonio beat Minnesota, 114-89, yesterday in Minneapolis for their franchise-record 13th straight victory.
Robinson capped his performance with a 3-pointer with just over a minute left.


Honda Plans To Cut Ties With Rover
The Honda Motor Company said today that it would end its ownership ties with the Rover Group in response to the sale of the British automobile company to BMW.
Honda, which had made no secret of the sense of betrayal it felt when the controlling stake in its longtime partner was sold, also hinted that it would end many of its collaborations with Rover and set up a more independent operation in Europe.


Market Place; Enthusiasm for hockey looks like good news for skate makers
TELEVISION screens around the world have been carrying Olympic images of graceful and athletic skaters and ice dancers flaunting their quadruple whizzos, triple Gewurtztraminers and double flying sistroids, and of national hockey teams going for the gold medal.
But even without the Winter Games, the National Hockey League's expansion in the southern United States has been creating growing enthusiasm for youth hockey.
This year's new teams -- the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, Calif., and the Florida Panthers -- have been capturing the headlines.
And the Stars, who moved to Dallas from Minnesota, have been doing well at the box office and in merchandising, while a number of malls in Texas have added skating rinks.


Winter's Chill Empties Upstate Pedestrian Mall


It's Nice to See Mason Back to His Playful Self
For those who may be wondering what ever happened to Anthony Mason, it seems that he is finally approaching his level of play from last season.
"He's getting back on track and playing some more consistent minutes," the Knicks' coach, Pat Riley, said after practice today.
"He's been healthier, too. He's a role player who can get a lot done for us, a lot of the stuff you don't see in the box score. Now, he's scoring and hitting his medium-range jumper and you are beginning to see some numbers. I just hope he keeps playing the way he is."


Review/Theater; Brooklyn in the 60's: Race, Stress, Doo-Wop
Those "oldies but goodies" days when teen-age doo-wop groups combed New York City's bridges and tunnels in search of the perfect echo were less than idyllic for the singers who hung out on the street corners of the Gravesend section of Brooklyn.
The way "Avenue X," the new a cappella musical at Playwrights Horizons, remembers things, the same tensions between blacks and Italian-Americans that have spawned incidents of violence in Bensonhurst and Howard Beach in recent years were already simmering in 1963.
The show, which has a book and lyrics by John Jiler and music and lyrics by Ray Leslee, describes the strife that erupts when two youthful singers, one Italian-American, the other black, try to put together an interracial act for a talent show at the Brooklyn Fox Theater.
Although only one busy street separates their neighborhoods, Pasquale (Ted Brunetti) and Milton (Harold Perrineau) live in worlds that go to great lengths to avoid contact.
They meet by accident when Pasquale hears Milton's voice rising from a sewer grate.


Tax-Rate Scare Hides Real Health Plan Fear
To the Editor:
In "Jim Cooper's Pointless Plan (Op-Ed, Feb. 13), Henry J. Aaron writes: "Such taxes are almost confiscatory.
It is hard to believe that any member of Congress would knowingly support the creation of a near-poverty trap like the one that would result from the Cooper health proposal."


Handshake Starts Talks in Mexico


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Announced the resignation of Calvin Hill, vice president of personnel.
Agreed to terms with John O'Donoghue, pitcher, and Sherman Obando, outfielder, on one-year contracts.


Clinton Moving To Avoid Losses In '94 Elections
President Clinton, worried that Democrats may suffer significant losses in this year's midterm elections, has given one of his closest advisers the job of repairing the troubled political operations at the White House and the Democratic National Committee.
The aide, Harold M. Ickes, has begun holding weekly meetings at the White House with senior Presidential aides and top Democratic officials to devise a strategy for minimizing losses in November.


Bomb Scares
American nonproliferation policy in South Asia isn't working.
Both India and Pakistan have the capacity to develop nuclear weapons in short order.
The barn door is open, the horse long gone.
This troubling fact should guide Congress and the Clinton Administration in the next few months as they reconsider the Pressler amendment, which has driven U.S. policy on the issue since 1985.
The amendment, sponsored by Senator Larry Pressler of South Dakota, bans most U.S. aid to Pakistan unless the President certifies that Pakistan does not possess a nuclear explosive device.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about shopping and waiting at shopping malls misidentified a man shown reading and drinking coffee.
He is Bob Jensen, who was waiting for his children to leave a movie at the Menlo Park Mall.


Italy's Hot Without Tomba
Even before Alberto Tomba competes in his first ski race, Italy is heading toward its greatest Winter Games.
Today, with six days still to go, the Italians earned their 14th medal, tying their best effort, two years ago in France.
As recently as 1980, at Lake Placid, the Italians won all of two medals.


Q&amp;A
Sleet and Snow
Q.  What is the difference between sleet and freezing rain?


Buffalo Rethinks Downtown Car Ban
It's been years since anyone arrived by cab beneath the marquee of the Shea's Buffalo theater or jockeyed for a parking space in front of A M &amp; A's department store.
It's been a decade, in fact, since this city ripped up the busiest section of its Main Street, banishing the automobile in a quest for urban renewal and better mass transit.


Solar Heat Unit in Use At a Pole
AT the South Pole, where winter temperatures often dip below minus 100 degrees Fahrenheit, four-engine transport planes must operate a continuous shuttle during the summer months to replenish the research station's tanks with fuel oil for its ravenous furnaces.
But for the first time, solar heating has begun to take a bite out of South Pole Station's monstrous heating bills.
Dr.
John Lynch, a physicist with the National Science Foundation's polar program, said last week that solar heat collectors installed on the sides of a new South Pole dormitory building had sharply reduced fuel consumption.
During one recent week, the three-and-one-half-story building, which accommodates 20 occupants, needed to burn only 12 gallons of fuel to supplement the heat generated by its solar panels.
During that week the outdoor temperature ranged from a high of minus 14.4 degrees to a low of minus 41.6 degrees, he said.


2 Questions on Coleman
There were two questions regarding Derrick Coleman that hung over the Nets' practice this afternoon: Whether the injured All-Star forward would be healthy enough to play against Miami Tuesday night at the Meadowlands and whether he would still be playing for the Nets by Thursday's trading deadline.
"I've got nothing to say," Coleman said today, leaving practice early after getting treatment for the left ankle he sprained in last Friday night's game against the Bullets.
"Call my lawyer."
Easier said than done.
Harold MacDonald, who advised his client not to sign an eight-year, $69 million contract extension offer from the Nets last November, did not return calls to his office in Birmingham, Mich., and General Manager Willis Reed of the Nets could not be reached either; he was reported to still be out of town on a scouting trip.
Reed has promised he would either sign Coleman or trade him by the deadline.


A.S.P.C.A. Dismisses 4 Over Money
The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, the oldest humane society in the country, has dismissed four officials in the last few weeks, amid questions about how the agency and its finances are being managed.
The four officials, all longtime employees, were dismissed after it was discovered that some low-paid workers accumulated up to $131,000 a year in overtime, said Steven Rubenstein, a spokesman for the society.
For example, the agency's senior investigator, who was dismissed last week, was paid $192,096 last year, including $131,949 in overtime.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Washington's Birthday.
Government offices, banks and many businesses were also closed.


Midwinter Recess Reviving An Old Parental Complaint
Rosa Julien, a registered nurse, is paying a sitter $150 to watch her children for the week.
Linda Ferline has no job, so she does child care herself, cramming her schedule with museum visits and movies.
And Lillian Lopez, another working parent forced to plot a child-care strategy this week because New York City public schools are closed for a midwinter recess, is sending her children to a special tutoring program.


Queens Teen-Ager Wounded by Police
A 16-year-old Queens youth was shot yesterday after he grappled with three police officers in the lobby of an apartment building and then turned and confronted them holding a toy gun, the police said.
A police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis, said that three plainclothes officers on narcotics duty confronted the youth after they emerged on the first floor from an elevator at 1410 New Haven Avenue in Far Rockaway.


Don't Label All Young Germans as Neo-Nazis; Hate Is International
To the Editor:
Stephen Silver's "Music of Hate" (Op-Ed, Feb. 8) misses two points.
"Hate music" is not, as the article implies, a specifically German phenomenon.
The fascist music scene indeed exists, but on an international level.
Screwdriver, the right-extremist rock band from Britain, for instance, has direct connections with White Aryan Resistance, the United States extremist group.


By Design; Shining in the Rain
After the snows come the rains.
And when the sun isn't shining this spring, fashionable raincoats will be.
Shimmery slickers look wet even when they're dry, but the shiny coating on the fabric protects the wearer from the elements.
There is a major trend toward silver this season, so there are trench coats and balmacaans in silver, but that's not the only choice.
There are also matte gold finishes and coats that gleam like patent leather.


Dell's Second Stab at Portables
When John Medica came to the Dell Computer Corporation last April, he brought a reputation as one of the stars of the notebook computer business, the man who had headed the product development teams for Apple Computer's extraordinarily successful Powerbook line.
But only after he arrived here at Dell's headquarters did it become apparent to Mr.
Medica that he would really be putting his reputation on the line.


New Inquiry on Plea Deal in a Rape Case
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York yesterday announced that he was naming Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell as a special prosecutor to investigate an upstate case in which five men accused of raping a woman in a restaurant were permitted to plead guilty to misdemeanor counts of sexual misconduct.
Mr.
Cuomo acted on a recommendation by the State Commission of Investigation, which concluded, after a six-month review of the case, that the case was an exception to the rule of double jeopardy, the legal concept that bars multiple prosecutions for the same offense.


Revisiting Tragedy in a Troubled City by the River
JUST past the bar where the West Point cadets were stomped and stabbed, Officer Charlie Fiscella dropped his cruising speed to a crawl.
"This is one of the best blocks," he said, looking over a row of Victorian houses.
He pointed to each one.
"Nice, nice, drug den. Nice, nice, welfare building."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Twenty new questions that address that age-old query: Is there truth in advertising?
WHOEVER first said "Ask me no questions and I'll tell you no lies" must not have worked in advertising.
Here then are 20 questions about the industry.
*Can there be a single living being who remains unaware that "New York Telephone is now called Nynex"?


INSANITY DEFENSE IS BARRED IN TRIAL
A judge today ruled out an insanity defense by the man on trial in the killing an abortion doctor outside his Pensacola clinic last March.
The ruling by Judge John T. Parnham of Escambia County Circuit Court struck down the primary strategy of the lawyers defending the accused killer, Michael F. Griffin, whose trial on a charge of first-degree murder began here today.


People
*
Myer Berlow was named to the new position of executive vice president and strategic planning director at Mendelsohn/Zien Advertising, Los Angeles.
He was previously executive vice president and business development director at Griffin Bacal, New York.


Reviews/Music; Works of Dark and Light By Russian Composers
For at least half a century, music critics in New York have fretted that the city's musical institutions partake too little of its intellectual life.
Recent attempts to revive a moribund musical world have included several brainy jolts administered with mixed success by the American Symphony Orchestra under the direction of Leon Botstein.
But the program Mr.
Botstein presented on Friday evening at Avery Fisher Hall, a fascinating juxtaposition of works by Alfred Schnittke and Sofia Gubaidulina, drew impetus from a less likely source, the long-maligned New York Philharmonic.
Virgil Thomson dismissed the Philharmonic as irrelevant to the city's intellectual life in 1940, and listeners in the 80's had reason to wonder whether the orchestra was even a factor in the city's musical life.
But Kurt Masur has given a more thoughtful cast to programming and audience-building, and the Philharmonic's recent Composer Week, devoted to Mr.
Schnittke, set a broader agenda in and around the city, spawning an informal festival.
The American Symphony program was merely the latest in a remarkable outpouring of performances and discussions of Mr.
Schnittke's music and that of other former Soviet composers.


Guard Shot in Robbery on Floor Of Crowded Atlantic City Casino
Two armed robbers stole $400,000 and shot an unarmed security guard yesterday morning in front of hundreds of patrons crowded into the main gambling floor of Merv Griffin's Resorts Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City.
But casino officials said the shooting and the robbery hardly fazed the gamblers, who continued to play blackjack and the slot machines as if nothing had happened.


Review/Dance; New Look for National Ballet of Canada
Like all dance companies, the National Ballet of Canada has had its ups and downs.
The death in 1986 of Erik Bruhn, the Danish star and artistic director who brought the troupe to its peak, left the National Ballet in a visible search for redefinition.
This weekend, however, the company showed off a promising new collaboration: between Karen Kain, who is not only the company's prima ballerina but also Canada's sweetheart, and James Kudelka, not only Canada's premier ballet choreographer but also one of the best in the world today.


CHRONICLE
There has already been what HELAINE GEISMAR KATZ calls "flak" about the talk that ROSEANNE ARNOLD is supposed to give on Monday.
Ms.
Katz, director of the 92d Street Y Center for Adult Life and Learning, which is sponsoring the event, said she had received letters and phone calls asking, in effect, Why?
The fact that many people have strong reactions to Ms.
Arnold, she said, "probably made it even more important to us to have her speak." The 40-minute talk, which will be at Congregation Rodeph Sholom, 7 West 83d Street, will be followed by a question period.


SOCCER
FIFA Seminar
The world governing body of soccer will conduct a two-day seminar in Manhattan starting tomorrow for the coaches and delegates from the 24 nations that will play in the tournament.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  A CALL FOR BROADER BOSNIA PEACE  As the United Nations sought control of the remaining Serbian guns around Sarajevo, President Clinton called for a broader use of power and diplomacy to end the fighting in other besieged cities.
A1


James Rusbridger, 65, Co-Author Of a Contested Pearl Harbor Book
James Rusbridger, a British businessman-turned-writer who was the co-author of a book about Pearl Harbor that was published in 1991 despite the protests of the British Government, died on Wednesday in his home near Bodmin, in Cornwall.
He was 65.
The cause of death was not known. The police said there would be an inquest.


A Name Change For CME KHBB
What do Peter Piper, Sally the seashore seashell vendor and CME KHBB Advertising have in common?
Not a whole lot, except they tie tongues.
But now the agency, which has been struggling with one of the most disliked, hard-to-say names in the industry, is simplifying it somewhat.
Executives at CME KHBB said last week that it would be renamed Campbell Mithun Esty in North America, though it would remain CME KHBB in Britain and Europe.
The cumbersome CME KHBB name was created in October 1992, when Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. started a third international agency network by merging Campbell-Mithun-Esty with KHBB in London.


Lotas Minard Gets Jenny Craig Projects
Lotas Minard Patton McIver in New York has switched diet clients.
The agency, which had worked for Nutri-System Inc. before that company suffered financial setbacks, has begun handling creative projects for Jenny Craig International.


Holyfield Loses a Trainer, But Moorer Keeps a Friend
The EVANDER HOLYFIELD-MICHAEL MOORER heavyweight title bout on April 23 has lost its Oedipal angle.
The trainer EMANUEL STEWARD , who developed a father-son relationship with Moorer before joining Holyfield, has been replaced as Holyfield's trainer by DON TURNER .
In announcing the switch yesterday, Holyfield said that he and Steward, who supervised Holyfield's comeback after he lost his title to RIDDICK BOWE , had not been able to come to terms, with Steward seeking a percentage and Holfyield offering a flat fee.


Balkan Update
With the threat of NATO air strikes averted, United Nations troops monitored the remaining Serbian guns at TILAVA and another site near SARAJEVO yesterday.
In WASHINGTON President Clinton said the United States would renew its efforts to help "reinvigorate the peace process," and Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia stressed the need for cooperation between MOSCOW and the West on Bosnia.
Defense Minister Pavel S. Grachev of Russia talked with Defense Secretary William J. Perry for 40 minutes by telephone.


U.S. Surgical Learns Hazards of Fast Growth
Leon C. Hirsch likes to describe himself in Horatio Alger terms, as an up-by-the-bootstraps youth from the Bronx with a high school education, who single-handedly created an entirely new market in medical devices and then, still single-handedly, changed the way surgeons practice medicine.
But after setbacks that analysts attribute at least partly to faulty business judgments by Mr.
Hirsch, his company, the United States Surgical Corporation, announced last week that it was dangerously short of cash.
After reporting three consecutive quarterly losses, it said it was negotiating with its creditors and seeking equity investors.


Good News on Ozone
To the Editor:
In "Sunscreen May Be Skin Cancer Villain" (letter, Feb. 6), Jeffrey Klein, editor in chief of Mother Jones magazine, refers to a study that indicates ultraviolet A, rather than ultraviolet B, is the major risk factor for melanoma.
If the conclusions of this study on fish can be extended to human beings, then as Mr.
Klein notes, UVB sunscreen lotions that allow sunbathers to remain in the sun without burning "may cause them to expose themselves to large doses of melanoma-inducing UVA."


Review/Pop; Texas Takes to the Road
It's no coincidence that the work of songwriters from the Texas panhandle is twangingly austere and mystically obsessed with travel.
In these dry Texan flatlands, the overwhelming realities are the sky and the road.
Tornadoes randomly dip from above and tear up the land.
The road is the inescapable metaphor for life itself.
A car is such an essential possession, that like an old-time cowboy's trusted horse, it becomes a companion, invested with its own quirky personality.
This relationship between environment and popular music was made vividly clear in a program called "The Amarillo Highway," which had two performances at the Church of St.
Ann and the Holy Trinity in Brooklyn Heights, on Friday and Saturday evenings.
The show featured two West Texan singers and songwriters, Butch Hancock and Terry Allen, and the author Michael Ventura, doing songs and readings.
They were joined by Charlene Hancock singing Mr.
Ventura's plaintive ballad "I Still Go Dancin'," which imagines the life of Buddy Holly's character Peggy Sue at 51, and by Jesse Taylor who played acoustic guitar with Mr.
Hancock.
The songs and poems were illustrated with slides showing the landscape around Holly's Lubbock hometown.


A Break From Work, But Hardly a Holiday; Presidents' Day Becomes Macy's Day
Feb. 21 is a day in history to remember.
On that day in 1846, Sarah G. Bagley became the country's first female telegrapher; Lucy B. Hobbs became the country's first female dentist 20 years later, and much more recently, Macy's had another big sale.
What did not happen was the birth of George Washington.
The 262d anniversary of that event didn't arrive until today, and the date will pass unnoticed by all but a handful of Revolutionary War enthusiasts as they gather under their Gilbert Stuarts to rekindle the old flame.


Providence Goes Deep to Beat St. John's
Providence 75, St. John's 67
Michael Brown made 8 of 13 shots and scored 21 points to lead Providence past visiting St.
John's, 75-67, last night.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TRUSTEES' QUESTIONS FOR CUNY CHANCELLOR The Chancellor of City University of New York is paid $158,000 a year, more than the Governor or Mayor, and makes almost that much again through her membership on five corporate boards.
Some trustees are questioning whether her corporate work is taking too much time from her day job.
But the Chancellor, W. Ann Reynolds, defended her performance, saying, "I work for CUNY from dawn until dusk." A1.


Editor of Science To Retire in 1995
DANIEL E. KOSHLAND Jr., editor in chief of the journal Science, has announced that he will retire from the post next year.
He has held the position since 1985.
The journal is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
In 1993, said Dr.
Eloise E. Clark, president of the association, it achieved the largest circulation increase, greatest income and highest renewal rate in its history.


Stomach Microbe Offers Clues To Cancer as Well as Ulcers
AFTER a decade of fierce debate and much research, the once heretical view that stomach ulcers are an infection caused by a bacterium, Helicobacter pylori, and are curable with antimicrobial drugs, has prevailed.
And now leading researchers are turning to the public health implications of H. pylori, including a link to stomach cancer.
Until this view of the cause of ulcers was endorsed this month by an independent panel of medical experts convened by the National Institutes of Health, a Federal agency in Bethesda, Md., the theory and benefits of antimicrobial therapy were still considered unproved and radical.
The panel not only endorsed the theory but also strongly urged a drastic change in standard ulcer therapy: the addition of combinations of antimicrobial drugs to the usual ulcer regimen.


As Market Pressures Build, Fed Chief Goes to Congress
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, will deliver his semiannual report on interest rates to a Congressional panel on Tuesday against a backdrop of pressure from financial markets for a second increase, a move the Fed is believed to be trying to avoid for now.
The pressure from bond traders, who are steadily pushing up long-term interest rates and pushing down bond prices, is only one reason Mr.
Greenspan's testimony before a House Banking subcommittee could scarcely come at a more awkward time for the nation's central bank.


Acura Tire Wear Comes Under Fire
The Acura NSX is hardly your typical car.
An aluminum-bodied rear-wheel-drive sports car with a 270-horsepower engine, it lists for $65,000, can hold the road at 140 miles an hour and was acclaimed at its introduction in 1990 as a marvel of Japanese automotive technology.
But its tire wear has been far from typical, as well.
In some cases, the rear tires have been found bald of tread after 3,000 miles.


Russian Ice Dancers Rock 'n' Roll to a Golden Beat
It was nostalgia night in Olympic ice dancing, and while the audience went for the golden oldies named Torvill and Dean, the judges preferred the 50's rock 'n' roll of Oksana Grichtchuk and Yevgeny Platov.
On a night when light, vibrant dancing replaced passion and drama, Grichtchuk and Platov of Russia skated to "Rock Around the Clock" and won the gold medal with an athletic jitterbug and a jazzy fox trot.


Thirty Seconds Over Lillehammer on Air Tonya
No, despite three interviews, Tonya Harding and CBS's Connie Chung are not close.
They did not bond intellectually in two hours of taping for Chung's "Eye to Eye" news-magazine program.
They did not swap peanuts for pretzels on the flight to Norway.
They did not trade wacky husband stories.
If they were tight, or even respectful, would Tonya have walked out when Chung's questions got touchy on last night's "Evening News" interview?


INSIDE
News of 2000 B.C.
A little known people, dismissed by their neighbors as barbarians, invented the chariot, researchers say, transforming the history of transport and warfare.
Science Times, page C1.
Japan Alters Nuclear Plans
Bowing to international pressure, Japan is said to have decided to put off several nuclear projects that would add tremendously to the world oversupply of plutonium.
Page A2.
Cuts Seen in Cable TV Rates
The Federal Communications Commission is preparing to order a further reduction in cable television rates of 6 to 10 percent, a senior agency official said.
Page D1.


Russia's Yegorova Turns the Cross-Country Course Into Her Stage
When Lyubov Yegorova was growing up in Siberia, what she wanted most had little to do with the rugged land that surrounded her.
Yegorova wanted to be a ballerina, to dance at the Kirov, dazzle all of Leningrad and hear its warm applause.
Yegorova would never get her wish.
Instead of ballet shoes and polished stages, she would make her living on narrow skis and the snowy tracks that were so much easier to find in her frigid corner of the world.
Instead of artistry, she would rely on endurance and grit.


Russian Teams Take Top Spots in Ice Dancing
The Russian pair of Oksana Grichtchuk and Yevgeny Platov, skating to an energetic rendition of "Rock Around the Clock," won the ice dancing competition, outperforming the British pair of Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean.
Maya Usova and Aleksandr Zhulin, the husband-and-wife world champion team, won the silver.
Torvill and Dean, attempting an Olympic comeback 10 years after their gold-medal performance in Sarajevo, included lively maneuvers to the music of Irving Berlin.
They pleased the crowd immensely, but the judges were less impressed, and placed them third.
RUSSIAN TIES MEDAL RECORD
Lyubov Yegorova, a Siberian native who grew up dreaming of dancing in the ballet, anchored the victorious Russian cross-country relay team.
The gold medal was her sixth, tying the Winter Games record for golds.
U.S.
HOCKEY TEAM ADVANCES
The United States routed Italy, 7-1, and moved on to the medal round, where it will face unbeaten Finland on Wednesday.
SportsTuesday, page B7.


Don't Label All Young Germans as Neo-Nazis
To the Editor:
While it is important to draw attention to neo-Nazism in Germany, as Stephen Silver does in "The Music of Hate" (Op-Ed, Feb. 8), we also need to know that many young Germans work against racism in their country and support their Government's efforts to eliminate skinhead culture.


New York City Could Sell a Station or Two Without Much Loss
To the Editor:
"WNYC Belongs to New Yorkers, Not to Mayor" (letter, Feb. 11) by Constantine Karalis, who appreciatively lauds WNYC, the city station, for its continued presentation of classical music, is right on target in his taste.
However, Mr.
Karalis needlessly fears the often-discussed sale of some of the city's radio and television properties.
Several could be sold without any loss of programming to the public.


The Pain of British Privatizations Has Yielded a String of Successes
Not too long ago, the idea would have been laughable: BMW, a name synonymous with German quality and industrial prowess, paying $1.2 billion to acquire Rover, the struggling car maker and a name once synonymous here with British clunkers and industrial decline.
But in the five and a half years since the British Government privatized Rover and cut off the billions of dollars in subsidies that had sustained it for more than a decade, the company has completed a remarkable turnaround.
Quality, design and efficiency have improved tremendously.
Last year it was one of the few European auto makers to weather a sales slump profitably.


Putting Shells Within Shells
A WINDOWS shell sounds like a contradiction in terms.
Microsoft Windows is itself a shell (although the preferred term these days is "environment") that puts icons and dialogue boxes between the user and the fussy DOS command line.
Other companies try to improve Windows by wrapping it in another shell, and some succeed.
Dashboard, from Hewlett-Packard, places a strip on the screen that shows the time and date, the amount of system resources that Windows is taking up and the kilobytes of memory consumed, and provides 27 "buttons" to push to start programs, to print out files and to do a large number of other things with its gauges, arrows and other gadgets.


Two Executives Join Lowe Howard-Spink
Two former executives of Young &amp; Rubicam London have been officially appointed to top positions at Lowe Howard-Spink in London.
Lowe's parent, the Lowe Group, had lured them away in December, but their contracts with Y.&amp; R. had kept them from joining their new agency.
Jerry Judge, 43, was named chief executive, and Tim Lindsay, 38, was named managing director; they previously held similar positions at Y.&amp; R. London.
Mr.
Judge succeeds David Jones, 46, who was promoted to the new position of chief executive at Lowe Group Europe.
Mr.
Lindsay succeeds David Wheldon, who left to become director of advertising at the Coca-Cola Company, an important Lowe client.
Also, Adrian Holmes, 40, the chairman of Lowe Howard-Spink, was named to the additional new position of chief creative officer at Lowe Group Europe.


Lebow Feels 'Pretty Good'
On a telephone conference call from Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center yesterday, FRED LEBOW , fighting a reoccurence of brain cancer, sounded tired and weak.
The hospital continued to list his condition as fair, and he said he felt "pretty good." He expects to leave the hospital Friday or Saturday in time to watch Sunday's New York Sheraton Bagel Run in Central Park.


Just When Needed, the Rinse Cycle Goes On


A Church-State Issue in Italy: Doctors' Role in Birth Control
For Dr.
Anna Maria Rizzi, the choice was clear.
Like other doctors across Italy, she had to decide which birth-control method to prescribe for a 28-year-old woman.
Dr.
Rizzi refused to prescribe birth-control pills because, as a Roman Catholic, she prefers "natural means."
The patient called Corriere Della Sera, the national daily put the story on its front page and papers throughout Italy expressed outrage that religious considerations had motivated a doctor's decision.


Gretzky Signs His Deal
WAYNE GRETZKY , the National Hockey League's all-time leading scorer who agreed to a three-year, $25.5 million contract with the Los Angeles Kings in September, signed the contract yesterday.
Gretzky, who owns 60 N.H.L. records and is within eight goals of tying GORDIE HOWE 's league mark of 801 career goals, is the highest-paid player in the N.H.L. at $8.5 million per season.


A Bronze in Norway, A Holiday in Slovenia
The 18-year-old had just won a bronze medal, but for Alenka Dovzan of Slovenia it was as good as gold.
Her third-place finish this afternoon in the women's combined Alpine ski event, which features downhill and slalom races, was the first Winter Olympics medal for her country.
Slovenia became an independent nation in 1991 after breaking away from the Republic of Yugoslavia.
"The people of my country will be very excited, I think so," she said in English.
"For a little state of only two million people, I think this means a lot."


No Headline
"Here it's not do I have a choice? It is what do I do  to find a doctor or a nurse  practitioner?" -- GALE WALKER, a hospital administrator in South Dakota, discussing rural health care.  [ A1:2. ]


CHRONICLE
JUDY PFAFF, a sculptor known for her large environmental installations, has taught at various universities over the years, but until she and WILLIAM TUCKER were appointed to head the art department at Bard College, she had never held an administrative position.
The dual appointment was announced by LEON BOTSTEIN, the president of the college, in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
"I liked the idea of sort of building something," Ms.
Pfaff said.
"Instead of fighting the administration, we are the administration."


Mother Accused of Neglect
A Brooklyn woman was charged with child endangerment yesterday after relatives reported that her four children had been left alone over the weekend, the housing police said.
Detective Sonia Burgos said the woman, Patricia Cobbs of 2218 Batchelder Street in Sheepshead Bay, was arrested when she returned to her apartment yesterday afternoon.
The children's grandmother had called the police earlier after receiving a telephone call from the oldest child, an 8-year-old boy, who told her that he and the other children had been alone over the weekend.
The children, who neighbors said were well taken care of, were released into their grandmother's custody.


Review/Television; On the Ruin of Cultures In Tibet and Iraq
With Bosnia relatively quiet, PBS aims its heavy guns at Washington tonight for failing to come to the relief of beleaguered peoples in Tibet and Iraq.
In the latest edition of "Frontline," Orville Schell pays a melancholy visit to Tibet and describes the impact of 40 years of Chinese occupation on that remote land's way of life.
Mr.
Schell, known for his writings on China, tells with quiet emotion of the smashing not just Tibet's religion, culture and history, "but of its soul as well."


Fossils Hint Land Life Began in Far Earlier Era
THE traditional view that life began to colonize the land only about 500 million years ago has apparently been refuted by the discovery of fossils of microscopic life thought to be as old as 1.2 billion years.
The discovery of what may be filaments of bacteria, or blue-green algae, was made at two sites in the American Southwest.
At both sites, the discoverers reported, the carbon content of rock that had once been soil indicated that there had once been "a significant cover of photosynthetic organisms." The oldest specimens were found 80 miles northeast of Phoenix.
The others, dating from 800 million years ago, were found near Death Valley, Calif., 50 miles southwest of Las Vegas, Nev.


Editor of Science To Retire in 1995
DANIEL E. KOSHLAND Jr., editor in chief of the journal Science, has announced that he will retire from the post next year.
He has held the position since 1985.
The journal is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
In 1993, said Dr.
Eloise E. Clark, president of the association, it achieved the largest circulation increase, greatest income and highest renewal rate in its history.


U.S. Offers Pact To the Muslims And the Croats
While attention over the last two weeks has focused on the showdown around Sarajevo, United States diplomats have been pressing a peace plan for other regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina where there has been fighting between Croatian forces and the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army.
A broad outline under consideration would end their battle for territory and create a joint sovereign state from land they control in a economic and commercial federation with Croatia.
The next step, Croats here said, would be to invite the Bosnian Serbs to join a new Bosnian state under a political arrangement that has not yet been defined.


Edward E. Rigney, 85, a Lawyer And Ex-Federal Prosecutor, Dies
Edward E. Rigney, a retired Manhattan lawyer and former Federal prosecutor whom New York State sent to uncover graft and corruption in Suffolk County in the 1950's, died on Saturday at St.
Patrick's Manor, a nursing home in Framingham, Mass.
He was 85 and had lived in Manhattan until about two years ago.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Dispute Over Prudential Accounting
Auditors who read prospectuses for a series of energy partnerships sold by Prudential Securities said in a sworn statement that they had never learned about significant details of an accounting tactic that Prudential said it had disclosed but that some investors called a secret fraud.
The statement by Deloitte &amp; Touche, which audited the books of Prudential-Bache Energy Production Inc., one of the general partners for the partnerships, was cited in a motion filed over the weekend.
The motion asked a Federal judge in New Orleans to set aside his approval last month of a $90 million class-action settlement involving the Prudential-Bache Energy Income partnerships.


Out of the Trash, an Infant Gets Another Life Chance
The baby lived because of a spring-like day, a mountain of garbage and melting snow.
Otis Parker, 57, the building superintendent at 1520 Carroll Street in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, seldom bothers with the garbage on Sunday.
But the sanitation department had asked people to dig their trash out of the hills of snow that were slowly melting in the weekend's springlike thaw, so that trucks could pick it up over the next few days.


R. Eugene Curry, 93, Real-Estate Developer
R.
Eugene Curry, a real-estate developer and civic leader concerned with problems of the aging, died on Sunday at Greenwich Hospital in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 93 and lived in Armonk, N.Y.
Mr.
Curry, a graduate of the Harvard School of Business Administration, made a career as a real-estate developer in Westchester County before World War II.
During the war he served with the United States Navy, ending as a lieutenant commander and deputy chief of the naval base at Kwajalein in the Marshall Islands.


Supreme Court Roundup; Court to Weigh Ban on Spread Of Some Fliers
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether states can ban the distribution of anonymous campaign literature.
The case is an appeal by an Ohio woman who was fined under the state's election law for distributing leaflets, signed only by "concerned parents and taxpayers," urging the defeat of a local tax referendum.
At stake is the constitutional balance between the free speech rights protected under the First Amendment and a state's interest in guarding against election fraud.


Fearing Shrunken Stature, France Endows a Fund
Fearful of losing political and cultural stature, France is giving money to six major American universities in the hope of creating a new generation of Francophiles.
The French are responding to declining interest in their language and culture in this country and to growing tension between France and the United States that exploded into the open last year during the waning days of world trade talks.


Topics of The Times; Antique Tech
The neon sign may read Tower Records, but the store has not stocked records for years.
When the customer told the salesclerk at the front desk he was there to pick up a stylus, she looked blank.
"I'm sorry," she said, "this store does not do special orders."
"But I called in the order two weeks ago," he replied, "and I have an order number."


Italians Silence Norsemen In Relay
It began with a remarkable performance by a man old enough to be Bjorn Daehlie's father.
It ended with Daehlie being beaten by an Italian of his own generation.
Seldom have 105,000 people suddenly gone so quiet.


James L. Daly; Lawyer, 80
James L. Daly, who served as an assistant district attorney in Manhattan from 1943 to 1960, died on Thursday at Vassar Brothers Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Mr.
Daly, who lived in Hopewell Junction, N.Y. was 80.
The cause was lung disease, said his wife, Doris.


Radio Free Patronage
Fifteen years ago, Mayor Ed Koch got a half-baked inspiration: he would deter prostitution by embarrassing convicted johns.
At his behest WNYC, the city's radio station, would broadcast their names on the "John Hour." The John Hour aired only once, for less than two minutes, and an announcer read the names of nine men.
Nine was enough.
The Mayor was accused of abusing his power by manipulating the city radio and TV stations for political purposes.
WNYC lost a $250,000 foundation grant and held on to a $1.1 million grant from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting only because Mr.
Koch, his arm twisted by WNYC's president, Mary Perot Nichols, held a mea culpa breakfast and promised to keep hands off WNYC programming.


Tension in the Talks With Mexico Rebels Seems to Be Reduced
In an sharp change of tone, the Government's representative in talks to end the peasant rebellion in Chiapas agreed tonight that peace would require "a commitment to democracy" by both sides.
Speaking after two days of talks with the Zapatista National Liberation Army, the envoy, Manuel Camacho Solis, appeared to drop the Government's earlier insistence that the insurgents' demands for national political changes had no place on the agenda.


Lewis Patton; English Professor, 91
Dr.
Lewis Patton, a Coleridge scholar and retired professor of English at Duke University, died on Thursday at the Forest at Duke, a retirement center in Durham, N.C.
He was 91 and lived in Durham.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, Dr. Robert G. Patton.


Big Skateoff Live on Radio
Viewers must wait until prime time on CBS-TV tonight to watch women's figure skating, but radio listeners will hear live, axel-to-axel coverage of Tonya Harding's and Nancy Kerrigan's technical routines.
WFAN-AM (660) will broadcast Harding's routine at about 1:40 P.M. and Kerrigan's at about 4 P.M., with commentary by Paul Wylie, the 1992 Olympic silver medalist, and Mark Champion, a Detroit sports broadcaster.
WCBS (880) will also carry live coverage.
Each 15-minute segment will start a few minutes before the skaters step onto the ice and last until the judges' scores are posted.


William Brown, 75, Professor Emeritus In Criminal Justice
William P. Brown, who had a long career as a New York City police commander and then became a criminal justice educator, died on Feb. 15 at the Hospice Inn at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
He was 75 and lived in Slingerlands, N.Y.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Safe From Maine's Cold Winds, Salad Greens Sprout Happily
THERE'S a big round thermometer attached to the trunk of a silver birch in the yard of Barbara Damrosch and Eliot Coleman.
At noon it reads precisely 5 degrees below zero.
The winter sun, still low in the southern sky, casts long blue shadows across snowy fields as Ms.
Damrosch and Mr.
Coleman set out to harvest greens for a lunchtime salad.
Robust weather may be a fact of nature here on Penobscot Bay, but the nose-tingling cold of this winter is uncommon.
Even at midday the frigid air is much colder than the ocean, and sea smoke rises in extravagant curls from each cresting wave.


F.C.C. ORDERS CUTS IN CABLE TV RATES OF 7% ON AVERAGE
Conceding in effect that the cable television regulations it adopted last year were inadequate, the Federal Communications Commission today ordered cable rates cut once again, this time by an average of 7 percent.
The F.C.C. chairman, Reed E. Hundt, said the additional rate cuts would force 90 percent of all cable systems to reduce at least some of their prices.


Hospitals Cost Too Much for Long Birth Stays; Shifting the Burden
To the Editor:
Re "Drive-Through Deliveries" (Op-Ed, Feb. 14): When I gave birth to my son last year, I was, in accordance with my insurance company's policy, discharged from the hospital 24 hours after giving birth.
Not only was I still groggy after having been in labor for 32 hours, but I was also forced to leave my baby behind, as he was being monitored in the intensive care unit for a pneumothorax.
I spent the next two days shuttling between my bed at home and the hospital, where I tried to establish breastfeeding with my son.


Big Marketers Are Divided On Issue of Homosexuality
Two giant national advertisers are taking widely disparate approaches on homosexuality and advertising that underscore how this contentious issue continues to divide marketers.
On one hand, Kraft General Foods is asking that none of its commercials appear during an episode of the ABC sitcom "Roseanne," scheduled to be broadcast next Tuesday night.
The episode, already the subject of much publicity, centers on a kiss the eponymous star, Roseanne Arnold, receives from the actress Mariel Hemingway, who portrays a lesbian.


Review/Met Opera; Caught Between Faith and a Brutal World
The Metropolitan Opera's production of "Dialogues of the Carmelites" opens with a haunting image: in silence, and bathed in warm light on a raked stage, nuns lie prostrate in prayer with their arms outstretched on a large white cruciform slab.
The picture lasts only a few seconds before Poulenc's jagged opening string motto shatters the silence, and the scene is moved to the library of the Marquis de la Force.
But in its simplicity and brevity, the violently interrupted scene suggests the tragedy that is about to unfold.
John Dexter's stark production was an eye-opener when the Met first staged it in 1977, and its power was was undiminished on Monday evening, when it returned to the house after a seven-year absence.
Its sets, sleek and minimal, are far more evocative than the overpacked shows that fill the stage most nights.


Books of The Times; How Stars and Stargazers Deserve Each Other SUB!!SUB!!
Claims to Fame
Celebrity in Contemporary America
By Joshua Gamson
Illustrated. 256 pages. University of California Press. $35, cloth; $14, paper.
"Who are the sexiest actors working today?" Entertainment Weekly's intrepid Dana Kennedy asks Meryl Streep, Glenn Close and Winona Ryder.
Obligingly, they offer names: John Turturro, says Ms.
Ryder; Kevin Bacon, says Ms.
Streep; John Malkovich is "lookin' good," Ms.
Close asserts. (Her dropped "g" is a folksily roguish touch.) Then they demur: if men were asked to name sexy actresses in print, they point out, stomachs would turn.


Blackmun: 'I . . . Concede That The Death Penalty Experiment Has Failed'
Following are excerpts from Justice Harry A. Blackmun's opinion dissenting from the Supreme Court's order denying review in a Texas death penalty case.
The order, Callins v.
Collins, No. 93-7054, was unsigned and was issued without an opinion.
On Feb. 23, 1994, at approximately 1 A.M., Bruce Edwin Callins will be executed by the State of Texas.
Intravenous tubes attached to his arms will carry the instrument of death, a toxic fluid designed specifically for the purpose of killing human beings.
The witnesses, standing a few feet away, will behold Callins, no longer a defendant, an appellant or a petitioner, but a man, strapped to a gurney, and seconds away from extinction.


People
*
Anthony Pearson was named to the new position of managing director at Peterson &amp; Blyth Associates, New York, which has been renamed Peterson Blyth Pearson.
He previously held a similar position at Addison Design Co., New York.


State Panel Decides to Censure Bronx Judge
New York State's Commission on Judicial Conduct has ruled that a Bronx Supreme Court justice should be censured for using campaign funds to buy a car phone and a camcorder, and to make political contributions.
The decision to censure -- a sanction that falls between public admonishment and removal from office -- was announced yesterday against Justice Barry Salman, who was elected to a 14-year term in November 1990.


Norwegian's Quest for 3d Gold Medal Is Denied


A Spy's Story in a World Of Many-Sided Betrayal
Aldrich Hazen Ames walked into the Central Intelligence Agency's new headquarters for his first day of work in June 1962, three weeks after his 21st birthday.
Carved into the white marble of the lobby was the Gospel verse, "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."
Today he emerged from the hall of mirrors that is counterintelligence, a graying man in handcuffs, and entered a Federal courthouse, the highest-ranking C.I.A. officer ever charged with espionage.


INSIDE
Court Orders New Timetable For New York City Recycling
The state's highest court said New York City had violated the law by failing to meet the requirements of its own recycling statute, and ordered the city to devise a potentially expensive new timetable to do so.
Page B1. 9 Accused in NASA Inquiry
Federal prosecutors accused nine people, including a partner of a former space agency administrator, of taking part in several bribery and kickback schemes.
Page A10.
Senate Approves Talbott
Republicans attacked Strobe Talbott, and 31 voted against his nomination as Deputy Secretary of State, but he was confirmed.
Page A9.
Donor to Health Causes Dies
Mary Woodard Lasker, a philanthropist who championed medical research on cancer, heart and eye diseases and also supported urban beautification projects, was 93.
Page A17.
New CUNY Rules on Income
The trustees of City University called for the Chancellor and top aides to disclose any outside income.
Page B1.


The Hatter's Shakes
To the Editor:
Re "What It Was That Made Hatters Mad" (letter, Feb. 9):
Danbury, Conn., where I have lived all my life, was known as the hat city of the world.
I worked as a hatter during school breaks.
My grandfather was a hatter, and members of my family worked in the factories.


Warm Return to Capitol Hill After Acquittal


CHRONICLE
Rejections are not unfamiliar in most authors' lives, which is why GARRISON KEILLOR came up with the idea of having five authors each write a rejection of a literary classic for the entertainment of the Authors Guild Foundation benefit at the Metropolitan Club on March 7.
Calvin Trillin said he would dismiss T. S. Eliot's "Waste Land" in rhyme; Wendy Wasserstein planned to disappoint Jane Austen; Anna Quindlen would cast off "Alice in Wonderland"; George Plimpton planned to reject some imaginary work.
But with 12 days to go there may be changes.


In School
The discussion topic in Room 211 at the Hunter High School 10 Percent Club was political correctness and within minutes members were debating how they like to refer to themselves.
The girls felt "gay" was a little too male-ish, "lesbian" a bit harsh-sounding.
Everyone concurred that "homosexual" had too clinical a ring.
"There should be a term besides 'homosexuality' that means everything," said the club treasurer.


Death Penalty Is Renounced By Blackmun
Justice Harry A. Blackmun said today that after a 20-year struggle with the issue of capital punishment, he had concluded that "the death penalty experiment has failed" and that it was time for the Court to abandon the "delusion" that capital punishment could be consistent with the Constitution.
"From this day forward, I no longer shall tinker with the machinery of death," Justice Blackmun, the Court's 85-year-old senior member, wrote in an emotional, highly personal and solitary dissent from the Court's refusal to hear the appeal of a Texas inmate.


CUNY Chancellor Must Disclose Outside Income
The Chancellor of the City University of New York and other top CUNY officials will be required to disclose any income they earned from sources other than their university jobs and to account for the time they spent on non-CUNY business, under a resolution passed yesterday by the university's trustees.
The resolution, in response to criticism by two trustees that Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds spends too much time away from the university doing unrelated corporate and professional work, was passed unanimously.


Nets Cold on Court, Warmer on Coleman
Derrick Coleman watched the Nets' game tonight from the end of the bench, courtesy of a sprained left ankle.
He didn't miss much.
New Jersey had its five-game winning streak snapped in a big way by the Miami Heat, 123-97.
But the big news wasn't the game.
Coleman is apparently closing in on a contract with the Nets that could make him one of the highest-paid players in the National Basketball Association.


French Devaluation Of African Currency Brings Wide Unrest
A wave of price increases, labor disputes, demonstrations and violent clashes has spread across West Africa in recent weeks, prompted by France's decision to devalue the currency used by tens of millions of people in more than a dozen of its former African colonies.
Nearly a month after the value of the African franc was suddenly and sharply cut in half when France bowed to Western pressure to end what amounted to a subsidy, people are trying to adapt to painful price increases for nearly everything they eat and drink.
Prices for pharmaceutical products, nearly all of which are imported, have soared.
The cost of drugs for malaria, the continent's biggest killer, have nearly doubled in some places, putting them out of reach of many Africans.


A Maverick Enters Chip Making
By Silicon Valley's common wisdom, the computer designers here at Microunity Systems Engineering have it all wrong.
Microunity, a highly secretive, privately held start-up company, is nearly finished with a new chip factory that is expected to match the world's best in its ability to create ultrathin wires less than a half-micron wide -- less than a hundredth the thickness of human hair.
Such chips, which the company plans to start shipping late this year, are likely to provide the circuitry for consumer products like video telephones and television set-top computers, as well as the most powerful supercomputers.


Book Notes
Author and Subject
Stephan Lesher's new biography, "George Wallace: American Populist" (Addison-Wesley), is a thoroughly documented account of Governor Wallace's life that seeks, as the author said in an interview, "to present him as wholly as possible."
It is no secret that Mr.
Lesher feels an almost grudging admiration for the political importance of a man he covered for years, first as a reporter in three small-town Southern newspapers and then as a reporter for Newsweek.
Nor is it a secret to those connected to the book that Mr.
Lesher paid Mr.
Wallace for his cooperation, which included exclusive access to his papers at the University of Alabama at Birmingham and hours of interviews.


Tokyo Can Stop Plutonium Traffic
Japan is prudently deferring long-range plans to build new nuclear reactors that would add to the world's growing glut of plutonium.
In the same spirit, Tokyo might also reconsider near-term plans for reprocessing plutonium.
Otherwise it risks contributing to the spread of nuclear arms in Asia and around the world.
Japan hoped to turn nuclear waste into plutonium fuel to meet its energy needs.
But it can assure energy independence for the next half-century, and save money in the bargain, by relying on uranium to fuel its power plants.
Like plutonium, uranium is readily available.
Unlike plutonium, it is not readily usable to build bombs.


DEERE &amp; CO. (N)
Deere &amp; Company showed a turnaround in first-quarter earnings as sales of its three main product lines rose sharply.
Deere, based in Moline, Ill., reported earnings of $87 million, or $1.02 a share, for the quarter, which ended on Jan. 31, compared with a loss of $1.1 billion for the comparable quarter a year ago.
Before accounting changes for retirement and employment benefits, the 1993 loss totaled $36.9 million.
Sales and revenues for the quarter rose 21 percent, to $1.7 billion, from $1.4 billion in the comparable period a year ago.


Some Wives' Tales Withstand Scrutiny
EAT your carrots; you'll see better in the dark.
Don't go swimming until an hour after you eat.
Fish is brain food.
It's my mother's voice exhorting me.
It could be your mother's voice, too.
Or maybe she made you wear garlic around your neck to ward off colds, or insisted that you have chicken soup if the cold arrived.


T.C.I.
The Federal Communications Commission said it would try again to order a cut in cable television rates, dealing a blow to the nation's largest operator, Tele-Communications Inc., known as T.C.I.
After losing as much as $1 a share, the stock of the company rallied somewhat to close at $24.875, down 37.5 cents a share, in Nasdaq trading yesterday.


Food Notes
Low Prices, High Quality
A large new food market with low prices and high quality, called By Choice, has opened in Hamilton Heights, in upper Manhattan.
It is well-stocked with meat, poultry, seafood, dairy products and produce, plus some groceries and frozen foods.
For instance, on a visit to the store last week, a 40-pound sack of chicken wings was $11.60 and shell steak was $2.49 a pound.
In the seafood department, fresh mussels were 59 cents a pound and whole Atlantic salmon (6 to 8 pounds) was $2.99 a pound.
Whole fish and large whole cuts of meat can be cut up free.
Good produce buys included shelled cranberry beans at 79 cents a pound, cabbage for 19 cents a pound, one-pound bags of carrots for 25 cents each and half-pints of blackberries from Chile for $1.99.
By Choice also had assorted tropical fruits and tubers.
The store plans to buy as much as possible from local farms.
The grocery section is limited to items that can be sold at low prices, like one-pound boxes of De Cecco pasta in a dozen shapes for $1.39.
Frozen foods ranged from standard juices and vegetables to blintzes, pot stickers and quiche, and included Wolfgang Puck pizzas for $4.89.
A selection of foods prepared on the premises will be available soon.
By Choice, 2328 12th Avenue (at 133d Street), is open seven days a week and has free parking.
Organic Vegetables
Urban Organic, which is to celebrate its first anniversary in March, is an organic vegetable delivery service that was started by Mitchell Holmes-Baer, because, he said, he found it difficult to get satisfactory organic produce for his family.
It delivers weekly in Brooklyn, Manhattan, and to Long Island City in Queens and Riverdale in the Bronx.
Each delivery consists of 16 to 22 certified organic fruits and vegetables that are selected according to market availability.
Last week, the list included red lettuce, mizuna, leeks, carrots, red potatoes, oranges, lemons, bananas, red delicious apples, D'Anjou pears and grapefruits.
There are boxes for $25, $35 and $50, all containing the same items but varying in quantity.
A one-time $20 registration fee is required, but is returned if three new customers are referred to Urban Organic.
For information: (718) 638-2888.
Mexican Cooking
Diana Kennedy, a cookbook author and an authority on Mexican cooking, will be making one of her rare appearances in New York next month.
She will teach a weekend workshop on March 25, 26 and 27 at Peter Kump's New York Cooking School, 307 East 92d Street.
The classes will meet from 6 to 9 P.M. on Friday and 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
The cost is $290.
To register, call (800) 522-4610.
New Food Magazine
A new food magazine is slated to hit newsstands in May.
Called Saveur, it is the American version of a popular magazine published in France.
The editor in chief is Dorothy Kalins, the former editor of Metropolitan Home.
The executive editor of Saveur will be the food columnist and cookbook author Colman Andrews.
The magazine will focus on regional cuisine, Ms.
Kalins said.
"When we do a travel piece about a place it will be connected to the food, like our story about Parma, Italy, in the first issue," she said.
Also on the masthead are Marion Cunningham, Alice Waters, Sheila Lukins, Darrell Corti and Paula Wolfert, among others.
The magazine is published by Meigher Communications, a new company formed by Christopher Meigher, formerly with Time Warner; Douglas Peabody, one of the founders of America Online, and Ms.
Kalins.
Food Newsletter
Mail Order Gourmet, a newsletter published six times a year, devotes each issue to different kinds of mail-order foods.
The current issue lists sources for baked goods, candies and baking mixes for people who have allergies to certain grains, dairy items and sweeteners.
The issue also includes sources for regular bread mixes.
Subscriptions to Mail Order Gourmet, published by EC Communications, are $18 a year.
For information: (800) 989- 5996.
Vinegar Classes
Marta Pulini, the executive chef of Mad. 61, at Barneys New York, 10 East 61st Street, will give a class about balsamic vinegar on Monday and again on March 7.
Steven Jenkins, the cheese buyer, will talk about cheeses today, March 2 and March 9.
The classes, $50 each, meet from 4 to 6 P.M.
For reservations, call Jay Magazine at (212) 833-2217.


Taking the Pro Plunge When Feet Aren't Wet
The promoters say definitely.
Her coach says maybe.
Her father says possibly.
Her mother says why so soon.
The sponsors say hurry up already.
What the player herself says is that she wants to compete this August in the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles at Manhattan Beach, Calif., an upscale seaside haunt she rarely glimpsed from Compton, Calif., the downscale suburb where she spent her wonder years before relocating to Florida at age 11 to begin taking in tennis every which way but intravenously.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.21
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.33
3.27
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.43
3.47
3.01
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.04
6.07
5.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.60
6.62
6.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.40
7.43
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.65
5.59
5.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


On Paper, the U.S. Can't Defeat Finland, but Hockey Is Played on Ice
On paper, it's not much of a contest.
Finland is 5-0, has given up only four goals and leads the Olympic hockey tournament in power-play percentage.
So why should the United States, with a 1-1-3 record, 17 goals allowed, and seventh in the power-play rating, believe it has a good chance of beating the Finns in the quarterfinals on Wednesday?


Green Plans Investigation Of Files Lost By a Court
Accusing the city's Housing Court of losing thousands of documents each year, Public Advocate Mark J. Green said yesterday that he would conduct an investigation focusing on the Civil Court Administration's handling of files.
Mr.
Green, the city's second-highest elected official, said he had become aware of problems in the Housing Court after receiving a complaint from the owner of an Upper West Side apartment building who was unable to enforce a court ruling evicting her superintendent because the court lost her documents.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The F.C.C. ordered additional cuts in cable television rates.
The cuts, which average 7 percent, are the commission's second attempt to reduce cable rates in response to the 1992 cable television act.
The move is expected to force 90 percent of cable systems nationwide to lower at least some of their prices.  [ Page A1. ]


Vance Picked To Mediate A Macy Plan
In a surprise move intended to speed R. H. Macy &amp; Company's emergence from Chapter 11 bankrupcty protection, Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of State, was appointed yesterday to mediate negotiations on a reorganization plan.
Judge Burton R. Lifland of the United States Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, who has presided over the Macy case for more than two years, gave the company until March 8 to submit an outline of a plan to Mr.
Vance.
"This case is one that should be out of the court's clutches by the end of the year," Judge Lifland said.


A Vice Chairman at Nynex Is Appointed as President
The Nynex Corporation said yesterday that it had named Ivan G. Seidenberg, a vice chairman, as its new president, as well as chief operating officer, a new position.
Mr.
Seidenberg's promotion comes as Nynex faces growing competition from local providers in the New York area.


Duran Keeps Going and Going and Going
ROBERTO DURAN scored a unanimous decision last night over CARLOS MONTERO of the Dominican Republic in a 10-round supermiddleweight bout in Marseilles, France.
Duran, 42, a former champion in four weight categories, looked chunky compared with his muscular 27-year-old opponent.


ATONEMENT ASKED FROM THE RUSSIANS
In retaliation for the alleged espionage operation that led to the arrest of a C.I.A. official, the United States demanded today that the Russian Government take specific steps, including the voluntary withdrawal of some intelligence officers from the United States, senior American officials said tonight.
James Collins, the Ambassador-at-large for Russia and the former Soviet Union, met with Russian officials here tonight to try to win their agreement to the American plan, the officials said.


ON THE FAST TRACK WITH: Dr. Richard Coburn; Doctor, Lawyer, Restaurant Chief
DR.
RICHARD COBURN, the owner of Colors, a contemporary American restaurant on East 46th Street near Park Avenue in Manhattan, may be the most overeducated, and underprepared, restaurateur in New York City.
Five years ago, with knowledge extending no further than the tables that he occupied nightly at various restaurants, he leapt blindly into the business "because it was something I always wanted to do."
Taking on new challenges is nothing new to Dr.
Coburn, 59, who is a plastic surgeon with a thriving private practice on the East Side.
He is also certified for general surgery, has a dental degree, a law degree and a Masters of Business Administration.
He has owned a small oil-exploration business, owns several Popeye's Fried Chicken outlets in Philadelphia and was an amateur jockey until he broke his back and smashed some ribs.


What About the Nation of Islam's Historical Ties to Fascism?
To the Editor:
It was widely reported when Louis Farrakhan, head of the Nation of Islam, suspended Khalid Abdul Muhammad, who told an audience at Kean College of New Jersey that Jews are bloodsuckers, gays are sissies, and the Pope is a cracker.


Accounts
*
CIC Video International, London, to the Lowe Group, London, as the first agency to handle the video distributor's pan-European account.
Lowe's sibling shop, Lowe Howard-Spink, London, already handles CIC Video's account in Britain.
Billings were estimated at $12 million. *
Sterling Software Inc., Dallas, to Arnold Advertising, McLean, Va., as the first agency to handle advertising for its systems management division in Reston, Va.
Billings were not disclosed.


On Ulster Border, Grim Days for Grenadier Guards
The squad of British infantrymen of the Grenadier Guards, automatic rifles at the ready, moved at double-time out of their base on a routine patrol to look for guerrillas of the Irish Republican Army.
The British soldiers operate in the rolling green hills and villages of this southern border region of the British province of Northern Ireland.


A Respite From Fear for Sarajevans


Theater in Review
A Malice in the Wood  Nat Horne Theater 440 West 42d Street Clinton Through March 11 By Le Wilhelm; directed by Sharon Fallon; set by Mr.
Wilhelm; lighting by Richard Kent Green; scenic artist, Mark Briggs; stage manager, James Gordon; assistant stage manager, Bart Tangredi; incidental music by Faser Hardin.
Presented by Love Creek Productions; Mr.
Wilhelm, executive artistic director; Jeffrey Albright, Ms.
Fallon and Philip Galbraith, artistic directors.


No Headline
"From this day forward, I no longer shall tinker with the machinery of death." -- JUSTICE HARRY A. BLACKMUN.  [ A1:5. ]


Despite Problems, Recycling Works, Sometimes, Some Places
Recycling in New York City poses problems, but in some neighborhoods it works very well, and it can be made to work all over, according to its advocates.
And, at least according to optimists, it can cost less than alternatives like incineration, or burying wastes at the Fresh Kills landfill or in another state.
But the city says it does not know when it can reach the goals laid out in the recycling law passed by the City Council in 1989.


At Last! 'Snow White' on Home Video


Jordan Gets Through A Real Hitting Debut
Baseball officials surely have to hope that Michael Jordan will draw new fans to a sport they believe has this little image problem.
Well, baseball may have hit its mark if the size of the crowd drawn to this city today is any indication.
The fans, numbering in the hundreds, came to watch a spring training practice, yes.
But mostly they came to watch Jordan, the three-time most valuable player of the National Basketball Association, face live pitching in the infancy of his professional baseball career with the Chicago White Sox.


Government Securities Rise a Bit
Following two sharp selloffs in as many days, the government securities market received a little lift yesterday from Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman.
The price of the Treasury's 30-year bond rose 5/16 , to 9517/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from price, fell to 6.60 percent, from 6.62 percent on Friday.


Estonia Shows Russia Shock Therapy Works
To the Editor:
In "Russia Won't Bankrupt Itself for Our Sake" (letter, Feb. 6), David Keppel questions the wisdom of the Clinton Administration, and the West, in suggesting that Russians continue the economic reforms sometimes referred to as shock therapy.
His main argument is that these changes would cause widespread unemployment and high inflation.
Yet Estonia, Russia's neighbor, did as the West recommended, and with good results.
This Baltic nation has often been called the economic success story of the former Soviet Union.


From Top of the Pile To Bottom of the Mets
Pete Smith has been here before.
He looks around the Mets' spring-training complex and he sees players who have been through the worst.
And although he wasn't with them last season, he knows exactly how they feel.
Smith was a member of the Atlanta Braves in 1993, the season the Mets lost 103 games and the Braves went to the playoffs for the third straight year.
Still, he can remember a time not so long ago -- three springs to be exact -- when he came into a camp where memory loss could be one's best asset.


Albert T. Sommers, 74, Analyst Of Shifts in American Economy
Albert T. Sommers, an analyst of national economic trends, died on Sunday in Boca Raton, Fla., where he was vacationing.
He was 74 and lived in Manhasset, L.I.
He suffered a heart attack on a tennis court on Feb. 7, his family said.


Preview on Ice for Rangers
Although there are still 26 regular-season games left, Coach Mike Keenan is already gearing his league-leading Rangers for the National Hockey League playoffs.
Monday afternoon's comeback 4-3 victory in overtime against the Pittsburgh Penguins at Madison Square Garden, which saw Keenan experiment with different combinations on the ice, was a prime example.
"We started to formulate some of the things we might do," the Rangers' coach said after an optional practice today.
"Some of the aspects of playoff competition were put into place: line-matching, one-on-ones, Esa Tikkanen up against somebody for a game, whatever it takes in terms of the situation."


Bridge
In any bidding system, it should be possible to describe a distribution, within close limits, in two bids.
For this reason three-suited hands, 4-4-4-1 or 5-4-4-0, are a nuisance.
If the opening bidder shows one of his suits and then another, a fit in the third suit can easily be missed.
Some 60 years ago an avant-garde system devised by Harold Bissell included specific bids for three-suiters.
A similar plan was followed two decades later in the Roman System, which used two clubs to show normal three-suiters, with 11-16 points, and two diamonds for stronger hands.
Variations of this idea are common in tournament play.


Public &amp; Private; Go For the Gold
The In-Home All-Kid Winter Olympics began here on the second school snow day of the year.
The opening ceremonies consisted of eating Honey Nut Cheerios out of the box and singing along loudly to the Royal Canadian Kilted Yaksmen anthem from the Ren and Stimpy show.
"You be Nancy," said the representative of the third grade to the representative of the kindergarten.
"I'll be Tonya's bodyguard."


Aftermath of Teen-Age Melee in New Jersey


A Fractional Peace
Behind the self-congratulation and assertions of victory in the Clinton Administration over the military respite in Sarajevo lie two stark realities: fighting still rages in parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and any peace settlement that emerges may very well give the Muslims less territory than they could have gotten a year ago.
The NATO allies can plausibly take credit for finally giving the Bosnian Serbs an ultimatum that worked, proving that the credible threat of force can get at least short-term results.
But their very success raises the question of why it took the United States and the rest of NATO so long: the Serbs have been seizing territory, after all, for nearly two years.


A Walk Through Wintry Woods


Protest Against the Leadership of the A.S.P.C.A.


Hospitals Cost Too Much for Long Birth Stays
To the Editor:
I do not agree with Suzanne Gordon's "Drive-Through Deliveries" (Op-Ed, Feb. 14), which argues that health care for postnatal mothers means a lengthy hospital stay.
When my own children were born, 12 and 15 years ago, I went home with each of them within a few hours after birth, confident in my ability to care for each and feeling well prepared to care for myself.
In pregnancy and childbirth I had been taken care of by midwives, as well as by an enlightened obstetrician, and had extensive prenatal instruction from midwives.


Diplomats See a New Chance to End Bosnia War
American, Russian and European diplomats agreed today that the withdrawal of Serbian heavy weapons from Sarajevo after a NATO bombing ultimatum and Russian intervention had created a fresh chance to achieve a negotiated end to the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and vowed to make a new push for one together.
Jurgen Chrobog, a German Foreign Ministry official who presided over a conference called on short notice, said that the officials had recommended concrete steps to their governments but that these did not include any new bombing threats to stop the fighting in other areas.


5 Arrested in Casino Robbery


3 Women on Crew of U.S. Entry
If appearances mean anything, the tentative plans by BILL KOCH to support an all-women's team for the 1995 America's Cup races seem inevitable.
Koch's America
team showed up in Auckland, New Zealand, this week for a nine-race practice session against New Zealand cup sailors with three female crew members: J. J. ISLER, of San Diego, a top match-racing sailor; BETSY ALISON, of Newport, R.I., 1993 Rolex Yachtswoman of the Year; and LINDA LINDQUIST, of Weehawken, N.J., an accomplished sailor.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with J.T.
Snow, first baseman, and Rod Correia, infielder, on one-year contracts.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Graf-Austin Matchup  Steffi Graf of Germany needed only 47 minutes to defeat Gigi Fernandez in a first-round match of the $400,000 Evert Cup women's tournament yesterday in Indian Wells, Calif.
Graf spoiled Fernandez's 30th birthday with a 6-1, 6-2 thrashing at the Grand Champions resort.
Graf will meet Tracy Austin today in the second round.
Austin won her first-round match Monday in struggling fashion, defeating Radka Zrubakova of Slovakia, 6-2, 5-7, 6-3. (AP)


Sun Always Rising On Norway's Ski Fans
Dawn was 15 minutes away, and Kjell Odegaard was whispering in the dark to an American.
"I heard on the radio that the tracks are getting full," he said.
"You probably think this is crazy."


3 Are Arrested After Shootout At Restaurant
Three gunmen were captured last night after a shootout with the police during an attempted robbery at a Roy Rogers Restaurant in Queens.
Police officials said no one was hurt, including a dozen or so customers and employees who were caught inside at 8:15 P.M. when the three men, two of them with pistols, entered and shouted, "This is a holdup."


Pope Deplores Gay Marriage
Fueling a debate in the United States and Europe over homosexual matrimony, Pope John Paul II chastised such unions today as "a serious threat to the future of the family and society" and said they could not be "recognized and ratified as a marriage in society."
The Pope's comments were made in a 100-page letter on family values that not only restated the Vatican's familiar views on contraception, divorce and abortion but also sent a message to Catholics to refrain from supporting the notion of gay or lesbian marriage.


Change at New Yorker
Thomas A. Florio, who was appointed vice president and publisher of The New Yorker in January, was given the title of president and publisher yesterday.
A former publisher of Conde Nast Traveler, Mr.
Florio succeeds his brother, Steven, at The New Yorker.
Steven T. Florio, who will assume the position of president of Conde Nast Publications Inc. on June 1, has already moved into the Conde Nast headquarters to facilitate the transition.


Review/Theater; 4 One-Acters, 4 Different Directions
The pickings are slim at the Manhattan Class Company's sixth annual Class One-Acts festival.
Of the four offerings on the bill, only "Good as New," written and directed by Peter Hedges, has any sticking power.
The others are piffle.
It wouldn't take a strong wind to blow them over; someone inadvertently opening a door backstage during the performance could probably do it.


Havelange Will Run Again for President
JOAO HAVELANGE of Brazil announced yesterday that he would run for a sixth term as president of FIFA, the world governing body of soccer.
The 78-year-old Havelange made the announcement, which was no surprise, during a meeting with reporters in Manhattan in conjunction with a FIFA seminar for delegates of the 24 countries participating in the World Cup next summer.


WAL-MART STORES INC. (N)
Wal-Mart Stores Inc. yesterday reported an increase in fourth-quarter earnings of almost 16 percent and a revenue rise of nearly 19 percent, helped in part by the opening of additional stores.
In the fourth quarter, the company, the nation's leading retailer, opened 33 Wal-Mart stores and 94 Sam's Club wholesale stores.
Eighty-seven of the clubs were acquired from Kmart Corporation's PACE Club wholesale unit.
As of Jan. 31, Wal-Mart had a total of 2,440 stores, up from 2,136 a year ago.


Personal Health
"CHEAP 100-Year-Old Household Drug Found to Fight Heart Attacks, Strokes, Cancer, Etc." sounds like a too-good-to-be-true headline.
But dozens of studies involving more than a million people have hailed such a drug.
It is none other than ordinary aspirin, the standby for reducing pain, fever and inflammation.
The findings of recent studies strongly suggest that an aspirin a day -- or at least every other day -- may be better than an apple at keeping the doctor away.
Aspirin, these studies indicate, can reduce a person's chances of suffering a heart attack or stroke and of developing cancers of the colon and other digestive organs.
It may also improve brain function in people with dementia who have suffered little strokes, ward off or reduce the severity of migraine headaches and help prevent hazardous high blood pressure in pregnant women.
Also being studied are aspirin's possible roles in preventing cataracts and averting recurrences of gallstones.


AUSTRIA PROTESTS CZECH ATOM PLANT
Worried about the potential for a nuclear accident near its border, the Austrian Government has sent a high-level delegation to Washington to protest plans to use American technology to complete a Soviet-style nuclear power plant in the Czech Republic.
In January, the United States Export-Import Bank agreed to guarantee a $317 million loan to the Czech electric utility to buy equipment and nuclear fuel from the Westinghouse Electric Corporation to start up two reactors at the Temelin nuclear plant, 40 miles from the Austrian border.


Sonics Blast Knicks and So Does Riley
Pat Riley was livid. Actually, he was angrier than that.
The Knicks' coach had just witnessed last night's pathetic performance by New York, a 93-82 loss to the Seattle SuperSonics at Madison Square Garden.
How inept were the Knicks?
New York shot 28.7 percent, the lowest field-goal percentage in the National Basketball Association this season.
Patrick Ewing missed his first 14 shots.
And the Knicks tied a season-low half with just 33 points at intermission.


Michigan Picks Up 20th Victory
Michigan 79, Illinois 70
Jalen Rose scored 17 of his 24 points in the second half and No. 3 Michigan ran its winning streak to nine with a victory at home over Illinois last night.


PROSECUTORS SAY OFFICIAL AT C.I.A. SPIED FOR RUSSIA
A former official of the C.I.A.'s Soviet counterintelligence branch and his wife were charged today with accepting more than $1.5 million for nearly a decade of spying for the K.G.B. and its successor intelligence agency in Russia.
Federal prosecutors accused Aldrich Hazen Ames, now employed in the Central Intelligence Agency's narcotics intelligence operation, and his wife, Maria del Rosario Casas Ames, who once was a paid agency informer, of compromising some of the most closely guarded secrets in intelligence, including classified operations and the identities of operatives employed by the United States abroad.
Lavish Spending
Former and current counterintelligence officials said today that the case represented a disaster for American intelligence.
Mr.
Ames, one of several branch chiefs responsible for trying to unmask Soviet spies and otherwise thwart Soviet efforts to spy on the United States in the mid-1980's, had access to American espionage operations, C.I.A. efforts to recruit agents in the Soviet Union and the C.I.A.'s own attempts to ferret out Moscow's spies.


In School
The discussion topic in Room 211 at the Hunter High School 10 Percent Club was political correctness and within minutes members were debating how they like to refer to themselves.
The girls felt "gay" was a little too male-ish, "lesbian" a bit harsh-sounding.
Everyone concurred that "homosexual" had too clinical a ring.
"There should be a term besides 'homosexuality' that means everything," said the club treasurer.


2 Children Are Killed In Car Fire; Mother Held
A woman was accused of killing two of her young children today by igniting a can of gasoline in her car as the infants sat trapped in the back seat, the authorities said.
In seconds, flames and thick smoke filled the car as the woman, Maria Montalvo, 29, was pulled from the open driver's door, her coat aflame.
Then it exploded into a fireball in the driveway of Ms.
Montalvo's in-laws' home as her husband and a neighbor tried in vain to unlock the two rear doors and pull the children to safety.


At Some Artillery Sites, Serbs Remain Stubborn
Although the United Nations claims to control all Serbian artillery within 12.4 miles of Sarajevo, this village just west of the capital illustrates that the control is partial at best.
Despite protracted negotiations, Serbian forces are frustrating efforts by British troops here to bring 19 pieces of artillery under United Nations control, two days after a NATO deadline.


Big Board and Amex Uncovered Short Sales Rise
Short-selling activity, usually done as a bet that stock prices will fall, rose significantly earlier this month, evidently as a result of the sharp fall in stock prices that followed the Federal Reserve's move to raise the Federal funds rate on Feb. 4.
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the total short position in its stocks -- the number of shares borrowed and sold short, but not yet covered by repurchasing the shares -- rose 3.7 percent in the month that ended Feb. 8, to a record 1.32 billion shares.
That was the largest increase in five months, perhaps reflecting renewed confidence among bears.
At the American Stock Exchange, the short interest position rose 3.5 percent, to a record 104.9 million shares.
It was the largest rise in three months on that exchange.


Williams Is 'Awake and Alert' in Hospital
TED WILLIAMS was "awake and alert" but still had some loss of sight and weakness days after a minor stroke.
"All his indicators are favorable for recovery," said DANIEL MOORE, a spokesman for Shands Hospital in Gainesville, Fla.
Williams, 75, was admitted to Citrus Memorial Hospital on Saturday after his mild stroke at home.
He was transferred Monday to Shands.


Corrections
A map of Bosnia yesterday showing areas controlled by Muslims, Serbs and Croats reversed two labels.
The area identified as under the control of Bosnian Serbs is actually under the control of Croats, and vice versa.


After Conviction, Essex County Head Resigns
One day after he was convicted on Federal extortion charges, the Essex County Executive, Thomas J. D'Alessio, resigned today, ending his tenure as one of the state's most powerful elected officials and shaking up the county's Democratic Party.
The Board of Chosen Freeholders, Essex County's nine-member governing body, said it would meet Wednesday night to begin choosing Mr.
D'Alessio's interim successor, who will serve until the end of the year, when Mr.
D'Alessio's four-year term was to have expired.
The county charter requires that the successor be a Freeholder or the county business administrator.


Gen. Johannes Steinhoff, 80, Dies; Helped Rebuild German Air Force
Lieut.
Gen.
Johannes Steinhoff, one of the Luftwaffe's fighter aces of World War II and a mover in rebuilding the postwar German military under NATO auspices, died on Monday in Bonn.
He was 80 and lived in nearby Bad Godesberg.
The cause was complications of a heart attack he suffered in December, his family said.


Final Summation Offered By U.S. in Bombing Trial
Promising that there would be "no gimmicks, no magic," only "plain talk," a Government prosecutor in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday began the Government's rebuttal of the summations of defense lawyers, which had drawn to a close only minutes before.
The prosecution's rebuttal of the defense's closing arguments is the last of the lawyers' presentations in the four-and-a-half-month-old trial.
After the rebuttal, which seemed likely to end today, the presiding judge, Kevin T. Duffy, will instruct the jury in the law, and then the jury's deliberations will begin.


Kraft Is Approved as Patriot Owner
The sale of the New England Patriots to ROBERT KRAFT was unanimously approved yesterday by National Football League owners, assuring the team a new stability and a permanent spot in New England.


Senate Confirms Talbott as State Dept. Deputy
The Senate confirmed Strobe Talbott today as Deputy Secretary of State, but only after Republicans skewered the Clinton Administration's diplomatic record as well as that of the nominee.
The nomination drew 66 votes in favor, and a surprising 31 against.
Mr.
Talbott is widely viewed as a likely successor to Secretary of State Warren Christopher, if Mr.
Christopher leaves his job.


I.B.M. Says Canon Agrees To Use New Power PC Chip
I.B.M. announced yesterday that Canon Inc. had agreed to use the Power PC chip in future generations of personal computers, giving the new microchip a welcome, if limited, endorsement.
The Japanese company is one of the few computer makers beyond the three companies that have jointly developed the Power PC -- I.B.M., Apple Computer Inc. and Motorola -- to commit itself to using the new chip.


A Pause In Scandal: Now They Will Skate
After weeks of ceaseless speculation, of courtroom drama and a threatened lawsuit, of a possible suspension and last-minute relenting, after claustrophobic training sessions under searing pressure, Nancy Kerrigan and Tonya Harding have nothing left to do at the Olympics but skate.
It seemed as if this day might never come, the two of them together, skating for a gold medal, accountable for the moment to no one other than nine judges scoring at rinkside.


A Second Chance For D.M.B.&amp; B.
Kraft General Foods yesterday granted D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles of New York a second chance to handle advertising for the Crystal Light sugar-free powdered drink mix brand.
The account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $15 million, had been at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York for nine months after leaving D.M.B.&amp; B. in April.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
March Madness is just around the corner, and most schools have just two or three games left in the regular season.
Here are the favorites and a few outside shots to win conference tournaments, with an automatic bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament on the line: Big East
Although UConn (23-3 over all, 13-2 in the conference) will probably run away with the regular-season conference championship, 18th-ranked Syracuse has a good chance to improve its 17-5 record, since it plays Seton Hall at home tonight and St.
John's Sunday at Madison Square Garden, then Miami next week.


New Delhi Journal; Bandit Queen Returns, an Angel to the Oppressed
In the legend conveyed by the books, films and articles that have made her one of India's best-known women, Phoolan Devi is known as the Bandit Queen, the Avenging Angel and the Rebel of the Ravines -- a lower-caste fisherman's daughter from the badlands south of Delhi who leveled a bolt-action Mauser rifle in protest against a life of lower-caste misery and male repression.
When Miss Devi was released from prison last weekend, after 11 years without trial, few newspapers revived the grimmer facts behind the legend, involving years of armed robbery, kidnapping for ransom and murder.


In Hell's Kitchen, Savory Temptations
The temperature is rising in Hell's Kitchen.
After nearly a decade, its main thoroughfare, the stretch of Ninth Avenue between 35th and 55th Streets, is emerging from the gray chrysalis of economic woe to beckon diners and shoppers back to its crumbling sidewalks, its venerable groceries and a new generation of restaurants.
Former hardware stores have been reincarnated as fancy bakeries, former smoke shops have become Afghan and Caribbean restaurants, and mom-and-pop cafes have been reborn as -- is it possible? -- trendy restaurants.


Off the Menu
Flatiron Italian
Mark Strausman, the chef at Coco Pazzo on the Upper East Side until last spring, has signed a lease for his own restaurant, Campagna, at 24 East 21st Street.
The space formerly housed the restaurant Luxe.
Since leaving Coco Pazzo, Mr.
Strausman has been doing consulting work and most recently has been cooking at Tavola, at 1481 York Avenue (78th Street).
With his new venture, he will be adding his brand of lusty, Italian peasant cooking to the Flatiron district, where a number of young chefs have recently opened their own places.
Mr.
Strausman, backed by a group of silent partners, said he plans only slight changes in the decor of the 130-seat dining room.


Clues but No Real Answers In Fumes Case at Hospital
The mystery in an apparent poisoning of a doctor and two nurses who were caring for a patient in a California emergency room last weekend deepened yesterday even as doctors gained clues to they type of poison.
Medical officials say that a chemical used in many pesticides, organophosphate, was a leading candidate as the poison, but that they have no idea how or why the poison got into the emergency room.
The patient was initially suspected of emitting toxic fumes.


CHRONICLE
When GILLIAN ANDERSON, the music specialist at the Library of Congress, was given access in 1992 to the Charlie Chaplin archives, at the Chaplin home in Vevey, Switzerland, she considered herself privileged.
When she unearthed the original musical scores of three silent films -- "The Circus," "The Gold Rush" and "A Woman of Paris" -- what else could she do but, in her own words, "flip out"?
On Friday night at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, there will undoubtedly be others who flip out at a special showing of his 1928 film, "The Circus," with Ms.
Anderson conducting an ensemble from the Manhattan School of Music in the original score.


E. P. Conkle Is Dead; Drama Professor, 94
Dr.
E.
P.
Conkle, professor emeritus of drama at the University of Texas at Austin whose plays were produced on Broadway and in theaters across the country, died on Friday at Seton Medical Center in Austin.
He was 94.
The cause was a lung infection, said his wife, Virginia.


Europeans Threaten Big U.S. Film Distributor
The United States and Europe appeared headed toward another confrontation over the film industry after an unusually sharp dispute broke out today between the European Union and United International Pictures, a film-distribution company owned by three big Hollywood studios.
Joao de Deus Pinheiro, the European commissioner in charge of audio-visual issues, told reporters in Brussels that United International should not receive an extension of an antitrust waiver granted in 1989 that allows the three studios -- Paramount, Universal and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer -- to distribute films to theaters in Europe through a single organization.


Mullen Returns To Frito-Lay Roster
An agency that was dropped by Frito-Lay Inc. because of a conflict with its corporate sibling Pepsi-Cola is back on the Frito-Lay roster.
Frito-Lay said yesterday that it had retained Mullen Advertising in Wenham, Mass., to handle regional promotional projects for its Smartfood popcorn brand.
Billings were not disclosed.
Tod J. MacKenzie, Frito-Lay's vice president of advertising and public affairs in Plano, Tex., denied a report this week in Adweek that Mullen would handle the creative portion of the account.
Though the account has been inactive for at least two years, he said, it would continue to be handled by BBDO New York, which also handles Frito-Lay brands like Doritos, Sunchips and Ruffles.


U.S. Accuses 9 in Kickback Scheme at Space Agency
Federal prosecutors today accused eight people who work for either NASA or three of its contractors, as well as a partner in a consulting firm headed by a former space agency administrator, of taking part in bribery and kickback schemes at the Johnson Space Center.
The Justice Department said agents posing as executives paid bribes to win a place aboard the space shuttle for a fake device to detect and crush kidney stones during space missions.
The ailment is thought to be a risk on long flights.


Reacting to Crimes, Police Plan to Pick Up Truants
Trying to get juvenile delinquents off the streets, the New York City Police Department and the Board of Education are planning a joint effort to round up teen-age truants and force them back to school.
More than 100 police officers are to be assigned to the task full time in the coming weeks, in what city officials said would be a major component of a plan to curb youth violence and mischief.
The truancy program was developed in response to a growing public perception that crime by young people has increased as more youths rob stores, snatch purses and shoot one another in drug turf battles, police officials said.


Market Place; Agent Orange ruling may affect product-liability lawsuits.
IT got only the briefest of mentions in yesterday's voluminous roundup of announcements from the United States Supreme Court.
But the court's decision not to consider reopening the settlement over the Vietnam-era defoliant Agent Orange could be big news financially for companies that face huge product-liability lawsuits.
The biggest beneficiaries, lawyers and analysts predict, may well be the makers of breast implants such as Dow Corning and Bristol-Myers Squibb.
They are in the midst of wrapping up negotiations on a proposed $4.75 billion settlement to benefit women who say the devices have caused health problems.


U.S. TELLS ARISTIDE TO BEND ON PLAN
In a change of strategy, the Clinton Administration has decided against imposing tighter economic sanctions on Haiti unless the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, agrees to broaden his government and grant immediate amnesty to military officers who ousted him in 1991.
Administration officials said today that in effect Father Aristide must do more to embrace a recently formulated plan to restore him to office.
The plan was drawn up in Washington by a visiting Haitian parliamentary delegation that has consulted closely with Administration and United Nations officials.
President Rejects Plan
The plan, which Father Aristide has so far rejected, calls on the exiled President to name a new Prime Minister, who would form a new, broadly based Government and obtain immediate passage of legislation giving amnesty to Gen.
Raoul Cedras and other Haitian officers involved in the coup.


Review/Dance; 'Quirky' As the Word Of the Day
"Soulcatchers" was both the overall title of the program that Kathy Wildberger and Sean Curran presented on Sunday afternoon at the Bessie Schonberg Theater and the title of their first dance.
It was also the weakest effort on what was otherwise a choreographically quirky matinee.
In their collaboratively created "Soulcatchers," Ms.
Wildberger and Mr.
Curran, both wearing skirts, fluttered coyly as if they had the bad luck to be cast as elves in some ghastly show for children.
The duet was more silly than amusing.


Not Much for the Artist
To the Editor:
"The Strictest Censor Is the Bottom Line" (The Week in Review, Feb. 13), your article on art in the 90's, errs in stating that the tax bill passed last August allows gifts of appreciated art to museums "to be fully deducted at the fair market value."


Study Ties Women's Brands To Smoking Increase for Girls
A NEW study has linked a sharp increase in smoking by teen-age girls in the late 1960's and early 1970's to soaring sales of widely advertised cigarettes for women.
The study's authors say their findings provide the strongest evidence to date that cigarette advertising, despite industry assertions to the contrary, lures children into starting smoking.


Quick, Flavorful Couscous
IN the last 10 years, couscous has become another starch in the culinary arsenal.
It is a tiny pasta, made of semolina, that can be substituted for rice, for other small pasta, or for buckwheat groats.
Quick-cooking couscous that is ready in 10 minutes can be found in either refined or whole-wheat versions.
The whole-wheat couscous provides more fiber.


Theater in Review
My Virginia  Ohio Theater 66 Wooster Street SoHo Through March 6 Written and performed by Darci Picoult; directed by Suzanne Shepherd.
Part of Word Fire Festival 1994.
Presented by Watermark Theater, Nella Wagman, artistic director, and Parallax, Jeanne Muller, executive producer.


Sports of The Times; No Taste Of Victory For Harding
IF Tonya Harding wins the gold, I promise to eat my plate, right down to the very last bite.
My ears could not handle losing their closest friend in Norway -- my hat -- and my words long ago ceased going directly to paper.
No way I munch on a laptop computer, so a compromise would seem to be the local lunch platter, hold the lunch.
This, I am obligated to report, wouldn't be an Olympic first.


Fund for Neediest Lags; Forgotten by Delayers?
As The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund enters its last week, dozens of readers have suddenly begun to heed the gnomic six-word warning, "To delay may mean to forget," that has served as the fund's unofficial motto for decades.
The maxim is usually included in small lettering at the end of articles about contributors to the fund or about the assistance the fund gives to hundreds of thousands of indigent New Yorkers every year.


Sabotage Against Muslim Speaker Charged
An organization of black students at Trenton State College today accused the school's administration of attempting to sabotage its effort to bring a controversial speaker from the Nation of Islam to the campus next week.
The planned speech on Monday would come two months after the speaker, Khalid Abdul Muhammad, spoke at another state school, Kean College in Union, and made what many considered to be inflammatory remarks against Jews, Catholics, whites and homosexuals.


Damage by Accused Mole Could Take Years to Repair
The charges filed today against a Central Intelligence Agency officer represent the agency's worst nightmare: a mole inside the C.I.A.'s headquarters who knew about the secret operations, past and present, that the agency conducted in Russia.
Former C.I.A. officials said the agency would have to review every secret file that the officer, Aldrich Hazen Ames, might have seen over the last 10 years and reconstruct what he might have told Russian intelligence officers.


Mattingly Sticks With The Here And Now
Maybe Don Mattingly is simply using reverse psychology on himself.
Maybe the constant discussion about his futile effort to play in the post-season will dissipate if he treats it casually.
After sauntering into spring training last February and saying that he wanted it all, Mattingly today danced around the topic of playing baseball in late October.


Diet Coke's Redesign; A Splashy New Look, With a Hint of Nostalgia
Seems it just wasn't right to have a new advertising campaign with the same old tired look for the product.
So in keeping with Diet Coke's "This is refreshment" theme now abundantly familiar to those watching the Winter Olympics from Norway, cans of Diet Coke around the world will soon reflect their first design change in more than eight years.


Even Without the Guns, Sarajevo Is Under Siege
On the snow-covered pavement outside the covered market, sleds with high runners are piled with bundles of firewood, fuel for the sheet-metal stoves developed here during the siege that can provide heat and a cooking surface by burning almost anything -- pieces of furniture, books, gas tapped from a line.
Ifet Karic, a haggard man of 45 in clothes that now hang off his frame, was among the wood sellers the other day, shivering in the cold.
Sometimes he glanced toward the hills looming over the city where he collects his wood during his service as a Government soldier.
The Serbian heavy guns there are quiet now, withdrawn or being rounded up in compounds guarded by the United Nations.


Mary W. Lasker, Philanthropist For Medical Research, Dies at 93
Mary Woodard Lasker, the philanthropist and champion of medical research and urban beautification, died on Monday at her home in Greenwich, Conn.
She was 93 years old and also had an apartment on the East Side of Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, said her nephew, James W. Fordyce.
She made her last public appearance at a luncheon at the Pierre Hotel in October.


Don't Rush Back to Unesco
The State Department recommends that the United States wait until at least 1995 before rejoining Unesco, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
That makes political as well fiscal sense.
Both Unesco and the U.N. system benefited from the Reagan Administration's decision to pull out a decade ago.
A two-year delay will give Congress a chance to determine whether the gross mismanagement prompting that pullout has been convincingly corrected.
Mr.
Reagan's move won widespread applause.
Washington provided one-fourth of the budget for Unesco's profligate Paris-based bureaucracy, notorious as a patronage dumping ground.
Unesco had also become synonymous with vaporous declarations that were hostile to Western institutions, especially the press.
Delegates from Soviet bloc and third-world tyrannies pushed for a "New World Information Order" in which journalists would become little more than cheerleaders for established regimes.


In America; Counting the Jobless
The Government has changed the way it determines the national unemployment rate, which has resulted in a number that is marginally higher.
But the new and supposedly improved methodology does not provide anything close to an accurate picture of a devastating jobs crisis that is becoming ever more entrenched.
Legions of Americans who once felt secure in the workplace are now stunned to find themselves caught in the hideous undertow of long-term unemployment.
You don't hear much from them after that.
The jobless tend to go quietly.
One day they're at their work station, the next day they're not.
When enough time passes, they're no longer even counted as unemployed.


Greenspan Seeks to Push Down Long-Term Rates
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, used an appearance before Congress today to try to talk down the long-term interest rates that rose unexpectedly after the Fed pushed up short-term rates on Feb. 4.
Testifying before a House Banking Committee panel whose members mostly criticized the latest increase in interest rates, Mr.
Greenspan sought to calm inflation fears but keep his options open.


Clinton Tells Educators Youths Are Not Getting Practical Skills for Jobs
Challenging American educators to move away from pure academics and toward applied skills, President Clinton said today that one of his Administration's top goals would be to help the nation's schools prepare students for work.
"In the 19th Century, at most, young Americans needed a high school education to make their way," Mr.
Clinton told 1,500 educators at a luncheon during the American Council on Education's annual conference.
"It was good enough if they could read well and understand basic numbers. In the 21st Century, our people will have to keep learning all their lives."


Appeals Court Gives Go-Ahead to Switch Of State Senate Seat
A Federal appeals court today refused to block a lower court order that last week shifted the political majority in the state Senate by throwing a Democrat out of his seat and replacing him with his Republican opponent in the election last November.
After an emergency session, a panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit today scheduled oral arguments for March 10 on the decision by Judge Clarence C. Newcomer to remove William G. Stinson, and replace him with Bruce S. Marks.


Senate Debates Budget Amendment
The Senate began a long and solemn debate tonight on a proposed constitutional amendment to require the Federal budget to be balanced.
Its chief sponsor asked Congress and the states to take away the "blank check" that Government had used to build the national debt to $4 trillion.
"The deficit grows and grows, ad infinitum," said Senator Paul E. Simon, Democrat of Illinois, the main sponsor.
Pointing to the young messengers who serve the Senate, he added, "It is hurting these pages and their future right down here."


CHRONICLE
There's nothing too unusual about going to law school and graduating, or marrying, or running in the New York City marathon, or buying a red car.
But that's the whole point of the gathering to be held March 15 at the Plaza Hotel.
Called "Celebrate Life," the event is sponsored by the National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations and the idea is to let women know that life -- and as some of last year's participants related, law school, marathons and red cars -- goes on after a breast cancer diagnosis.
One of the women to be honored is Dr.
SUSAN STEWART, an internist whose breast cancer was diagnosed three years ago, just after she completed a term as president of the American Medical Women's Association.
Within two months of surgery, she returned to her practice.


Do Oscar Nominees Benefit at Box Office? This Year, Not Much
Films nominated for Academy Awards usually get a big boost at the box office.
Not this year.
Since being nominated on Feb. 9 for a whole slew of Oscars, including best film, "The Remains of the Day" and "The Piano," two critically acclaimed movies, have registered barely more than an extra blip on the box-office radar screen.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
Finding her church unusually crowded several weeks ago, my sister was directed to squeeze into the front row.
Accompanied by her sons, ages 5 and 3, she took her seats -- and her chances.
The 5-year-old remained quiet; the younger lad seemed to think the crowd was there for him.
Finally getting the boy to settle in his seat, my sister was able to then focus on the minister's sermon: "Who will save us from ourselves?"


Theater in Review
Looking Back  Henry Street Settlement 466 Grand Street Lower East Side Through March 13 Conceived and directed by Shauneille Perry; songs by Micki Grant; musical director, Julius Williams; set by Robert Schwartz; costumes by Judy Dearing; lighting by Antoinette Tynes; choreographer, Chiquita Ross-Glover; production stage manager, Dale Smallwood.
Presented by New Federal Theater; Woodie King Jr., producer WITH: Lena Berrios, Debbie Blackwell-Cook, Anthony Gaglione, Micki Grant, Pepsi Robinson, Miki Sakaguchi and Adam Wade.


Big Board and Amex Uncovered Short Sales Rise
Short-selling activity, usually done as a bet that stock prices will fall, rose significantly earlier this month, evidently as a result of the sharp fall in stock prices that followed the Federal Reserve's move to raise the Federal funds rate on Feb. 4.
The New York Stock Exchange reported yesterday that the total short position in its stocks -- the number of shares borrowed and sold short, but not yet covered by repurchasing the shares -- rose 3.7 percent in the month that ended Feb. 8, to a record 1.32 billion shares.
That was the largest increase in five months, perhaps reflecting renewed confidence among bears.
At the American Stock Exchange, the short interest position rose 3.5 percent, to a record 104.9 million shares.
It was the largest rise in three months on that exchange.


With the Right Touch, Offal Can Be Anything but Off-Putting
EVEN though offal is seldom consumed in the United States, most of the world considers it a delicacy.
The braised beef-kidney stew in my menu today serves as the perfect introduction to this esoteric food.
When served rare, as it is traditionally, beef kidney has an assertive taste that some may not find inviting.
But when cooked until well done in a stew, as it is here, kidney is quite mild in flavor.
While the British are renowned for their comforting beef and kidney pie, the French seldom feature kidneys in long-cooking dishes.
Lamb kidneys and veal kidneys are most prized in France, and they are usually quickly grilled or sauteed.
Beef kidneys, although very inexpensive, are rarely used; in fact, I couldn't find a single beef-kidney stew recipe in any of the French cookbooks on my shelves.


After Rent-Free Years, Boaters Face Eviction; L.I. Yacht Club Must Leave State Land
On Long Island, where boaters are numbered in the thousands and sometimes must wait as long as a decade to find berths for their vessels, membership in the Kings Park Yacht Club is something of a plum.
The weatherworn brown-shingled clubhouse, overlooking the mouth of the Nissequogue River, is not a place where people in ascots and blue blazers gather to sip Chardonnay.
Nor do the members moor streamlined 60-foot schooners and three-bedroom luxury cruisers.
Rather, most own small sloops and fishing boats with outboard motors.


President of Ukraine Says He Will Not Run
President Leonid M. Kravchuk was quoted today as saying he will not run for re-election in June, raising anew questions about the accord Mr.
Kravchuk signed with the United States and Russia to hand over all of Ukraine's nuclear weapons.
In a front-page interview in the newspaper Demokratichna Ukraina, Mr.
Kravchuk said he had made "a final decision" not to seek a second term because he could not "defend the current economic situation." The interview came a little more than a week before Mr.
Kravchuk is to visit Washington for talks with President Clinton.


MAY DEPARTMENT STORES CO. (N)
The May Department Stores Company said yesterday that fourth-quarter earnings rose 14.4 percent, to $365 million, or $1.37 a share, on sales of $3.57 billion.
The 7.5 percent increase in sales for the quarter, which ended on Jan. 29, was somewhat surprising because several Robinsons-May department stores and Payless Shoe Source stores in the Los Angeles area were damaged by the January earthquake.
Five damaged Robinsons-May stores remain closed.


The Pop Life
Rhythm-and-Blues Honors
The Rhythm-and-Blues Foundation will celebrate Little Richard's contributions to music -- everything from his dress and performance style to his whoops and hollers -- when it hands him its Ray Charles Lifetime Achievement Award at its fifth annual Pioneer Awards on March 2 at Roseland.
An official part of Grammy week -- the Grammy Awards are the night before -- the ceremony will also honor 10 singers and instrumentalists, as well as two groups, with awards totaling $190,000. (The lifetime achievement award carries no money.)


Amid Artifacts of Past, Gadfly Visions of Future
LOOKING into the large storefront at 49 East Houston Street, it is hard to figure out exactly what goes on inside.
In one window there is a pedicab, a bicycle conveyance for two passengers like the ones in Calcutta.
The other window has brochures on low-energy transport and broadsides inveighing against advertising linked to public toilets.
Then there are pictures of antique wooden bars.
"That's what I do for a living -- I sell old bars," said Steve Stollman, the 51-year-old proprietor, somewhat helpfully.
"I buy them from gin mills going out of business and I sell them to restaurants that are opening up." Just inside the door there is a 12-foot bar from a hotel in Pennsylvania that teetotaling owners had turned into a soda fountain.


5 Are Arrested in Holdup Of Atlantic City Casino
Less than 24 hours after two men snatched sacks containing hundreds of thousands of dollars in gambling receipts from Merv Griffin's Casino Hotel, shooting an unarmed security guard in the process, the police arrested five people and charged them with planning the unprecedented holdup.
All but $6,000 of the money from the robbery was recovered.


Radinsky Will Probably Miss Season
SCOTT RADINSKY, A Chicago White Sox reliever, had a malignant lymph node removed from his neck, and will likely miss the season while undergoing treatment to prevent the spread of Hodgkin's disease.
Radinsky, 25, has returned to his home in Simi Valley, Calif., to begin chemotherapy and radiation treatments that could last six to eight months.


Henderson Watchers May Get a Surprise
Followers of the annual spring ritual known as the RICKEY HENDERSON watch could be in for a shock this year.
Henderson, the Oakland Athletics' perennial enigma, actually may arrive in camp with the rest of the players, Manager TONY LA RUSSA said yesterday in Scottsdale, Ariz.
"I talked to Rickey last week and I think there's an excellent chance he'll be here Thursday," La Russa said, citing the day of the A's first full-squad workout.
"That would be a big plus for us." Henderson rejoined the A's as a free agent.


British Gay Rights Groups Vow to Fight Consent Age
A day after the House of Commons refused to make sex between men legal at the age of 16, which is the age of consent for heterosexual and lesbian sex, supporters of equal rights for homosexuals vowed today to step up protests against what they called blatant discrimination.
The age of consent for sex between men had been 21.
On Monday night the House of Commons voted 307 to 280 against reducing the age of consent to 16, then voted 427 to 162 in favor of a compromise, setting the age at 18.


Japan's Retreat on TV
Japan is considering abandoning its high-definition television system.
The announcement that the Government may adopt a system using digital technology was an admission that Japan had fallen behind the United States in television advances.
Business Day, page D1.


Topics of The Times; Judge Not
Controversy over the ice dancing scores in Lillehammer the other night suggests that Olympic judges are less than 6.0 themselves, but doubts about judges' competence are as old as the Winter Games.
Over the years they have given the edge to established winners, favored conservative performances and, when Communism was in flower, showed blatant national bias.
The popular favorites in ice dancing were the British, Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean, returning to the Olympics for the first time since winning gold in 1984 at Sarajevo.
They are classical stylists, which judges usually prefer -- but not this time.
The audience gave them a standing ovation; the judges gave them a third-place bronze.
Top marks went to a pair of accomplished young Russians, Oksana Grichtchuk and Yevgeny Platov, who skated to 1950's oldies like "Rock Around the Clock."


Japan May Abandon Its System for HDTV
In what could signal the end of one of Japan's most ambitious technology projects, a senior telecommunications regulator said today that the Government was considering abandoning the nation's high-definition television system.
The announcement by Akimasa Egawa, director general of the broadcasting administration bureau in the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, was an admission that the HDTV system that was once a symbol of Japan's industrial prowess had fallen technologically behind developments in the United States.
His remarks set off ferment today in the nation's electronics industry.


Ralph W. Tyler, 91; Researcher Devised Nationwide Testing
Dr.
Ralph W. Tyler, an educator who sought to find what students were learning in school by helping to devise a national testing program, died on Friday at St.
Paul's Health Care Center in San Diego.
He was 91.
The cause of death was cancer, said a daughter, Ann Fathy.


Sanctions Timetable Asked
Senator Max S. Baucus, Democrat of Montana, who heads the Senate Finance Committee's trade panel, introduced legislation today to revive a lapsed section of American trade law that sets a fixed timetable for trade sanctions on countries that do not open their markets to American goods.
Congressional trade hawks have been pressing President Clinton to reinstate the law by executive order since the collapse 11 days ago of trade talks with Japan.
Mr.
Baucus's move to reinstate the law, called Super 301, relieves some of the pressure on the President.


METRO DIGEST
OLD POLICE JOB IS BACK: TRUANT OFFICER
Trying to get juvenile delinquents off the streets, the New York Police Department and the Board of Education are planning a joint effort to round up teen-age truants and force them back to school.
More than 100 police officers will be assigned to the task full time in the coming weeks, in what city officials said would be a major part of a plan to curb youth violence and mischief.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Sell WNYC? Unthinkable.
Senselessly, New York City may sell its public broadcasting outlets -- WNYC-AM and FM and WNYC-TV, Channel 31 -- to commercial interests.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, in drawing up his four-year fiscal plan, has indicated that these treasured cultural institutions could be sold to help close a $2.3 billion budget gap for the 1995 fiscal year
Supporters of the sale say New York has "no business in broadcasting." Come on.
It is no more "in broadcasting" than it is "in museums." The city provided complete financial support until 1979, when WNYC started relying on contributions from listeners and viewers.
Today, self-sufficiency and independence are near: about 90 percent of the stations' operating costs and program funds are generated by the private, nonprofit WNYC Foundation; the city's direct cash contribution to the stations' $17 million budget is down to $1.7 million.


Scalia: Fifth Amendment 'Clearly Permits the Death Penalty'
Following are excerpts from Justice Antonin Scalia's opinion concurring in the Supreme Court's order denying review in a Texas death penalty case, Callins v.
Collins, No. 93-7054.
In it, Justice Scalia responds to Justice Harry A. Blackmun's condemnation of the death penalty.
Justice Blackmun dissents from the denial of certiorari in this case with a statement explaining why the death penalty "as currently administered," is contrary to the Constitution of the United States.
That explanation often refers to "intellectual, moral and personal" perceptions, but never to the text and tradition of the Constitution.
It is the latter rather than the former that ought to control.
The Fifth Amendment provides that "(n)o person shall be held to answer for a capital . . . crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury, . . . nor be deprived of life . . . without due process of law." This clearly permits the death penalty to be imposed, and establishes beyond doubt that the death penalty is not one of the "cruel and unusual punishments" prohibited by the Eighth Amendment.


For Those Who Judge, Expect Same Treatment
The judges will be under as much scrutiny as the skaters Wednesday night when the women's competition begins in Olympic figure skating.
A huge television audience will tune in.
The Olympic Amphitheater will be packed with 6,000 spectators and journalists.
Every decision by the nine judges will be debated, examined in detail, poured over for evidence of national bias or individual prejudice.


Greenspan's Remarks Send Stocks Higher
Despite a report that the nation's confidence in the economy had fallen this month, stock and bond traders had their ears cocked for only one man's opinion yesterday, and Alan Greenspan did not disappoint.
When Mr.
Greenspan told Congress he saw an economy with inflation at 3 percent or less, low long-term interest rates, as well as steady expansion, all the leading stock markets and the bond market rallied.


Long Road to Louisville Claims Its First Major Casualty
They may be the best bunch of Kentucky Derby candidates in nearly 40 years, as many racing people suggest.
But in the punishing tradition of the Triple Crown classics, they are starting to be ambushed along the road to Louisville.
The class of 1994 reported its first major casualty today when the colt Patton, one of the ranking candidates for the Derby, was found to have bone chips in both front knees and was promptly withdrawn from the campaign.
He was flown to Lexington, Ky., this morning for arthroscopic surgery and will not even jog again until perhaps early June, one month after the Derby.


An Heiress, a Will, a Loyal Butler And the Remains of a Mystery
As a butler, Bernard Lafferty was nothing like the primly elegant Anthony Hopkins character in the film "The Remains of the Day." With his salt-and-pepper ponytail and his far less formal clothes, he was "always a little different from what one thinks of as a butler in the MGM musicals, in the corner holding Fred Astaire's jacket," said a public-relations executive who worked for him briefly after his boss died.
The boss was Doris Duke, the deeply suspicious, desperately unhappy tobacco heiress who died last year.
The public-relations executive, Lloyd Kaplan, said Mr.
Lafferty was "indisputably" the most important person in her life.


Spring Fever Claims Another Victim


Heat Is Off As UConn Beats Miami
Mindful of last season's lopsided loss to the University of Miami here, Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun kept his basketball team in Atlanta until this morning so it would not have a chance to be seduced by the warm weather here.
"I'm not superstitious at all, but actually I've booked Atlanta for next year already," said a smiling Calhoun after the Huskies' 74-49 runaway over Miami tonight at the Miami Arena.


Theater in Review
Holly Hughes  Performance Space 122 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street East Village Through March 12 Written and performed by Holly Hughes; directed by Dan Hurlin; lighting by Eleanor Savage; production assistants, Sharon Hayes and Jackie Gares; technical director, David Herrigel.
Presented by P. S. 122.


Flaim Has a Record but Not Nearly a Gold
Eric Flaim of Milwaukee broke the American record in his quarterfinal heat in the 1,000-meter short-track speed-skating race here tonight.
Unfortunately, this was the Olympics, and two others in the race skated faster, thus rendering Flaim nothing but a spectator in the semifinals and finals.
"You know you broke the American record," someone said to him after the race.


Court Orders Revised Goals For Recycling
New York State's highest court ruled today that New York City has violated the law by failing to meet the requirements of its own 1989 recycling statute, and it ordered the Giuliani administration to devise a new and potentially expensive timetable for doing so.
The decision could mean a new fiscal headache for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who has proposed saving $5.7 million in next year's city budget by decreasing the frequency of residential recycling collection.
But some city officials said the decision could give the Mayor new leverage in negotiations with the sanitation workers' union, a critical component of his plan to close a $2.3 billion budget gap in the fiscal year that begins on July 1.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  MUTED VICTORY FOR BOSNIA  News analysis: Despite the self-congratulation among NATO allies over the Serbian pullback, the fact is that fighting still rages in Bosnia and that any settlement may be worse for the Muslims than it would have been a year ago.
A1  PUSH FOR BOSNIA PEACE  Russian, American and European diplomats agreed that the withdrawal of weapons from around Sarajevo gives them a fresh chance to work together to apply pressure for a negotiated peace for Bosnia.
A8


Wine Talk
WHAT bothers you more about restaurant wine: figuring out what to buy from an undecipherable list or paying an arm and a leg for it after you decide what you want?
Suppose someone was to say: "Look, there is a place in Manhattan where you don't have to worry about any of this. They pick four good wines, pour as much as you want and include it all in the price of the meal."


Secular Muslim Countries Watch Bosnia
To the Editor:
The United States and the West often show little understanding of the impact of their actions or inaction on other countries.
Take Bosnia.
While there has been much concern -- and little action -- about the atrocities committed daily against the citizens of Bosnia by the Serbs and Croats, Americans do not stop and think how their actions affect countries other than the former Yugoslavia.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES, Houston, announced that a subsidiary had acquired the Dutch company Jan Oldenburger B.V.
Terms were not disclosed.
HELIONETICS INC., Irvine, Calif., a maker of electronic power products, said it planned to acquire a controlling stake in Acculase Inc., San Diego, which is developing a system to improve the treatment of atherosclerosis.


Last Arguments Made In Trial of 11 Cultists
As relatives of slain Federal agents wept and David Koresh's grandmother prayed "for the truth to come out," the murder trial of 11 Branch Davidians wound toward a conclusion today with the jury hearing final arguments.
In a major ruling, the judge overruled objections by prosecutors and gave jurors broad leeway to consider the contention of sect members that they acted in self-defense during a shootout at their compound near Waco, Tex., a year ago.
Four Federal agents and six Branch Davidians died in the encounter.


Critic's Notebook; Torvill and Dean Opt for Pure Dance, and Lose
It might be argued that a dance critic who has followed Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean since they won an Olympic gold medal in 1984 and then turned professional has a very different bias from a skating judge.
But even the public at large seems stunned by the fact that the British pair won only the bronze in the Olympic ice-dancing competition on Monday in Norway.
The overriding feeling seems to be that they should have won the gold.
By now, the debate over whether ice dancing is a sport or an art is just one big yawn.
Torvill and Dean, as they are known throughout the world, were not the first to prove that skating can be a means of artistic expression, even in rules-burdened international competition.
But they are the ones who have done the most to make the issue moot through their dazzling creativity.


For Kerrigan Family, It's Business as Usual
In the crush in the news media room waiting for Nancy Kerrigan to arrive for her post-skate interview at the Olympic Amphitheater tonight stood a middle-aged couple from Stoneham, Mass.
Dan Kerrigan was holding a bouquet of flowers wrapped in plastic and tied with a red-white-and-blue ribbon.
Brenda Kerrigan, who is legally blind, was holding his arm.
The smiling parents of the dark-haired, 23-year-old woman who had emerged in first place in the technical program suddenly became the center of an army of reporters' questions.
Were you relieved or were you excited?


Tight Logging Limit Set in Northwest
In what is likely to be the final blueprint for managing 24 million acres of public forests in the Pacific Northwest, the Clinton Administration today announced a plan to protect a host of endangered species by significantly reducing logging from the high levels of the 1980's.
The new policy, which came in one of the most extensive environmental impact statements ever done by the Government, is largely similar to a draft that President Clinton presented last summer.
The final plan further reduces logging and nearly doubles estimates of the number of jobs that will be lost, to 9,500 from 5,500 in the draft.


Review/Music; Dvorak And His Descendants
The Chamber Music Society played Czech music on Tuesday evening, and to lend its brief overview an air of authenticity, Josef Suk, the violinist, was among the performers.
Mr.
Suk's grandfather, also called Josef Suk, was a composer whose work is lately finding an American audience, and whose "Elegie" was on the program.
The violinist's great-grandfather was Dvorak.
And for good historical measure, though extraneous to the Czech theme, he played a 1722 Stradivarius whose previous owners include Mischa Elman and Joseph Joachim.
The program began with a Baroque oddity, an attractive sonata by Jan Dismas Zelenka.
Its charms include long-lined oboe melodies, played gracefully by Stephen Taylor and Allan Vogel, and some quick display figuration for the bassoon, which Julie Feves handled with virtuosic flair.
Robert Wolinsky, harpsichordist, and Lewis Paer, bassist, filled out the texture with elegance and energy.


Espionage Case Raises Few Eyebrows in Russia
There was little surprise in Moscow today at the news that a top official of the Central Intelligence Agency had spent eight years on the payroll of first the Soviet and later the post-Communist Russian intelligence service.
Few Russians ever really believed that spying had ended with the cold war.
"There is nothing new or sensational in the fact that countries are involved in intelligence gathering," said Yuri Kobaladze, a spokesman for the Russian Foreign Intelligence Agency, in a brief interview on an evening news program here.
Mr.
Kobaladze gave no further comment on the case involving the C.I.A. official, Aldrich Hazen Ames, and noted that the Russian Government would have to examine the evidence before responding to the American request to recall from Washington any Russian diplomat involved in the affair.


South Africa Campaign Violence


Mother Is 'Devastated' Over 2 Children's Deaths
The mother accused of fatally burning her two young children in her car on Tuesday in Long Branch, N.J., was "devastated" by their deaths, her lawyer said yesterday.
"I'm not sure the full impact of this has been brought home to her," the lawyer, Diane Aifer, a court-appointed public defender, said.
"It's a horrible, horrible situation."


Lillian Weber, 77, Educator and Expert In How Young Learn
Lillian Weber, a City College of New York professor who was known for her work in early childhood education, died on Tuesday at her home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
She was 77.
The cause was cardiac arrest, reported the City University of New York.
Professor Weber was professor emeritus of education at the time of her death, and her work continues to influence public-school education.
She worked with teachers in the New York City schools, helping them to organize the learning process in ways intended to make the classroom more responsive to young pupils as they struggle to make sense of the world.


Big East Conference Approaching a Crossroad
Now that a countdown is leading toward the inevitable demise of the Big East Conference as we have known it, to be determined as soon as tomorrow, the most remarkable achievement of this collection of colleges should be remembered as something beyond its meteoric growth, its special collection of gifted athletes, its honeymoon with cable television and its boldly successful risk taking.
For a decade and a half, since four Eastern athletic directors first gathered at a La Guardia Airport hotel in search of a better way, a league has somehow reached unparalleled success in an enclave free from the influences of the football establishment.


Spy Suspect Betrayed 10 U.S. Agents, F.B.I. Says
The F.B.I. is accusing Aldrich Hazen Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency officer arrested on espionage charges this week, of betraying at least 10 Soviet citizens working for American intelligence, Government officials said today.
All were convicted of treason and executed in Moscow by the Soviet authorities, they said.
The agents, reported to have been identified by Mr.
Ames, included the first two intelligence officers the Federal Bureau of Investigation were able to recruit from the Soviet Embassy in Washington and a senior Soviet counterintelligence official in Moscow responsible for catching American spies.


B.C.C.I. Details Misuse Of Arab Ruler's Funds
In 32 pages of handwritten and typed notes, Swaleh Naqvi, chief executive of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, outlined to the bank's majority shareholders the parameters of the financial crisis the institution faced in April 1990, but chose not to admit that more than $2.6 billion invested by the shareholders had been used to conceal B.C.C.I's huge losses.
Copies of Mr.
Naqvi's explanation to the ruling family of the Persian Gulf sheikdom of Abu Dhabi were made public for the first time yesterday.
That document was accompanied by hundreds of pages of documents detailing the manner in which B.C.C.I. diverted billions from the investment account of Sheik Zayed bin Sultan al-Nahayan.


Thurmond's Nimby
To the Editor:
Senator Strom Thurmond states that he doesn't want the world's nuclear wastes stored in South Carolina, that is, not in his backyard (letter, Feb. 14).
He suggests they all go to Nevada.
He hopes for a safe and secure world, with nuclear weapons alongside a safe and secure waste site, but far away from his state.
Is that possible, with a plutonium half-life of 20,000 years?


Jets' Moore Goes Hunting For a Pass-Minded Team
In all likelihood, receiver Rob Moore has caught his last pass for the Jets.
Moore, an unrestricted free agent who is also the Jets' transition player, visited Chicago on Tuesday, is scheduled to visit Denver next week and has planned stops in Cleveland, Cincinnati, New England and at the Los Angeles Rams.
Moore's agent, Gary Wichard, said that Moore might not make it down his list of stops if he finds a team that he likes, but indicated that returning to the Jets wasn't a high priority for Moore.
Because Moore is a transition player, the Jets can match any offer the receiver gets.
Under rules for transition players, Moore's asking price begins at $2.1 million a season.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Feb. 18
Feb. 11
Feb. 19
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
6.9
7.0
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.3
2.8
Gasoline stocks
228.1
228.8
240.4
Distillate stocks
110.2
113.4
118.3
Crude imports, daily
6.3
5.6
5.7
Product imports, daily
2.2
2.0
2.1
Crude stocks
333.5
331.3
329.0
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
90.0
90.3
86.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


CHRONICLE
A new era at Andover: BARBARA LANDIS CHASE will become the first woman to lead Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., on July 1.
Mrs.
Chase, 48, who has been the headmistress of the Bryn Mawr School, a private day school for girls in Baltimore, since 1980, will succeed Donald W. McNemar , who is retiring.


As Is, Clinton Health Plan Isn't Flying
The first lawmakers to begin formal consideration of President Clinton's health care plan said today that the plan could not be passed in its current form but that there was no consensus yet for an alternative.
Several elements of the Clinton plan appear imperiled as the bill faces its first tests in two House subcommittees, which are the gatekeepers of the legislative process.
The lawmakers said there was little support for requiring most Americans to get their insurance through large purchasing pools called alliances.


Moscow Frees Accused Spy Under Habeas Corpus Law
Vil S. Mirzayanov, a scientist on trial for revealing state secrets, was freed on Tuesday night from the prison where he had been held for almost a month.
The general prosecutor's office ordered Mr.
Mirzayanov's release; the charges have not been dropped.
Mr.
Mirzayanov's case has cast light on Russia's uneven judicial reform, much of which has been carried out since his arrest on charges of revealing state secrets in an article published in a Moscow weekly in September 1992.


Review/Music; A Sonata by an Archduke
The Archduke Rudolph, Beethoven's chief benefactor and only composition pupil, was no ordinary aristocratic dilettante.
By all accounts he was an expert pianist, and under Beethoven's guidance he became a composer of considerable fluency, if not consummate skill.
His Violin Sonata, given its American premiere by Josef Suk and Susan Kagan on Monday night at the Kaye Playhouse, has its lapses and longueurs, its disconcerting near-quotations (from Mozart's Piano Quartet in G Minor and, logically enough, Beethoven's "Archduke" Trio), but its main ideas are gracefully formed and idiosyncratically developed.
Ms.
Kagan, a pianist, musicologist and critic, is the world's leading authority on the Archduke.
She has written an extraordinarily thorough study of his music for Pendragon Press and recorded the Violin Sonata with Mr.
Suk for the Koch International label.
If, as she states in her book, the sonata is an early effort and far from the composer's best, then more would certainly be welcome, particularly the monumental Variations on a Theme of Beethoven.


Market Place; With a rival falling to a suitor, First Chicago gets Wall St.'s eye.
LAST month's surprising announcement that Bank of America planned to pay nearly $2 billion in stock and cash to acquire Continental Bank was taken as good news by investors in the First Chicago Corporation, Continental's longtime rival for banking pre-eminence here.
First Chicago had already gone a long way toward repairing the damage to its reputation created by a series of misguided strategic moves and bad investments in the 1980's.
Earnings reports have come in above Wall Street's consensus estimates for the last six quarters.


No Headline
"We want to protect our investment and increase ridership. We don't look fondly on projects that depict the system as being out of control." -- JARED LEBOW of the Transit Authority, explaining a ban on movie crime scenes filmed on the subway.  [ B1:3. ]


Murphy's Irish Stout Looking for a Shop
Van Munching &amp; Company, importers of beer including Heineken and Amstel Light, said yesterday that it was seeking an agency to become the first shop to handle advertising for its Murphy's Irish Stout brand.
Philip Van Munching, the company's advertising director in New York, confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek.
He said he had a list of small to midsized agencies contending for the account, but declined to identify them.
He added that Warwick Baker &amp; Fiore in New York would continue to handle Heineken, Amstel Light and Buckler, a nonalcoholic brew.


Redated Fossil Upsets Map of Man's Evolution
New evidence strongly suggests that the human race migrated from its African cradle to Asia nearly one million years earlier than most scientists believed.
The discovery will force anthropologists to re-examine some long-held beliefs about how and where evolutionary turning points made mankind master of the world.
In a paper presented yesterday at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in San Francisco, Dr.
Carl C. Swisher 3d of the Institute of Human Origins in Berkeley, Calif., reported that skull fragments of Homo erectus found some time ago on the Indonesian island of Java are up to 1.8 million years old -- as old as the oldest Homo erectus fossils ever found in Africa.


Goals for Recycling May Change
A day after New York State's highest court ordered New York City to comply with its own 1989 recycling law, a senior official in the Giuliani administration said the Mayor might seek to renegotiate the law's timetables with the City Council because of the costs of complying with the statute.
Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers suggested that the recycling goals set forth in the law were no longer affordable given the fact that the law was passed "when the finances of the city were nicer."


Eclectic Composer Gives Buster Keaton A Modern Voice
The guitarist Bill Frisell is known as one of the great sidemen.
He has worked with the pop singer Marianne Faithfull and the jazz guitarist Jim Hall.
He has worked with gentle European experimentalists and with John Zorn's groups playing everything from noise to hardcore rock to surf music.
And he has been a longtime member of the drummer and composer Paul Motion's band.
It was just a matter of time until he collaborated with someone who was dead.
When Arts at St.
Ann's in Brooklyn Heights suggested last year that he compose and play music to accompany a group of Buster Keaton films to be shown at the church, Mr.
Frisell took them up on the offer.
He wrote long pieces that blended composition with free-flowing improvisations.
Then, with his group -- Kermit Driscoll on bass and Joey Baron on drums -- he performed the music onstage, under the screen on which the films were projected.


Sitting at War's HQ, Bosnian Serbs Talk of Peace
Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the Bosnian Serbs, put it bluntly this week: "We would rather drive Mercedeses than tanks."
After almost two years of war in Bosnia, it appears that the Serbs -- both in Belgrade and in Bosnia -- are actively pursuing a peace settlement in the conviction that Russia's new involvement can secure them a share of Bosnia that they could accept.


Director Shakes Up Syracuse Stage
Soon after he was named the new artistic director of Syracuse Stage two years ago, Tazewell Thompson met with a group of the theater's subscribers who asked him if he was going to do only black plays and if rap music would now be the music of choice.
"I flinched, and it hurt," recalls Mr.
Thompson.
He immediately responded to the doubts, saying that he had to pay attention to the culture he knew best, and, yes, there would be more plays by black authors.
But his intention, he said, was to expand the constituency; his theater would be inclusive rather than exclusive.
In his choice of repertory and in his personal style of management, the 39-year-old Mr.
Thompson (whose first name is pronounced TAZZ-well) is shaking things up in Syracuse.
He stands in the lobby after a performance, talking to theatergoers, accepting criticism as well as appreciation.
Except for his lumberjack shirt (appropriate for snow-capped Syracuse), he could be a minister greeting his flock after a church service.


Journal; The Perils of Diane
The biggest cliffhanger in television news this month was the network bidding war for Diane Sawyer, fueled by strategic leaks to the press and by a sudden case of flu that allowed the star to take a powder from "Prime Time Live" at the height of the bargaining.
The spectacle ended last week with Ms.
Sawyer staying put at ABC, with a new salary estimated at up to $7 million and new assignments that will make her, as Bill Carter wrote in The New York Times, "the most visible news figure in television's most watched hours."
The biggest coup in television news this month, aired on PBS's "Frontline" just as Ms.
Sawyer closed her deal, was a documentary titled "Tabloid Truth." Tracing the TV-news feeding frenzy on a single story -- the Michael Jackson scandal -- the correspondent, Richard Ben Cramer, revealed that the seamy journalistic standards and sometimes the personnel of tabloid shows like "Hard Copy" and "A Current Affair" are inexorably tainting network news departments.


Student Death Is First Case Of Rare Virus in Northeast
A 22-year-old college student from Long Island died last month in Providence, R.I., from a virus that caused a deadly outbreak of illness in the Southwest last summer, Federal health officials said tonight.
His was the first known case of infection with the deadly microbe, called hantavirus, in the Northeast.
The student, who died on Jan. 20, presumably acquired his infection in Rhode Island or New York, officials of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention here said.


Board Bans Georgia Flag at Atlanta Stadium
In the latest of several official and unofficial actions that have made the Georgia flag less visible in Atlanta in the past year, officials voted today to remove the flag with its Confederate battle emblem from Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium, home of the Atlanta Braves.
The decision by the Atlanta-Fulton County Recreation Authority means the flag will not fly at the Braves' home games this season.
It also sets the stage for debate over whether the state flag, as now designed, will fly at the Summer Olympics here in 1996.


Get it before it's hot


Israel Must Decide Price of Peace for Itself
To the Editor:
Israelis living in the valley below the Golan Heights may still remember the shells that were fired from Syrian guns in 1967.
The condition was unacceptable.
At the cost of the lives of several hundred Israeli soldiers, and many more who were maimed for life, the guns were silenced.
These young men gave their lives for one reason only, that there be peace and quiet in the valley.


Man Is Fatally Shot Protecting Daughter
A Brooklyn man who was so worried for his daughter's safety that he escorted her home when she worked into the night was shot and killed Tuesday in East Flatbush when two men tried to rob them, the police said.
The man, Desmond Antoine, 47, and his daughter, Audra Scott, 22, were walking to their apartment building about 9 P.M. when two men ambushed them near Newkirk Avenue and East 35th Street, said Deputy Inspector William Gardella of the Brooklyn South detective squad.


Review/City Ballet; Mating Rites Out of the Past
A sense of specific time and place is not to be assumed in the New York City Ballet.
Most of the company's works are plotless, with the dancers representing only themselves as dancers moving through space.
Jerome Robbins's "Fancy Free" (1944) and George Balanchine's "Bugaku" (1963) are exceptions to the rule, so clearly do they refer to national mating rites of another time.
In "Fancy Free," the first collaboration between Mr.
Robbins and Leonard Bernstein, three sailors are on the town, looking for action in Times Square during World War II.
The centerpiece of "Bugaku" is a highly erotic duet in Balanchine's convoluted acrobatic style, but the overall frame is an ambiguous homage to ancient Japanese court music and dance.


Rangers Leave Keenan Sputtering
Mike Keenan did a marvelous job disguising his anger with sarcasm after the Rangers came up with one of their most listless performances of the season last night, losing to the Boston Bruins, 6-3, at Madison Square Garden.
The Rangers coach had every right to blast his team, but he was rather kind to his players.


RESULTS PLUS
C.U.N.Y.
TOURNAMENT  Baruch Keeps Surprising  Baruch kept its Cinderella season alive last night in the semifinals of the City University of New York Athletic Conference tournament, defeating Staten Island, 74-65, and earning a date with Hunter for the championship tomorrow night.
Hunter (24-2) defeated York (15-11), 95-80, in the other semifinal at the Lehman College Apex in the Bronx as Shawn McCartny contributed 32 points, 7 steals and 3 assists.
Baruch (10-15), seeking its first C.U.N.Y. championship in the 29-year history of the tournament, got a game-high 28 points from Gerald Thomas and 21 points and 12 rebounds from Sean McGee.
Staten Island (13-12) was led by Kirk Staine's 17 points.
TENNIS  McEnroe Loses Return  John McEnroe played his first competitive singles in 15 months yesterday, losing in straight sets at the Rotterdam indoor tournament in the Netherlands.
McEnroe, who turned 35 last week, volleyed strongly but had rhythm and service problems during a 6-2, 7-6 first-round defeat by third-seeded Magnus Gustafsson. (Reuters)


James Robertson, 86, Ex-Banking Regulator
James L. Robertson, a member of the Federal Reserve Board for 21 years and vice chairman from 1966 until his retirement in 1973, died yesterday at his home in Bethesda, Md.
He was 86.
His family said he had suffered from Alzheimer's disease.


INSIDE
'Aladdin Takes the A Train'?
New York subway officials are refusing to let producers film scenes in the subway that the Transit Authority thinks are too violent.
Page B1.
Microsoft Loses Patent Case
Microsoft was found guilty in a patent infringement suit and ordered to pay $120 millionin damages to a small California company.
Page D1.
Jury Gets Trade Center Case
The jurors began deliberations in the World TradeCenter bombing case after the judge instructed them to put aside their political beliefs.
Page B1.


Some in Haiti, Impatient With Aristide, Plan Vote
Further complicating stalled diplomatic efforts to restore Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, some of his opponents say they plan to install an interim Government to organize new elections within three months.
These opponents, led by two senior senators, have boasted that their plan enjoys the support of the Haitian military.
"A Government has to be installed by the end of the week," said one senator, Bernard Sansaricq.
"We can't go on like this any longer."


Dr. Bruce Voeller Is Dead at 59; Helped Lead Fight Against AIDS
Dr.
Bruce Voeller, a specialist on human sexuality and sexually transmitted diseases who was in the forefront of the fight against AIDS, died on Feb. 13 at his home in Topanga, Calif.
He was 59.
The cause was AIDS-related, said Richard Liuck, his companion and associate at the Mariposa Education and Research Foundation in Topanga.


Winter Olympics Ratings On Record Pace for CBS
With each passing night, CBS feels brighter about spending $295 million on its coverage of the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.
The Olympics have already produced the highest-rated week in CBS history.
In the period ended on Sunday, CBS had a a 25.9 rating, putting the network on a pace to exceed the top-rated Olympics, the 1972 Summer Games in Munich, which had a 24.4 rating on ABC.


Canseco Appears Eager And Fit to Resume Play
Jose Canseco reported to the Texas Rangers today, bigger and stronger in body than he has been in years.
But he also arrived much lighter in spirit, thanks to his emergence from an emotional purgatory he says ravaged his psyche as badly as injuries ravaged his body the last two years.
Canseco, tanned and relaxed, declared the major part of his game 100 percent and ready to go after a winter's worth of strenuous workouts with running, throwing and conditioning coaches.
"And," he said, underscoring a different kind of healing, "I feel a lot stronger and a lot faster, mentally and physically."


Tailed Cars and Tapped Telephones: How U.S. Drew Net on Spy Suspects
On the evening of Sept. 9, 1993, Aldrich Hazen Ames and his wife drove their 1992 Jaguar to their son's elementary school in Alexandria, Va., for a parents' meeting.
But instead of going straight home when it ended, they took a detour for what Federal prosecutors say were the couple's final acts as spies for Moscow.
Tailed by Federal agents, the couple slipped into the District of Columbia, driving through the quiet streets of Northwest Washington.
Suddenly, they slowed down and swerved into a cul de sac.


Showalter Makes a Very Early Decision
It is 40 days until opening day for the Yankees, but Manager Buck Showalter has already named Jimmy Key as his starting pitcher for that date in a decision as easy for him as penciling in "Mattingly, 1b."
"He deserves the honor," the manager said of the left-hander who went 18-6 in 1993, his first year with the Yankees.
"He had probably as good a year last year as he's had, from start to finish. He gave us an opportunity to win almost every time he took the hill, and that's what you ask of a starting pitcher. You don't ask him to pitch a shutout or be unhittable. You ask him to give you an opportunity to win. Jimmy Key's been able to do that for us."


George Tames, Photographer, Dies at 75
George Tames, a news photographer for The New York Times whose work for nearly half a century changed the way Americans looked at Presidents and political power, died here today while undergoing heart surgery.
He was 75.
His photographs chronicled 10 Presidents from Franklin D. Roosevelt to George Bush, countless members of Congress and visiting statesman from Churchill to Khrushchev.
President Eisenhower chose two Tames photographs for official portraits, and a third became the basis of a 6-cent Eisenhower stamp.


Hyundai Commercial For Charles Barkley
Hyundai Motor America has selected Charles Barkley, the basketball star, as its first American celebrity endorser, introducing him in a television commercial on March 7 by Backer Spielvogel Bates West that slyly imitates spots for athletic footwear -- which is, of course, another product he endorses.
"Oh, no, just what we need," an announcer, the actor Jeff Goldblum, says as the commercial begins, "another basketball shoe commercial." As Mr.
Goldblum establishes that it is really a commercial for the 1995 Hyundai Sonata, he expresses surprise that the attractive-looking car is a Hyundai.


Russia Congress Votes to Release Yeltsin Enemies
In a sharp rebuke to President Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian Parliament approved a sweeping amnesty today that will probably free those accused of leading the armed insurrection against his Government in October.
Mr.
Yeltsin cannot veto the resolution or legally prevent the release of any of the prisoners covered.
Thus Mr.
Yeltsin's archenemies, former Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi and the Speaker of the old Parliament, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, could be back on the streets of Moscow as early as Thursday.


New Site for School Shut Due to Asbestos
A vacant furniture warehouse in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn will be rented and renovated to become the new home of Public School 156, which was closed this fall for asbestos repairs, the New York City Board of Education decided yesterday.
The 83,000-square-foot building, at 1150 East New York Avenue, will be open for classes in the fall of 1995, said Amy Linden, chief executive for school facilities.


Books of The Times; A Wilderness Child Confronts Civilization
Second Nature  By Alice Hoffman  254 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.
The fable that lies at the heart of Alice Hoffman's lyrical new novel, "Second Nature," is familiar almost to the point of cliche.
In it, a half-man, half-beast accidentally emerges from the wilderness.
Men see him as dangerous and lock him up.
A woman who is herself close to nature rescues him, takes him home and is rewarded with extraordinary love.
But her community fails to understand and drives the monster away.
As the book's epigraph, by Rousseau, puts the moral, "Nature never deceives us; it is always we who deceive ourselves."


CHRONICLE
A Los Angeles man has filed suit against JACK NICHOLSON, charging the film star with assault and battery and infliction of emotional distress in papers filed in Superior Court in Los Angeles last week.
Det.
ROBERT SEARLE of the North Hollywood division of the Los Angeles Police Department said, "The crime report alleges that both were stopped at a red light in Studio City on Feb. 8, when Jack Nicholson got out of his car and shouted unknown comments at the driver and hit the roof of his car with an unknown object."


Bend the U.N. To Our Will
One of the saddest and most pernicious outcomes of the cold war has been the breakdown of the proper relationship between our Government and the U.N.
Secretariat.
When President Clinton says that "the U.N. must know when to say no" to peacekeeping, and when his Administration studies ways in which it will respond to U.N. peacekeeping initiatives, something is seriously amiss.


U.N. Sets Deadline of November For Ending Role in Mozambique
Efforts to end the 16-year-old civil war in Mozambique passed an important milestone today when the United Nations Security Council agreed to start replacing some of the peacekeeping soldiers it has stationed there with civilian police officers and set a November deadline for ending its involvement in the African country.
In a decision showing the peace effort is shifting away from monitoring the cease-fire toward preparing for elections next October, the Council agreed to send 1,144 United Nations police monitors to Mozambique but told Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to cut back the 6,200-member military peacekeeping force at the same time to avoid additional cost.


Knicks Hit the Road After a Slam From Riley
A night's sleep did not do Pat Riley any good.
He was still visibly -- and vocally -- angry this morning.
A day after the Knicks shot a National Basketball Association season-low 28.4 percent from the field in a 93-82 loss to Seattle at Madison Square Garden, Riley frequently made his voice heard outside the gym here where the Knicks were reviewing tapes of their home-court embarrassment before starting a four-game Western swing.


Economic Scene; After tough talk, can the U.S. and Japan get back to business?
THE President's line on trade with Japan apparently played well with corporate America -- and for that matter, with the public.
Typical of the reaction was the comment from Kenneth Kay, spokesman for a trade association of computer makers: President Clinton was "smart to let the Japanese Government know in no uncertain terms that the lack of progress is unacceptable," he cheered.
But now that the adrenaline rush is winding down, a lot of people are wondering how the interdependent economies are going to get back to the all-important business of business.
For unlike earlier trade disputes, this one does not offer an obvious way out.


Gullit to Play for Dutch
The former Dutch captain RUUD GULLIT, who said last year he was retiring from the national team, has changed his mind and will play for the Netherlands in the World Cup this summer.
"He will be a member of the squad again," said the Dutch team coach, DICK ADVOCAAT, in New York yesterday.
He added that Gullit, currently playing for Sampdoria of Italy, was keen to return to international soccer.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Arizona Public Service Co., Phoenix, a unit of Pinnacle West Capital Corp., is selling $100 million of 6.625 percent first mortgage bonds due in 2004 at 99.531 to yield 6.69 percent through Salomon Brothers.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service, BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation and BBB+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Croats and Muslims Reach Truce To End the Other Bosnia Conflict
Bosnia's warring Muslims and Croats agreed tonight to a cease-fire aimed at restoring peace and order to wide areas of central and southern Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The agreement, to take effect at noon Friday, is intended partly to break the siege that Croatian fighters have waged for nine months on the Muslim quarter in the ancient city of Mostar, where the toll of suffering, including an estimated 2,000 dead on the two sides, parallels the worst moments of the Serbian siege of Sarajevo.


Executive Changes
CATELLUS DEVELOPMENT CORP., San Francisco, said Vernon Schwartz had resigned as chairman and chief executive, effective June 30.
GENERAL FOODS U.S.A., White Plains, appointed four senior executives to new posts: Charles A. Phillips to executive vice president of operations and sales for General Foods U.S.A.; Ann M. Fudge to executive vice president and president of the Maxwell House Coffee Company; James R. Craigie to executive vice president and general manager of the dinners and enhancers division, and Mark Leckie to executive vice president and general manager of the Post Cereals division.


Computer Chip Threatens Civil Liberties
To the Editor:
In "Sink the Clipper Chip" (column, Feb. 14), William Safire offers an argument against the Clinton proposal to put an encryption chip in every telephone and computer made in the United States.
The "Clipper Initiative" would have three "keys" to unlock encrypted messages -- one held by the individual and the other two by the Commerce and Treasury Departments.
The proposal's constitutionality is also an issue.


R. Van Gelder, 65, A Museum Curator And Animal Expert
Dr.
Richard G. Van Gelder, whose romance with animals started when he was 7 and led to his becoming one of the youngest curators of the American Museum of Natural History, died yesterday at Pascack Valley Hospital in Westwood, N.J.
Dr.
Van Gelder, who lived in Harrington Park, N.J., was 65.
The cause was leukemia, said his daughter, Leslie Van Gelder.


Blair Speeds To Fifth Gold Of Her Career
When it was over, when she had won the 1,000-meter speed skating race to become America's most decorated female Olympic athlete, Bonnie Blair skated around the oval at the Viking Ship Hall, a smile on her face, a moistness in her eyes, and raised her left hand up to a band of cheering fans.
She seemed to be saying, "Five," for the fifth gold medal she has won over three Olympics.
She might also have been waving goodbye, not just for the night, but for all time.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI SEEKS NEW BUDGET POWERS Hoping to wield greater control of New York City's finances, Mayor Giuliani said that he would seek new powers to oversee the budgets of independent agencies that receive money from the city.
B3.
AN ORDER TO EXECUTE A JOURNALIST A confessed murder conspirator and drug trafficker testified that he relayed an order from Colombia to kill Manuel de Dios Unanue, the crusading antidrug journalist slain execution style in Queens two years ago.
B3.


Short- and Medium-Term Rates Rise
Short- and intermediate-term interest rates rose sharply yesterday, one day after the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, tried to reassure bond traders and investors not to be concerned about inflation in the near term.
Traders said there were two reasons for the jump in short-term rates, which took the yield on the three-year note to 5 percent, its highest level since January 1993, when it was 5.08 percent.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Scott Lewis, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
National League
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Agreed to terms with Mike Sharperson, infielder, on a minor-league contract.


Republicans Say Congress Could Balk on Bosnia Force
As the United States begins pressing the Bosnian Government to make peace, key Republican Senators questioned today whether Congress would approve the Administration's plan to send American troops there if a settlement is reached.
At a hearing of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Secretary of State Warren Christopher warned that Bosnia's Muslim-led Government would not sign a peace treaty without an American pledge to send troops to take part in peacekeeping in Bosnia.


Sports of The Times; Nancy Beats Whole World This Night
WE saw it from our own narrow isolationist viewpoint, an American morality play happening in some foreign theater, the Drama in Hamar, like the Thrilla in Manila.
Back home, this day was reserved for Kerrigan verses Harding, the obedient girl against the tough girl, the girl who bakes cookies against the girl who smokes, and wasn't it nice of the Winter Games to accommodate it.
But despite the warnings from the experts, Americans tended to overlook the rest of the world -- the graceful Oksana Baiul, the vibrant Surya Bonaly, the composed Katarina Witt, and all the young skaters from all those other countries with skating rinks and choreographers and coaches and designers all their own.


Wife in Spy Case Is From Elite of Colombia
Maria del Rosario Casas Ames, the woman who along with her husband is charged with espionage, grew up in Bogota, Colombia, as a member of that city's elite.
The parents of the 42-year-old Mrs.
Ames came from two socially prominent Colombian families.
Her father, Pablo Casas Santosinio, is a respected political figure who has served in the Colombian Senate.
Her mother, Cecilia Dupuy de Casas, comes from a relatively affluent and socially prominent family.


South Korean Expects Atomic Backdown by North
In South Korea's most optimistic assessment yet of the tense standoff on the Korean Peninsula, President Kim Young Sam said today that he had become "very sure that in the end North Korea will accept the nuclear inspections" that the United States and its allies have demanded for more than a year.
That upbeat view, expressed by Mr.
Kim in an interview at the presidential mansion in Seoul, was a sharp turnaround from his tone just eight months ago.
At that time he warned the United States against being "led on" by North Korea and suggested that "time is running out" because North Korea would be able to produce plutonium by early 1994 in large enough quantities to make nuclear weapons.


Thrills, Spills and Icy Hills
It's one thing to run with the pack in a city marathon.
But try strapping skis onto your feet, then make your way up an icy hill with more than 6,000 cross-country skiers elbowing you pole to pole.
Your ability to finish unscathed is part of the adventure that annually draws Americans and Europeans alike to the American Birkebeiner, the largest cross-country ski race in North America.


Mexico's 2 Faces: Is Political Change Top Priority?
Scarcely two days after it sat down to peace talks with the peasant rebels who rose up against it in the southern state of Chiapas, the Mexican Government appeared today to be at war with itself.
From a podium in the 16th-century cathedral here where the talks are being held, the Government's chief negotiator announced that he had seen clearly through the fighting and political conflict that began on Jan. 1 to the roots of the rebels' violence.


Wasmeier Grabs Spotlight From Tomba, Norwegians
There was no bombast today on the gold medal stand, no La Bomba, just the modest renaissance man from Bavaria.
Markus Wasmeier keeps showing up where he isn't expected.
Or wanted.
But when Alberto Tomba, the world's foremost Alpine producer of headlines, skied himself into a slow news day, here came Wasmeier to beat not only Tomba but the highly touted Norwegians as well, to win the gold medal in giant slalom.


CLINTON CAUTIOUS IN REBUKING RUSSIA
Even as his Administration warned that it would not tolerate more spying by Russia, President Clinton took pains today to keep the case of a C.I.A. officer accused of being a double agent from leading to a rupture in relations between Washington and Moscow.
The mixture of sternness and apprehension reflected a concern that the embarrassing episode would be used by the Administration's opponents to limit American aid to Russia while Mr.
Clinton's advisers believe that such a course could hurt President Boris N. Yeltsin.


McDonald's Bans Smoking at All the Sites It Owns
The McDonald's Corporation said today that all its 1,400 wholly owned restaurants would ban smoking immediately.
At the same time, the association representing 90,000 chain restaurants backed a bill to end smoking in all restaurants and other buildings used by the public.
The announcements were prompted by the increasing numbers and outspokenness of nonsmokers who have demanded freedom from smoke in restaurants, said Terrie Dort, executive director of the trade association, the National Council of Chain Restaurants.
She said 30,000 of the nation's chain restaurants already banned smoking, and the proposed law "provides a level playing field that our industry needs to reach the 100 percent mark."


Ida Parkinson Bruce Ballet Dancer, 93
Ida Parkinson Bruce, a ballet dancer who performed in this country in the 1920's, died on Sunday at the Pine Run Health Center in Doylestown, Pa.
She was 93 and lived in Greenwich, Conn., and Palm Beach, Fla., before she moved to Doylestown in 1984.
She had a long illness, her family said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
EXECUTIVE TELECARD LTD., Nanuet, N.Y., said it was considering a plan to spin off its Executive Telecard S.A. unit in a distribution to stockholders.
FRUIT OF THE LOOM INC., Chicago, Ill., said it had bought a plant in Clinton, S.C. from the McGregor Corporation.
Terms were not disclosed.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.33
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.37
3.33
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.58
3.43
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.12
6.04
6.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.64
6.60
6.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.45
7.40
7.79
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.68
5.65
5.92
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Devils Look Grand As They Dump Detroit
The Devils scored a handful of goals early and then put it on cruise control to take a 7-2 victory over one of the league's best teams, the Detroit Red Wings, at Joe Louis Arena.
This should come as no surprise.
Although they get less attention than most good teams, the Devils rank with Detroit in the top echelon of the National Hockey League's 26 teams.
Coming into the game, Detroit was second in winning percentage at .636 and New Jersey was fourth at .603.
And the Devils may be peaking.


Kiwi Seeks New Labor Ethic, End to Us vs. Them
Around the halls, hangars and cabins of fledgling Kiwi International Air Lines, good help is easy to find.
Flight attendants volunteer for top-to-bottom cabin cleaning of new Kiwi jets.
Pilots pick up trash under seats between flights, and mechanics drop in on travel agents for a little schmoozing.
This esprit de corps isn't just altruism: Every Kiwi worker has invested $5,000 to $50,000 in the airline to help get it started.
And because Kiwi's entrepreneurial culture contrasts so sharply with the rigid work rules that govern most airlines, the start-up carrier is one of the best examples of how employee ownership can dissolve the us-versus-them mentality of labor-management relations through much of corporate America.
Notion of Common Goals
Indeed, many corporations are trying to copy the success of Kiwi and other employee-owned companies like Avis rental cars in aligning the goals of workers and managers.
The number of companies where workers own a stake has dramatically risen since the 1970's, to about 10,000, with roughly 11 million employees at companies of all sizes taking part in stock ownership plans.
In only about a quarter of these, however, do the workers own a majority of the stock, as they do at Kiwi.


As Guggenheim Adjusts, Pinch Is Felt Elsewhere
Fallout from the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum's recent financial troubles is being felt at other museums.
Two weeks ago, the Guggenheim dismissed nearly 10 percent of its staff, reduced the hours at its uptown Frank Lloyd Wright building and its SoHo branch, temporarily closed its library and postponed its major fall exhibition: paradoxically, all of this happened not long after the museum announced it had raised $50 million.
An indefinite postponement of the exhibition, "Total Risk Freedom Discipline: Abstraction in the 20th Century," because of what Guggenheim officials described as a lack of financing, has set off a chain of events that has left the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis scrambling for a fall show of its own.


Sugar Is to Blame for Little Monsters
To the Editor:
The sugar industry must be pleased that a new study is being pointed to as proof that sugar does not cause hyperactivity in children.
The study, conducted by Dr.
Mark L. Wolraich of Vanderbilt University and involving 48 normal preschool and school-age children, shows only that a small number of children whose parents believed they were sugar-sensitive did not react to table sugar. (Corn sugar, a widely used sweetener, was not tested.)
Several previous studies, as well as numerous reports from pediatricians and allergists, found that sugar indeed causes some children to become more active or to engage in inappropriate behavior.
The effects of sugar could well be exacerbated by the effects of dyes or other food ingredients commonly found in sugary foods.


Bomb Scare Delays Trains
A bogus bomb threat disrupted subway service on the Upper West Side and in Harlem for nearly three hours last night.
A caller reported at 8 P.M. that there was a bomb on the Lenox Avenue line between 110th and 148th Streets, said Jared Lebow, a spokesman for the Transit Authority.
The No. 2 train was shut down between Times Square and the Grand Concourse in the Bronx, and the No. 3 from Times Square to the Lenox Terminal in Harlem.
By 10:50 P.M. the New York City police bomb squad had determined that the threat was a fake, Mr.
Lebow said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at 11th Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
Barry Harris's hands rarely stray from the middle of the piano keyboard.
He plays quietly, too, and everything he proposes is balanced and conversational.
At the Village Vanguard, his gentleness at first begged the rhythm section to push a little harder, although it was just as easy to imagine a touch more volume overwhelming his thin, clear lines.
Mr.
Harris's civility made him rather fragile.


Hair-Dryers Aiding Metro-North's Image
When the snow falls, Metro-North electricians take to the tracks with a new weapon in their war on winter: the hand-held hair-dryer.
"They're the handiest thing for de-icing the electrical couplers" where cars connect, said Richard Renbarger, the New Haven facility director.
After employees hit on the idea of using their hair-dryers to keep the couplers dry during winter storms, he said, the railroad bought its own supply.
"It works," Mr.
Renbarger said.


Americans Lose Shot at a Hockey Medal
They were young, eager and cohesive, and because another optimistic band of American hockey players somehow transformed those elements into gold 14 years ago, this group of Americans thought it might do the same.
But the only thing close to a miracle on ice in Norway involves a team from Finland.
And tonight in Hakon Hall, those same undefeated and untied Finns put a convincing end to the Americans' slim medal hopes with a 6-1 victory in the quarterfinals.


The Bereaved Call Attention to Mortality
To the Editor:
Frank Rich perceptively zeroes in on the fears people have about being near someone who's dying (column, Feb. 3).
My husband died of cancer four years ago, and I have never forgotten how some people shunned him during his illness, nor the time he overheard an associate whisper, "That man has the smell of death." Such experiences compound an ill person's feelings of isolation.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications called off their merger.
A decline in the value of Bell Atlantic's stock and the potential impact of cable television rate cuts on Tele-Communications apparently led to the decision to end the $33 billion deal.  [ Page A1. ]  Raymond W. Smith and John C. Malone once seemed to be the shapers of a new information age.
Today, they are two tired executives who could not meet their own deadlines for completing the deal. [ D6. ]  The collapse of the merger was not a complete surprise to analysts who had wondered how the conflicting styles and goals of the two companies could be resolved.  [ D6. ]
Microsoft was ordered to pay $120 million in damages to Stac Electronics Inc.
The judgment came in the first patent infringement suit against Microsoft ever to reach a trial.  [ D1. ]


Senator Asks Demotion Of a Retiring General
Over the objections of at least one Senator, the White House has recommended that the Air Force general who directed the allied air campaign against Iraq be retired as a three-star officer, rather than being demoted for improper interference with a promotion board.
The officer, Lieut.
Gen.
Buster C. Glosson, was admonished last year by Air Force Secretary Sheila E. Widnall after an investigation found that he had improperly intervened with a promotion board to try to block the advancement of a lower-ranking general.


For Bonds, A Wager Can Work Wonders
At first, the three-time most valuable player appeared to resent the sign taped to the top of his locker and he yanked it down.
The sign, using locker-room language, said you are nothing "till you win #4."
But the sign, Barry Bonds quickly concluded, could serve a purpose and he taped it back up.
Now he had two major motivational spurs; the other is a bet with Jose Canseco.


Home Depot
Shares of Home Depot, the chain of home repair stores, rose for the second consecutive day yesterday.
On Tuesday, it reported a 16 percent gain in fourth-quarter profit, which was below analysts' expectations.
But Wall Street seemed to give the company the benefit of the doubt because of the severe winter weather in the quarter that ended Jan. 31.


Giuliani Wants More Spending Control
Hoping to wield greater control over New York City's finances, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would seek new powers to oversee budgets of independent authorities or agencies receiving money from the city, including the Health and Hospitals Corporation, Board of Education and Transit Authority.
Neither the Mayor nor his senior aides gave details of how they hoped to do so, but changes in the structure or fiscal management of such agencies would require approval of the Legislature and the Governor.


COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
Chasing Harvard
Brown has been the most persistent pursuer of the ECAC-leading Crimson since November when the two played twice, with Harvard winning the first game, 5-4, in overtime and tying the second, 3-3.
In spite of losing their two top scorers from last season's National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament team -- Derek Chauvette and Scott Hanley -- the Bears have outscored their foes by 81-58 in 18 league games and their goalie, Geoff Finch, has a .903 save percentage.


Giuliani Helps Kick Off 'Grammy Week'


Some Male Bats May Double as Wet Nurses
Scientists casting their nets in the dense forest canopies of Malaysia have discovered the first example of a wild male mammal that lactates.
The species is a Dayak fruit bat, a large and poorly understood creature with an 18-inch wingspan, a dog-like face and, it turns out, a touch of androgyny.
When the researchers captured a group of the bats in a wide-ranging effort to survey animals that inhabit the Malaysian canopy, they were dumbfounded to see that the eight adult male Dayaks in the net all had visibly swollen breasts that produced milk upon being gently squeezed.


Hoping Someone (Else) Would Abolish Slavery
In a letter written from his home in Mount Vernon on Sept. 9, 1786, to John Francis Mercer, a fellow Virginian, George Washington wrote: "I never mean (unless some particular circumstance should compel me to it) to possess another slave by purchase; it being among my first wishes to see some plan adopted, by which slavery in this country may be abolished by slow, sure, and imperceptible degrees."
At that time -- a year before the drafting of the Constitution -- George and Martha Washington owned 216 slaves.
Under the provisions of his will, Washington's slaves were freed after his death.
Although he did stop buying and selling slaves, his vague hope for "some plan" of abolition was not fulfilled until the 13th Amendment was ratified after the end of the Civil War in 1865.


McSorley Out 4 Games
The Los Angeles Kings defenseman MARTY McSORLEY will sit out a total of four games, without pay, and pay a $500 fine for gouging the eye of San Jose's BOB ERREY last Saturday.
McSorley was suspended on Monday, pending a hearing.
He sat out home games against Toronto on Monday night and Dallas last night.


Anderson Carries Out The Rescue
While the Nets' management continues to struggle over signing or trading one superstar, another continues to rescue the team on a regular basis.
Kenny Anderson, who has become the pillar of the franchise, erupted for 14 of his game-high 29 points in the third quarter tonight to help the Nets erase a 13-point Philadelphia lead in a 106-102 victory over the 76ers at the Spectrum.


Gideon Chagy; Arts Consultant, 78
Gideon Chagy, an arts consultant, writer and broadcaster, died on Sunday at St.
Clare's Hospital.
He was 78 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Lea.


Microsoft Loses Case On Patent
A Federal court jury found the Microsoft Corporation guilty of patent infringement today and awarded $120 million in damages to a small California company that had accused Microsoft of appropriating its technology for increasing the storage capacity of computer disks.
The judgment in favor of Stac Electronics Inc. came in the first patent infringement suit against Microsoft ever to reach a trial.


Fever Sickens Dozens Near Earthquake Epicenter
To the woes of the victims of the Northridge earthquake, add pestilence.
In the month since the Jan. 17 quake shook the San Fernando Valley and much of the rest of the Los Angeles area, at least three dozen people in this part of California have become ill from what doctors say is an unusual outbreak of "valley fever."


Calendar: Decorative Objects By Wright
Wright Interiors  Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street; (212) 879-5500.
An exhibition of furnishings and decorative objects by Frank Lloyd Wright opens on Tuesday and runs through Sept. 4.
The show includes furniture, ceramics, textiles, sculpture and architectural fragments.
Visitors to the American Wing can also see the museum's installation of a living room designed by Wright in 1912-14.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M. (to 8:45 P.M. on Friday and Saturday).
Suggested admission is $6; students and those 65 and older, $3.


A Frenchwoman Takes Hanoi by Helicopter
Anoa Dussol, a 37-year-old Frenchwoman of Vietnamese birth, has brought off a peaceful helicopter assault on a country where the aircraft that she pilots were for many years dreaded machines of war.
Last March, Ms.
Dussol was in deep trouble with the Government for arriving on an Air France flight in Ho Chi Minh City, where she was born when it was still known as Saigon, with a fully operative but totally undocumented French helicopter in the plane's cargo hold.


Facing Criticism, Clinton Will Name Envoys Soon
Facing criticism for being slow to name ambassadors to several major countries, President Clinton will soon name envoys to India, Britain and Saudi Arabia, Administration officials said today.
In an effort to break the logjam that has delayed numerous appointments, the President plans to name Stephen J. Solarz, the former Representative from Brooklyn, to be Ambassador to India, and William J. Crowe Jr., the retired Admiral who was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to be Ambassador to Britain.


Essay; Holy Moley!
Aldrich Ames, the C.I.A. official accused of being a Russian penetration agent, was "fluttered" -- polygraphed -- in 1986 and again in 1991.
If he is found guilty, that would prove the "lie detector" is unreliable.
It would show how the C.I.A. was lulled into a false sense of security by a device that law enforcement officers know is a splendid tool to scare suspects into confessions, but could be easily fooled by a natural liar, a psychopath or a trained spy.


Rebuilt Globe on the Way to Reopening Night
When the American actor Sam Wanamaker made a pilgrimage here to search for Shakespeare's Globe Theater in 1949, all he found was a blackened sign on a brewery wall: "This is on or around where Shakespeare had his Globe."
So began a lifelong obsession to reconstruct the historic theater.
Mr.
Wanamaker died of cancer two months ago at 74 before he saw it completed, and with $3 million still to be raised, many of the Globe's supporters feared the project would founder without him.
There was hope that Kenneth Branagh might come to the rescue as Mr.
Wanamaker's successor.
But Mr.
Branagh, who is busy directing his next movie, "Frankenstein," remains uncommitted.


Robert Trojanowicz, Police Academic, 52
Robert Trojanowicz, a professor of criminal justice at Michigan State University who was the leading academic advocate of community policing, died on Feb. 11 at his home in Holt, Mich.
He was 52.
He died of a heart attack, a spokeswoman for the university said.


Japan Relents, Will Retain Its HDTV
A firestorm of protest from executives of some of Japan's big electronics companies led the Government today to partly recant statements suggesting that it might discontinue the Japanese high-definition television system.
Akimasa Egawa, director general of the broadcasting administration bureau in the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, said at a news conference that the ministry would now continue to promote the existing system and that broadcasts would continue into the next century.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Betty  The Ballroom 253 West 28th Street Chelsea Through March 12
In a new single by the talented pop trio Betty, a song that takes off from a line of Gertrude Stein's makes an intentionally awful pun: "Udderly romantic." Edgy and enigmatic, it is a comic love song for people who abhor romantic pop cliches.
And it exemplifies the contradictory qualities of the trio, which consists of Alyson Palmer and the sisters Amy and Bitzi Ziff.


MERGER TALKS FAIL ON $33 BILLION DEAL IN COMMUNICATIONS
After months of frustrating negotiations, the Bell Atlantic Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc. said last night that they had terminated plans for the largest merger in history.
The $33 billion transaction, announced four months ago, would have joined Bell's regional telephone business with the vast cable operations of Tele-Communications and those of a third company, the Liberty Media Corporation.
The merger would have radically altered the landscape of the telecommunications industry by quickening the development of new technologies for home entertainment and information.


CHRONICLE
DOLLY PARTON has apologized to the Anti-Defamation League for remarks she made about Jews during an interview published in the January issue of Vogue magazine.
The article quoted Miss Parton as saying that she had planned to do a television series about a country singer who switches to gospel music after a near-death experience.
"But everybody's afraid to touch anything that's religious because most of the people out here are Jewish, and it's frightening thing for them to promote Christianity," she said.


Review/Dance; Movement and Music, Together and Separately
Li Chiao-Ping, a Chinese-American choreographer who teaches at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, and Marilyn Crispell, a classically trained jazz pianist and composer, shared a program on Tuesday night as part of the Face the Music and Dance series at Symphony Space.
The presentation concluded with a collaborative "Improvisation," in which Ms.
Li moved diagonally back and forth from upstage left to downstage right to agitated piano music by Ms.
Crispell.
The rest of the evening featured selections by Ms.
Crispell without dancing and a long solo by Ms.
Li set to taped scores by several composers.
Ms.
Crispell's music brooded, smoldered and often became fiery, and it received fine performances by a trio that included, in addition to the composer, Reggie Workman on bass and Gerry Hemingway on percussion.


No Rest for the Wobbly; Many Surgeons Agree: This Winter Is Bad to the Bones
Now is the winter of our dislocated knee.
And our broken arm and our separated shoulder and our unstable fracture of the fibula.
Not to mention our intertrochanteric fracture and our cracking of the distal radius.


Accounts
*
Carphone Warehouse, London, to Bartle Bogle Hegarty, London, to handle the independent mobile communications retailer's account in Britain, previously at CTSS, Oxford, England.
Billings were estimated at $4.5 million. *
Goldberg Fossa Seid Advertising, New York, was awarded two accounts: American Express Co., New York, as the first agency to handle a direct marketing creative assignment for the new business partnership unit of its establishment services division, and Duncan Toy Co., Middlefield, Ohio, to handle its Duncan Yo-Yo, previously at the Century Group, Cleveland.
Billings were not disclosed.


Buyout at Ross Roy Brings a New Shop
Two principals of Calet, Hirsch &amp; Ferrell in New York said yesterday that they had completed a long-pending buyout from the agency's parent, Ross Roy Communications, and opened a shop called Ferrell Calvillo.
John Ferrell and Ric Calvillo opened their agency -- at 250 Park Avenue South in Manhattan between 19th and 20th Streets -- with billings estimated at $80 million.
They will continue working on all Calet, Hirsch accounts except for the Kmart Corporation.
The accounts include Toshiba, Corning and Giant Eagle supermarkets.
Kmart, with billings estimated at $55 million, was retained by Ross Roy through a new agency, New York Partners/Ross Roy, also at 250 Park Avenue South and headed by Peter Hirsch as vice chairman and executive creative director.


Parcells Is Snaring A Second Giant
The Giants are being raided by Bill Parcells.
First it was offensive lineman Bob Kratch.
Now, safety Myron Guyton -- people close to the situation said last night -- has agreed to a three-year, $5.2 million contract.
And Parcells, the former Giants and current New England coach, is apparently primed to make a move for running back Lewis Tillman.
Guyton has not signed, but apparently has agreed to rejoin his old coach.
All of this comes several days after the Patriots got Kratch.
Guyton did not take telephone calls at his home last night, and the person who answered said a deal was not yet complete.
It is believed that the Patriots do not want to announce the deal until Guyton signs.


Legal Fight on Ousted School Head Is Likely to Clarify Chancellor's Powers
A dispute between Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines and a community school board that wants to oust its superintendent has turned into a legal battle that is very likely to clarify the Chancellor's powers to oversee local districts, lawyers for both sides said yesterday.
Community School Board 9 has sued Mr.
Cortines, seeking judicial backing for its dismissal of its superintendent, Felton Johnson, after Mr.
Cortines earlier this month ordered the board to renew Mr.
Felton's contract.
Mr.
Cortines has credited Mr.
Johnson with leading an educational renaissance in the district, which includes the west central Bronx.


Critic's Notebook; 'Jackson Family Honors' A Night of Oddities
On NBC Tuesday night, "Jackson Family Honors" certainly scored a 10 on the bizarre meter.
Not since Bill and Hillary, battered by pre-election stories of his marital indiscretions, took their case directly to a television news magazine, has the craft of image repair been used so, well, craftily.
Let's not even get into the motives of the Jackson family in its decision to bestow honors.
Certainly the last thing the universe needs is another awards show.
And let's not question NBC's decision to devote two hours to a ceremony that involved only two recipients: Michael Jackson's dear friend Elizabeth Taylor, and Motown's founder, Berry Gordy, the man most responsible for the fame and fortune of the Jacksons.


Bribe-Taking By Honda Officials Seen
After a yearlong inquiry, Federal prosecutors in New Hampshire are preparing to charge more than a dozen current and former American Honda Motor Company executives with accepting bribes from dealers in exchange for franchises and hot-selling Honda models from 1986 through 1991.
Prosecutors are likely to file the charges, which include racketeering, bribery, extortion and obstruction of justice, before mid-March, according to officials close to the investigation.
The officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said prosecutors believed the Honda executives -- both Japanese and American -- would plead guilty to the charges.
Other executives are expected to be charged later.


Woman Is Slain in Queens
A 64-year-old woman was shot to death and her brother was wounded in the leg in their Queens apartment last night, the police said.
This morning, investigators were questioning a 16-year-old who is the son or foster son of the woman, Dorothy Lide, but he had not been arrested or charged, said an officer who insisted on anonymity.
At 10:46 P.M., Ms.
Lide's brother, Francis Lide, 56, reported the shooting at 145-30 Arlington Terrace in Jamaica, the police said.
Ms.
Lide was found dead in the living room, shot once in the head, said Sgt.
Joseph Gallagher, a police spokesman.
Mr.
Lide was in good condition at Mary Immaculate Hospital.


Former Prosecutor to Study White House Aide's Suicide
The independent counsel investigating the real estate investments of Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, said today that he had selected a seasoned former New York prosecutor to look into the suicide of a senior White House official last summer.
The counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr., said that the Washington office of his investigation would be headed by Roderick C. Lankler, who will examine the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr. last July.
Mr.
Fiske also announced the appointment of seven lawyers to the inquiry's Little Rock office.


Medicare Suggests Way To Reform Health Care
To the Editor:
Controversy over health care may block action on this critical issue.
A simple approach offers a solution.


Virginia, Say No to the Mouse
The Walt Disney Company excels at creating artificial wonderlands aimed at 10-year-old, television-nurtured sensibilities.
Nothing wrong with that, in Anaheim or Orlando.
Neither place was ever known for its cultural or natural treasures.
Prince William County, Va., is another matter entirely.
It is a region of natural beauty and historical importance, flanked by the Blue Ridge Mountains and the Civil War shrines of Manassas.
Its rolling farmland preserves a piece of rural America, with roots in the country's earliest settlement.


Sing-Along Requiems
The West Village Chorale is sponsoring a new Requiem Winter Sing series on three consecutive Sundays at 4 P.M. at the Church of St.
Luke-in-the-Fields, 487 Hudson Street, West Village.
Gwen Gould is to conduct all three sessions, in which the audience is the chorus.
The first, this Sunday, features the Mozart Requiem, with Danielle Woerner, Valerie Coates, Eric von Bleicken and John Eppler as soloists.
The second is to be the Faure Requiem; the last, Brahms's "German Requiem." Admission is $10.
Information: (212) 570-7301.


Pippen Is Cleared
Misdemeanor weapons charges against SCOTTIE PIPPEN, the Bulls' star, were dropped yesterday in Chicago after a judge granted a defense motion to suppress as evidence the gun seized from Pippen's car.
The motion granted by Associate Cook County Circuit Court Judge PATRICK MORSE contended that the Chicago police seized the gun during an illegal search.
Pippen was arrested outside a Near North Side nightclub early on the morning of Jan. 20 after the police found a loaded .38-caliber pistol in his illegally parked Range Rover.
The police said that said Pippen had a state firearm owner's card and was entitled to own the gun, but had no permit to carry it on the street or in his vehicle.


DILLARD DEPARTMENT STORES INC. (N)
Dillard Department Stores said yesterday that earnings for the fourth quarter rose slightly to $111.3 million, or 99 cents a share, from $110.4 million, or 98 cents a share, for the quarter a year earlier.
Revenue for the quarter, which ended on Jan. 29, rose 6 percent, to $1.6 billion, compared with $1.5 billion for the quarter year ago.


Vance and His Law Firm Have Ties to Macy Case
Creditors of R. H. Macy &amp; Company were taking a hard look yesterday at Cyrus R. Vance's ties to the retailer after the former Secretary of State was appointed as mediator in Macy's bankruptcy.
Simpson, Thacher &amp; Bartlett, where Mr.
Vance is a partner and which was appointed his legal counsel during the mediation, advised Dillard Department Stores Inc. earlier this year when it was exploring a possible bid for some Macy assets, according to bankruptcy court documents.


Bridge
When the auction begins with three passes, the fourth player often has a delicate problem: Should he open the bidding with a borderline hand?
He knows that the points are scattered fairly evenly around the table, and that his partner is likely to be in the 8-11 range.
A game for either side is most unlikely, so it is a question of a part-score.


Irving Levine; Judge, 84
Irving Levine, a retired judge of the Connecticut Superior Court, died on Feb. 15 at his home in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 84 and also lived in Bridgeport, Conn.
The cause was a heart attack, said his stepson, Kenneth J. Stuart of Manhattan.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE harassment started a few months ago on the school bus.
Millie, a 10th-grade student with red hair, was called "fire crotch" by several sixth-grade boys, who giggled and snickered among themselves.
"I was embarrassed," said Millie, who asked that her last name and town not be used so that she could avoid further harassment.
I told them not to say it, but they kept on.
Then I tried to ignore them."


Justices, a Bit Amused, Ponder a Ban on Signs
In a lively Supreme Court argument today, a pristine city's authority to control its visual landscape by banning most signs clashed with a homeowner's right to express her political opinion by displaying an anti-war sign in her own window.
The case, from the elegant St.
Louis suburb of Ladue, Mo., has First Amendment implications not only for political activists but for outdoor advertising and for the Federal Highway Beautification Act, which bans billboards along interstate highways.


AT HOME WITH: Pete Hamill; On Background
IN the movies, at least, there was always a world-weary editor in the newsroom with smarts to spare for a neophyte reporter.
He would say something magical and the kid would come back a star.
Pete Hamill, the former New York Post columnist and the newspaper's editor during last year's frenzied Abe Hirshfeld reign, found such a mentor when he showed up for the night shift there in 1960.
Paul Sann, who Mr.
Hamill recalls smoked Camels and looked like Bogart (who else?), gave him a motto a journalist could live by: "If you've got the story, tell it. If you don't have the story, write it."


'Gangsta' Rap: Hard Edge or Mainstream?


Critic's Notebook; In Russia, Artists Talk of Money and Money Talks
In the depths of the Russian winter, the cold drives the tattier St.
Petersburg street vendors indoors.
Snow masks the urban decay and reflects light off the city's pastel palaces and golden monuments glittering in the sun.
The canals and even the Neva River are mostly frozen, steam rising eerily from the water and ducks scrabbling desperately for food.
It's so cold, about all one can do is talk.
At the State Hermitage Museum, as at all large Russian arts institutions, the talk is mostly of money.
Since Mikhail B. Piotrovsky inherited the job of director from his father in the summer of 1992 -- Vitaly A. Suslov briefly bridged the gap between the two men -- he seems to have done an admirable job establishing links to the West and otherwise compensating for faltering state support.


More Relief for Californians


Queens Woman Foils Attack, And Police Officer Is Charged
A New York City police officer was arrested yesterday and accused of trying to assault a woman who was walking home from work after midnight down a quiet street in Astoria, Queens.
A police spokesman said detectives were investigating whether the incident was an attempted rape.
Police officials said that Officer Ronald Murgo Jr., 26, who was off-duty and out of uniform, lunged at the woman from behind, put his hand over her mouth and pulled her off to a poorly lighted area.
The woman, 22, a clerk who works in the area, bit his hand and escaped, officials said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
TanaReid  Sweet Basil 88 Seventh Avenue South (above Bleecker Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
TanaReid, a cooperative group led by the drummer Akira Tana and the bassist Rufus Reid, is a good idea on paper.
The band is meant to be a working group with set personnel, which usually guarantees a high level of improvisational interplay.
And it features three promising young musicians, Dan Faulk and Craig Bailey on saxophones and Rob Schneiderman on piano.
Things don't always work out as planned: on Tuesday night at Sweet Basil, the band seemed both intelligent and inert.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Clean Soil
Q.
I'd like to use soil from my garden for my houseplants, but I've heard it's not a good idea.
How can I make outdoor soil safe for indoor use? -- Jerome J. Newberger, Rosyln, L.I.


Panel Criticizes Prosecutor In Inquiry on Woody Allen
A Connecticut prosecutor's handling of a child-molestation complaint against Woody Allen was cause for "grave concern" and may have prejudiced the legal battle between Mr.
Allen and Mia Farrow, a disciplinary panel has found.
But while its decision, dated Feb. 3, amounted to a stern rebuke of the prosecutor, Frank S. Maco, the state Grievance Panel concluded that Mr.
Maco, the State's Attorney for Litchfield County, had not violated any provision of the state's code of conduct for lawyers.
The panel, a state agency, could have voted sanctions ranging from censure to disbarment.


Jurors Begin Deliberations In Blast Case
The jurors began deliberations in the World Trade Center bombing case yesterday after the judge instructed them to put aside their political beliefs, their sympathies and prejudices and to decide the case solely on the basis of the evidence presented in the courtroom.
"It is time to do our part in the administration of justice in this case," the judge, Kevin T. Duffy, said as he signaled the end of nearly five months of testimony and lawyers' arguments, during which the jury heard from 207 witnesses and watched as 1,003 exhibits were put into evidence.


H.I.V. Counseling Keeps Mothers Connected
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 10 news article on a New York State Health Department panel's rejection of a proposal for mandatory human immunodeficiency virus testing of all newborns may mislead readers.
The panel's focus was not "how to balance the rights of women with those of their children"; rather, the report makes clear the issue is defining the most effective way to identify H.I.V.-positive newborns and get them into care.


Syracuse Bounces Back to a Victory One More Times
Syracuse 91, Seton Hall 69
Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim should have known better than to be worried about how his team would react against Seton Hall in Syracuse after a tough loss to Boston College in its last outing.
The Orangemen responded the same way they have all season as they rolled to a 91-69 victory last night.
"It's a good win for us coming off a tough loss," said Boeheim, referring to Boston College's 89-83 victory on Saturday.
"In this league, when you have those games, it's very easy sometimes to not bounce back. Every time we've loss this year, we've bounced back and played well."


Giuliani Names Administrator to Head Homeless Agency
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani today will appoint Joan Malin, a veteran city administrator, to head the city's Homeless Services Department, a department spokesman said yesterday.
In the Dinkins administration's waning days, she coordinated the city's efforts to get out of the business of running shelters and turn the job over to nonprofit groups, a goal Mr.
Giuliani has consistently praised.


Gastre Journal; For the Desperate, Nuclear Waste Isn't Dreadful
This dusty desert town, which seems to be lost in the middle of Patagonia, fits Buenos Aires policy makers' description of a "nonviable" area -- one that has no economic resources to support its people and where continued Government subsidies would be too costly.
But Gastre, in Chubut Province 900 miles south of Buenos Aires, is a special case because it is likely to be the site for Argentina's first repository for radioactive waste created by the country's three nuclear power plants.


What's Gleaming In Collectors' Eyes
YOU say you missed the boat on mission furniture and Clarice Cliff pottery?
That 12th-century bronze lions are impossible to find and George II chandeliers sell for millions of dollars?
Take heart.
For the nonmillionaire collector, what's important is knowing what's going to be hot next.
To that end, people with an eye for such things in the decorative arts and design have identified promising collectibles among items that now sell for $200 or less at flea markets around the country.
While they do not suggest that any of them will gain value in the future, they see cultural or esthetic significance in these everyday objects.


Patrick Award Is Added To Gretzky's Collection
WAYNE GRETZKY, the National Hockey League's career-leading scorer, has been named the 1994 winner of the Lester Patrick Award for outstanding service to hockey.
The N.H.L. also announced yesterday that ROBERT RIDDER, a long-time administrator and builder of amateur hockey programs in the United States, will also be honored with a Lester Patrick Award.


Sober 90's? Not at Auctions
WHAT do Michael Jordan, Hubert de Givenchy and the Russian space program have in common?
All added value to the pedigrees of items auctioned last year at record prices.
And while public sales have always thrived on the glamour derived from the names of owners past and present, collectors in 1993 found a wider range than ever of offbeat treasures on the block, from college basketball jerseys to space capsules.
For this reason, the sober 90's auction scene became positively scintillating on occasion last year, and not just for items with august pedigrees.
More than half the auction records were rewritten by items made in the 20th century.
Fans of the flicks continue to buy the finest in Hollywood memorabilia: Oscars, for instance.
At sports memorabilia sales, the feverish pitch of bidding seen in the late 1980's is gone.
But uncommon items -- the college jerseys of basketball stars and documents relating to such ancient heros as Babe Ruth -- continue to rack up records.


Newark Council Head Among 3 Indicted
Widening their investigation into corruption in Essex County, Federal prosecutors today accused the current president and a former president of the Newark City Council and a former City Councilman in East Orange of accepting tens of thousands of dollars in bribes from a towing company that was seeking lucrative municipal contracts.
Michael Chertoff, the United States Attorney for New Jersey, said the three officials were recorded repeatedly taking money from the towing company, including one instance in 1992 when the current Newark City Council President, Gary Harris, 40, received $12,000 in cash at his office in City Hall.


Another Time Another Place
A villa in Europe in the Dark Ages?
A prospector's shack in Montana in the 19th Century?
A temple in China during the Ming Dynasty?
Not even close.
The pictures actually show some rather un-New York looking buildings in New York.
At top left is the Cloisters in upper Manhattan, above is a 19th-century wooden house on Weehawken Street in lower Manhattan and at left is the Chinatown Merchants Building at Canal and Mott Streets in Chinatown. (Photographs by Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times)


Winter's 13th Storm Puts Ice Back in Spring Tonic
A touch of spring that had Northeasterners basking briefly in the sun disappeared with the dawn yesterday as the 13th storm of the season covered a winter-weary region with yet another layer of snow, causing traffic accidents, delaying trash pick-up, and bringing with it the threat of flooding.
Roughly three inches of snow fell across New York, New Jersey and Connecticut by early yesterday afternoon, turning to sleet and rain by dusk.
Forecasters advised that more rain could mean some flooding in low-lying areas and spots with poor drainage.


Irish From All Over in a Belfast Court
With a row full of Kennedy family members sitting up front, three judges began today to hear the appeal of a 1975 murder conviction brought by Paul Hill, one of the Guildford Four, who were recently portrayed in the film "In the Name of the Father" as innocent victims of British police and jurisprudence.
Mr.
Hill's contention is that his confession to a murder in Belfast -- the only evidence against him -- was coerced while he was being held in the police station at Guildford, in Surrey, England, for questioning over the bombing of a pub there.


Mets Set to Stay Tuned For Clubhouse Address
Fred Wilpon, the Mets' owner, arrived at the team's training facilities today and will address the team personally on Thursday, something he has done just one other time in his 14-year association with the club.
Wilpon, the team president and chief executive officer, said today that his speech would likely be different from the message he sent during a closed-door clubhouse meeting last August.


Winter Repeats Itself From Midwest to East
The winter of 1994, which has already set records for both cold and hot weather, delivered yet another dose of snow and freezing rain across much of the Midwest and Northeast today.
Following a pattern that is now all too familiar, today's storm snarled traffic on thousands of miles of highway throughout the Midwest and Northeast, closed many schools and delayed trains and airplanes.
The storm also set the stage for possible flooding of rivers and streams in many states.


Canada Wins and Chases Elusive Goal
Canada 3, Czech Republic 2
Petr Briza of the Czech Republic, the top goaltender in the 1992 Olympics, smashed his stick on the floor, his medal hopes dashed seconds earlier by a 3-2 loss in overtime to Canada yesterday in Gjovik, Norway.
It meant that the Czech Republic would have to wait at least four more years to play its former countrymen from Slovakia in Olympic hockey.


Children's Furniture Zooms Into the 1990's
FOR years, the ABC's of children's furniture were appalling, bulky and clunky -- in short, charmless.
But now it seems that designers are catching up to the demands of the functional 90's.
Some are doing it by reverting to the 60's.
How about a magical mystery tour via a bean-bag chair?


Murder Case Against 11 Cult Members Goes to Jury
After seven weeks of trial that encompassed 130 witnesses, nearly 1,500 pieces of evidence and impassioned arguments over who provoked the carnage near Waco one year ago next week, the murder case against 11 Branch Davidians went to the jury late today.
Both sides in the trial taking place in the Federal courthouse here described the original shoot-out and what followed as a totally needless horror.


Job M. Evans; Pet-Care Author, 53
Job M. Evans, a dog trainer who wrote extensively about the care of pets, died on Feb. 19 at his home in Key West, Fla.
He was 53.
The cause was AIDS, said his publisher, Sean Frawley.


Kerrigan Glitters; Harding Totters
On the most anticipated night in the Olympics, when seven weeks of speculation were distilled to 2 minutes 40 seconds of skating, Nancy Kerrigan performed the best short program of her life, while Tonya Harding performed one of her worst.
While Kerrigan sits in first place, one performance away from a gold medal, Harding could only sit in a glass booth at the Olympic Amphitheater, watching her chief rival from 10th place, unsmiling, her hands slapping together in hollow applause.


Unaccustomed Setback for Two Executives
John C. Malone and Raymond W. Smith stood at a starkly lit lectern last October, a huge video screen behind them that seemed to symbolize their vision of a bold new information age.
As Mr.
Smith put it, the $33 billion merger of his company, the Bell Atlantic Corporation, with Mr.
Malone's Tele-Communications Inc. would "make the electronic superhighway we've been talking about for a while a reality." The merged giant would provide "wire and wireless service, video-on-demand and interactive media, all rolled into one," he said.


Bradley Rebukes Clinton on Japan
In an unusually pointed rebuke of his own party's leader, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey charged today that President Clinton's hard line on Japan trade policy was "gratuitous brinkmanship" that puts the United States' long-term economic and strategic interests at risk in pursuit of domestic political gain.
"I mean, it's kind of Japan-bashing for domestic constituency, without regard to the long-term strategic interests of the country, not even achieving the short-term objective, which is getting the bilateral trade deficit down," the Senator said in an interview in his office that he solicited to talk about Japanese trade.


Fantasy: Asking Mickey to Quell Fear of a Dentist?


Bosnia: Next Steps
Sensibly, U.S., European and Russian officials meeting in Bonn Tuesday decided to hold off on any new bombing threats and concentrate on intensified diplomacy.
That means trying to consolidate the cease-fire around Sarajevo and extending it to other battle fronts, improving the peace terms offered to the Bosnian Government and nurturing a reconciliation between Government and Bosnian Croat forces that could lead to political and economic federation.


Tiles Acquire Star Quality
DESIGNERS in the United States have embraced handmade items, from wood furniture to decorative tiles.
Tiles made in this country, after serving largely as functional items for years, now appear as stylish elements on everything from fireplaces to floors.
Though handmade tiles have an obvious audience among people restoring historic buildings, their appeal extends to anyone intrigued by their distinctive color, their historic appearance by the fact that no two are alike.


Pilon Goes to Minors
The Islanders sent defenseman RICH PILON to Salt Lake for conditioning.
He partly dislocated his shoulder in mid-November and has been out of action since Dec. 3.
He had 1 goal and 2 assists in 19 games.
JOE DAY , a wing, was sent back to Salt Lake to make room on the roster for PIERRE TURGEON.
Day did not play in the last 11 games.


Not young, but restless: A 53-year-old creative director says there's no substitute for experience.
A LONGTIME advertising executive doesn't care if you call young people Generation X, twentysomethings, twentynothings or slackers.
All he asks is that you call him instead of them.
In an unusual and provocative campaign, Bob Cox, the president and creative director at the Cox Group, a small agency in New York City, is seeking to sow doubts about the expertise, skill levels, competence and involvement that young account and creative employees bring to their work.
His alternative: experienced talent like -- surprise! -- Mr.
Cox, 53, who has worked at agencies including Cox Landey &amp; Partners, Needham Harper Worldwide, Wells Rich Greene and Young &amp; Rubicam.


Spectrum Says It Lost $12 Million
Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., the embattled wireless communications company that John Sculley recently quit as chairman, has announced a loss of $12.1 million, or 17 cents a share, for its fiscal third quarter.
The loss, announced late Tuesday, included a $4.7 million charge to cover the expected settlement of a shareholder class-action suit filed against the company and a special $2.9 million charge for shutting down operations of Spectrum's Data One portable computer unit.


Partners in a Failed Merger, 2 Very Different Companies
The key to the breakup of the Bell Atlantic-Tele-Communications Inc. merger, announced last night, is likely to be found in the striking differences in the styles and goals of the two companies, which are run for two different kinds of shareholders: "widows and orphans" in the case of Bell Atlantic, and aggressive investors with Tele-Communications Inc.
So perhaps Wall Street should have seen the collision coming.


Witness Tells of Murder Order for Editor
A confessed murder conspirator and drug trafficker testified yesterday that he relayed an order from Colombia to kill Manuel de Dios Unanue, the crusading antidrug journalist slain execution-style in Queens two years ago.
At the opening of the trial of a teen-ager charged with being the hired hit man who shot Mr. de Dios, the conspirator, John Harold Mena, went from a matter-of-fact recitation of a series of bloody deeds to a sudden eruption of tearful emotion as he told a Federal court jury in Brooklyn about the plot to kill Mr. de Dios.


Pentagon Lawyer Nominated to Be Deputy Attorney General


KERRIGAN IS FIRST AFTER SHORT PROGRAM


Top McCann Officer Plans to Step Down
In the next phase of a planned change in top management, McCann-Erickson Worldwide said yesterday that Robert L. James, 57, would relinquish his position as chief executive on July 1, then retire as chairman at the end of the year.
John J. Dooner Jr., 45, now the agency's president and chief operating officer, will succeed Mr.
James in both positions.
"It takes a bit of doing to make sure the right succession is made," Mr.
James said.
"John has earned his stripes." Mr.
Dooner has risen through the ranks at McCann in New York since he joined the agency in 1984; he was promoted to his current position in February 1992.


Review/Music; Quartet of Soloists Balancing Egos and Skills
In chamber music, balance is not everything, but it is almost everything.
The question of how the parts fit together is asked over and over on a number of levels.
In the case of Emanuel Ax, Isaac Stern, Jaime Laredo and Yo-Yo Ma, who played quartets for piano and strings at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday, one began with the strong personalities: how four visible soloists with egos agree on matters of how fast, how loud, how legato or non-legato.
There is also the balance of instrumental skills.
Though his sense of style remains impressive, Mr.
Stern's violin sound is not as strong as it once was.
These players have adjusted with great skill, and with evident enthusiasm and respect.
Then too there is the balance of inanimate objects: how instruments constructed with different strengths coexist, the weaker with the stronger.


Officials Say 'Cut!' to Subway Violence on Film
The New York City subway system, the setting of the chaotic chase in "The French Connection," the train hijacking in "The Taking of Pelham One-Two-Three" and countless other cinematic scenes of crime, is seeking a more pristine image by refusing to allow producers to film scenes in the subway that officials think are too violent.
Transit Authority officials say such scenes are at odds with a reduction in subway crime in recent years and create an impression of a dangerous system that could threaten ridership.
But representatives of the film industry in New York say restrictions by the Transit Authority smack of censorship and could harm the health of the city's film industry, which spent $1.3 billion in the five boroughs in 1992.
Contrary to Reality?
"We've been very successful in the last two or three years in reducing violence and increasing ridership." said Jared Lebow, a Transit Authority spokesman.
"We want to protect our investment and increase ridership. We don't look fondly on projects that depict the system as being out of control."


Critic's Notebook; 'Jackson Family Honors' A Night of Oddities
On NBC Tuesday night, "Jackson Family Honors" certainly scored a 10 on the bizarre meter.
Not since Bill and Hillary, battered by pre-election stories of his marital indiscretions, took their case directly to a television news magazine, has the craft of image repair been used so, well, craftily.
Let's not even get into the motives of the Jackson family in its decision to bestow honors.
Certainly the last thing the universe needs is another awards show.
And let's not question NBC's decision to devote two hours to a ceremony that involved only two recipients: Michael Jackson's dear friend Elizabeth Taylor, and Motown's founder, Berry Gordy, the man most responsible for the fame and fortune of the Jacksons.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  A SETBACK FOR YELTSIN  In a sharp rebuke to President Yeltsin, the Russian Parliament approved a sweeping amnesty that would free those accused of leading the armed insurrection against his Government last October.
A1


Imperfect Spies, Imperfect World
When James Jesus Angleton died in 1987, he was regarded with justification as brilliant but unbalanced.
In his long career as chief of the C.I.A.'s counterintelligence operations, Mr.
Angleton was so suspicious of Soviet trickery that he even dismissed as a charade Moscow's break with Chinese Communists.
He seemed to see potential "moles" everywhere and talked continually of "dangles," "false flags" and "disinformation."
Yet there was also method in Mr.
Angleton's view of "the wilderness of mirrors," his term for the duel between Soviet and American intelligence agencies.
He would not have been surprised by the allegations that Moscow paid more than $1.5 million since 1985 to Aldrich Ames, who once headed the agency's Soviet counterintelligence bureau.


Must You, If You'd Really Rather Not?
WHAT to do, what to do, when a friend, or even an acquaintance, asks for a reference for a job or a club, for which he or she -- in your mind at least -- isn't qualified?
What to do with an unwanted lunch or dinner invitation?
And, finally, what to do with an unwanted face-to-face conversation on the morning commute?
Nice isn't always easy.
Sometimes it's impossible to tell the truth and leave the other person with a modicum of dignity.
In short, there are occasions, not infrequent, when kindness calls for -- no, demands -- subtle evasions, half truths and even outright lies.
Despite the best intentions and equivocations there can still be a residue of awkwardness and embarrassment that both parties try hard to pretend doesn't exist.


11 Hurt in Bombing by Egyptian Militants
Muslim militants detonated a bomb on a train from Cairo to Aswan today, slightly wounding six foreigners and five Egyptians.
The bomb exploded at 3 P.M., about half an hour after the train left Asyut, a militant stronghold 200 miles south of Cairo, an Interior Ministry statement said.
It was the second attack along the same line since Saturday, when gunmen belonging to the Islamic Group sprayed a train with automatic fire.


U.S. Seeking to Ease Restrictions On Export of High-Tech Products
The Clinton Administration today proposed the first major overhaul of American export controls since the cold war, aiming to ease the sale abroad of machine tools, telecommunications equipment and other devices that had been restricted because they could be used to make sophisticated weapons of mass destruction.
Clinton Administration officials said the legislation to rewrite the 1979 Export Administration Act, which expires in June, is intended to balance the Administration's commitment to nonproliferation with its desire to promote and increase American exports, a driving force in the economic recovery.


Critic's Notebook; Twisted Titles or the Edsels Of Broadway
REHEARSALS for "The Red Shoes" were barely under way last fall when Broadway wags christened the $5 million musical "The Red Snooze."
After the original director and several of the lead performers were dismissed, it became known as "The Pink Slips," then, when further details leaked out, as "The Cement Shoes."


REGULATOR BRIEFED WHITE HOUSE AIDES IN INQUIRY ON S.&amp; L.
In a surprising admission, the head of a Federal agency examining the failure of an Arkansas savings and loan at the center of the inquiry into the Clintons' real estate investments said he held a briefing three weeks ago for senior White House aides on the agency's progress.
Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman, who is also the acting head of the Resolution Trust Corporation, acknowledged today under questioning by Republicans on the Senate Banking Committee that he had met with the White House counsel, Bernard W.  Nussbaum, the deputy chief of staff, Harold M. Ickes, and Hillary Rodham Clinton's chief of staff, Margaret A. Williams.


Sounds Around Town
Shearing Plus
George Shearing Duo and Kenny Burrell Trio, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
February has been a month of significant beginnings for George Shearing, a British-born pianist whose first professional job -- playing an old upright piano in a London pub -- began on Feb. 25, 1936, when he was 16.
He discovered the quintet sound that made him famous while recording "September in the Rain" on Feb. 17, 1948; it featured vibraharp (Margie Hyams), guitar (Chuck Wayne) and Shearing's adaptation of Milt Buckner's locked-hand piano style, in which the two hands, closely aligned, span an octave.
Mr.
Shearing finally escaped this sound in 1978 by dropping the quintet and forming a duo with Neil Swainson on bass.
The duo shares this weekend's program with Kenny Burrell's Trio, in which Mr.
Burrell joined by the bassist Marcus McLaurine and the drummer Sherman Ferguson.
Shows are at 9 and 11:30 tonight, tomorrow and Sunday.
There is a $25 cover and $5 minimum at tables, or $15 admission to the bar area.
JOHN S. WILSON Equal Partners
TanaReid Quintet, Sweet Basil, 88 Seventh Avenue South, at Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 242-1785.
When the drummer Akira Tana and the bassist Rufus Reid formed a quintet three years ago after working together for a decade in various groups, they joined their last names to make sure that they got equal billing as leaders.
Their repertory ranges from be-bop, blues and Ellington to free association and group interaction.
TanaReid includes the pianist Rob Schneiderman and the saxophonists Dan Faulk and Craig Bailey.
They play tonight and tomorrow night at 9, 11 and 12:30 and on Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
There is a $15 cover and a $10 minimum J. S. W.


Albany Tries Putting Minds Over Other Matters; With New Slogan, New York Attempts to Sell Itself as the Home of Intelligent Workers
It won't replace "I love New York," that's for sure.
But from the people who brought you New York's venerable tourist slogan, here's a new one meant to appeal to business: "I.Q.NY: A State of Minds."


Devils Can't Break the Ice Against Rangers
The Devils went home tonight wondering whether they will ever beat the Rangers this season, and they have every right to have their doubts.
The Devils entered tonight's game in ideal circumstances.
They had played one of their best games of the season a night earlier in a 7-2 triumph at Detroit, and the Rangers had played one of their worst in a 6-3 loss to Boston at Madison Square Garden.


An Information Detour
For all the talk and the high-tech visions of 500 channels, interactive television, movies or libraries summoned at the tap of a button, the real vision behind the Bell Atlantic-T.C.I. merger plan was profit.
And the agreement collapsed because, after the deal makers looked hard at the financial markets and tighter Government curbs on cable television rates, the dollars and cents no longer seemed to add up.
The coming together of television, telecommunications and computer technologies at some time in the future has become popularly known as the information highway -- an evocative image, but a flawed one.
The more apt metaphor, some suggest, would be a railroad.


Negotiators Fault Lower Cable Rates
How could a proposed $1.45 cut in the average monthly cable-television bill scuttle the largest merger in business history?
Negotiators in the talks to merge the Bell Atlantic Corporation with Tele-Communications Inc. attributed the failure of the deal to new Government rules that will roll back rates 7 percent, or $1.45 for the average bill of $20.45 a month.
The rollback by the Federal Communications Commission would severely hurt the projected cash flow of Tele-Communications and thus its potential value as a merger partner with Bell Atlantic, Tele-Communications executives said.


On Stage, and Off
Smaller Is Better
Ricky Jay, the man who cut a deck of cards to the queen of hearts at the behest of David Letterman's mom on national television on Tuesday night, will not be moving his prestidigitory show, "Ricky Jay and His 52 Assistants," from the Second Stage Theater after all.
Though larger quarters are available -- notably the Promenade Theater, downstairs from the Second Stage -- he prefers the comfy confines on the second floor at Broadway and 76th Street, an intimate space that reinforces the performer's bond with the audience and, not incidentally, allows everybody a clear view of his assistants, i.e., the cards.
"Ricky's afraid of anything with more than 100 seats," said Ben Sprecher, the disappointed owner of the Promenade.
"That's what I was told." (Actually Second Stage has 108 seats; the Promenade has 399, though not all of them would have been used for Mr. Jay's show. And Jules Fisher, the lighting designer, said it was possible to light the theater in a way that preserves the living-room feel of the Second Stage.)


COMPANY REPORTS
The American International Group yesterday reported a gain of 11.2 percent in profits for the fourth quarter.
The earnings of $510.2 million for the quarter reflected gains in all its major businesses: general insurance, life insurance and financial services.
The New York-based company, which was founded in Shanghai, is the most internationally minded of large American insurers and derives about half its profit overseas.
In the general insurance business, consisting mostly of property and casualty insurance, American International benefited from activity inforeign markets where profit margins were much higher than in the American market.
Expenses were about 20.9 percent of premiums last year, or well below the 26.3 percent industry average estimated by analysts at the A. M. Best Company.
Insurance losses were about 79.2 percent of premiums for the company, lower than the industry average of about 81.5 percent.


Shades of the Creepy Old Days
WHEN I was 10 years old, I thought that the Charles Addams cartoons in The New Yorker were the height of sophistication, which meant I somehow assumed that I was the only one who "got" them.
I was raised in the New Jersey suburbs, and the deadpan renderings of Morticia, Gomez and the other assorted ghouls struck me as adult and depraved, qualities I yearned for and linked with words like "Manhattan," "cocktail" and "penthouse."
Recently I wandered through the New York Public Library's retrospective of Addams's work, and I felt wildly cosmopolitan once more.
Suddenly my vocabulary again included such phrases as "deliciously macabre" and "fetchingly evil"; only Charles Addams makes a taste for pyromania and premature burial seem like marks of polished nonchalance.


New Effort By Nabisco To Split Up
For the second time in a year, the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation is attempting to separate its food and tobacco businesses.
Only in plans announced yesterday, an issue of preferred stock to raise more than $2 billion, the strategy is far different from the previous try.
The food and tobacco conglomerate said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that 300 million depository shares of preferred stock would be sold and converted to common stock in three years.
The company said that with new revenues making acquisitions, mergers, joint ventures and other transactions possible, "it is likely that the company's tobacco and food businesses would be separated."


Warning on Fund Sales, Promotions
The National Association of Securities Dealers is beginning a campaign to discourage brokers and mutual-fund companies from using misleading advertisements and sales practices to promote funds to the public, particularly when those sales take place in banks.
The association, which aside from regulating brokerage firms oversees the marketing efforts of most funds, will send a bulletin to all of its members next month warning them of potential problems with fund sales practices, said R. Clark Hooper, N.A.S.D. vice president.
The self-regulatory group has also put together a special group on mutual funds, she said, adding, "We're trying to get on a preventive compliance track."


Jackson Talks, but Not About Jordan
Bo Jackson, who doesn't like interviews intruding on his workouts, held a mini-news conference after the California Angels' workout today, making his first extended comments of spring training on his fifth day in camp.
His very first comment, intended to be a noncomment, was not about baseball or himself but about Michael Jordan.
"The first person who asks me about Michael Jordan I'm kicking their butt," Jackson said, seated at a picnic table behind the right-field seats.


Algiers Journal; Fare for Foreigners: Eat, Drink and Be Terrified
The lilting voice of Ella Fitzgerald drifted softly through the dining room of the El Djazair Hotel as waiters in black bow ties poured out red Algerian wine.
Couples huddled over the white tablecloths.
American and British oil workers polished off lamb chops.
And the cream of Algerian society looked out over the whitewashed Mediterranean city they once called their own.
But dining amid the ornately tiled walls, white marble floors and arabesque alabaster friezes no longer denotes arrival in the haute societe of Algeria.
The meals served these days in the capital's most famous hotel are to the condemned.


Corrections
A report in the Off the Menu column in The Living Section on Wednesday included an erroneous description of the status of the restaurant La Colombe d'Or, provided by an owner, Helen Studley.
The restaurant is to be sold on Monday to the owners of March, Wayne Nish and Joseph Scalice, not merely to be managed by them.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Dr.
Bruce Voeller, a specialist on human sexuality and sexually transmitted diseases, misspelled the surname of his companion, who was his associate at the Mariposa Education and Research Foundation in Topanga, Calif.
He is Richard Lucik.


No Headline
"They're telling me I don't have the right to stand on the sidewalk. They're telling me I have no right to stick my hand out. Everybody's got their hand out in New York City." ROGER ROBERTSON, homeless for four years.  [ B2:6. ]


CHRONICLE
Relatives of the previous President are also in the limelight -- for more than one day, they hope.
Two sons of GEORGE BUSH have entered the political fray: JEB BUSH, 40, is running for governor of Florida and GEORGE W. BUSH, 46, for governor of Texas.
As a result, the former President told an audience of 1,200 this week at the Registry, a resort in Naples, Fla., "I'm having a little bit of an identity crisis."


Clinton Names Choice for Pentagon Deputy
President Clinton today named John M. Deutch, the Pentagon's acquisition chief, to be Deputy Defense Secretary.
Mr.
Deutch, 55, who is now the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Technology, will fill the position William J. Perry left after he succeeded Les Aspin as Defense Secretary.


Durable Goods Increase, But Effect Is in Doubt
In a report less robust than it appeared at first glance, orders for long-lasting manufactured goods increased 3.7 percent in January, the biggest of six straight advances, Commerce Department figures showed today.
But while the rise surpassed expectations, analysts noted that the strength was highly concentrated in civilian and military aircraft, which involve long lead times in development and production, and that orders for durable goods were up just three-tenths of 1 percent when the transportation industry was excluded.


Ice Shuts Bridges, Delaying Cars
Falling chunks of ice, one in the litany of woes that winter has visited on New York City, forced several bridges to be closed yesterday, snarling traffic in much of the metropolitan region for hours.
The Bronx-Whitestone Bridge and some lanes on the Throgs Neck, George Washington and Verrazano-Narrows Bridges were closed during the afternoon after ice that had built up during Tuesday's storm began to melt and fall, pelting the cars below.
The closings on the four bridges, which carry more than 500,000 vehicles on an average day, caused backups around the city and far beyond, adding as much as two hours to the drive home for hundreds of thousands of people.


AIDS Panel Urges Tests for More Women
A panel of New York State AIDS advisers rejected a controversial proposal yesterday to identify newborn babies that test positive for H.I.V., amid concerns that it would jeopardize the privacy rights of mothers.
Instead, the panel recommended that doctors be required to "strongly encourage" all pregnant women and new mothers to undergo H.I.V. testing in order to offer early treatment to infected babies.
The panel's recommendations come after months of debate and study by a subcommittee that tried to balance the privacy rights of mothers with the medical needs of the babies.
Some advocates said rights to privacy would be threatened because identifying infected newborns identifies their mothers.


COMPAQ COMPUTER TO EXPAND U.S. PRODUCTION
The Compaq Computer Corporation yesterday announced a $20 million expansion of its manufacturing operations in Houston that will increase production to cope with strong demand for its desktop and portable personal computers.
With the expansion, Compaq will begin making notebook computers in the United States for the first time since it moved all portable PC production to Singapore in 1991.
Compaq shares rose $3.375 yesterday to close at a new 52-week high of $100.50 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The company said it planned to add seven new assembly lines at its headquarters complex in Houston.


At the Bar; A decade ago, one lawyer lost his reputation. When he died, another set out to redeem it.
Even in an era of legal specialization, Harley Scott Herman has developed a most extraordinary area of expertise.
Mr.
Herman, a solo practitioner in this central Florida citrus town, may be the only American ever to get a disbarred lawyer reinstated posthumously.
Five and a half years ago he did it for Virgil Darnell Hawkins, a black man whose lawsuit desegregated the University of Florida Law School but who was barred from the school himself.
Three years after Mr.
Hawkins gave up his law license amid a flurry of ethical complaints against him, and eight months after he died, the Florida Supreme Court was persuaded by Mr.
Herman to readmit him.
Mr.
Herman argued that Mr.
Hawkins's contributions to civil rights in the state far outweighed whatever mistakes he had made.


Review/Dance; An Athletic New Feld Work
In "MRI," the premiere Eliot Feld presented with Feld Ballets/NY on Wednesday night, the dancers climb up and down cargo nets and maneuver, trapeze-style, around two bars suspended eight feet above the stage.
Once one has admired the strong visual impact and the ingenuity of Mr.
Feld's structures (how one dancer or a line of dancers in the air relates to another in terms of movement motifs), "MRI" would not seem to bear repeated viewing.
Like Mr.
Feld's equipment pieces of the past, which relied on ramps and trampolines, the choreography in "MRI" is determined, and limited, by its utilitarian decor.


Serbian Guns Still Threaten Sarajevo, Bosnia Says
Frustrated by suggestions that civilians in Sarajevo are out of danger, the Bosnian Government contended tonight that Serbian heavy weapons in the hills above the capital are still able to fire, despite reports by the United Nations that they had all been withdrawn or placed under peacekeepers' control.
The removal of the guns threatening the city has "not been accomplished," President Alija Izetbegovic said in a statement after a meeting of the Muslim-led Government.


Death and the Supreme Court
Justice Harry Blackmun, never afraid to show the human, often anguishing side of judging, now roundly condemns the death penalty.
It is clear, he said in a dissenting opinion this week, that no rules or rulings "can ever save the death penalty from its inherent constitutional deficiencies."
His was a noble cry of conscience and a bitter indictment of the Court itself for mishandling death cases.
He wrote from a quarter-century of experience on the Court and with the credibility of a Justice who had tried hard to make capital punishment work justly.


Robber Slays Grocer, Whose Son Then Kills Him
A robber shot and killed the owner of a Manhattan bodega yesterday, then the man's son grabbed a gun from behind the counter and shot down his father's killer.
People who live near the bodega, Gonzalez Grocery on the corner of Manhattan Avenue and 103d Street near the Douglass Houses, said that the store had been robbed before, about 10 years ago, and that the earlier robbery had also involved a shooting.
Yesterday, when two masked men entered the bodega about 1 P.M. and demanded money, the owner fought back, the police said.


Shares of Stac Electronics Rise on Ruling
Shares of Stac Electronics Inc. soared today, a day after the company won a $120 million judgment against the Microsoft Corporation in a patent infringement case.
Stac contended in a suit filed in January 1993 that Microsoft had appropriated its technology for compressing data stored on computer hard disks.


Review/Film; Brothers Undone By Life
"Sugar Hill," an ambitious but terminally self-important film set in Harlem, begins with flashbacks to the childhood of Roemello (Wesley Snipes) and his brother, Raynathan (Michael Wright), who as young boys were forced by their mother to help her mainline heroin.
One day, the mother injected an overdose and died before her sons' eyes.
Roemello also witnessed the drug-related shooting of his father (Clarence Williams 3d), whose drug dealing got him into trouble with Italian gangsters.
Somehow, the film insists, these early traumas made both Roemello and Raynathan determined to go into the drug business themselves.
Now Roemello is a major kingpin, with a taste for suave clothes, Art Deco furniture (heavy on the urns) and endless angst.
"I'm sorry I let you down," he says in voice-over, while visiting his mother's grave.
"I'm consumed by chaos, consumed by guilt, consumed by grief."


COMPANY BRIEFS
AIR CANADA, Saint-Laurent, Quebec, said it had received permission to fly to the new Kansai International Airport in Osaka in September under an agreement reached between the Canadian Government and Japan.


Yeltsin Urges Foes to Join in New Amity
Two years after he set Russia on the road of economic and political reform, President Boris N. Yeltsin acknowledged today that the results had so far been disappointing and called on his opponents to join him in "a new political style" to move the country forward.
"Let us at long last recognize that so far we have a weak state and that there is no elementary order in the country," Mr.
Yeltsin said in a long-awaited address before a joint session of the newly elected Parliament.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  Suns' Spell Still Unbroken
The Phoenix Suns remained unbeaten in 19 games against Minnesota, defeating the Timberwolves, 120-101, last night in Minneapolis behind 26 points from Cedric Ceballos.
Phoenix, which has won five of its last six, built a 65-57 halftime lead as Ceballos scored 13 points in the second quarter.
The Timberwolves, who lost their fifth straight, never drew within 16 points during the second half.
Dan Majerle scored 17 of his 21 points in the first quarter, when he tied a Suns record with five 3-pointers.
Charles Barkley scored 17 points and had 8 assists for the Suns, and Kevin Johnson added 14 points. (AP)


Sounds Around Town
Tropical Punch
Marce et Tumpak, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, at Houston Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
One of the best bands in the Caribbean, Marce et Tumpak is Martinique's answer to Tabou Combo from Haiti, or Kassav from Guadelope.
It's drum-driven music, and highly danceable.
And it mixes high tech with the rural: the band uses wooden flutes and bamboo drums, along with synthesizers.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.
There is a $16 cover charge.
PETER WATROUS Back With the Blues
Louisiana Red, Tramps Cafe, 45 West 21st Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-7788.
Louisiana Red is a powerful blues guitarist who went into exile in Europe and hasn't played New York in more than a decade.
He'll be joined by Carey Bell, the harmonica virtuoso, and a rhythm section from Chicago.
It's a rare chance to hear a strong voice in an increasingly threadbare idiom.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.
There is a $10 cover and a two-drink minimum at the tables.
P.
W.
Salsa Record of the Week
Descarga Boricua: "Esta Si Va!" (Tierrazo), $22.98 plus $3.95 for shipping and handling.
Available from Descarga, 328 Flatbush Avenue, Suite 180, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11238; information: (800) 377-2647.
Salsa is a music ruled by its formulas, by the overwhelming power of record companies and their marketing ideas.
That isn't always bad: it makes musicians write melodies and work on songs.
The commercial pressure has also produced a whole tradition of descarga records, jam-session recordings that allow the musicians to stretch out, usually showing their love for jazz.
This is an ambitious two-CD set, does exactly that, letting the musicians have some say.
The opening track, nearly 16 minutes long, is the sort of heated, improvised performance that's heard regularly in clubs but rarely on records.
The rest of the album features all sorts of music, from pop salsa tracks to a chant for the santeria saint Elegba, from a long homage to the great Cuban bassist and composer Cachao to a few instrumental pieces.
P.
W.


Ratings as Powerful As a Big Bodyguard
I couldn't take my eyes off Nancy and Tonya. Apparently, neither could you.
The Kerrigan-Harding Show, the raison d'etre of CBS's Wednesday night telecast, yielded an astounding 48.5 rating and a 64 share, placing it behind Super Bowl XVI and just below Super Bowl XVII as the third highest-rated sports show ever.
Its 126.6 million viewers rank it fourth among all prime-time shows.


Smile! It's Graduation Day for Transit Police


Salary Cap Beginning To Take Toll on Jets
The Jets have met with their first about-face in their efforts to get players already under contract to take a pay cut in the name of the salary cap.
It seems that receiver Chris Burkett's retirement on Wednesday was a pre-emptive move by the player to keep the team from releasing him or trimming his $1.075 million salary for the 1994 season.
He earned $925,000 last season.
Dick Steinberg, the Jets' general manager, said they never asked Burkett, 31, to take a pay cut.
Instead, Steinberg said they had a general discussion about what the team wanted to do with older players who had high yearly salaries in an effort to make room under the salary cap to sign other players.
Those options included having their contracts restructured or being waived and brought back at a lower salary.


Hope for Spring Blossoms in New Jersey


They Just Want Injury Victims to Suffer More; The Right Kind of Case
To the Editor:
Your Feb. 11 front-page article perpetuates a misconception about contingent fees: that a lawyer "earns" the fee only where liability is difficult to establish, and that where it is easy to establish, a lawyer is unnecessary, and a contingent fee upon settlement is a windfall to the lawyer.


Can Drugs Be Used Only in Moderation?
To the Editor:
Re "Prohibition, for Drugs as for Alcohol, Only Fails" by Richard Hyse (letter, Feb. 11): The often-repeated comparison between repeal of Prohibition and legalization of opiates and cocaine is mistaken.


Coghlan's Indoor Career Ends on Winning Note
EAMONN COGHLAN plans to let his last sub-four-minute mile -- the first ever by a runner over 40 -- stand as the final indoor race of his career.
Coghlan, 41, set the world masters record of 3 minutes 58.15 seconds last Sunday at Harvard.
The time qualified him for the USA-Mobil Indoor Championships at Atlanta on March 5.
But Coghlan has decided to skip the meet.
"I received my masters degree at Harvard, and I'd like to end my indoor career on that note," he said yesterday.


Sports of The Times; An Angry Kerrigan Emerges
IT began serenely.
Nancy Kerrigan commenced her training session in the Olympic Amphitheater yesterday afternoon, skating in black leotard and with a dark, dancing ponytail to a Neil Diamond medley.
It is the background music, and the skating routine, she will use tonight, a night in which she can win the Olympic gold medal.
Just her being here seemed beyond imagination to many just seven weeks ago, when she was stalked and clubbed on the knee with a metal baton.
Now she spun, she soared, she floated, and received polite applause from the scattering of onlookers.
She smiled, but it was hardly a genial smile.
Kerrigan, in first place following the first of the two-day competition, appeared to be saying that she meant business.


INSIDE
2001: A Fiscal Odyssey
Balancing the Federal budget by the next century, as the proposed Constitutional amendment requires, would spell many tough choices.
Page A14.
AIDS, Babies and Privacy
Rejecting a proposal to identify newborns who test positive for H.I.V., a New York State panel opted for urging tests on more women.
Page B4.
Dinah Shore Dies
The singer and television entertainer, known for her vitality, charm and a relaxed down-home style, died of cancer at the age of 76.
Page B16.


Market Place; Brazil's Market Boom Is Not for Faint-Hearted
After Brazil's stock markets more than doubled last year, analysts warned investors to proceed with caution in 1994.
So much for the experts.


Class-Action Bias Suit by 500 Blacks At Immigration Service Is Approved
Clearing the way for the largest discrimination case ever to be filed against the Federal Government, a judge with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission has ruled that more than 500 black employees may have systematically been denied promotions and training at the Immigration and Naturalization Service over the last 14 years.
The judge, Jane Goodman, ruled that about 550 agents and supervisors and an undetermined number of former employees may join a class-action suit against the immigration service.
The Jan. 11 ruling, based on a preliminary review of the facts, was sent to the Justice Department last week.


Corrections
A chart yesterday listing films that portray violence on the New York City subway system misstated release dates for two films in some editions.
"The French Connection" was released in 1971, not 1975; "Dutchman" was released in 1966, not 1967.


Giuliani Fights Restriction on Filming in Subways
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday criticized the Transit Authority for restricting the filming of violent movie and television sequences in the subway system, saying attempts to screen the content of films raised freedom-of-speech questions and gave the mistaken impression that the city did not welcome movie producers and their big budgets.
"I don't think you get the choice, if you want movies made in your city, to say, 'Well, the movie has to be favorable with regard to the subways,' or 'The movie has to be favorable with regard to the city,' " Mr.
Giuliani said.
He said that by seeking to do that, "you're getting into pretty dangerous grounds with regard to the First Amendment."


Fund Gets Welcome Lift as Wall Street Remembers Neediest
They come each year by the hundreds, fresh from impressive college careers and eager to seek their fortunes at Wall Street's biggest financial firms.
Known as analysts, they often work 80 or 100 hours a week in a grueling two-year program to learn the tools of their trade: equity, debt, capital markets, strategic alliances.
It is a life that leaves little time for anything outside the office.


Review/Photography; Artist as Everyone and Everything
Issues of portraiture and identity are at the heart of Judy Dater's work, now at the midtown branch of the International Center of Photography.
For more than 30 years, Ms.
Dater has explored both the capabilities and limitations of photography as a way of depicting herself and others, and this show, "Cycles: Photographs by Judy Dater," provides a thorough overview of her shifting approaches to the problem of photographing people.
In the course of her career, Ms.
Dater has also taken a long stylistic odyssey, moving from the romantic but more or less realistic depiction of everyday moments to a highly self-aware mode of working.
The twists and turns of Ms.
Dater's path also reflect changing fashions in photographic style.


Rising Doubts on a Price Finally Killed a Merger
They came so close, both sides say.
After months of dickering, the top executives of the Bell Atlantic Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc. had resolved virtually all the bargaining issues by Monday evening, and each company had scheduled a board meeting for later in the week to vote on a definitive merger agreement.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Dr.
Richard G. Van Gelder, a retired curator at the American Museum of Natural History, omitted a survivor.
He is Dr.
Van Gelder's brother, Lawrence.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Can three elderly women in sensible cardigans add a little sizzle to fast-food sales?
IF one little old lady shouting "Where's the beef?" could spark a national fad, helping a marketer achieve stellar sales, imagine what three times that many might accomplish talking about burgers, biscuits and chicken.
That's the idea behind a new campaign for Hardee's by Deutsch Inc., the new agency on the fast feeder's $75 million account.
A series of warm, humorous commercials, carrying the theme "Have a good meal," features a trio of down-to-earth elderly women dubbed the Hardee's Girls, Meg, Peg and Ronnie.


Baiul Is Injured In Skating Collision
In this odd season, when figure skating has gone from a genteel amusement to a full-contact sport, the Olympics took another bizarre turn today when Oksana Baiul of Ukraine, the 16-year-old world champion and the most serious challenger to Nancy Kerrigan, collided in practice with Tanja Szewczenko, the 16-year-old German champion who is also a medal contender.
The collision occurred the day after Wednesday's short program, in which Baiul finished second to Kerrigan and Szewczenko finished fifth, and just a day before Friday's long program, which accounts for two-thirds of the scoring and will determine the gold medal winner.


Clues Sought In a Death From a Virus
Health officials yesterday began the painstaking medical detective work to explain the death of a Long Island college student last month from a mysterious virus spread through mouse droppings.
In New York City, they began inspecting a Queens factory owned by the student's father and told workers they would be given blood and urine tests.
On Long Island, they took blood samples from the man's parents and began setting rodent traps at their home in Roslyn Harbor.


LETTER TO JURORS LEADS TO INQUIRY
As the jury began its first full day of deliberations in the murder trial of 11 Branch Davidians, the Federal Bureau of Investigations today started an investigation into how letters highly critical of the Government's case were mailed to at least eight jurors, all of whom were supposed to be anonymous.
Jo Simpson, a spokeswoman for the United States Marshal's office here who described the possible jury-tampering effort as "disturbing," confirmed that her agency had asked the F.B.I. for the inquiry.
The mailing of the letter was disclosed last week by Federal District Judge Walter S. Smith Jr., who said it did not constitute grounds for a mistrial.


Nets' Coleman Is Staying Put
Derrick Coleman is staying with the Nets, for now.
After the National Basketball Association trading deadline expired last night, General Manager Willis Reed, who had promised either to sign or trade the team's All-Star forward, said there were some issues to be worked out but talks would continue in an effort to sign Coleman.
"We're getting close," Reed said in a conference call. "That's why there was no trade."


Surgeon General Urges Banning Cigarette Ads Aimed at the Young
The Surgeon General said today that the battle against cigarettes and other tobacco products should shift to preventing adolescents and teen-agers from becoming addicted in the first place, and that this effort should include a ban on tobacco advertising aimed at young people.
Releasing the 23d Surgeon General's Report on Smoking and Health, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders said health agencies, schools, parents and others concerned about young people should make smoking prevention among teen-agers a priority.
While tobacco use continues to drop among adults in this country, an increasing number of young people are taking up the habit, she said.


A Femme Fatale For the Ages
THERE is a tough but lovely moment in "The Old Lady Who Wades in the Sea" when Jeanne Moreau, as an aging femme fatale and con woman, suddenly pulls out photographs of herself in her youth and middle age.
There she is at 17, exquisitely young; again in her 20's, and at 42.
It is the face that launched dozens of films and countless male fantasies.
Now, playing a rich old sensualist called Lady M., she spreads the photographs before a 25-year-old man with whom she is enamored, and asks which of them he likes best.
It is a hopeless question.
When he says he likes her best in the present (he's young; he's not an idiot), she accepts it as a gracious lie.
More important, the actress moves quickly past the moment and stays in character, half-trying to seduce the young man while plotting jewel heists in this quirky dark comedy (made in 1991 and never before shown in the United States).
But a glimpse of the real Jeanne Moreau has broken through, in a defiant, unsentimental scene that says, "I've had a glorious past and I'm not through yet."


Clinton Fails to Get Endorsement Of Elderly Group on Health Plan
The board of the American Association of Retired Persons has decided not to endorse President Clinton's health plan, despite a concerted campaign by the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton to win support from the elderly, officers of the organization said today.
First word of the decision came from Administration officials, who said they were somewhat disappointed but not completely surprised.
They noted that the board had not endorsed any specific alternative to the Clinton plan.


Spy Defendant Plans To Contest Charges; Secrets May Be Issue
The lawyer representing Aldrich H. Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency official accused of spying for Moscow, said today that Mr.
Ames would fight the charges against him, raising the prospect of a messy trial that could involve secrets the agency would rather not disclose.
The lawyer for Mr.
Ames's wife, Maria del Rosario Casas Ames, also issued a statement denouncing the accusations in a Federal Bureau of Investigation affidavit that was unsealed on Tuesday after the couple were arrested.


Interest Rates Worry Markets
The stock and bond markets fell sharply amid growing concerns that long-term interest rates are likely to continue rising.
Page D1.


Review/Film; 'Savage Nights': An Adieu
"Savage Nights" was shown in the 1993 New Directors/New Films series.
Here are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 20.
The film -- in French with English subtitles -- opens today at the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village.
Cyril Collard can be seen in his own film "Savage Nights" as a warm, attractive actor with a rueful grin that never quite fades away.
Mr.
Collard's vivid presence in the film makes it especially sad to note that he died of AIDS on March 5, 1993, less than a week before "Savage Nights" received four French Cesar awards, including the one for best picture.


'Schindler's List' Errs on Gas Chambers
To the Editor:
Re "Schindler's Jews Find Deliverance Again" (The Week in Review, Feb. 13): Should those of us who were there nit-pick at inaccuracies in Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List," or remain silent and not distract from the film's power?
I think it is important to point out inaccuracies, lest Holocaust revisionists do it for us.





They Just Want Injury Victims to Suffer More; Lobby for Insurers
To the Editor:
The Manhattan Institute's effort to revamp the legal profession's contingency-fee structure (front page, Feb. 11) is another effort to sell Americans on the notion that lawyers who represent injured consumers all have their briefcases lined with gold.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Nate Minchey and Cory Bailey, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
Announced a one-year agreement to have their Florida State League affiliate play at Ed Smith Stadium in Sarasota.


Witness Admits Recruiting Teen-Ager to Kill Journalist
An admitted murderer and double-crossing drug dealer testified in court yesterday that he had recruited a teen-ager to shoot Manuel de Dios Unanue to death without knowing that the victim was a muckraking anti-drug journalist.
Rather, the witness said, he and the trigger man and a third conspirator who accompanied them to the vicinity of the murder had been told by another conspirator only that the intended target was a "snitch."


Restaurants
"Do I have to dress for dinner?"
Each time you ask that question you honor the tacit contract between a restaurant and its customers.
Although it is rarely discussed, we all understand the terms: the restaurant sets the scene and the customers dress the part.


What Is the Sound of Lawlessness? Zzzzz
In 1981, the city fathers of Davis, Calif., a college town 60 miles to the east, enacted an anti-noise ordinance.
Since then it has been applied to quiet partygoers, lovers of loud stereo and all manner of boisterous barfly.
But the history of the statute took a new turn one night a few weeks ago.
On Jan. 31, Chris Doherty, a college student living in a Davis duplex, called the police to complain that his neighbor was making so much noise that he could not sleep.
An officer responded to the call and, from Mr.
Doherty's bedroom, did hear a noise coming through the walls.


Hospitals Unit And City Hall Trade Charges
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to turn over city hospitals to private management and impose a moratorium on the reconstruction of Kings County Hospital ran into its first official resistance yesterday, as some members of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation board said the Mayor does not have the authority to carry his proposals out.
But in a clear demonstration of City Hall's intention to play hardball on such issues and assert its power over the hospitals, the Mayor's chief aide immediately lashed back at the hospital agency's board, accusing it of negligence in carrying out its duties.


Dinah Shore, Homey Singer And Star of TV, Dies at 76
Dinah Shore, a vivacious entertainer who was widely loved for her homey, heartfelt singing and breezy Southern charm, died yesterday at her home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
She was 76.
The cause was cancer, said Constance L. Stone, her publicity agent.


New Champion Stops to Mourn An Old Friend
With so much in her own career to cry about, Deborah Compagnoni of Italy could only weep when the name of Ulrike Maier came to her lips.
She wanted to dedicate the gold medal she won today in the women's giant slalom to the Austrian skier who died after a collision in a World Cup downhill event in Germany last month.
She wanted to say what she had to, get on with her news conference and an evening that would bring some laughs with her Italian buddy, Alberto Tomba.


Astronaut Is Accused of Harassing a Woman
An astronaut who is to be aboard the space shuttle when it is launched next Thursday has been accused of harassing and stalking a woman who says she gave birth to a child by him two years ago.
The accusations were made in a civil suit against the astronaut, Lieut.
Col.
Charles (Sam) Gemar, 38, of the Army, and his wife, Charlene, who is also a NASA employee.
The woman who filed the suit last month in state District Court in Houston, Bernadette Cardenas, a 35-year-old aerospace engineer, is seeking unspecified damages.


Accounts
*
HBG Advertising, New York, was awarded two accounts with combined billings estimated at $2 million: Legal Sea Foods, Boston, to handle advertising and promotions for its restaurants, stores and mail-order business, previously handled in-house and on a project basis, and Interactive Publishing Co., Spring Valley, N.Y., to handle advertising for the publisher of CD-ROM software, previously handled by Hudson Valley Advertising, Nyack, N.Y.


The Spoken Word
"LITERATURE AND HISTORY THROUGH BIBLICAL EYES," 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
A daylong seminar takes a look at humorous and ironic biblical stories and how new archeological findings affect biblical concepts.
To be led by Itzhak Itzhaki, who develops curricula for Israeli public schools.
Sunday from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Fee: $50.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
"AFRICAN-AMERICAN CONGRESSIONAL PIONEERS," Pace University, North Lecture Hall, 1 Pace Plaza, at Spruce Street, lower Manhattan.
A daylong seminar about black members of Congress during Reconstruction in the late 1800's.
Speakers are to include Dr.
Roscoe C. Brown, the director of the Center for the Study of Urban Educational Policy at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York; Gil Noble, a correspondent for WABC-TV; Stanley Turkel, a former president of the City Club, and Peter F. Vallone, Speaker of the City Council.
Today, 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 788-7694 or (212) 649-1712.


Fallout From the Breakup
It is hard to find winners, but there are plenty of losers now that the union between the Tele-Communications Inc. and the Bell Atlantic Corporation has fallen apart.
Among the biggest:  John C. Malone: T.C.I.'s president and chief executive would have ended up with about $1 billion of Bell Atlantic stock.
But he still owns half of Liberty Media and has hefty holdings of T.C.I. stock.


Visa Ban on H.I.V.-Infected To Be Waived for Gay Games
The Clinton Administration is expected to waive the rule that bars foreigners with the AIDS virus from entering the United States to accommodate athletes and spectators planning to attend the Gay Games in New York in June, officials in several Federal agencies said today.
The State Department actually took the first steps toward issuing the visas, but suspended the effort after the Justice Department said it had not yet approved the waiver.


On My Mind; The Basic Rights
In the last decade of the century, the fight against crime is the single most important struggle for civil rights in the country.
It is a struggle for the most basic civil right Americans possess: the right to the public safety that will free them to use the schools, the hospitals, the streets, without fear of being struck down by violent crime.
Almost word for word, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said that to New York police cadets on Feb. 17.
The Mayor was saying what more and more Americans now understand in mind and stomach.
Crime can kill not only Americans and their children but the kind of free, unafraid democratic society they want to live in.


For Lease: A Sweet Suite
The body is not quite cold yet, but already people are carefully examining the carcass of Shea &amp; Gould, the large and influential New York law firm that announced last month that it was dissolving.
And what a carcass: nearly 220,000 square feet of custom-built space -- including conference center, law library, computer room, kitchens, mahogany work stations, custom lighting and 180 offices with a view -- spread over floors 42 through 46 at a prestigious Manhattan address, the former Exxon Building, 1251 Avenue of the Americas, between 49th and 50th Streets.


AMERICA WEST PICKS GROUP FOR CHAPTER 11 PLAN
A group led by the Fort Worth financier David Bonderman was chosen by the board of America West Airlines Inc. to help the carrier finance a plan to emerge from bankruptcy, a spokeswoman for the airline said last night.
The group, called AmWest Partners, had offered about $210 million.
AmWest's main competitor was an investment group led by Michael Steinhardt, a New York money manager, who had said he would invest up to $250 million.
But the airline said its board had broader considerations than the highest bid in making its choice.


50 Killed by Raging Rains in Peru


Brind'Amour Slap Shot Lifts Flyers Over Isles
It was a game that took fans back to the glory days of the Islanders and Flyers.
There were three ties and three lead changes, but in the end, the Flyers' Rod Brind'Amour scored at 1 minute 25 seconds of overtime to win the game, 5-4.
The slap shot was from the right circle and sailed past goalie Ron Hextall.


Sliwa's Hiring a Pledge Bonanza for City Station
The hiring of Curtis Sliwa as a talk show host on New York City's main public radio station has been a surprising fund-raising bonanza for the station, even though many longtime listeners have stopped donating as a result, WNYC officials said yesterday.
Mr.
Sliwa's hiring initially produced a torrent of angry phone calls to the station, many from listeners who accused it of bending to the will of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
The Mayor had publicly suggested the hiring of the Guardian Angels head, a political supporter.


They Just Want Injury Victims to Suffer More
To the Editor:
I almost fell out of my chair laughing at your Feb. 11 front-page article reporting the organized attack on contingent fees by "legal scholars." You describe these "legal scholars" as "ranging along the philosophical spectrum from Erwin N. Griswold to Robert H. Bork." That is a range on the political spectrum from very conservative to ultraconservative.


Let's Make a Start on Environmental Justice With Brooklyn
To the Editor:
I am pleased that "Environmental Justice" (editorial, Feb. 11) praises President Clinton for asking Federal agencies to insure that their environmental programs do not inflict disproportionate environmental harm on the poor or minorities.
Unfortunately, you do not support environmental justice in New York City.


Dining Reviews
Restaurant reviews and advertising, usually found in Weekend, appear today on pages A20-A21.


Art in Review
George Dokoupil 'The New Immigrants'
Tony Shafrazi Gallery  119 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through March 12
These most recent paintings by George Dokoupil are, like his previous works, derived from photographs and made with candle soot.
The photographs are projected onto the canvases, then Mr.
Dokoupil traces the forms with a lighted candle whose flame leaves black trails of soot.
Charcoal drawing may come to mind, but with a difference: the effect may be closer to enlarged black-and-white snapshots seen through gauze.


Theory on Aging Is Tested, Adding 30% to Flies' Lives
Testing a leading theory of the cause of aging, researchers say that by giving flies new genes they have been able to extend their lives by 30 percent and to keep them more nimble and robust.
The theory says that a group of unstable and damaging molecules called free radicals bombard cells throughout life, inflicting steady damage.
Eventually, the injuries are so great that cells no longer function properly, organ systems fail, diseases like cancer or heart disease occur, cataracts cloud the eyes, and finally the organism dies.
Vitamins C and E, and beta carotene, can help mop up free radicals, and so those who believe in the theory often take them as dietary supplements.


Commissioner Quits Shrinking Atlantic 10
Ron Bertovich, the Atlantic 10 commissioner throughout its recent rise as a nationally respected basketball conference, announced his resignation yesterday as the league faced the possible loss of one-third of its membership.
Bertovich, the league's commissioner for eight years, said his decision to become vice president of a regional sports cable-television network is unrelated to the expected departure of Temple, West Virginia and Rutgers, a decision that could take place as soon as today.
The three schools, along with Virginia Tech of the Metro Conference, appear certain to become part of an all-sports league that includes football.
Xavier and La Salle May Join
The four would either be accepted into an expanded Big East Conference, a move that could become official today at a meeting in Boston, or they would join Syracuse, Boston College, Pittsburgh and Miami, the four full-time Big East members with Division I-A football programs, in an eight-team league.


Interest Rates Surge on Pace of Economic Gain
Interest rates surged again yesterday as traders and investors continued to worry about the steady pace of economic growth and inflation.
But the Federal Reserve tried to play down their concerns.
Long-term interest rates jumped to an eight-month high, with the yield on the 30-year bond finishing at 6.73 percent.
Shorter-term rates also shot higher, with the yield on the three-year note at 5.07 percent, its highest since December 1992.


Law Firms Begin Reining In Sex-Harassing Partners
Fourteen years ago the Federal Government adopted guidelines that encouraged employers to eliminate sexual harassment on the job.
The guidelines promoted the ideal of a workplace free of hostility, and subsequent Supreme Court interpretations of them enhanced sex harassment suits' chances of success if defendant employers had no effective anti-harassment policy.
It was Government lawyers who wrote the guidelines, and it is private lawyers who have been advising employers on the implications ever since.
But with a myopia variously attributed to arrogance, ignorance or innocence, most law firms themselves long declined, or simply neglected, to police sexual harassment in their own offices.
Many simply had no written policy against it.


Home Video
This week, both a major studio and a small distributor were careful to avoid specific predictions when discussing coming releases.
"First, second, third or fourth -- it will be one of those things," said Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, in a telephone interview.


CHRONICLE
What's another week when you're in love and the best man is otherwise engaged?
ROGER CLINTON, the President's brother, and MOLLY MARTIN had hoped to marry on March 19, but PRESIDENT CLINTON had plans for that day.
The wedding will take place on March 26 instead.
The couple expect a baby in May.
Mr.
Clinton divulged his wedding date during an interview on the syndicated television show "American Journal." The interview is to be broadcast in New York and Washington on Monday and elsewhere in the country today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Collapse of a Giant Deal
Profit, not the vision of a new information age, drove the talks for a combination of Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications.
The deal ultimately collapsed because the dollars and cents no longer appeared to add up.
With the merger shelved, progress toward new information technologies may well be slowed and may not be led by telephone-cable combinations.
News Analysis.  [ Page A1. ]


Top Tenneco Officer Quits To Fight Effects of Illness
Michael H. Walsh, who helped revive the fortunes of Tenneco Inc., resigned as chairman and chief executive today to devote himself to battling the effects of a brain tumor.
The Tenneco board approved Mr.
Walsh's choice of Dana G. Mead, the company's president, to succeed him as chief executive.


Diner's Journal
Where Sam's Was
"Whatever you want, the answer is yes."
The Judson Grill was only three days old.
It was huge.
It was almost empty.
Still, the hostess was just starting to explain why the restaurant would be unable to accommodate a special request when the owner, Jerome Kretchmer, intervened with the words every restaurantgoer wants to hear.
It was the start of a beautiful evening.


Knicks Aren't Getting the Point, or the Points
Pat Riley is considering a change in the starting lineup after another abysmal performance by the Knicks.
In its second-lowest point total of the season, New York dropped a 93-73 decision tonight to the Houston Rockets at the Summit.
The 20-point loss tied the Knicks' largest margin of defeat this season, and they have averaged just 77.5 points in their last two games.
New York's 29-point second half was its lowest-scoring half of the season.


Spy Suspect Gave to the Democrats
Aldrich H. Ames was well enough off that besides owning an expensive house and car, he donated a total of $5,000 to the Democratic Party in 1990 and 1991.
Mr.
Ames, who is accused of spying for Moscow, gave $1,500 to the Democratic National Committee in September 1991, an additional $1,000 in February 1992 and $2,500 after the Democratic National Convention in New York in July 1992, according to Federal Election Commission records.
Earlier, he contributed $500 to the party in 1990.


Moral It's Not
In a series of blatantly anti-gay comments, the Rev.
Ruben Diaz has shown himself unsuited to remain on New York City's Police Civilian Complaint Review Board -- a quasi-judicial post that is no place for bigots.
Mr.
Diaz, the leader of the Christian Community Church in the Bronx and an important political supporter of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, recently used his column in the Spanish-language newspaper Impato to attack the upcoming Gay and Lesbian Olympic Games scheduled for June in the city.
The games, he warned, could lead to the spread of AIDS, and lead children to conclude there is nothing wrong with homosexuality.
Mr.
Diaz later confirmed his homophobia by explaining that he was not trying to cancel the games, but was opposing public nudity, open sex and the spread of AIDS, though it is hard to see the connection between the games and such behavior.


Books of The Times; An Ancient Mariner Tells a Haunting Modern Tale
Amnesia
By Douglas Cooper
227 pages. Hyperion. $19.95.
"Amnesia," Douglas Cooper's chilly, chilling first novel, is one of those books that immediately make you think of dozens of other books.
Its allusive narrative is filled with explicit references to "Frankenstein," "The Sea Gull," "Hamlet" and the writings of Freud and Nietzsche, while its elliptical narrative style recalls works by D. M. Thomas, Paul Auster, Sam Shepard and Vladimir Nabokov.
The framing story is borrowed from Coleridge's "Rime of the Ancient Mariner." As in that famous poem, a man on his way to a wedding (in this case, the groom himself) is buttonholed by a stranger, who has a bizarre tale to tell; the tale will become both a private act of expiation and a public means of communicating (and transferring) his pain.


LEBANON PLEDGES STRONGER SECURITY
Responding to American pressure to curb anti-Israeli violence in southern Lebanon, the Beirut Government announced Wednesday that it was taking steps in cooperation with Syria to strengthen security throughout the country and insure calm in southern Lebanon to help Arab-Israeli peace talks in Washington.
The announcement came after an extended meeting on Tuesday of the country's top defense and security officials under President Elias Hrawi, who had talks in Damascus on Sunday with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria.
The talks focused on letters they had received from Secretary of State Warren Christopher urging joint Syrian-Lebanese action to stop guerrilla attacks on Israel.


At Home Abroad; Major Discontent
The Conservative Party has been in power in Britain for nearly 15 years now, and it is showing the inevitable signs of that long a hold on office: weariness, stumbling, public disaffection.
Many feel about Prime Minister John Major and his Government what Oliver Cromwell said to the Rump Parliament in 1653:
"You have sat here too long for any good you have done. Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In the name of God, go!"


Bogar Is Trying to Reverse a Career Slide
The perfect day came to an end at 3 A.M. in a hotel room in Center City, Philadelphia.
Tim Bogar awoke with an awful ache in his left hand, the pain so great he could not get back to sleep.
His wife, Karrin, was there with his baby son T. J. Earlier in the night, friends had joined him to watch sports highlights on television.
He had gone 4 for 5 with two homers, 4 runs scored and 4 runs batted in in the game against the Phillies.
All those numbers represented career highs for Bogar, who was trying to prove to the Mets that he just might cut it as the team's starting shortstop, rather than as the utility infielder they had pegged him to be.
Big Opportunity Wasted
But Bogar made a stupid mistake.
On his last at-bat he hit an inside-the-park homer and slid head first into the plate.
His left hand twisted, the ligaments tore and suddenly his season was over on Aug. 15, his big opportunity wasted away.


Corrections
A chart on Wednesday showing states with death penalty laws from 1970 to 1993 misstated the situation in Kansas in 1980.
No valid death penalty statute was in effect there.


Homeless Seeing Less Apathy, More Anger
The old man stands so still against a wall at Grand Central Terminal that he seems part of it, a rundown monument to homelessness rising from the cigarette butts.
Charlie Buchanan never begs, he watches, and what he sees is the end of an era.
New York was never a gentle city, but for years it let him drift along the currents of its sidewalks.
Now he says police officers treat him like a trespasser.
People who used to smile or nod do not even look at him, as if they left their heart in their other suit.


TV Listings And Restaurants
Restaurant reviews and advertising, normally in the Weekend section, appear today on pages A20-21.
Television and radio news, listings and advertising are on pages B14-15.


Option May Doom Budget Amendment (for Now)
Democratic opponents of the proposed constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal budget offered a counterproposal today that seemed likely to lead to the defeat of all versions of the plan.
The substitute version was intended to serve as a political fig leaf that would allow some Senators to vote for the measure and then, after its near-certain defeat, vote against the original version and still tell constituents they had supported a balanced budget amendment.


Bosnia Muslims and Croats To Discuss Proposal in U.S.
The Administration said today that it would play host to talks in Washington this weekend on an American-backed peace plan for Bosnia that would unite those parts of the country held by Muslims with those held by Croats, a senior State Department official said today.
The goal of the plan, which is only beginning to take shape but has the backing of Secretary of State Warren Christopher, is to avoid a three-way partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina along ethnic and religious lines.


Review/Film; Finally Riding a Rodeo Bull Off Into the Sunset
John G. Avildsen's film "8 Seconds" could spawn a boom in rodeo bull riding the way the movie "Urban Cowboy" did in mechanical bull riding 14 years ago, except for one crucial fact.
The sport it depicts is just too dangerous.
As the film makes graphically clear, trying to stay atop a snorting, bucking 2,000-pound bull for eight seconds while holding a mount with only one hand is no idle party game.
The movie's viscerally gripping scenes of competitive bull riding take the camera into the thundering heart of the action, where maintaining a precarious perch is only one challenge.
Once a rider is thrown, he faces the immediate threat of being trampled or gored.
And the film has scenes of both.


John F. Reilly; Lawyer, 78
John F. Reilly, a New York lawyer and former Family Court judge, died on Monday in Cabrini Hospital.
He was 78 and lived in Manhattan.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


7 Companies May Back A South African Code
Seven major American multinational companies, uncertain what will be expected of them after the South African elections this spring, are considering support for a new code of corporate conduct being developed by South African churches.
The seven -- Borden, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Colgate-Palmolive, Ingersoll-Rand, International Paper, Kimberly-Clark and Pfizer -- all indicated a willingness to talk with the South Africans about how they could help put the code into practice, according to the Interfaith Council on Corporate Responsibility, a New York-based organization that coordinates stockholder activities by church groups.


Di Centa Leads An Italian Explosion
For a hot-blooded fan of Italian skiing in this frigid clime, it is becoming difficult to set priorities.
Too many good things keep happening at once.
Today, while Manuela Di Centa, the Italian cross-country skier, was busy recording the fastest 12-kilometer split time in the final women's race, a group of Italian cross-country supporters were staring tensely at a television screen showing Deborah Compagnoni's final run in the giant slalom.


Cyril Schneider, 64, Advertising Executive
Cyril M. Schneider, an advertising and communications executive for more than 40 years in Manhattan and Los Angeles, died on Tuesday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
Mr.
Schneider, who lived in Manhattan, was 64.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Jackie Schneider.


A Key Czech Learns to Speak Politics
In a severe Stalin-era hall in this grim industrial town near the German border, a standing-room-only crowd has gathered to hear one of Eastern Europe's most durable post-Communist leaders, a silver-haired man with a mustache in a dark mauve suit whose plain talk and personal asides are unusual in a region where many politicians have been reluctant to explain themselves.
The speaker, Vaclav Klaus, the 52-year-old Prime Minister and a conservative economist, has been making these expeditions outside the capital for some time.
His gift for communication has helped make him one of the most popular political figures in the Czech Republic.


Pharmacist Helps Clinton Sell His Health Plan
The backdrop was just right today but the dialogue was desultory until a pharmacist began to tell the kind of story President Clinton wanted to hear.
"I've seen people break down and cry across the counter," John Kiszkiel said, telling of his elderly customers who can no longer afford to pay for prescription drugs.
It was just that painful problem that Mr.
Clinton had flown here to dramatize, and he was quick to seize the opportunity.


Review/Rock; The Who, Regrouped and Reinterpreted
For half his life, Roger Daltrey has been another man's mouthpiece.
As the singer for the Who, he performed Pete Townshend's songs in a voice that helped define hard-rock vocal style: strong, straight-from-the-chest belting.
His body language, too, was the template for arena rock: shaking his golden curls, twirling his microphone on its cord, throwing back his head and singing upward toward the balconies.
To celebrate his 50th birthday, March 1, Mr.
Daltrey assembled the all-star concert "Daltrey Sings Townshend." The Carnegie Hall shows on Wednesday and last night were videotaped for a pay-per-view cable television broadcast on Saturday and recorded for Continuum Records.


Beyond Budget Debate Hyperbole
Balancing the Federal budget by the beginning of the 21st century, as the Constitutional amendment now before the Senate would require, would not be easy.
It could not be accomplished, as some conservative advocates of the amendment seem to believe, simply by eliminating wasteful programs, by placing a cap on Government benefits and by cracking down on welfare cheats.
And it could not be done, as some liberal supporters seem to think, just by raising taxes on the wealthy and slashing spending at the Pentagon.


Inside Art
Block That Buyer! Hold That Statue!
When the British Government thinks a work of art is part of its national heritage, officials can make exporting it a tough prospect, even if a handsome American suitor like the J. Paul Getty Museum steps in with a lucrative offer.
It's been more than five years since the Malibu, Calif., museum first tried to buy Antonio Canova's "Three Graces," a nearly five-and-a-half-foot marble statue of Venus's handmaidens commissioned by John Russell, the sixth Duke of Bedford, in 1814.
The museum began negotiations to buy the sculpture in 1989; its request for an export license was refused in 1990 when a new law was enacted stipulating that artworks considered part of Britain's national heritage might leave the country only if no public or private parties in Britain wanted to buy them. (Previously, an export license could be granted if no public institutions were among the competing buyers.)


Winners and a Sore Loser


To Allay Concerns, Barneys Shows Off Its Balance Sheet
Aiming to put rampant and persistent speculation about its financial stability to rest, Barneys New York yesterday released for the first time sales and earnings figures and some balance-sheet information that indicated the family-owned retail business is doing well.
Sales in the five months ended Jan. 2, four months after it opened a 270,000-square-foot store on Madison Avenue in Manhattan, climbed 69.3 percent, to $150.5 million, compared with $88.9 million in the corresponding period last year, according to audited figures provided yesterday.
And profits in that period more than doubled to $5.9 million, compared with $2.8 million in the comparable period of 1992.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  PLAN TO EASE EXPORT RULES  The Clinton Administration plans to rewrite the export laws.
The proposed overhaul, which would be the first since the cold war, is aimed at easing the sale abroad of machine tools, telecommunications equipment and other products that had been restricted because of their potential use in weaponry.
A1  BIG GUNS ARE SILENT  After more than nine months of relentless bombardment, a steady rain of shells and sniper fire that has wreaked devastation beyond what Serbian gunners did to Sarajevo, the big guns besieging the Muslim quarters of the ancient city of Mostar have fallen silent.
A1


Art in Review
Osami Tanaka
Stephen Haller Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Wednesday


Review/Film; Variation of Farmer's-Daughter Tale, Times Four
"Belle Epoque," a hot-blooded human comedy from Spain, is indebted equally to Jean Renoir's more bucolic films and to all those old jokes about the farmer's daughter.
The farmer in this case is a droll old painter, and he is the father of four pretty, flirtatious and conveniently lonely young women.
The story's traveling salesman, so to speak, is Fernando, a deserter from the Spanish army in the winter of 1930-31.
And as the film unfolds, Fernando is made to feel extraordinarily welcome by each and every member of the household.
That sounds smirky, but "Belle Epoque" isn't blunt or simple.
This warmly inviting film, with its serene mood and leafy, idyllic backdrop, is clever enough to avoid settling the question of whether Fernando is a brazen adventurer or simply a boy toy.


Cable Stocks Fall on Merger's Demise
The collapse of the merger between Tele-Communications Inc. and the Bell Atlantic Corporation Wednesday took its toll yesterday on cable stocks.
Investors had been hoping that the merger would provoke other combinations in the media business.
For now, "the outlook for cable stocks is bleak," Jessica Reif, who follows cable for Oppenheimer &amp; Company, said.
"There is increasing competition and reregulation likely to push cash flows down."


New York: The Movie Set
New Yorkers can take crowds, traffic jams, too-small apartments, too-big rents, potholes, noisy neighbors and, this winter, more weather than seems absolutely necessary.
They can handle buses that never show up, subways that pause for a while under the East River, cabdrivers to whom this city is a magical mystery tour and more than a few scam artists.
They can take them because, along with armies of tourists, they know that New York is worth the trouble.
Sure, there are a lot of places that look a lot more like Eden, but few so fascinating -- and, consequently, so irresistible to film makers.


Welfare Plan May Require New Taxes
Finding it difficult to produce a welfare plan that could be financed through spending cuts alone, the Administration is contemplating tax increases, with gambling establishments among the targets, officials said today.
No decisions have been made on whether to propose the taxes.
But the talk of taxes contradicts the Administration's previous contention that President Clinton can pay for his ambitious plan to change the welfare system simply by cutting other programs for low-income people.


Corrections
An editorial on Wednesday incorrectly identified the distributor of "Fresh Air," a radio program on WNYC.
It is National Public Radio, not American Public Radio.


Reporter's Notebook; Like Old Times: A Hoffa Amid Top Labor Chiefs
No one wears or solicits credentials, so almost anyone can hang around the annual gatherings of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s executive council, organized labor's 35-member ruling hierarchy, and bend the ears of the presidents of the nation's leading unions.
At this week's events, which end today, one visitor had gall enough to roam around the council's immense meeting room one day in the half- hour before the doors closed and business began.


China to Disregard Hong Kong Vote
China reiterated today that when it resumes sovereignty over Hong Kong in 1997 it will dismantle any democratically elected legislature formed under a vote taken early today by the colony's lawmakers.
The Chinese statement appeared to formalize the total breakdown in cooperation between London and Beijing over how to handle the political transition when Hong Kong, after 150 years of British colonial rule, reverts to Chinese sovereignty on July 1, 1997.


Short Fuse on Short Track as Turner Wins
Short-track speed skating has all the elegance of roller derby, and never was that more evident than with the aggressive tactics, furious protests and agitated name-calling in tonight's 500-meter race for women.
Cathy Turner, 31, of Hilton, N.Y., defended her Olympic title over the protest of the second-place finisher, Zhang Yanmei of China, who stalked off the medal podium and removed the silver medal from her neck after the national anthem was played, refusing to shake Turner's hand or to stand for photographs that are traditionally taken of the three medalists.


Clippers Deal Manning To Hawks for Wilkins
Two flashy forwards swapped teams last night, with Danny Manning, the disgruntled Los Angeles Clippers star, going to Atlanta for Dominique Wilkins, the Hawks' aging but still effective highlights man.
In exchange for the 27-year-old Manning, the Clippers will also receive the Hawks' first draft choice either this year or in 1995.
The deal, which came after Manning had made it clear that he would leave the Clippers when he became an unrestricted free agent after the season, was announced just before the 9 P.M. trading deadline.


Isabel B. Wasson, 97, A Petroleum Geologist
Isabel Bassett Wasson, one of the country's first female petroleum geologists, died on Monday in La Grange Park, Ill.
She was 97.
A former resident of River Forest, Ill., Mrs.
Wasson moved to the Plymouth Place Retirement Community in La Grange Park 10 years ago.


For Children
This is the last weekend to attend the free Black History Month events for children at various New York City libraries.
Or to hear a contemporary tale at the Museum for African Art. 'Meet the Author' 'Brenda Wilkinson'
New York Public Library  Baychester Branch  2049 Asch Loop North  The Bronx  (718) 379-6700  Recommended ages: 8 to 12  Today


Fireworks Are Absent As UMass Wins Again
Moments before his Temple Owls faced the University of Massachusetts in a much-anticipated rematch, John Chaney shook hands with John Calipari and then the two coaches embraced.
Tonight's game at McGonikle Hall was much tamer than the first meeting.
There were no confrontations with referees, no post-game tirades, just two halves of hard-nosed basketball played by fierce rivals.
For Temple, the result was the same.


TVWeekend; Of a Black's Struggle at West Point in the 1880's
In 1880, a West Point Cadet, Johnson C. Whittaker, was brutally attacked by three masked men in his dormitory room and left on the floor, bleeding profusely while tied to his bed.
Whittaker, a 21-year-old black man, accused three of his more racist fellow students.
West Point adminstrators chose to believe their explanation that Whittaker had staged the attack himself because he was afraid of failing a philosophy course.
Whittaker was found guilty in a court-martial and dismissed from West Point.
The story is reconstructed in "Assault at West Point," having its premiere Sunday on Showtime.
An older Whittaker (Al Freeman Jr.), now battling bigots who don't want him and his family living in a white Oklahoma City neighborhood, tells his story to a local journalist.
The flashback begins as Whittaker's lawyers, the white Daniel Chamberlain (Sam Waterston) and the black Richard Greener (Samuel L. Jackson), prepare their case for the aggrieved cadet (Seth Gilliam).
News reporters are out in force, their own racial biases often undisguised.


Sharpton Challenges Moynihan for Democratic Senate Nomination


Art in Review
Terry Winters
Sonnabend Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through March 12
To judge from this show of 5 big paintings (the largest is 8 feet by 10 feet), 7 watercolors and 17 acrylics on paper, Terry Winters is moving in the right direction.
Some of these new works have an intensity and energy missing in his previous art, for all its softspoken appeal.
His colors are bolder, deeper, more activated, jazzier; the droopy webs of lines and biomorphic shapes that have long been characteristic of Mr.
Winters's paintings and drawings have grown more complex and more interesting (Brice Marden comes to mind, a little).


Review/Film; Sam Shepard's Spiritual, Imagistic Vision of the Old West
"I want to purchase your second daughter," Richard Harris tells Alan Bates.
Prescott Roe (Mr. Harris) has already made one dirty deal with Eamon McCree (Mr. Bates).
He bought the older of McCree's two half-Indian daughters as a bride for his son, Talbot (River Phoenix).
But she has died in childbirth, his son is deranged with grief and the hapless father has hunted down McCree's traveling medicine show to make another bargain.
"I am not a bottomless pit of daughters, Mr. Roe," says the drunken McCree, who in top hat and fancy vest looks and sounds a bit like the Mad Hatter.
And this is the realistic part of "Silent Tongue," Sam Shepard's eerie, inventive, poetic new film.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.25
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.34
3.37
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.59
3.58
3.03
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.20
6.12
6.02
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.73
6.64
6.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.53
7.45
7.79
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.74
5.68
5.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Utopia in the River
To the Editor:
Roosevelt Island is far more than "an apartment community," as you call it in "Islands Make New York New York" (editorial, Feb. 15).
It is a huge social experiment on which the Federal Government, the state and city of New York embarked nearly 20 years ago, to see if a middle-class community could be sustained close to the heart of midtown New York.
By race, ethnicity, income level, age and physical abilities, it is the most highly integrated community in the city, the state and, for all I know, the world.


3 Gunmen Shoot Man After He Refuses to Give Them Money
Three gunmen, one of them masquerading as a police officer, entered the home of a 29-year-old Long Island fisherman Wednesday night and shot him after he refused to give them money, the Nassau County police said today.
The victim, Edward Herbig, was listed in serious condition today at North Shore University Hospital in Glen Cove with bullet wounds of the face, neck and buttocks, the police said.


Slaughtering the Messengers
The murder of journalists has become a global plague.
At least 56 journalists were killed last year while gathering news, including nine in Algeria, seven in Moscow, four in Turkey and three in Angola.
Within the past 13 months, five journalists died while on duty for The Associated Press, the greatest toll in so short a period in the agency's 146-year history.
Why the escalation?
One reason is that the rules have changed.
In earlier wars, belligerents generally tolerated correspondents, who were normally unarmed and plainly identified.
Now journalists are not only exposed to fire but deliberately targeted, as in Bosnia, or taken hostage, as in Beirut.


Tames Memorial Service
A memorial service for George Tames, the longtime photographer for The New York Times and chronicler of the politically powerful in Washington, will be held tomorrow at St.
Sophia Greek Orthodox Cathedral at Massachusetts Avenue and 36th Street in Washington.
The family will receive visitors today at the Gawler Funeral Home at 5130 Wisconsin Avenue N.W. from 7 to 9 P.M.


Truce in Bosnia's Other War Quiets Guns in Another City
After more than nine months of relentless bombardment, a steady rain of shells and sniper fire that has wreaked devastation beyond what Serbian gunners did to Sarajevo, the big guns besieging the Muslim quarters of this ancient city have fallen nearly silent.
Behind the curtains of sandbags and overturned buses that screen them from snipers across the Neretva River, hundreds of people emerged from their underground shelters this morning, and for the first time in months crowds spilled along Marshall Tito Avenue, despite occasional bursts of small arms fire from Muslim and Croatian soldiers facing one another across the front lines.


Art in Review
Robert Rahway Zakanitch
Jason McCoy Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Through March 12  129-31 Greene Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through March 31


New Caution At Blockbuster
The chairman of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation, H. Wayne Huizenga, said yesterday on Dan Dorfman's program on CNBC that Blockbuster management was unhappy with the price of the company's sale to Viacom Inc.
It was not clear, however, whether Blockbuster expected to attempt a renegotiation of the deal, which was announced in January.
Executives at Blockbuster and Viacom did not return telephone calls yesterday.


Cuomo Stumps for Change In the Medicaid Formula
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo came to Capitol Hill today to urge New York's Congressional delegation to keep the fight for a formula that gives the state more Medicaid money at the center of its negotiations on President Clinton's health-care proposals.
He said afterward that he did not believe the President had been purposely "unfair to my state," though he said White House actions had often hurt it in the last year.
But then Mr.
Cuomo repeated, as he has again and again, that it would be terribly unfair, indeed, if New York did not get -- what else -- more Medicaid money.


Review/Art; Armory Show Reveals the Recession's Plus Side
"It's fun, it's fresh, it's post Depresh." If Cole Porter's lyrics don't exactly describe the sixth annual "Art Show," which opened yesterday at the Seventh Regiment Armory for a five-day run, they come close.
The recession, in fact, still has the art world in its grip, which may explain why so much of the work in this year's group show of the Art Dealers Association of America is on the small side and big-gun pieces, like Picasso's stunning portrait of Dora Maar at Pace Wildenstein's booth, are few.
But anyone who thinks belt-tightening has to be all bad should take note of what the 61 participants have come up with: dozens of offbeat, thought-provoking works, often presented with a nice sense of curatorial flair.
The exhibition that results is big and diffuse, but it has a nice low-key intimacy, as if attics and closets had been turned out to furnish an unusually cosmopolitan country fair.


Stocks Fall On Fears of Rate Rise
The growing conviction that interest rates in the United States will continue to rise pushed world stock markets down yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average dropping 51.78 points, or 1.3 percent, to close at 3,839.90.
In Europe, the slides were steeper.
The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index in London fell 2.23 percent, or 74.4 points, to 3,267.5, its biggest one-day drop in 16 months.
Stocks also fell more than 2 percent in Sweden and Switzerland.


Review/Art; Group Shows of Every Kind, Even Where the Show Itself Is an Art Form
The gallery world breaks out in group shows at fairly regular intervals, and this weekend is one of those times.
These exhibitions can create the illusion of broader horizons for the visitor, no mean task in a February like this one, enabling one to traverse a great deal of esthetic terrain in a relatively small amount of space and a minimum of weather.
They provide momentary respite from winter's doldrums, when the vision narrows and the mind hunkers down.
In SoHo and on 57th Street there are shows with three or more artists at nearly every turn, in young galleries and blue-chip venues alike.
Some focus on one medium; others have a thematic or formal organizing device.
Most are in-house efforts, organized by dealers happy to take a break from the steady march of one-person exhibitions; a few bear the imprimatur of independent curators.
And one or two even push the envelope of the group show format, suggesting that it can be a provocative art form in itself.
Paula Cooper
"Pictures of the Real World (In Real Time)," at the Paula Cooper Gallery (155 Wooster Street, near Houston Street), is an oddly handsome show, organized by Robert Nickas, that measures life and photography, constancy and change.
The constants are the austere Conceptual Art date paintings of On Kawara, which here are something akin to wall labels.
Announcing dates like "May 6, 1972" or "June 9, 1985," these small white-on-black canvases mark off the 28 years of 1966 to 1993 and alternate with 28 photographs, one from each year.
The show's main achievement, other than to give Mr.
Kawara's paintings somethings to do, is to trace photography into Conceptual Art and out the other side.
It begins with Conceptualists like Dan Graham and Douglas Huebler, includes appropriation artists like Cindy Sherman, Richard Prince and Sherrie Levine and concludes with more idiosyncratic manipulators of the medium like Andres Serrano, Jeanne Dunning and Zoe Leonard.
Documentary photographs, primarily by Larry Clark and Diane Arbus, are definitely in the minority.
Yet in many ways, reality and how artists with cameras have insinuated it into art are the show's underlying subjects. (Through March 12.) Luhring Augustine
By its very title, "The Ossuary," at Luhring Augustine (130 Prince Street), evokes two of contemporary art's most prevalent subjects: death and the body.
The show, which has been organized by Diego Cortez and Arto Lindsay, brings together 26 artists, many of them the usual suspects, like Edward Ruscha, Brice Marden and Philip Taaffe, all intersecting with the show's theme from different angles and tangents.
Richard Prince for example, contributes a joke painting about a funeral.
Included are "Jawbone," a powerful, uncharacteristically wordless painting by Jean-Michel Basquiat, and an exceptional four-panel painting by Francesco Clemente in which a seemingly living face is progressively readied for burial, winding up dead.
But the show's main action is sculptural: impressive objects by Louise Bourgeois, Kiki Smith, Matthew Barney and, most startlingly, a Brazilian Candomble priest named Mestre Didi, create a garden of earthly delights centerstage. (Through March 19.) Jay Gorney
The exhibition at Jay Gorney (100 Greene Street, near Prince Street) includes works by the painter David Deutsch, the photographer James Welling and Douglas Blau, a critic, curator and expert image-gatherer who is giving appropriation art a few new twists.
Mr.
Deutsch's painting of a small town glimpsed through the lush overgrowth of summer trees plays off the starker realities of Mr.
Welling's black-and-white photographs of old houses whose weathered exteriors and hillside settings immediately evoke the harshness of mining-town life.
In the other direction, Mr.
Deutsch's "Double Plaza" and "Repository," in which pantheons of blurry portraits invoke a rather daunting sense of cultural authority, are relieved by Mr.
Blau's "Views and Vistas." This work of 81 found images from sources high and low and ranging through several centuries, concentrates on isolated figures seen from the back, looking at landscapes.
After Mr.
Deutsch's generic evocations of human achievement, it's nice to see man and woman dwarfed by nature. (Through March 26.) Postmasters
"Untitled," the group show at Postmasters (80 Greene Street, near Spring Street), presents work by five women and reminds us that, contrary to the impression created by the current exhibition at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo, abstract artists, too, can be "Bad Girls." All it takes is irreverence, a certain raunchiness of style or material and a healthy disregard for the lines between media.
Beth Haggart constructs a huge, truculent yet buoyant sphere from cardboard boxes, while Polly Apfelbaum states the colors of the spectrum in radiant terms on strips of white velvet arranged neatly on the floor.
In an especially beautiful work that recalls the early 1970's poured-latex paintings of Lynda Benglis, Lauren Szold creates an in-progress piece of Process Art by swirling color across the floor and letting it drip from the ceiling.
Nancy Rubins's rugged graphite drawings and Jessica Stockholder's bristling found-object formalism complete this impressive gathering. (Through March 19.) P.P.O.W.
"Arabesque," at P.P.O.W. (532 Broadway, near Spring Street), follows the curving, undulating and occasionally curlicue lines of arabesques from artwork to artwork, which are good, bad and indifferent and mostly paintings.
It gets credit for emphasizing the decorative in art of all kinds, be it the political surrealism of Frank Moore's painting "Easter," with its spiral of blood, or the intimate heraldic shapes of David Moreno's untitled abstract collage.
In Lari Pittman's ferociously decorative "Untitled No. 4 (Insist)," the decorative and the political fuse seamlessly.
Also engaging are the works of Betsy Friedman, Amy Sillman, Fred Tomaselli, Gregory Crane and Peter Nagy, who has abandoned his black and white palette for pastels.
And the overall ambiance of this show -- bright, formally exuberant and, well, a little loopy -- is a pleasant change of pace. (Through March 19.) Lennon, Weinberg
"An Exhibition in Memory of Raoul Hague," at Lennon, Weinberg (580 Broadway, near Prince Street), is a touching meditation on the artist's quest.
It brings together six sculptures by Raoul Hague, who died last year at the age of 88, with three or four drawings or paintings each by Arshile Gorky, Bradley Walker Tomlin and Philip Guston, all of whom Hague claimed as friends and inspirers.
Each artist's progress toward abstraction and an individual style is briefly indicated, starting with Tomlin's "Tulip," a lovely little painting from 1930, and ending with Guston's lumpily sensuous "Afternoon II" of 1963.
Especially noteworthy is Hague's "Belgian Marble," a 1940 sculpture of a standing female nude whose simplified forms reflect the artist's studies with William Zorach and John Flannagan.
The figure's face is awkwardly schematized and its arms are poorly resolved, but the abbreviated yet gently swelling torso achieves a balance between the real and the abstract and between flesh and stone that is completely riveting. (Through tomorrow.) Thread Waxing Space
In "Don't Look Now" at Thread Waxing Space (476 Broadway, near Broome Street), the critic Joshua Decter creates a picture gallery that is also a slide show.
In the process he demonstrates the appeal that strictly limited formats hold for curators.
Mr.
Decter invited 68 artists (and a few writers) to submit any work they wanted so long as it was in slide form.
All are projected high on the walls of a dark narrow space, in alphabetical order.
Some artists simply sent slides of their work.
Others, like Jon Kessler, who turned his slide into a work of kinetic art, have bent the format to their particular sensibilities.
For some, no bending was necessary.
The self-absorbed Sean Landers sent a childhood photograph, while Robert Gober is represented by a slide of an early painting from a work that consists entirely of slides of no-longer-extant early paintings.
This show may be a critic's revenge on the art object, or an aside about art in the age of mechanical reproduction.
But it's also great fun, perhaps in spite of itself. (Through tomorrow.) Galerie St.
Etienne
Not all the artists in "The Forgotten Folk Art of the 1940's," at Galerie St.
Etienne (24 West 57th Street), deserve to be remembered.
It doesn't seem necessary, for example, to retrieve from obscurity the sentimental, heavy-handed canvases of Abraham Levin or Lawrence Lebduska, although the latter comported himself quite well when painting fish and cactuses on small wood panels.
The show is further weakened by poor examples of artists who aren't all that forgotten, like John Kane; and by so many similar snow scenes by Grandma Moses that the term cottage industry gains new meaning.
Still, it's great to see Israel Litwak's dense little landscapes in which careful patterns make every leaf and flower stand out.
Also worthy of rediscovery are the paintings of Grandma Moses' younger brother, Fred Robertson, who took up the brush after his sister's success.
Sibling rivalry is clearly as effective as any other artistic motivation: at least in this context, Robertson's less meticulous, more emotional landscapes and farm scenes outshine the efforts of his famous sister. (Through March 19.)  Barbara Mathes
The twain that meet in "Alternative Visions" at the Barbara Mathes Gallery (41 East 57th Street) are 19th-century French wallpaper and 20th-century Minimal Art, realms of artistic endeavor so disparate that one doesn't even think of them as opposites.
The meeting is more a miss than a hit, partly because many visitors to contemporary art galleries may find the wallpaper designs so unfamiliar and striking, especially in their unusual, often intense color combinations, that the efforts of Sol LeWitt, Robert Mangold, Robert Ryman and Carl Andre may simply be overlooked.
There's shared territory: an emphasis on repeating forms and at times a chalky surface delicacy.
But the show's only real click is the juxtaposition of three scenic panels and a stripe painting by Agnes Martin, which share a similar grisaille color scheme and sense of restraint.
Otherwise, it's a nice try, with the wallpaper doing most of the work. (Through April 2.)


Polonia Gives Boggs a New Dimension
Hitting second in the Yankees' batting order, behind newly acquired Luis Polonia, presents a unique situation with a wide range of possibilities for Wade Boggs.
"I've never really had a fast guy in front of me," Boggs said recently.
"I played 11 years in Boston and never had a guy who could run. Last year we had Bernie, but he never really stole." He was referring to Bernie Williams, the center fielder.


A New Commissioner Says Homeless Issue Is Long-Term
New York City's new Commissioner of Homeless Services said yesterday that the city had to stop looking at homelessness as "an emergency, short-term crisis" and start treating it as a "long-term, systemic issue" that will require the collaborative resources of the government and nonprofit groups.
The Commissioner, Joan Malin, a veteran city administrator, said at a City Hall news conference to announce her appointment that she would continue the effort that she began during the Dinkins administration to turn the city's job of running homeless shelters over to nonprofit groups.


De Klerk Turns a Campaign Fiasco to Advantage
From the moment his green Mercedes pulled onto the raggedy soccer field in the mixed-race township of Postdene on Wednesday, President F. W. de Klerk could see that a lackluster campaign swing was about to take a dramatic turn for the worse.
His waiting supporters were surrounded and heavily outnumbered by young blacks loyal to the African National Congress, their mood teetering between festivity and rage.


New York Officer Is Held in Abduction Of L.I. Woman, 64
A New York City police officer forced a woman into her car at gunpoint yesterday outside a Selden, L.I., supermarket, let her out unharmed after a 10-minute drive and then drove off in her car, the Suffolk County police said.
The police said they did not know the motive the suspect, Maxime Baptiste, a 13-year Police Department veteran assigned to the courts in Queens.
He is to be arraigned today in Central Islip, L.I., on charges of kidnapping, robbery, assault and resisting arrest.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "IRENE WORTH'S PORTRAIT OF EDITH WHARTON," New York Shakespeare Festival Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
A one-woman show based on writings by Edith Wharton.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 598-7150.


The Kerrigan Watch; Endorsement Avalanche Is Possible in Norway
If a whack on the knee has helped make Nancy Kerrigan as popular as she is now among corporate sponsors, imagine what a gold medal would do.
"We're talking Michael Jordan numbers," said Brandon Steiner, who heads a marketing firm in New York that matches athletes with companies.


City Hall's Job Targets Center on Agency for Poor
The Giuliani administration has identified many of the city jobs it hopes to eliminate by offering an ambitious severance package to employees beginning next month, and almost half of them would come out of the agency that serves New York City's poor, officials said yesterday.
About 3,600 of the jobs the administration plans to cut would fall in the Department of Social Services, the officials said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Those cuts would come on top of the 1,000 positions that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani proposed eliminating when he unveiled his preliminary budget at the beginning of this month.
Before the cuts the department had a total of 23,700 positions.


Violations Admitted
Maine admitted to more National Collegiate Athletic Association compliance violations yesterday and suspended its athletic director for a week without pay.


Elaborate Precautions Taken for Autopsy in Mystery Fumes Case
The bizarre and puzzling circumstances of Gloria Ramirez's death in the emergency room of Riverside General Hospital last Saturday have suddenly transformed this city of 200,000 people into the scene of a techno-thriller straight from a best seller like "The Andromeda Strain."
A doctor and five nurses in the hospital's emergency room were felled by a mysterious substance from Ms.
Ramirez's body; two of them are still hospitalized.


Decades Pass, and What's New Under the Sun?
That unfinished decade, the 1960's, began 30 years ago today when Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. inconclusively beat Sonny Liston for the heavyweight boxing title.
The decisive decade, the 2000's, may begin tonight when Nancy Kerrigan gets the gold medal and Tonya Harding gets the cold shoulder.
This would sound like a stretch even to me, cold and miserable in New York watching warm and happy people in Norway, except that 30 years ago, warm and happy in Miami Beach, I found it impossible to believe that Clay -- viciously attacked by the press as a fraud, a disgrace, an obnoxious fool, the dupe of a dangerous gang of hate-mongers -- could actually avoid being damaged by the intimidating champion.


New Deal for Langston
Pitcher MARK LANGSTON and the California Angels agreed yesterday to a three-year contract extension through the 1997 season.
Langston, 33, will earn $3.25 million this year, the final season of a $16 million, five-year contract.
Terms of the extension were not announced.
Langston said the off season resignation of the general manager, WHITEY HERZOG, and the appointment of BILL BAVASI to replace him were a factor in the decision.


JEWISH FEAST OF PURIM IS A JOYOUS CELEBRATION


The Owner Talks of Staying in The Bronx
George Steinbrenner made his first appearance at the Yankees' spring training camp complex here this morning.
No, he did not want to discuss Tonya Harding.
He preferred to talk about whether the Yankees could stay in the Bronx, and pitcher Jim Abbott and Manager Buck Showalter.
"We're making some progress," Steinbrenner said, referring to negotiations to keep the Yankees from moving out of Yankee Stadium.


Surgeon General Says Medicaid Enslaves Poor Pregnant Women
The Surgeon General, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, said today that Medicaid must have been developed by "a white male slave owner" because "it fails to provide services to poor women to prevent unwanted pregnancies, and this failure contributes to poverty, ignorance and enslavement."
At the same time, Dr.
Elders said the Government should work closely with churches to improve public health and provide social services to "our poorest and most helpless citizens."


CLINTON MOVES TO RESCUE TALKS; A Killer's Path of Militancy: From Brooklyn to West Bank
Across his 37 years, Benjamin C. Goldstein followed a path of militancy that took him from the Brooklyn ranks of the Jewish Defense League to the faithful's ultimate pilgrimage to Israel where he worked as the head doctor in Qiryat Arba, the largest Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank.
Friends of Dr.
Goldstein, who was known by the Hebrew name Baruch, described him as a fervent supporter of the movement of Meir Kahane, the Brooklyn-born rabbi who inspired many militant disciples to follow him to Israel where he founded a far-right party, Kach, banned in Israel as racist.


Suspect in Rail Shootings May Have Kunstler's Help
William M. Kunstler, a lawyer known for representing unpopular defendants, may add one more to his roster: Colin Ferguson, the 36-year-old man accused of killing six people on a Long Island commuter train in December.
In at least two court appearances, Mr.
Ferguson has said he wanted to replace his court-appointed lawyer, Anthony J. Falanga.
Over the last three weeks, he has called Mr.
Kunstler and his partner, Ronald L. Kuby, twice, and Mr.
Kunstler said today that the two were planning to visit him in the Nassau County Jail on Monday to discuss taking the case.


Sports of The Times; The Survivor Won't Let Time Slip By
NANCY KERRIGAN had already skated a gold-medal performance.
The people running the figure skating championship did not even have the Ukrainian national anthem at hand, but it is a safe guess they knew exactly where "The Star-Spangled Banner" could be found.
And then the hauntingly gifted young woman from Odessa began to skate.
She is different, this young woman with the circles below her eyes, this young woman with grief lines on her face.
It is impossible to stop staring at her.
She knows how to express herself with her hands at all times and her slender body gyrates with emotions no instructor can supply.
She was in pain from a dreadful collision in practice on Thursday, but Oksana Baiul is no stranger to pain.


Woolworth Sees Loss in Quarter
The Woolworth Corporation said yesterday that it would report a loss for the fourth quarter, as well as lower-than-expected operating profit.
The company also announced that it would take a larger charge than originally estimated in the sale of a Canadian unit.
Shares of Woolworth fell 37.5 cents, to $22.50, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Business Digest
The Economy  Some of the nation's most powerful bankers pledged to support the Federal Reserve in a dispute with the Treasury Department over a plan to centralize bank regulation.
The Clinton Administration wants to create a Federal Banking Commission that would absorb most of the regulatory roles of the Fed, the F.D.I.C. and the Treasury.
But the bankers endorsed the Fed's plan, which calls for it to take over the bank supervision role of the F.D.I.C.  [ Page 39. ] Cigarettes may be subject to regulation, the F.D.A. suggested, saying there was mounting evidence that cigarettes are sold to satisfy an addiction.  [ 1. ]
Markets  Big global investors have taken hits recently because of a rise in U.S. interest rates and the collapse of trade talks between Japan and the United States.
One of the biggest hits was taken by George Soros.
The financier, famous for his successful investments in currencies, gold and real estate, lost $600 million in a single day's trading, betting the wrong way on the direction of the yen.  [ 39. ] A big mutual fund had to withdraw a $1.1 billion public offering because of an incorrect chart in the offering's prospectus.
Stock prices, meanwhile, were mixed.
Gold prices rose.  [ 47. ] Lumber prices declined as demand for building materials was smothered by snow.
Crude oil prices retreated.  [ 47. ] The total number of shares sold short in Nasdaq trading rose to record levels in the month that ended on Feb. 8.  [ 51. ] Companies  Bell Atlantic's loss of a merger deal may be A.T.&amp; T.'s gain.
A merger of Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications would have created a company with lines running past nearly 40 percent of all American homes.
The emerging marketplace for interactive services needs such a company with the power to combine disparate telephone and cable television networks, and only A.T.&amp; T. appears to possess that kind of technological might.  [ 39. ] Hearst decided it would keep its book division, which includes William Morrow and Avon Books, after months of negotiations on a sale.
Putnam Berkley Group had been seen as the likely buyer.  [ 39. ] America West's board has endorsed a $220 million bid from an investment group led by the chairman of Continental Airlines.
The interest in America West, which is in Chapter 11 bankruptcy, shows a renewed confidence in formerly troubled airlines. [ 41. ] Woolworth said it would report a loss for the fourth quarter, surprising investors.
But correcting errors requires a quick response and detailed records.  [ 37. ] Some mortgage lenders are willing to help borrowers with flexible terms and assistance when there is a disaster like the California earthquake.
Others are not so accommodating.  [ 38. ]


12 Bankers Back Fed On Powers
In a closed meeting with the Federal Reserve's top officials, a dozen of the nation's most powerful bankers have vowed to back the Fed in opposing the Clinton Administration's plan for centralizing bank regulation.
The chairmen of big banks in each of the Fed's 12 regional districts endorsed instead the Fed's plan to take over the bank-supervision role of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, according to a copy of the meeting's official summary.
HB&gt;Battle Between Agencies
The bank executives' position is the latest setback for the Treasury Department's proposal to create a giant Federal Banking Commission that would absorb most of the financial regulatory roles of the Fed, the F.D.I.C. and the Treasury.
The Treasury proposal has met with hostility from Congressional Republicans and muted support at best from Congressional Democrats.


Knicks Make A Late Rush, But Stop Short
The offense was better. The effort was better. But for the Knicks, it was another loss.
Losing their third consecutive game for the first time this season, the Knicks dropped a 102-94 decision to the Denver Nuggets tonight at McNichols Arena.
It continued a two-week slide for the Knicks (36-18), who have lost seven of their last 11 games.


Huskey Gets Help
The Mets announced today that they were shipping BUTCH HUSKEY, their overweight third-base prospect, to a fitness and nutrition center at Duke University in Durham, N.C.


Democrats Say Evidence Was Faked
Apologizing for what they called "a mistake," a group of Democratic senators admitted today that one of their aides altered copies of post office documents to make it appear that a Republican Senator had abused his taxpayer-financed mailing privileges.
The postal records purported to show that Senator William R. Sears, a Utica Republican, had mailed 350,000 items at a cost of $183,166 in September 1992 during the heat of a re-election campaign.


COMPANY NEWS: The Olympics Meddle; News Service Falls Victim To a Lutz That Disrupts
At 4:16 P.M. yesterday, the 35,000 electronic monitors that supply Bloomberg Business News services and securities prices to subscribers across the country ground to a momentary halt at a critical time -- just as final stock and bond prices were being reported in New York.
The problem: So many people were simultaneously trying to read a scrap of news that had flashed across the monitors.


David Grayson, 73, Led First Investors, A Brokerage House
David D. Grayson, the president of the troubled Manhattan-based First Investors Corporation, died on Wednesday in Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 73 and lived in Roslyn, L.I.
The cause was leukemia, a company statement said.


New Subway Cars Shouldn't Skimp on Safety; Put Trolley Elsewhere
To the Editor:
Testing a trolley is a good idea for New York City, but not on 42d Street, which is already well served by public transportation.
That street is one of our most heavily traveled and can ill afford to have its capacity so drastically reduced.
While 40th Street may be wider than 42d Street's eastbound half, the project's consultant states that diverting traffic to 40th Street will not work without traffic enforcement agents.
Who will pay for them?
There aren't enough agents now to enforce existing regulations.


Loan Assistance Varies For Borrowers in Crisis
AS Californians with earthquake-damaged homes recently discovered, all mortgages are not the same.
Some lenders are willing to provide flexible terms and other assistance when disaster strikes.
Some are not.
For example, Home Savings of America, the nation's largest savings institution, plans to make interest-free loans to 200 borrowers who have badly damaged houses and no other assets, with no payments until the houses are sold.
For borrowers needing a brief respite, Home Savings will stretch out their loans.
Along with good publicity, the move is intended to avert bigger losses in foreclosure.


CHRONICLE
Oh, PRINCE CHARLES, now you need new cuff links.
Police are investigating a burglary at the Prince's apartment in London's St.
James's Palace, Reuters reported yesterday.
In the third breach of security involving the royal family this year, cuff links, tiepins and other small personal items were stolen, a spokeswoman for Buckingham Palace said.


Iran Was Merely First To Condemn Rushdie
To the Editor:
"The Five-Year Stain on Iran" (editorial, Feb. 15) is misleading and shows a lack of understanding of any non-Western experience.


New Jersey Needs Glue To Hold Ball
Derrick Coleman's huge new contract was good fortune for him today, but it did nothing to change the Nets' collective misfortune against the Orlando Magic.
For the third time this season, the Nets put on a mistake-filled, sloppy performance against the Magic, and dropped a 114-102 decision at the Orlando Arena.
Coleman finished with 23 points and nine rebounds in his first performance as the Seven (Plus) Million Dollar Man, but Orlando used a combination of balanced scoring (four players over 20 points) and 3-point bombs by Dennis Scott to neutralize the Nets.
New Jersey fell to a 27-26 record with the loss.


A History of Anti-Arab Feeling
Following is the text of a letter by Dr.
Baruch Goldstein that was printed in The New York Times in 1981: To the Editor:
Rabbi Arthur Hertzberg is correct when he asserts that in annexing Judea and Samaria (which he refers to as the West Bank), with its large Arab population, Israel would be endangering its Jewish character.
According to statistics published by the Israeli Government in 1980, the Arabs of Israel have an average of eight children per household, as compared with an average of 2.9 children per Jewish home in Israel.
However, Rabbi Hertzberg fails to note that even within the pre-1967 borders of Israel this same disparity of birth rates, associated with a declining Aliyah, assures Israel of an Arab majority in Israel (70 years?) unless steps are taken to prevent this from occurring.
Ceding the "West Bank" to the "Palestinians" would, therefore, not solve the problem which Rabbi Hertzberg raises; it would serve only to further jeopardize Israel's security and betray a Biblical trust.


Classical Music in Review
Emma Tahmizian, Pianist  Weill Hall


Winter Olympics; Nancy's Coming Right Up!
Oh, the agony of CBS's teasing.
With ladies figure skating the cornerstone of last night's Winter Olympics program, CBS played the flirt.
A five-minute figure skating preview led off the program -- and not another word about Tonya, Nancy, Surya, Oksana or Katarina was heard for 93 minutes as men's Alpine combined and ski jumping filled the time.
The agony was compounded by many viewers' not only knowing the results, but by their having listened to the axel-by-axel call by CBS Radio's Mark Champion and Paul Wylie yesterday afternoon.


A History of Anti-Arab Feeling
Following is the text of a letter by Dr.
Baruch Goldstein that was printed in The New York Times in 1981: To the Editor:
Rabbi Arthur Hertzberg is correct when he asserts that in annexing Judea and Samaria (which he refers to as the West Bank), with its large Arab population, Israel would be endangering its Jewish character.
According to statistics published by the Israeli Government in 1980, the Arabs of Israel have an average of eight children per household, as compared with an average of 2.9 children per Jewish home in Israel.
However, Rabbi Hertzberg fails to note that even within the pre-1967 borders of Israel this same disparity of birth rates, associated with a declining Aliyah, assures Israel of an Arab majority in Israel (70 years?) unless steps are taken to prevent this from occurring.
Ceding the "West Bank" to the "Palestinians" would, therefore, not solve the problem which Rabbi Hertzberg raises; it would serve only to further jeopardize Israel's security and betray a Biblical trust.


Grace McMillan, 82, Roosevelt Grandchild
Grace Roosevelt McMillan, a photographer who was the eldest grandchild of President Theodore Roosevelt, died on Tuesday at the Greater Baltimore Medical Center.
She was 82 and lived in Baltimore.
The cause was a stroke, her family said.


Public &amp; Private; Inside The System
Yvette hasn't changed much since the last time I saw her.
She's still working on her weight; she's still warm and optimistic, signs her letters "Fondly," with a big curly F.
It was hot and muggy, that day three years ago, and Yvette was telling me then that a job was right around the corner.
And that's what she tells me now, as the snow turns smoke-gray outside the narrow, barred window of her living room, nearly five years after she first went on welfare.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a bombing case in Belfast referred incorrectly in some editions to the background of a woman convicted in another case, that of the Guildford Four in England.
She is an Englishwoman, not an Irishwoman.


An Unhappy Webber?
The relationship between CHRIS WEBBER and Golden State Coach DON NELSON has become so bad that the rookie standout may try to leave the team after this season, The San Jose Mercury News has reported.
The newspaper said Nelson complained to the team's guards that Webber, a 6-10 forward and center, was costing the Warriors games and Webber became incensed when told that.
During a Feb. 9 game at Charlotte, Nelson and Webber got into a shouting match.


After Sudden Death, a Birth of Hope
TEN weeks after her lover was shot to death in front of her by a robber who had demanded her sheepskin coat, Arlyn Gonzalez gave birth to a healthy girl.
Now, 14 days later, she was cradling the sleeping infant to her breast and talking of the loss of her man and the glory of her child.
"Have I cried?" said the woman in her basement apartment in Woodhaven, Queens.
"No, not much. In the last two months of my pregnancy I knew I had to concentrate on keeping calm. I didn't want to pass any nervousness on to the baby. I had to be strong so she wouldn't be colicky or troubled."
Her daughter, Bianca Alexis, slept peacefully beneath a tapestry of Marilyn Monroe.
She has a well-formed face with thick brown hair that has a little red in it, like her mother's.
If she grows up to look like her mother she will be a beautiful woman.
"She has her daddy's lips," Ms.
Gonzalez said, pointing to the photograph of Alexander Ortiz, the man who was shot as they walked back to this apartment from the movies on Nov. 26, three days before his 23d birthday.
She has not repressed the details of what happened that night.
She remembers the two men coming toward them.
The shot that knocked Alex down.
The second shot as she fumbled with buttons to remove her three-year-old shearling coat.
She remembers how after the killers fled into a white car, Alex, bleeding on the sidewalk, had told her he was scared.
"I told him to pray and he said he didn't know how. He hadn't been raised in church. I hugged him and prayed."
She also remembers how some police officers and some friends and relatives had assumed the gunmen were black.
"Why did they say that? The killers were my own kind. They were Spanish. You know there's plenty of bad in all kinds of people." Several times since then she has been at the spot where Alex was killed.
It is a shopping area and it is hard to avoid, but in any case, going there did not fill her with dread.
"I am not scared living here. This is not a bad neighborhood. What happened could have happened anywhere from Park Avenue to Florida."
She has written down her memories in a letter she plans to give her daughter on her 16th birthday.
She wrote how in the seventh month of pregnancy she had gone to the hospital to identify Alex.
How she had hugged his body there and later in the morgue.
She described how she went home and did his laundry, laying out socks and underwear in drawers where they still remain.
Sometimes, as she waited for birth, she wore his underwear.
In the letter she told of her gratefulness to friends, relatives and strangers who offered support.
After the funeral she used money sent to her to outfit Bianca's room and decorate it with Mickeys and Minnies and Donalds.
"I've written everything I could for her," said Ms.
Gonzalez, 23, who had worked as an executive secretary.
"Mostly about Alex, both the good and the bad."
With great joy she recalled her romance with a man who had been unlike any other she had known, a man younger than herself, a man with a prison record, a Bronx tough guy raised mostly on the streets.
They had met at Orchard Beach.
"I remember when I met him I thought men were slime. I had gone out with men with good careers, with prospects. But I wasn't interested in settling down. I didn't want children. I had a good job. I liked traveling. I guess I was a flirt. Then I met Alex and in one day it all changed."
Alex was starting to change as well.
Under her influence, he enrolled in a course on computer programming.
He found a job.
He learned to drive and bought a car.
"When I would come to visit him in the Bronx after work, wearing my business suits, it made him so proud. He thought of himself as an uptown man and I was his downtown woman."
They went to Cancun together.
They took the apartment near where she grew up in Woodhaven and they talked of one day having a house on Long Island.
Ms.
Gonzalez's parents, at first troubled by the young man, started to see in him some of what their daughter saw.
"We decided to have a baby," she said.
"If you measure life in years, you could think I was shortchanged. But if you look at it as experience or the intensity of experience, the year and a half Alex and I were together were complete. There was nothing missing. Everything we did was right and now there is Bianca." Lovingly, zestfully, and with more grace of spirit than you might expect to find in someone of her age, she placed the sleeping girl in her crib.


Settlers Allowed to Carry Guns
Jewish settlers in the occupied territories carry Uzi submachine guns that are issued to them by the army for self-defense.
Many also carry pistols, which they can purchase with a gun license available to any Israeli citizen who can pass an official background check.
Settlers also are issued rifles and trained in their use during annual service in the army reserve, and those who are officers are permitted to keep these weapons at home even when they are not on reserve duty.


Official Won't Take Part In Inquiry About Clintons
A day after acknowledging that he had held an unusual briefing for senior White House officials, the acting head of the Resolution Trust Corporation said today that he was removing himself from his agency's investigation of a failed Arkansas savings and loan at the center of the inquiry into the Clintons' real estate investments.
A senior Administration official said Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman, who is also the acting head of the Resolution Trust Corporation, had expressed regret over his briefing of senior White House aides on the agency's investigation into the savings association, Madison Guaranty, and its lawyers and executives.


Religion Notes
Skating to a Jewish Theme
Who was that couple gliding gracefully across the ice last Monday at the Winter Olympics in Hamar, Norway, she in a long-sleeve light blue outfit, he wearing what looked like the accouterments of Jewish prayer, a fringed shawl and phylacteries?


Orania Journal; In a 'Whites Only' Utopia, No Escaping Discord
Chris and Ina Smit pulled into this tiny whites-only Utopia at 3 A.M. today, driven, they said, by a personal message from God and a powerful anxiety about black rule.
Under a pounding afternoon sun they were still hefting furniture from a trailer, enthusing aloud that they were managing all this heavy lifting without a single black to help them.


Argentina Blocks Italian Rights Investigation
Under intense pressure from the military, President Carlos Saul Menem has stopped attempts by an Italian court to investigate human rights violations against Italians during the 1970's, when Argentina was run by a military Government.
A Federal Appeals court on Wednesday upheld an injunction that stopped an Italian judge and prosecutor from investigating the disappearances or torture of some 92 Italians or Argentines with dual citizenship, an injunction that had been initiated last week by Mr.
Menem's Justice Minister, Jorge Maiorano, at Mr.
Menem's insistence.


Critic's Notebook; Mozart and Daltry As 2 Kinds of Religion
Tuesday night at Carnegie Hall: Mozart is on the music stands and save for a recalcitrant cougher, not a creature is stirring.
Wednesday night at Carnegie Hall: Roger Daltry and his band are beginning "The Real Me." Hoots from the highest levels, a scream to the left, shouts of approval ahead, cries for more volume behind.
Tuesday night at Carnegie Hall: Emanuel Ax has finished a beautiful piano solo in Mozart's E-flat Quartet.
Lively silence, approval one feels but does not hear.
Wednesday night at Carnegie Hall: David Sanborn plays a beautiful solo on the saxophone and is greeted in midstride with whoops of gratitude.


Review/Music; Orchestra Shows Off Its Ellington
Jazz performances can start in all sorts of ways, and the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra opened its show at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night burning.
The orchestra, which was returning from a monthlong tour of the country, was clearly excited and prepared, and its version of "Second Line," a movement from Duke Ellington's "New Orleans Suite," bristled with energy.
It opened with its strongest hand.
Over the years its interpretations of Ellington's material have been gorgeous, the horns lush and fragrant.
And for the rest of the show, the band took on pieces from various of his suites, including "The Deep South Suite," "The Tattooed Bride" and "The Queen's Suite," eventually closing the concert with "Rockin' in Rhythm."


WEST BANK MASSACRE: Arabs; Palestinian Leaders Express Outrage and Urge Disarming of Settlers
Arab and Palestinian leaders today expressed outrage, vowed revenge, called for calm and demanded that Jewish settlers be disarmed after the massacre of Palestinian worshipers in the West Bank town of Hebron.
The chairman of the P.L.O., Yasir Arafat, called on the United Nations to deploy forces in the occupied territories to assure residents' security.
"We are in need of the international community to protect the Palestinian people," he told Cable News Network.


Bets on Municipals, Real Estate and Israel
The Strong High-Yield Municipal Bond Fund invests to produce high tax-free yields.
The fund buys municipal securities of medium quality and lower quality, making it riskier than regular municipal bond funds.
The current yield is 6.62 percent, the equivalent of 9.59 percent for investors in the 31 percent tax bracket, and 10.34 percent for those in the 36 percent bracket.
Regular municipal funds have a current average yield of 4.32 percent.
The Franklin Real Estate Fund invests mainly in publicly traded real estate investment trusts, or REIT's, and stocks, bonds and convertible securities of home builders and developers.
Purchasing a REIT fund is essentially betting on the housing market.
The Franklin fund yields 3.02 percent.
Dividends are paid annually.


National League Set To Name President
Baseball, which has decided to leave its office of commissioner vacant for an indefinite period, is expected to name LEONARD COLEMAN, a senior executive in the commissioner's office, as National League president next week during a meeting of owners in Phoenix.
If elected, Coleman, 45, of Middletown, N.J., would become only the second member of a minority group to hold a league presidency in one of the four major professional team sports.
The first was the current N.L. president, Bill White, who like Coleman is black.


Norden Unit Being Sold
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Norden Systems Inc., the radar and electronic surveillance unit of United Technologies Corporation.
The terms were not disclosed.
Norden will become a part of Westinghouse Electronic Systems, one of six core business groups on which Pittsburgh-based Westinghouse is focusing.


New Subway Cars Shouldn't Skimp on Safety; Go Electric
To the Editor:
To clean New York City's air, we must replace diesel and gas-burning vehicles with electric vehicles.
These should be electric buses, taxis and trucks, not private cars.


Giuliani Considers a Tuition-Voucher Plan for Day Care
The Giuliani administration is studying whether the city can save money and provide day care to more children by reducing subsidies to city-run day-care centers, but providing tuition assistance that could be used at public or private centers.
There would be no increase in the nearly $270 million that the city is now spending on day care for poor children, said Ilene Marcus, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's director for social services.
But the emphasis in spending would shift, she said, from maintaining and operating buildings to providing tuition vouchers.


CHRONICLE
It seemed as if there were no words of praise too laudatory for STEVEN SPIELBERG at a tribute held for him Thursday by the American Museum of the Moving Image.
More than 900 people, including many movie stars and movie executives, and not counting dozens of photographers and television crews, turned out for the black-tie dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Recounting how badly she wanted to be in "The Color Purple," which Mr.
Spielberg directed and co-produced, OPRAH WINFREY said: "I went to a fat farm to lose some weight. Then I got a call saying, 'If you lose one pound, you will lose this part,' so I immediately left and went to the Dairy Queen."


Williams Optimistic
The Hall of Famer TED WILLIAMS yesterday had a message for his friends and supporters: "Tell them I'll be making a comeback."


4 Hurt in Crash of City Bus in Queens


Boy With Gun Is Arrested
An 11-year-old boy was arrested after showing off a loaded semiautomatic handgun he found in his apartment building to fellow sixth-grade students in school, the authorities said.
Students told the police about the gun Wednesday morning, and an officer searching the boy's book bag came up with a .380-caliber handgun as well as 60 vials of cocaine with a street value of about $600.
The boy was released to his parents hours after his arrest at School No. 6.
He will have a hearing in family court, said Edward DeFazio, first assistant prosecutor for Hudson County.
"He found it stashed in the hallway of his building in Jersey City," Mr.
DeFazio said.


A Chancellor Encounters Opposition and Support
A president of one college of the City University of New York has asked other presidents of the 21-campus system to sign a letter of support for Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds, who has been criticized this week for spending too much time out of town.
At least eight presidents had signed the letter by yesterday afternoon.
It said criticism by some trustees and others of her travel was distracting from what some of the presidents viewed as her important initiatives for the university's future.


The Ice Queen vs. the Darling of Dysfunction
As the epic Tonya vs.
Nancy showdown fizzled into an athletic dud, Frank Brady never lost the faith.
Wearing a "Luv Ya Tonya" T-shirt reminiscent of his heroine's own famous 'No Comment' sweatshirt, Mr.
Brady aggressively recruited new members last night for his unofficial Manhattan chapter of the Oregon-based Tonya Harding Fan Club.
From a restaurant bar stool on the Upper West Side, Mr.
Brady, a freelance writer, issued more than 100 membership cards in the last two weeks with the slogan "I'll go for the gold -- you go for the throat." As Ms.
Harding nailed the opening triple Lutz in her long program, the crowd standing three deep erupted in cheers: "That's our girl." Two jars behind the bar filled with dollar bills for a betting pool.
One jar was labeled The Wimp, the other, The Imp.


GIULIANI DECLARES HOSPITALS AGENCY MUST BOW TO HIM
Facing resistance to his plans to reorganize New York City's municipal hospitals, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani warned yesterday that the board of the Health and Hospitals Corporation could be "reconstituted" if it opposed him.
The Mayor did not say how that would be done, nor did he elaborate on any other changes he could make on the 16-member board.
But changes beyond the appointment of members to new terms would require the approval of the Legislature and the Governor.
Such changes would almost certainly face fierce opposition, as some of his proposals for the system already have.


Minister Is Welcome at the Anti-Bias Event He Provoked
A Nation of Islam minister who is in the center of a firestorm over hate speech will not be barred from a special viewing of the movie "Schindler's List" on Monday if he shows up, a spokesman for Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said today.
The minister, Khalid Abdul Muhammad, could also take part in a panel discussion on racism and bias before the showing, said the spokesman, Carl Golden.
The Governor has organized the event as a rebuttal to Mr.
Muhammad's scheduled speech that evening at Trenton State College.


Winter Olympics; Baiul Wins as Kerrigan Smiles Away Her Tears
After the news conference was over, after the delicate questions had been danced around, the silver medalist's family moved into the room next door.
There didn't seem to be much time, or great need, to hang around the Olympic Amphitheater.
Everything they had come for, they had done.
There was nothing else left, nothing more they could do, no other road for them to take but the high one back home to the United States.
"We're going back to the hotel," Nancy Kerrigan's mother, Brenda, who is legally blind, told her daughter.


Winter Olympics; Norway Sweeps Alpine Combined
Norway earned a coveted sweep in men's Alpine skiing today, something that had not happened at the Winter Olympics since 1956.
But as much as Norwegians will remember the 1-2-3 finish of Lasse Kjus, Kjetil Andre Aamodt and Harald Christian Strand Nilsen in the Alpine combined, they won't soon forget the name Moe.


North Korea Agrees to Some U.N. Nuclear Inspections
The tense international standoff over North Korea's suspected covert nuclear weapons program eased tonight when the North Korean Government reached an agreement with the United States that will allow United Nations inspectors to visit some of the North's nuclear installations.
As part of the agreement, the United States and North Korea have also agreed to hold a third round of high level diplomatic talks in Geneva starting on March 31.
The talks could lead to inspections of North Korea's most secret nuclear installations in return for steps integrating North Korea into the world community and diplomatic recognition from Washington.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the fund-raising drive at WNYC, the public radio station in New York City, related the pledge results incorrectly to Curtis Sliwa's new program on the station.
WNYC received $192,000 in pledges for the whole day, not just during Mr.
Sliwa's three-hour program.


Biblical Tomb Long a Site of Arab-Jewish Conflict
Surrounded by a towering wall of massive hewn stones, the Cave of the Patriarchs, an ancient shrine that is holy to Jews, Christians and Muslims, has been the scene of repeated clashes between Israeli and Palestinian worshipers since Israel captured Hebron along with the rest of the West Bank in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
A complex of soaring pillars, arches and vaulted ceilings painted in traditional Arab style, the compound marks the burial place of Abraham, called Ibrahim in Arabic, a man revered by all three faiths.


A Plane From the Past Is in the Air Again


U.S. Asks U.N. to Condemn Sudan on Bombings
Alarmed that the refugee and food crisis in the Sudan could grow to rival the suffering in Somalia, the United States is pressing the United Nations Security Council to condemn the Sudan's Islamic fundamentalist Government for bombing Christian towns in the south of the country.
Administration officials say the ground and air offensive ordered by the Sudanese Government has put two million people in the south at risk of famine by forcing people to flee their farms and refugee camps and by thwarting food distribution efforts by relief groups.


Review/Music; UB40, Still on Top but With New Audience
UB40, which played at the Paramount on Wednesday night, started out in 1978 as part of the English two-tone movement, a trend that used reggae as its musical fodder.
At one time the band was cool, at least with critics; now it's not.
The group's newest record, "Promises and Lies" (Virgin), wasn't even reviewed in the top music magazines; it has, however, sold over one and a half million copies, according to its record company.
If Wednesday's show was typical, the band's audience, which used to be urban hipsters, is now teen-age girls.
It's easy to hear why people buy the records.
The sold-out show was overwhelmingly pleasant, and romantic.
The band traffics in the easy groove, a lazy reggae-and-pop mixture that features the high tenor pleadings of Ali Campbell.
Where reggae can sound ominous, UB40's version is relaxed, sensuous, friendly.
Even Mr.
Campbell sounds lazy; on one of the band's hits, "Red, Red Wine," he sang "reh, reh whine," spreading the words out all over the stage.


Director of Peabody Museum Is Named Yale's New Provost
Selecting an insider for the No. 2 position in his administration, Richard C. Levin, the president of Yale University, named Alison F. Richard, a 45-year-old anthropology professor, as Yale's provost today.
Professor Richard has been the director of the university's Peabody Museum of Natural History since 1990.
She has been credited with revitalizing the museum, well known for its dinosaur exhibits.


Rebels Battle for Hearts of Mexicans
As Government and rebel negotiators press ahead with talks to end the nearly two-month-old peasant uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, rebel leaders have begun a new offensive in their battle for public support.
Representatives of the two sides said late Thursday that the talks had advanced quickly and that after only four days they had reached tentative agreements on many of the less contentious demands made by the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army.


WEST BANK MASSACRE: Diplomacy; Clinton Calls Peace Talks From Cairo to Washington
Hours after he awakened to news of the massacre at a mosque in the West Bank, President Clinton today asked negotiators for Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization to move their Cairo peace talks to Washington.
They immediately agreed.
Mr.
Clinton and other American officials said they feared that the attack, carried out by an American emigre who sprayed the historic mosque with gunfire during morning prayers, would derail the peace negotiations that were revived in September on the South Lawn of the White House.


New Subway Cars Shouldn't Skimp on Safety
To the Editor:
How will the new New York City subway cars improve passenger safety?
Reducing the number of handholds that straphangers require to prevent falls during sudden stops and on sharp curves must be carefully considered.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about the military newspaper Stars and Stripes misidentified the first civilian editor of the paper's European edition.
He was Ken Zumwalt, managing editor from 1946 to 1955, not Bern Zovistoski, the current editor.


Dodgers Sign Karros
The Los Angeles Dodgers continued their commitment to youth, signing first baseman ERIC KARROS to a three-year, $6.15-million contract.
The 26-year-old infielder will receive $650,000 this season, $2.35 million in 1995 and $3.15 million in 1996.
"It's awesome," said Karros.
"Three years means they're making a commitment to me." (AP)


Francisco Carrillo Batalla Venezuelan Politician, 77
Francisco Carrillo Batalla, a Venezuelan politician and businessman, died Feb. 12 in Caracas.
He was 77.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, said Thomas W. Keesee Jr., a friend.


With Merger's Failure, an Industry Seeks a Leader
While the Bell Atlantic Corporation may have lost its chance to dominate the future of interactive television when Tele-Communications Inc. slipped from its grasp, its failure may be good news for another aspirant in the race: A.T.&amp; T.
So far the American Telephone and Telegraph Company has been relegated to the background as one of many technology subcontractors.
But A.T.&amp; T. has longed for a bigger, national role, and that chance may come.


Buying a Used Car for a Low, Low Price - at a Police Auction
For the last few years, Troy Boyette, 27, of Boston, has been buying cars at public auctions held by the Boston Police Department one Saturday a month.
On Feb. 5, he picked up a 1981 Buick Riviera for $560, which he may sell for a small profit or use himself.
The self-proclaimed car fanatic has bought about 25 cars at auction in the last four years.
He has re-sold about two-thirds of the vehicles, doubling his money on most occasions.
He typically spends between $50 and $100 to fix up the cars he re-sells.


Classical Music in Review
St. Luke's Chamber Ensemble  Guggenheim Museum SoHo


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Nicklaus Misses the Cut  Jack Nicklaus, coming off a first-round 69 on a course he designed, ballooned to an 80 yesterday and missed the cut at the Andalusian Open in Jerez de la Frontera, Spain.
Nicklaus stumbled with double bogeys on his second and third holes and had a triple-bogey 7 on the 10th.
He finished eight over par at the 7,024-yard Montecastillo course to miss the cut by five shots.
Peter Fowler of Australia shot a second-round 68 to take a one-stroke lead over Jim Payne of England in the $450,000 event.
Fowler, who sank a 15-foot putt for an eagle on the 16th hole, stood at nine under at 135. (AP)
N.B.A.
Celtics Set Negative Record  The Boston Celtics set a franchise record with their 11th consecutive defeat as the Seattle SuperSonics got a season-high 25 points from Kendall Gill in a 115-102 home victory last night.
The 11-game losing skid broke the storied franchise's previous-record streak of 10 in 1949.
Shawn Kemp had 23 points and 13 rebounds and Detlef Schrempf a season-high 23 points for the Sonics. (AP)
Jazz 107, Suns 87: Jay Humphries, starting in place of the traded Jeff Malone, scored 23 points and Utah beat Phoenix for the first time in three attempts this season.
Karl Malone, John Stockton and David Benoit had 18 points each as the Jazz recorded its fourth straight victory. (AP)
Hawks 111, Bucks 100: Duane Farrell, starting in place of the departed Dominique Wilkins, scored 20 points and Kevin Willis scored 17 of his 21 points in the fourth quarter last night as the host Atlanta Hawks beat the Milwaukee Bucks.
Danny Manning, obtained from the Los Angeles Clippers on Thursday for Wilkins, the Hawks' career scoring leader, watched in street clothes. (AP)
Spurs 126, Lakers 110: Willie Anderson scored a season-high 33 points in leading visiting San Antonio over the Los Angeles Lakers, the Spurs' 14th victory in 15 games.
Anderson, who played only in the first three quarters, made 14 of 18 shots. (AP)
Bulls 116, Bullets 94: Horace Grant had 26 points and 13 rebounds as Chicago continued its dominance of Washington with the victory in Landover, Md.
Grant made 12 of 15 shots and both of his free throws and is now 24 for 31 from the field (77 percent) in the Bulls' last three games -- all victories. (AP)
Cavaliers 107, Warriors 97: Bobby Phills scored a career-high 26 points and Tyrone Hill, replacing the injured Larry Nance, had 21 points and 17 rebounds in Cleveland's victory over visiting Golden State. (AP)
Pacers 110, Pistons 90: Rik Smits scored 25 points and grabbed 10 rebounds for his third straight double-double as host Indiana beat Detroit.
Indiana has won seven in a row at home and 11 of its last 13. (AP)
Heat 115, 76ers 84: Glen Rice scored 25 points and Steve Smith 21 as visiting Miami handed Philadelphia it eighth consecutive loss.
The losing streak is the 76ers' longest since they dropped 13 straight during the 1972-73 season.
Clarence Weatherspoon had 22 points and 12 rebounds for Philadelphia, which dressed only nine players. (AP)
YACHT RACING  Merit Cup Takes the Lead  A high pressure system split the field yesterday on the fourth leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race, with the Swiss Maxi entry Merit Cup taking the lead after radical changes in the leading positions.
Merit Cup made up over 70 nautical miles in 24 hours on Thursday's leader, the Japanese-New Zealand yacht Tokio, and sailed from seventh place to first. (AP)
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Harvard Slips Past Columbia  Tarik Campbell hit a 7-foot jumper with 1 minute 13 seconds to play last night to give Harvard a 70-68 victory over Columbia in Cambridge, Mass.
Harvard (9-14 over all, 5-6 in the Ivy League) fell behind, 7-0, but led by 33-30 at the half and by 50-36 with 15:02 left after Jared Leake's breakaway layup.
But Columbia (6-17, 4-7) went on a 21-6 run to take a 57-56 lead on C. J. Thompkins's court-length drive with 7:34 left.
Fred Johnson's 3-pointer with 4:15 left gave Columbia a 64-60 lead before Harvard rallied. (AP)
Penn 87, Yale 63: Shawn Trice scored 18 points and Jerome Allen made his 1,000th career point as Penn built an early lead and defeated Yale.
Yale (8-15 over all, 5-6 Ivy League) kept it close for 9 minutes, but Matt Maloney scored the second of two successive running jumpers at 11:30, and Penn (20-2, 10-0) went ahead to stay. (AP)
Princeton 74, Brown 51: Rick Hielscher scored 24 points and keyed a 13-2 spurt late in the first half that carried Princeton to its home Ivy League victory over Brown. (AP)
Canisius 76, Fairfield 73: Darrell Barley scored 23 points as Canisius won its 14th in a row and clinched the Metro Atlantic Conference regular season title in Fairfield, Conn.
After leading 34-33 at the half, Canisius (20-5, 11-2 Metro Atlantic) pushed its lead to 71-60 with 5:00 left but Fairfield (8-17, 4-9) responded with a 13-4 run to cut the lead to 75-73 with one minute left.
Fairfield's Craig Martin missed a 3-pointer with two seconds left.
TRACK AND FIELD  Gubicza Wins 1-Mile Run  Lauren Gubicza, a former Fordham University star now representing the Asics Club, won the women's one-mile run last night in 4 minutes 41.38 seconds at the Coors-Metropolitan Athletics Congress indoor track and field championships at the West 168th Street Armory.
Scott Carroll of Albany took the men's mile in 4:16.95.
In other highlights, Lou Chisari of the New York A.C. captured the 35-pound weight throw at 72 feet 6 3/4 inches and Wagner Marseille was first in the men's 55-meter hurdles in 7.24 seconds.


Studies on Immigrants Prove They'd Rather Give Than Receive
To the Editor:
Donald L. Huddle says that a column by Anthony Lewis and an article of mine are "clearly wrong" in saying that (a) immigrants do not increase native unemployment, and (b) they put more money into the public coffers in taxes than they take out in welfare and public services (letter, Jan. 26).
Not so.


Renaissance Choral Music
Ascension Music, a chorus and orchestra directed by Dennis Keene, is to present an evening of Renaissance choral music on Thursday at 8 P.M. at the Church of the Ascension, Fifth Avenue and 10th Street, Greenwich Village.
The program includes works by Palestrina, Victoria, Tallis, Byrd, Lassus, Josquin and others.
Tickets are $15 in advance or $18 at the door.
Information: (212) 254-8553.


Buying a Used Car for a Low, Low Price - at a Police Auction
For the last few years, Troy Boyette, 27, of Boston, has been buying cars at public auctions held by the Boston Police Department one Saturday a month.
On Feb. 5, he picked up a 1981 Buick Riviera for $560, which he may sell for a small profit or use himself.
The self-proclaimed car fanatic has bought about 25 cars at auction in the last four years.
He has re-sold about two-thirds of the vehicles, doubling his money on most occasions.
He typically spends between $50 and $100 to fix up the cars he re-sells.


Rose Law Firm, Arkansas Power, Slips as It Steps Onto a Bigger Stage
With Hillary Rodham Clinton in the White House and three other partners taking influential jobs in the Clinton Administration, the Rose Law Firm of Little Rock, Ark., seemed to be on the verge of national prominence a year ago.
But things quickly went awry.
The Rose firm, which made itself a dominant power in its home state, is now suffering under the unforgiving glare of publicity.


At Long Last, Rizzuto Makes Hall of Fame
Holy cow! The huckleberry finally made it.
Phil Rizzuto, the long-ago Yankee shortstop and longtime Yankee broadcaster, lost one of his greatest claims to fame yesterday: He can no longer complain that he has been passed over by the Baseball Hall of Fame.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro section on Monday, about New York City transit fares, mislabeled the amount represented for transit subsidies.
The figures were in hundreds of millions of dollars, not billions.


In Response to Spy Case, U.S. Expels Diplomat Russians Refused to Recall
The United States expelled a senior Russian diplomat today after Moscow refused to withdraw him in atonement for its possible role in employing a Central Intelligence Agency officer who was arrested on espionage charges this week.
The diplomat, Aleksandr Lyskenko, whom American officials described as the top officer of the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service here, was given seven days to leave the country.


The State Street Shovel


Clinton Defends Trip to Aid a Beleaguered 'Big Brother' in Congress
Defending his first big foray into electoral politics this year, President Clinton said today that there was nothing inappropriate about his planned visit to Chicago on Monday to campaign for Representative Dan Rostenkowski, who is the subject of a Federal criminal investigation.
Mr.
Clinton's trip raises the stakes in the already contentious re-election bid of Mr.
Rostenkowski.
The Illinois Democrat faces a difficult primary on March 15 because rivals are seizing on the accusations that he, among other things, misused House post office funds.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall


COMPANY BRIEFS
CONQUEST AIRLINES CORP., Austin, Tex., has received approval from the Mexican Government to begin service from San Antonio to Monterrey, Mexico.
McDONNELL DOUGLAS CORP., St.
Louis, will receive a $220 million down payment from the Navy for 36 F/A-18 fighters that will be ordered during the 1994 fiscal year.
MCCORMICK &amp; CO.
INC., Sparks, Md., has formed a joint venture with PT Rodamas to make and sell spices, herbs, seasonings, condiments, and sauces in Indonesia.


Rev. Joseph H. Fichter, 85, Dies; A Jesuit Sociologist and Professor
The Rev.
Joseph H. Fichter, a Jesuit sociologist who helped desegregate Roman Catholic parish schools in the South and believed that priests should have the option to marry, died on Wednesday in New Orleans at the Ignatius Residence, a Jesuit retirement home.
He was 85.
He had been ill for a long time, said officials at Loyola University in New Orleans, where he taught for 44 years.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7 JEWISH SETTLER SLAYS WORSHIPERS
A Jewish settler opened fire at Palestinian worshipers at a mosque in Hebron, in the occupied West Bank, killing dozens of people and setting off clashes elsewhere that led to several other deaths.  1


Investing in Futures
Q.
What is a managed futures fund?
SHELLY STEINBERG,  Manhattan  A. Futures are an investment vehicle.
They include not only commodities like grains and meats, but also markets for interest rates, currencies and stock indexes.
Many people without the skill, time or emotional discipline to trade in these volatile markets invest instead in managed futures funds, sometimes called commodity funds or pools.
Managed futures funds, which operate similarly to mutual funds, use professional commodity trading advisers to make buying and selling decisions.
Minimum investments in these funds are typically lower than they are for purchases of individual futures contracts.
Some funds may use more than one adviser for diverse points of view.


Hearst Decides Not to Sell Its Book Division After All
After months of tortuous on-again, off-again negotiations, the Hearst Corporation announced yesterday that it would hold on to its book division, which includes William Morrow and Avon Books, and not sell it off after all.
Among those bidding for the property was Phyllis E. Grann, the chairman and chief executive of the Putnam Berkley Group, who had made no secret of her desire to acquire Morrow, the troubled hardcover publisher, and Avon, which publishes paperback books, to help expand her business.
"In the end, we just couldn't come to a deal," she said in an interview after the accord fell apart late yesterday afternoon.


Science Fiction At the Planetarium
For the last eight months, the Hayden Planetarium at the American Museum of Natural History has been transformed into a shrine to "Star Trek." Visitors have been greeted by a cardboard cutout of Captain Kirk in a mock-up of the Starship Enterprise's transporter room.
Costumes worn by the original Enterprise crew and the aliens they encountered hang in glass cases.
A stuffed tribble, one of the furry, explosively reproductive creatures that once threatened to overcome the starship, occupies another display.
The sky show projected inside the planetarium dome features a simulated, faster-than-light flight aboard a Federation starship.
This fantasy, which has no basis in science, is bound to make a greater impression on the public than the program's incidental lessons in stellar formation and decay.


Wrapping the Reichstag: Christo Gets a Go-Ahead
Today was arguably the most important day in the life of the conceptual artist Christo, who is admired by some as a genius and reviled by others as an artistic fraud for such mass-scale outdoor projects as the wrapping of Florida islands in pink plastic and the installation of 31,000 immense blue and yellow umbrellas in California and Japan.
For more than 20 years, Christo has been seeking permission to execute what one of his aides recently called "the project that is more important to him than all of the others put together." He wants to wrap Germany's most famous building, the Reichstag in Berlin, with a million square feet of silver fabric.


Phone Lines Set Up for Questions on Mouse Virus
Health officials set up information lines yesterday for callers concerned about hantavirus, the mysterious infection with flulike symptoms that killed a 22-year-old college student from Long Island last month.
The phone lines drew 200 calls yesterday, authorities said.
The lines went into operation as experts from the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention arrived in New York City to oversee the trapping of mice in places the victim, David Rosenberg, is known to have spent time in December and January.
Hantavirus is spread through mouse droppings.


Whitewater Inquiry: Regret and Reversals
Expressing regret for briefing the White House on his agency's investigation of a savings and loan central to the Clintons' real estate investments, Roger C. Altman, the head of the Resolution Trust Corporation, removed himself from the inquiry.


The Horror in Hebron
The unspeakable atrocity in Hebron yesterday morning -- in which more than 40 Muslims were gunned down while they prayed at a sacred mosque -- appears to have been the work of a deranged and fanatical individual.
But Palestinian leaders are absolutely right to require decisive governmental action to prevent such outrages in the future.
That action can and must come not from the United Nations, as the Palestinians ask, but directly from the Israeli Government.
Recognition of Israel's formal authority, for now, over the occupied West Bank is central to the pending peace agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


It's Getting Remarkable: 3d Shutout for Hextall
He says his shutout spree is no big deal, overrated, overhyped.
His counterpart, goaltender Dominic Roussel of the Philadelphia Flyers, had a standout game, too, registering 39 saves.
But tonight's 2-0 victory at Nassau Coliseum had to please Ron Hextall, achiever of three shutouts in his last four starts and four shutouts this season, a career high.
It must have pleased him.
He was grinning after the game.
It was the first time in Coliseum history a goaltender has had three shutouts in a row.
Hextall has not yielded a goal at home in 207 minutes.


Catching and Correcting an Error in a Brokerage Account
A broker buys 200 shares instead of the 100 requested.
A quarterly dividend is not posted.
A trade is not executed.
Mistakes like these can crop up in an investment account at any time.
"There are so many things that can go wrong," said Bill Levine, chairman of Investors Arbitration Services of Woodland Hills, Calif.
Often, the errors are caused by a computer glitch or a human failing, not by someone trying to take advantage of a client.


Special Olympic Gold?
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert's "Getting a Perspective on the Olympics" (column, Feb. 20) prompts this thought.
In keeping with the original ideals of the Olympics what if, at the end of the Games, the International Olympic Committee presented a special gold medal to the Serb, Muslim and Croat who make up the Bosnian bobsled team -- for brotherhood?
Radical!
Maybe, with a lot of luck, it could turn out to be the most important Olympic medal ever awarded.
MICHAEL WALTERS  New York, Feb. 22, 1994


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.25
3.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.36
3.34
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.58
3.59
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.19
6.20
6.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.71
6.73
6.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.53
7.53
7.79
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.77
5.74
5.90
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Why Marijuana Should Remain Illegal
To the Editor:
I read with concern "Legalizing Marijuana Would Allow Regulation of Its Potency" (letter, Feb. 13).
According to the writer, marijuana with high levels of tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC (the chemical that causes the psychoactive effects on the abuser), is not a new phenomenon, and this high potency should not be used as a reason to keep marijuana illegal.
Marijuana is not the same drug it was 20 years ago.
Special fertilizers, plant hormones and steroids, carbon dioxide and advanced indoor horticulture techniques are used by the informed grower to "push" the plant to produce the highest grade, most potent variety of marijuana, sinsemilla.


Bridge
There have been numerous attempts to show bridge on television, and the Europeans have been rather more successful than the Americans in this area.
But the first effort was almost certainly on this side of the Atlantic.
More than half a century ago (1943), when the Europeans had other matters to concern them, an experimental program was broadcast to about 250 owners of television sets within a 50-mile radius of Schenectady, N.Y.
As reported in The Bridge World magazine, Albert Morehead, then the author of this column, provided the televised commentary for a rubber.
Two of the players were William McKenney and Al Sobel, both senior officials of the American Contract Bridge League, and each was playing with his wife.
Helen Sobel was one of the world's best players and had a chance to show her skill as East.


One Year Later, a Mass for the Victims of the Trade Center Bombing


Police Officer Wounded in Far Rockaway
A 34-year-old police officer was shot and wounded in the right arm yesterday as he was parking his scooter outside a public housing project in Far Rockaway, Queens, the police said.
It was unclear whether the officer, Paul Parlato, a seven-year veteran of the department, was the victim of a sniper or of random gunfire, said Sgt.
Andrea Herzberg, a police spokeswoman.


Mutual Fund Is Forced To Withdraw Offering
Billion-dollar public sales of stocks are supposed to go off without a hitch.
But yesterday, one of the nation's biggest mutual funds had to withdraw a $1.1 billion public offering, and the New York Stock Exchange suspended trading of the shares, after an incorrect chart in the offering's prospectus was discovered.
The embarrassed investment adviser to the fund is Alliance Capital Management, which has $115 billion of client money under management.
It said the prospectus for its new Global Privatization Fund contained a chart that exaggerated the performance of 22 former government enterprises that had been converted to ownership by private investors.


Classical Music in Review
Colorado String Quartet  Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


After Airtight Autopsy, Mystery Lingers in Case of Hospital Fumes
Clad in airtight safety suits and working inside a specially sealed room, a team of Riverside County pathologists conducted an autopsy early today on a woman whose body apparently discharged a potent toxic chemical as she died on a hospital gurney.
The pathologists completed the procedure without mishap, emerging from the sealed chamber into a cleansing spray of solutions.


Review/Television; Suing Over Sexual Walls In the Heart of Wall Street
Sex figures in tomorrow night's edition of "Trial Story," but not the sort that has lately kept a huge number of sets tuned to Court TV for weeks on end. (More than half the country watched all or part of the Menendez trial; almost as many as watched the trial of Lorena Bobbitt.)
"Fired on Wall Street: A Case of Sex Discrimination?" is a change from the bloody doings that seem to have become a Court TV specialty.
This hourlong courtroom condensation focuses on the charge brought by a sometime vice president of the Wall Street firm of Goldman Sachs that she was denied promotion and then dismissed because she was a woman.
Joanne Flynn and her lawyers, who sought about $2 million in damages, asserted that her troubles began when she dismissed a male employee.


No Headline
I fell down with my 7-year-old son, and I didn't know for several minutes whether he was alive or dead.
I later saw that he was unharmed.
People were evacuating the wounded.
The room was full of blood. -- SHAABAN SHWEIKI,  describing the West Bank massacre.  [ 1:5. ]


Ukraine's Baiul Edges Kerrigan For Gold Medal
When she had completed her routine, Oksana Baiul put her hands to her head in disbelief at what she had done, a final bit of daring improvisation that may have won her the Olympic gold medal.
Then she put her hands to her chest and looked up, her eyes wide in wonder, as if to say, was this good enough?
"My goal is to do well and give joy to the spectators and show myself to the judges," the 16-year-old Ukrainian said.
"Judging by the applause of the audience, I thought I had done well."


Big East Membership Remains at 10, for Now
The 10 members of the Big East Conference failed today to decide whether to add four football-playing colleges on a full-time basis, extending a complex process that will eventually produce a fundamental change in one of the most visible college leagues in the nation.
After five and a half hours of meetings and caucuses among chief executive officers and athletic directors, the representatives left town early this evening without taking a vote on whether to add Rutgers, Temple, West Virginia and Virginia Tech to form a 14-school, all-sport league.
They are expected to meet again next week, with 7 of 10 votes necessary to expand.


WEST BANK MASSACRE: The Overview; AT LEAST 40 SLAIN IN WEST BANK AS ISRAELI FIRES INTO MOSQUE; CLINTON MOVES TO RESCUE TALKS -- NEW CLASHES LIKELY
On the bloodiest day in the occupied territories since Israel captured them in 1967, a Jewish settler killed at least 40 and possibly 50 Palestinians and wounded an estimated 150 others today, spraying them with automatic rifle fire as they knelt together in prayer at a shrine venerated by both Muslims and Jews.
The gunman, Dr.
Baruch Goldstein, a 37-year-old resident of Qiryat Arba, opened fire on the Muslim worshipers at dawn in a mosque at the Cave of the Patriarchs in the tinderbox West Bank city of Hebron.
The terrorist attack came as the victims were gathered to offer prayers as part of Ramadan, the Muslim holy month of fasting.


Mexico's Chance for Fair Elections
Encouraging reports are coming from the Mexican state of Chiapas where Government and guerrilla negotiators seem to have reached agreements on a number of local issues.
Even more important for the rest of Mexico is another set of talks more quietly proceeding between the country's main political parties.
The subject is how to make this year's presidential elections fairer and more believable than the fraud-ridden exercises of the recent past.


Hunter: 3d CUNY Title in Row
Derrick Lawson and Shawn McCartney combined for 46 points, 11 assists and 8 steals last night to give Hunter a 96-68 victory over Baruch and its third consecutive Dutch Shoe trophy, awarded to the champions of the CUNY Athletic Conference.
Hunter (25-2), ranked fourth in the Division III Atlantic Region, forced an up-tempo pace and ran past the Statesmen (10-16) at Lehman College's APEX facility in the Bronx.
They should make their fourth consecutive Division III National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament appearance when the bids are announced tomorrow.


City Hall: Test the Toilets
New York City needs public toilets, and the sooner the better.
But too much haste could lead to trouble, especially since there is still no solid evidence that a proposal now pending before the City Council to bring public toilets to all of the boroughs would produce clean, safe and vandal-proof facilities.
Before the Council votes on a plan for 200 toilets -- and 400 advertising kiosks to pay for their maintenance -- it is imperative that the Giuliani administration conduct a brief, credible experiment to determine whether they will work.


Nets Put Up Big Numbers To Sign Coleman
The Nets decided today to stake their future on Derrick Coleman by signing the All-Star power forward to a four-year contract that makes him the highest-paid player in the National Basketball Association on an annual basis.
Terms of the agreement were not given, but league sources said that Coleman, 26, would be paid $35 million over five years, with the fifth year being an option year.


Farrell Is Named Chairman Of Ways and Means Panel
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver today appointed Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell Jr., a longtime legislator who heads the Democratic Party in Manhattan, as chairman of the powerful Ways and Means Committee.
Mr.
Farrell, who has represented Harlem and Washington Heights since 1975, is the first black legislator to hold the position, which is the highest-ranking committee chairmanship in the Assembly and one of the top negotiators for passing the $62 billion New York State budget.


Surgery for Vasquez
JACINTO VASQUEZ, the 50-year-old Hall of Fame jockey, will undergo surgery Wednesday for a knee injury suffered in a post-race accident at Gulfstream Park, but he plans to resume riding.
Vasquez suffered ligament damage in a knee when he was unseated after his mount stumbled while pulling up on Feb. 15. (AP)


Bergen Prosecutor Returns Police Control to Town
The Bergen County Prosecutor ended a monthlong investigation of the police force in this small, close-knit community today and returned the 17-member department to local control.
The Prosecutor, John J. Fahy, said his detectives kept two boxes of documents seized from police files.
Mr.
Fahy took command of the department Jan. 31 amid an inquiry into gambling and the fixing of criminal and motor vehicle cases.


Bond Markets Buoyed by Bargain Hunting
After a stormy week that saw interest rates surge, a still jittery market managed to find itself on firm footing yesterday.
Buyers, looking for value after a number of sharp selloffs had depressed prices, emerged in sufficient numbers to give the market a much-needed lift, traders said


With Tears and Prayers, Bombing Is Remembered
Seven candles flickered on the altar behind Msgr.
Robert M. O'Connell as he prayed for the six people killed in the World Trade Center bombing a year ago today, one for each of the dead, and one extra for the baby in Monica Smith's body who was never born.
The monsignor, offering a special Mass yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Peter, near the trade center, prayed for healing and peace for the survivors of the explosion that also left hundreds of people injured and uncounted numbers of Americans wondering if their lives could ever be the same.


CLINTON MOVES TO RESCUE TALKS; Sounds of Chanting and Gunfire Echo in a Town Awash in Blood
Sharif Zahde said he was kneeling forward in prayer when he heard long bursts of gunfire, punctuated by loud explosions, in the packed mosque in the Cave of the Patriarchs shrine where he attended dawn services today.
"It was about 5:30 A.M.," he recalled.
"The prayer leader was reading from the Koran. We were kneeling in the last row, and someone dressed in a military uniform began shooting at us. There was automatic weapons fire for fifteen minutes. Shooting, then grenade explosions, then more shooting. It sounded like it was coming from different directions. People started shouting: 'God is Great!' "


Serial Rapist Is Prowling Projects in Manhattan
The police said yesterday that a serial rapist is prowling lobbies in project buildings in East Harlem and the Lower East Side, stalking children and teen-age girls coming home in the middle of the afternoon with their hands filled with grocery bags or newspapers.
The rapist struck for at least the fourth time in two months on Thursday, the police said.
He assaulted a 10-year-old on the rooftop landing of her apartment building about 4:50 P.M. on Thursday, they said.


Review/Dance; Soloist Amid an Ensemble of Sounds
Eliot Feld's choreographic ingenuity was much in evidence when his Feld Ballets/NY danced on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater.
He was at his imaginative best in "Clave," a piece created in 1991 that is both a solo and more than a solo.
The title comes from the name of a wooden stick or block that can be used as a percussion instrument.
Appropriately, a recording of Steve Reich's "Music for Pieces of Wood" serves as the accompaniment.
By Mr.
Feld's design, the score's ceaseless clackings set Buffy Miller's wrists flicking and shoulders shaking.
His choreographic responses to the music were fascinatingly varied.
There were moments in which Ms.
Miller moved in harmonious partnership with the sound.
At other times, the music seemed to take control, tugging her from side to side.
Sequences of twitches even suggested that she was being pelted by a hailstorm of percussion.
But the sonic assaults left her undefeated.


American Jewish Groups Horrified
Leaders of American Jewish groups expressed shock and revulsion yesterday at the massacre of Muslim worshipers in Hebron by a Jewish settler and pleaded against retaliatory violence or any derailing of peace talks.
Top officials of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations called the shooting attack "an insane act."


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday, about Senator Bill Bradley's criticism of the Clinton Administration's trade policy with Japan, misidentified one committee on which Mr.
Bradley sits.
It is the Senate Finance subcommittee on international trade, not the Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee on international trade.


Reporter's Notebook; Hardly Mentioned at Cultists' Trial: Their Leader
For all the hundreds of exhibits and witnesses in the Branch Davidian murder trial, which entered its third day of jury deliberations here today, the central figure of the standoff outside Waco was curiously relegated to a much lesser role in the trial.
Not until summations in this seventh week of the trial did either the prosecution or the defense sketch a verbal portrait of the cult's leader, David Koresh.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MAYOR WARNS PANEL ON CITY'S HOSPITALS  Facing resistance to his plans to reorganize New York City's municipal hospitals, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani warned that the board of the Health and Hospitals Corporation could be reconstituted if it opposed him.
Page 1.
CITY STUDIES CHANGES IN DAY CARE  The Giuliani administration is studying whether the city can save money and provide day care to more children by reducing subsidies to city-run day-care centers, while providing tuition assistance that could be used at public or private centers.
Page 26.
PARTY LEADER HEADS POWERFUL PANEL  Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver appointed Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell Jr., a longtime legislator who heads the Democratic Party in Manhattan, as chairman of the powerful Ways and Means Committee.
Page 26.
LETTER BACKING CHANCELLOR CIRCULATED  A president of one college of the City University of New York has asked other presidents of the 21-campus system to sign a letter of support for Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds, who has been criticized for spending too much time out of town.
Page 27.
BOMBING VICTIMS MOURNED A YEAR LATER  Seven candles flickered on the altar behind Msgr.
Robert M. O'Connell as he prayed for the six people killed in the World Trade Center bombing a year ago, one for each of the dead, and one extra for the baby in Monica Smith's body who was never born.
Page 27.
YOUNG LIFE, QUICK DEATH  Bianca Alexis, two weeks old, has a well-formed face and thick brown hair with a little red in it, like her mother's.
"She has her daddy's lips," Arlyn Gonzalez said, pointing to the photograph of Alexander Ortiz, the man who was shot as they walked home from a movie three days before his 23d birthday.
About New York.
Page 27.
A police officer was shot while parking his scooter outside a public housing project.
Page 27.
REGION  SLAYING SUSPECT TO SEE KUNSTLER  William M. Kunstler, a lawyer known for representing unpopular defendants, said he is planning to meet with Colin Ferguson, the man accused of killing six people on a Long Island commuter train.
Page 28.
PHONE LINES TAKING CALLS ON VIRUS  Health officials set up information lines for callers concerned about hantavirus, the mysterious infection with flulike symptoms that killed a college student from Long Island.
Page 28.
MINISTER WELCOME AT ANTI-BIAS EVENT  A Nation of Islam minister who is in the center of a firestorm over hate speech will not be barred from a special viewing of the movie "Schindler's List" if he shows up, a spokesman for Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman said.
Page 28.
MUSEUM DIRECTOR NAMED PROVOST AT YALE  The director of Yale University's Peabody Museum of Natural History, Alison F. Richard, a 45-year-old anthropology professor, was named provost of the university, the No. 2 position in the administration.
Page 28.
CONTROL OF POLICE RETURNED TO TOWN  The Bergen County Prosecutor ended a monthlong investigation of the police force in the small, close-knit community of South Hackensack, N.J. and returned the 17-member department to local control.
Page 28.


Review/Dance; Balanchine Explores Beyond the Gaiety
"Robert Schumann's 'Davidsbundlertanze,' " which dates from 1980, is No. 415 on the published list of George Balanchine's 425 choreographic creations.
It is also one of several ballets in which he brooded over human frailty and mortality in the years before his death in 1983.
Balanchine explores his gloomy themes in "Schumann," as the work is often called, not with overt statements, but through a steady accretion of significant details, which the New York City Ballet captured in a nuanced performance on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.


U.S. Agency Suggests Regulating Cigarettes as an Addictive Drug
The Food and Drug Administration said today that there is mounting evidence that cigarettes are sold to satisfy an addiction and therefore may be subject to regulation as a drug.
Agency officials said they were seeking advice from Congress on how to proceed because the regulation of cigarettes by the F.D.A. would probably mean that their sale would be barred in the United States as an unsafe product.


Transactions
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Brad Pennington and Armando Benitez, pitchers, and Alex Ochoa, outfielder, on one-year contracts.
Named Ernie Accorsi executive director of business affairs.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Agreed to terms with Damion Easley, infielder, on a one-year contract.
National League CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms Jim Bullinger and Turk Wendell, pitchers, on one-year contracts.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Extended the contract of Don Baylor, manager, through the 1995 season.
American Association INDIANAPOLIS INDIANS -- Signed Frank Kremblas, infielder-outfielder; Greg Hammond, catcher; and John Burgos and Rusty Kilgo, pitchers.
Basketball  National Basketball Association CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Marty Conlon, center, to a contract for the remainder of the season and Tim Kempton, center, to a second 10-day contract.
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Placed Larry Nance, forward, on the injured list.
Activated Jay Guidinger, center, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League ATLANTA FALCONS -- Named Frank Gansz assistant head coach and Darrel "Mouse" Davis quarterbacks coach.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Released Floyd Fields, safety, and Brian Davis, cornerback.
Hockey  Central Hockey League FORT WORTH FIRE -- Announced that Corwin Saurdiff, goalie, has been recalled by Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
Added Trevor Robins, goalie, from Kansas City of the IHL.
MEMPHIS RIVERKINGS -- Announced that Dennis Snedden, left wing, has been recalled by Milwaukee of the International Hockey League.
Re-signed Marcel Sakac, forward.
OKLAHOMA CITY BLAZERS -- Activated Joe Burton, center, from injured reserve.
Lacrosse  Major Indoor Lacrosse League NEW YORK SAINTS -- Signed Dan Donnelly, forward.
Placed Seth Tierney, forward, on injured reserve.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League MILWAUKEE WAVE -- Signed Tommy Isirov, defenseman, for the remainder of the season.
College  FRESNO ST. -- Named Leon Burtnett defensive coordinator and secondary coach.
URSINUS -- Named Peter Crooke head track and field coach and Mauro Ibrain Medina and Aimee Puleo assistant track and field coaches.


Winter Olympics; Harding, In Finale, Comes Up A Lace Shy
On the big, black scoreboard at one end of the Olympic Amphitheater tonight the following message appeared:
On the Ice: Tonya Harding U.S.A.


INSIDE
Russian Diplomat Is Expelled
After Moscow refused to act, the United States expelled a senior diplomat for the co-opting of a C.I.A. officer charged with espionage.
Page 8.
Turmoil in the currency markets led to a one-day loss of $600 million for George Soros, normally one of the world's savviest investors.
Page 39.
Holy Cow!
The Wait Is Over
Phil Rizzuto, former Yankee shortstop, and Leo Durocher, former Giants and Dodgers manager, were voted into the Hall of Fame.
Page 29.


A $600 Million Miscalculation
With world financial markets roiled by developments including a rise in American interest rates and the breakdown of trade talks between Washington and Tokyo, some of the world's biggest and savviest investors have been taken down a notch or two.
Among them is one of the biggest and savviest of all, the financier George Soros.
Mr.
Soros, 63, who has developed a reputation as an investment seer for his successful bets on currencies, gold and real estate, suffered a $600 million loss on Feb. 14, the first full day of trading after trade talks between the United States and Japan collapsed.
His mistake was that he bet the wrong way on the direction of the Japanese yen's value relative to the dollar, his spokesman said today.


With a Truce in Effect, Life Goes on in Sarajevo


Winter Olympics; Norwegian Soars, but Please Don't Say Like an 'Eagle'
Espen Bredesen looked down from his perch atop the normal hill at Lysgardsbakken Ski Jumping Arena today.
The volume began to rise from the throng of 40,000 Norwegian countrymen.
He lifted from his sitting position on the narrow plank from which the jumpers begin their descent.
It had been like this once before, last Sunday, when Bredesen had a chance to win an Olympic gold medal on the large hill but settled for the silver.
Now, as the final jumper of the day, nothing could disturb his concentration.


Airline Bid Endorsed By Board
The board of America West Airlines has endorsed a bid from an investment group led by the chairman of Continental Airlines, David Bonderman, to help the carrier emerge from bankruptcy.
Mr.
Bonderman, along with other investors that include Continental Airlines, Mesa Airlines and Fidelity Investments, offered $220 million for a 37.5 percent stake in America West, which has operated under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection since June 1991.
The board accepted the bid late Thursday night.


A Great View Is Still Dimmed


Cherished Goals Give Way to Hard Facts
The sluggish real estate market in many parts of the country has prompted some house hunters to wonder whether renting may be a better deal financially than the long-cherished and heavily promoted American Dream of home ownership.
For many people, especially those who hold onto their houses for more than seven years, buying makes more economic sense.
Besides building equity, there are myriad tax advantages, like the deductions for mortgage interest and property taxes, or the rollover of a gain if the seller buys a more expensive house.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH SHABALALA and Ladysmith Black Mambazo, the South African a capella singing group he founded and leads, are visiting schools in the United States on a concert tour meant to raise funds to build a school in South Africa for children.
The group has been touring the United States and Canada since Jan. 22, giving concerts and classes in schools ranging from Harvard University and Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., to Northern Arizona University.
"We are teaching them about the music of South Africa; how to sing, how to dance, how to pick up their feet," Mr.
Shabalala said yesterday.
"Our rhythms are the same as American rhythms but our way of stomping is different."


Uncovered Short Sales Rise to Record on Nasdaq
Speculators expecting a drop in Nasdaq stocks raised their bets to record levels in the month that ended on Feb. 8, according to figures from the National Association of Securities Dealers.
The organization said yesterday that the total number of shares sold short in Nasdaq trading rose 2.5 percent, to 701.7 million, from 682.4 million for the previous monthly period.
This was the 12th consecutive monthly increase.
Since February 1993, short interest in Nasdaq stocks has risen by almost 50 percent.


Hedge Funds Find Profit In Uncertain Markets
DON'T run away!
That's the usual measure of bravery in a bearish market, but some intrepid investors have a more macho standard.
For them, perilous times are a chance to profit.
A standard vehicle for making money in meager markets -- at least for investors unwilling to do it themselves -- is the private hedge fund.
Using short-selling, leveraging and other risky techniques, these limited partnerships -- including those of George Soros and other lionized traders -- seek good returns not just in rising markets but in falling ones, too.


New Subway Cars Shouldn't Skimp on Safety; 40th Street Overload
To the Editor:
As a resident of an apartment house that abuts Manhattan's East 40th Street, I am extremely concerned about the consideration being given to installing a light-rail system on the south side of 42d Street.


Whalers Tie the Devils in a Duel of Goalies
Chris Terreri and Sean Burke engaged in a goaltending duel at Civic Center this afternoon in a manner reminiscent of an intrasquad scrimmage when they were fighting for the premier goaltending job on the Devils.
It was perhaps fitting that neither lost, because each played an outstanding game -- the Whalers' Burke was especially brilliant -- in a 1-1 tie.


Kramer Makes Lasting Impression
Some impressions are lasting.
Take Erik Kramer vs.
Dave Wannstedt's defenses.
Kramer was 13-7 as a Detroit Lions starting quarterback and threw 27 touchdown passes.
Three of those victories and seven of those scores came vs.
Wannstedt's defense.


. . . But Curtis Mayfield Won't Be Forgotten, Either
"EVERYBODY ASKS ME, 'When am I going to break down?' " says Curtis Mayfield, who helped define the rhythm-and-blues music of the 60's and 70's and now lies paralyzed from the neck down by a freak accident.
"You know -- the way you see it in the movies, the way people are supposed to play the fool and get mad and throw things and blame it on other people and what have you," he adds.
"Well, it hasn't happened yet. My spirits are high. It doesn't mean that I don't sometimes wake up with a tear in my eye, but I have to get on about the day."


The Spring Has Not Run Dry
To the Editor:
In his article "In Film Noir, the Past Is Present and Perfect"  [ Feb. 6 ] , James Greenberg laments the loss of such authors as Cornell Woolrich and James.
M.
Cain, saying that "the tough-guy novels and short stories . . . that were the source material for such films are not being written today."


It's Never Too Early to Plan the Garden
THOUGH catalogue study continues, the days are drawing closer to decision-making time.
Seed orders should be on their way to the suppliers soon, and, yes, a change of seasons is coming.
Vegetable gardening should always be based on growing the food that the family enjoys.
There is no sense in growing a bumper crop of a vegetable if no one will even taste it.
Another caution: don't bother with crops that take up too much space and effort for the small amount of harvest they supply.
And further, if the local produce stand has a particular vegetable for sale that the whole family enjoys, why bother with intensive labor all summer long?


In Another Role


Rent Aid to Tai Chi to Meals-on-Wheels: A Program Guide
NEW YORK CITY is blessed with an abundant variety of programs for the elderly, reflecting the city's cultural mix.
But it is also cursed by a lack of coordination that makes it hard for people to find out what is available.
"People don't know what services there are," said Grace Harewood, executive director of the Fort Greene Senior Citizens Council in Brooklyn.
"I know a woman who worked full time and would race home on her lunch hour to cook meals for her parents. Then one day she saw one of our vans going through the neighborhood, and she called to see if she could get meals delivered to them."


Don't Let New York Take The Fun Out of Dating
To the Editor:
Instead of all the personal ads, matchmaking services and other businesses designed to help find a loved one -- described on Feb. 13 in "Desperately Seeking Someone?" -- New Yorkers should find a solution that relies not on money but on the human spirit.


It's Never Too Early to Plan the Garden
THOUGH catalogue study continues, the days are drawing closer to decision-making time.
Seed orders should be on their way to the suppliers soon, and, yes, a change of seasons is coming.
Vegetable gardening should always be based on growing the food that the family enjoys.
There is no sense in growing a bumper crop of a vegetable if no one will even taste it.
Another caution: don't bother with crops that take up too much space and effort for the small amount of harvest they supply.
And further, if the local produce stand has a particular vegetable for sale that the whole family enjoys, why bother with intensive labor all summer long?


Corrections
An article on Feb. 13 about Albert Maysles and other documentary-film makers misstated the first name of the director of "Nanook of the North." He was Robert Flaherty.


Pierrepont Playground Expansion on Track
The city's budget woes notwithstanding, a plan to renovate and expand the chronically crowded Pierrepont Playground on the Brooklyn Heights Promenade is still on track, city officials said last week.
But whether a popular flower garden nearby and its stone thunderbird mosaic will survive the project remains to be seen.
The Brooklyn Heights Playground Committee and other residents have long urged the renovation of Pierrepont, one of the borough's most heavily used playgrounds.
The local City Councilman, Kenneth K. Fisher, won funds for the project in the budget for the current fiscal year, and work was scheduled to start before June 30.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
SUNSET PARK An unlikely habitat for birds in Gowanus Bay is the focus of a campaign to block development near the Bush Terminal.
Tony Giordano, executive director of Sunset Park Restoration, a community group, is to meet on Wednesday with Community Board 7's land-use committee, seeking support for his plan to ask the state and Federal governments to prevent developers from encroaching on the area.


Cortines Orders Districts to Limit Travel Expenses
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has ordered community school districts to limit the expenses of board members, teachers and other employees traveling to conferences outside New York City.
Citing the city's fiscal problems and "recent revelations" about out-of-town spending -- an apparent reference to news reports about travel by district employees to Hawaii, Las Vegas and Tarrytown, N.Y. -- the Chancellor imposed limits on the number of conferences school board members and employees may attend at city expense, and set spending limits for out-of-town travel.


A Seminal Architect
An exhibition honoring Frank Lloyd Wright, at the Museum of Modern Art, Feb. 16.


Trips to Japan That Focus On Traditions
Tours of Japan for travelers who want to experience an authentic sense of the country -- sleeping on futons at country inns and small hotels, taking the traditional evening hot baths, eating at neighborhood restaurants and riding local trains -- are being offered by two companies.
Esprit Travel has a 12-day walking tour of Kyoto, known for its 2,000 gardens, Buddhist temples, Shinto shrines and monasteries, including a 1,000-year-old working Buddhist nunnery.
Visitors will attend a tea ceremony and a flower-arranging class, and visit a kimono maker.
The tour covers an average of four to six miles a day on foot.
Sites visited include the 14th-century Moss Temple and the phoenix-shaped Byodoin Temple.
The tour costs $2,450 a person, including round-trip air fare from Los Angeles, accommodations at a small hotel, breakfast, most dinners and entrance fees to gardens and temples.
From New York, the cost is $2,750.
Tour dates include March 26 to April 7, April 6 to 18 and May 30 to June 11.
Information: Esprit Travel, (800) 377-7481 or, in Los Angeles, (310) 829-6060.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Seminars and Food Samples At Restaurant Trade Show
The first New York Restaurant and Foodservice Show, a three-day melange of seminars, cooking demonstrations and food samples, will open at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center today.
Some 8,000 members of the industry have signed up for the show, which is sponsored by the New York State Restaurant Association and is open to the public.
There will be more than 500 exhibition booths; smaller versions of the show have been presented at the Nassau Coliseum.


The Nation; A Capacity To Change As Well as To Challenge
JUSTICE HARRY A. BLACKMUN'S repudiation of the death penalty last week provided one of the most riveting moments in the Supreme Court's recent history.
It would be hard to design a more compelling image than that of this 85-year-old Justice, after accepting the constitutionality of capital punishment throughout a long judicial career, suddenly challenging his colleagues with his declaration that "from this day forward, I no longer shall tinker with the machinery of death."
But it is also hard to imagine a judicial or political climate less hospitable to Justice Blackmun's call for a reexamination of the premises underlying the Court's support for the death penalty.


Paris is a flutter
Down from its plinth in the Place de la Concorde steps a statue.
She is wearing one of those draped dresses that classical Greek goddesses favor -- a few white folds caressing the bosom and beyond.
And here is a crinoline lady, right out of a Gainsborough portrait, her skirts skimming the sidewalk below a skimpy bodice.
Has the Louvre come to life?
Has fashion gone mad?
No, it was just a monumental Paris season.
Beneath the arty clothes for spring 1994 is a message: Fashion has gone soft, feminine and pretty as a picture.
The new look starts with a dress falling in soft folds, in wispy fabrics, or cut to slither across the body.
Helmut Lang made a slip of a dress, as minimal as underwear -- so sheer you might need two, layered like tank tops.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
MARTIN THE WARRIOR By Brian Jacques.
Illustrated by Gary Chalk. 375 pp.
New York: Philomel Books. $16.95. (Ages 8 and up)


Corrections
A picture caption on page 17 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the actor Hugh Grant misidentifies the actress with him in "Bitter Moon." She is Emmanuelle Seigner, not Kristin Scott Thomas.


Charlotte
Charlotte isn't brand-new -- it was incorporated in 1768 -- but from its gleaming instant downtown to its relentlessly upbeat, look-at-me corporate culture, it sometimes seems that way.
Not long ago, it was a relatively obscure North Carolina textile and banking hub.
But over the past decade, Charlotte, with a population of 430,000 the largest city between Washington and Atlanta, has established itself as an increasingly conspicuous urban area.
It is now the nation's third-largest banking center, after New York City and San Francisco, the forcus of a burgeoning growth area with six million people living within a 100-mile radius, and an exemplar of the kind of midlevel Southern cities that are among the nation's most successful these days.


Conservatory 'Restoration'
To the Editor:
As a former vice president of the New York Botanical Garden and director of horticulture and operations when the New York Botanical Garden conservatory was restored in the 1970's, I read with great interest your "When Is a Restoration Not a Restoration?" on Jan. 16.
It was factual, but it did not address several key points.


The Gunshot: A Morality Play With Chorus
THE following may be an urban fable, a tale constructed for stoop seminars on the practical and moral implications of carrying a gun.
It cries for a Socrates of the streets, probing, hectoring, making us think beyond our comfort zones.
The people who told me the story weren't convinced it was totally factual but seemed to think it was true in some larger sense.
It captured one of our recurring urban anxieties.
And while they all agreed that there were lessons in it, they couldn't agree on what those lessons were.


Georgetown Wins 500th For Thompson
With five players, three of them starters, in deep foul trouble early in the second half, Georgetown showed remarkable poise and pulled out a 78-68 victory over Boston College today.
It was Georgetown Coach John Thompson's 500th victory and boosted the Hoyas (16-7, 10-5) past Boston College (19-8, 10-6) in the Big East standing.
Georgetown plays the league's leader, Connecticut, here Tuesday night.


In the Region/Westchester; Spate of Building Applications Heartens Greenburgh
SO far this year, the Town of Greenburgh in central Westchester County has had a spate of new-building applications, leading town officials to speculate on a possible economic turnaround.
"Every week, somebody's coming in with plans for a new development," said Paul Feiner, the Town Supervisor.
"A lot of them are for little projects, but we're moving in the right direction."


Don't Let New York Take The Fun Out of Dating
To the Editor:
Instead of all the personal ads, matchmaking services and other businesses designed to help find a loved one -- described on Feb. 13 in "Desperately Seeking Someone?" -- New Yorkers should find a solution that relies not on money but on the human spirit.


The Mole Who Never Was Takes On Flesh and Bone
AT the memorial service for James Jesus Angleton, the cruel father of American counterintelligence who died in May 1987, the poet Reed Whittemore recited T. S. Eliot's "Gerontion," in which the mind of a blind old man becomes lost in "a wilderness of mirrors."
That was Jim Angleton, who created and in part destroyed the Central Intelligence Agency's machinery for catching spies.
He shut himself away in his office most afternoons, a brace of martinis in his bloodstream, chain-smoking, blinds drawn against the light, searching, searching through the C.I.A.'s files for the spoor of the mole he believed had penetrated the agency's clandestine service.


Restoring Cars to the L.I.R.R. After Ravages of Snowstorm
MORE than two weeks after the severest storm of the winter, politicians are debating the Long Island Rail Road officials' competence in the face of crisis, commuters are finding seats scarce on shortened rush-hour trains, and maintenance workers are working around the clock to repair the damage to nearly the electrical cars damaged by the storm.
At the Hillside Maintenance Complex in Hollis there is little talk of management decisions or new emergency plans.
The mechanics say there was little that could be done to save the electrical cars from damage.
When fine powdery snow whirls beneath cars traveling at high speeds, the mechanics add, it penetrates the housings protecting electrical switches, sweeps into the intake fans of traction motors and wreaks havoc with the connections and resistors.


ACCESSORY of the moment; It's Better Worn On Top
The undershirt is no longer something to hide. It's this season's essential extra.


Capitalist Overkill
To the Editor:
The attacks against Ray Jenkins's praise of socialism (Letters, Feb. 6) demonstrate that capitalism produces a great fund of pious cant along with profits.
One needn't look to the robber barons for the vicious face of capitalism.
It is everywhere: plundered savings and loans, leveraged takeovers by hit-and-run artists, the daily exploitation of a labor movement gutted by the Reaganauts, unfinanced and looted pension funds, corporate downsizing, the endless pursuit of cheaper labor.


In Search of a Buzz
To the Editor:
You could learn as much about the insides of publishing from Michael Norman's essay on "the marketing of a first novel" as you can about the Atlantic Ocean from a tuna fish sandwich.
His article was all mealy byproduct.
Then again, what might one expect from a writer who so blindly accepts the un considered cliche and who feels warmed by the snobbery of received wisdom?
Mr.
Norman sweeps culture with the same vagueness one might get by passing a sieve through a cloud.


Elusive Playwright
TENNESSEE WILLIAMS Everyone Else Is an Audience.
By Ronald Hayman.
Illustrated. 268 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $27.50.


How to Assure Happy Landings for Pets
To the Editor:
A Federal judge, you report Feb. 16, has ruled that Floyd, a golden retriever who died in a jet's hold, counts for luggage, and the owner cannot sue for anguish and loss of companionship.
The case of Floyd is not a fluke.
Airlines are not required to report animal deaths, even on otherwise uneventful flights.
But Department of Agriculture records obtained under the Freedom of Information Act show that every major airline has been cited for multiple violations of the Animal Welfare Act, most result ing in animal deaths.
The airlines pay fines, agree to show training films to employees, and go on accepting live animals and delivering dead ones.


Short Quake, Long Ordeal in San Francisco
Moments after the 1989 San Francisco earthquake, Skip Kniesche switched on a hand-held television he had taken to Candlestick Park that afternoon and saw a shot of the elegant brick office building he and his father owned.
The roof and one wall had crumbled.
It was his first glimpse of what would become a long ordeal.
Where the building once stood is now only a basement floor.
The lot in the heart of the city's financial district is closed off by a tall wooden fence topped with barbed wire, littered with trash and occasionally occupied by homeless people.
Across the street and around the city, other plots of prime real estate remain vacant.


No Child's Play: Building a Low-Tax College Fund
CONGRESS created the "kiddie tax" in 1986 to stop parents from shifting income to their children solely to reduce taxes.
Last year, it bumped up the tax rates on trust income, greatly diminishing the use of another tax-saving tool.
"I used to be a magician," said Edward Mendlowitz, a partner in Mendlowitz Weitsen, a New York accounting firm.
"Years ago, I could save people seven times my fee -- no more."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: February 27, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
3
NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove, $5.99.) A servant hopes to win an heiress's heart in Victorian-era Minnesota.
3*
8
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
4
2
JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star Wars" saga.
5*
6
WINTER MOON, by Dean Koontz. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The families of law officers are besieged by violence in Los Angeles and Montana.
6
5
RUBY, by V.C.
Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) A young woman seeks to discover the dreadful secrets of her family's past in New Orleans.
7
9
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
8
1
SAVING GRACE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romantic problems of a 13th-century English widow.
9
5
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
10
4
SUDDENLY, by Barbara Delinsky. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) A pediatrician finds romance after the death of her dear friend.
11
1
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery.
12
54
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student investigates the murder of two Supreme Court Justices.
13
4
TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Berkley, $5.99.) A medical researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer and a nurse's pursuit of him.
14*
1
THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The final volume in a series about a fantasy land.
15
5
DRIVING FORCE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An ex-jockey's horse-transport business is besieged by a series of mysterious deaths.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
538
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
54
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
4
7
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
24
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
6
124
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
17
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
8
39
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
9*
4
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.
10*
13
GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Vintage, $14.) The life of the physicist Richard Feynman.
11*
138
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
12*
11
OPRAH! by Nellie Bly. (Zebra, $4.99.) The life of the television talk show host Oprah Winfrey.
13
13
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
14*
16
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
15*
13
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
16*
29
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
17*
27
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
18*
5
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop it.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
154
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
161
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
1
THE ERNST &amp; YOUNG TAX GUIDE 1994. (Wiley, $13.95.) Ways to cope with the I.R.S.
4
19
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Advice.
5*
5
A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Counsel for daily life.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


One Small Coup for Lotus
To the Editor:
Jim Manzi focused only on the exclusionary disadvantages and not on the potential abuses facing companies that join the electronic club, namely coercive cost-shifting and technology lock-in.


Special of the Day: Snow Pie


Higher Rates Sting the Wealthy
WHETHER you consider it soaking the rich or sharing the burden, the tax law of 1993 is taking a much bigger bite out of the wealthy.
The top tax rung has risen to almost 40 percent, the highest level since passage of the 1986 overhaul.
Although people with high incomes will be hit the hardest in April, others will pay more as well.
Various provisions of the law affect Social Security recipients and upper-middle-income families, among others.


Sound Bytes; On Building a Better Highway
IN the annals of computer networking, Ronald V. Schmidt should perhaps be known as the man who brought Ethernet to the masses.
Xerox developed Ethernet, the most common system for sharing computer resources across local area networks.
As a research fellow at Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center in California, Dr.
Schmidt devised a way to run Ethernet on standard telephone wire or fiber-optic cables.
As co-founder and chief technical officer of Synoptics Communications Inc. in Santa Clara, Calif., Dr.
Schmidt has built a leading networking company on low-cost Ethernet.


In Search of a Buzz
To the Editor:
"What is product and what is art?" Michael Norman asks.
I would affirm his implicit thesis that product sells, while art languishes (aspiring to product status).
SAM KASH KACHIGAN  New York


Christopher Hears Demands Of 2 Warring Bosnia Sides
For the first time in the 22-month war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Secretary of State Warren Christopher sat down with two of the three warring sides today to hear their demands and offer new ideas in an effort to find a formula for peace.
The half-hour meeting at the State Department came as the United States opened talks in Washington between the Muslim-led Bosnian Government and the Croatian faction on an American-backed peace initiative for Bosnia that would unite the Croatian- and Muslim-held parts of the country.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Seminars and Food Samples At Restaurant Trade Show
The first New York Restaurant and Foodservice Show, a three-day melange of seminars, cooking demonstrations and food samples, will open at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center today.
Some 8,000 members of the industry have signed up for the show, which is sponsored by the New York State Restaurant Association and is open to the public.
There will be more than 500 exhibition booths; smaller versions of the show have been presented at the Nassau Coliseum.


Getting a Grip on Dreams and Fantasies
IF art exhibitions were required to match their titles, "The Narrative Edge" at the Pelham Art Center here might fall short, for the six artists involved tell no stories.
But they do project fantasies, some routine, others quite original.
In Carol Barsha's watery scenes the protagonist is usually a young woman.
Here she floats spread-eagled on permanently waved blue water wearing a green dress and accompanied by the head and tail of a whale-like creature that pokes through the surface.
There she lies under a green blanket on two chairs, Mary Jane shoes on the floor and, in the background, an open window giving onto a large wave of brighter green.
Other pictures feature her or a child alone in a boat.


DEFUSE THOSE PARTICIPLES
Last month, when a former naval person chose to credit the news media, and especially me, with his withdrawal from the public arena, I discovered what it was like to be staked out, besieged and otherwise intruded upon by the pushy, pesky Nosy Parkers of the press.
How to put them off?
What message could I leave on my answering machine that would make my privacy impenetrable and yet not offend my hard-working colleagues?


Germans Ahead in 4-Man Bobsled


Slovenly White House Ethics
President Clinton and his helpers keep saying they have nothing to hide on Whitewater.
So some evil genie must be making them act as if they do.
The latest affront is the boneheaded conclave convened by Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger Altman to give a "heads up" to three White House officials about the Resolution Trust Corporation inquiry into a savings and loan association connected to Mr. and Mrs.
Clinton.
Mr.
Altman said he wanted to brief Bernard Nussbaum, the White House counsel, Harold Ickes, the deputy chief of staff, and Margaret Williams, the First Lady's chief of staff, on when the statute of limitations would run out on the R.T.C. investigation of Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan.


High School Senior Is Dead After Russian Roulette Game
An East Flatbush high school senior, whom relatives and authorities described as a model student with aspirations of attending college, killed himself playing Russian roulette Friday evening, the police said.
The student, Trent St.
Lawrence, 18, a few months shy of graduating from Transit Technical High School in East New York, died at Kings County Medical Center on Friday evening after shooting himself in the right temple with a .38-caliber revolver, police officials said.


Gold, Silver and Bronze Honors in Washington
IT WAS A GREAT DAY FOR European art when, in the mid-1430's, Leon Battista Alberti made a self-portrait medal of himself "in the Roman style."
He went straight to the point.
What mattered to him was that he should announce himself as a still young man of whom everything could be expected.
With his unmistakable profile standing tall on top of his columnar neck, he was intelligence personified.


Karen Katz and Steven Roy Hymowitz
Karen Katz, a daughter of Gladys and Joseph Katz of Borough Park in Brooklyn, was married last Monday to Steven Roy Hymowitz, a son of Beatrice and Leo Hymowitz of Flushing, Queens.
Rabbi Dale Polakoff officiated at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
The bride, 32, is an account executive at radio station WEVD-AM in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Brooklyn College.


In America; Use the Schools
It's refreshing, amid all the bluster and the dimwitted muscle-flexing of politicians masquerading as tough guys, to see a common-sense approach to the fight against crime.
For the past several weeks, ever since Congress and the White House awoke to the startling (to them) news that crime had risen to the top of the public-opinion polls, the country has been stampeded by John Wayne wannabes trying to outshout each other with hysterical cries of hang 'em, burn 'em, gas 'em, or -- failing that -- at least lock 'em up forever.


Jersey Joe Walcott, Boxing Champion, Dies at 80
Jersey Joe Walcott, the son of poor immigrants from Barbados who was to slug his way out of poverty and into the record books as the oldest fighter to win the heavyweight championship of the world, died Friday at Our Lady of Lourdes Medical Center in Camden, N.J., where he lived.
He was 80.
The cause of death was complications from diabetes, said a nephew, Richard Cream.


BEIJING IS WARNING LEADING DISSIDENT
Security officials in China have warned the country's most prominent dissident, Wei Jingsheng, that he will be arrested again if he continues to campaign for human rights and democracy while on parole.
Mr.
Wei has told associates that he has received three pointed warnings since Feb. 10.
In each case, Public Security Bureau officials have told him to stop meeting with foreign journalists to discuss democracy and rights issues and to abandon plans to publish a book about his 14 1/2 years in prison.


Wharton's Grave
To the Editor: Barbara Shoup's essay on visiting Edith Wharton's gravesite in 1990 was wonderfully evocative and poignant ("In Search of Edith Wharton," Jan. 23).
How ever, if one wishes to visit the street where the author lived between 1907 and 1920, 58 Rue de Varenne is now clearly marked with a large memorial plaque -- engraved with Wharton's own words about that period of her life in both French and English: "Rich years, crowded and happy years . . ."


The Contagious Other
SILENT TRAVELERS Germs, Genes, and the "Immigrant Menace." By Alan M. Kraut.
Illustrated. 369 pp.
New York:  Basic Books. $25.


Even Brutal Cases Show Death Penalty Is Unconstitutional
To the Editor:
Justice Antonin Scalia reprimanded Justice Harry A. Blackmun for his pronouncement that the death penalty cannot be administered in accord with the Constitution, writing a special concurrence in the denial of review of Bruce Callins's death sentence (front page, Feb. 23).


High School Seeks a Place To Call Home
The new High School for the Physical City, which specializes in New York's infrastructure, is experiencing infrastructure problems firsthand in its efforts to find a home.
The school, one of 30 theme schools set up last year, focuses on the study of bridges, water tunnels and other elements of the city's inner workings.
It started last September (late, because of asbestos removal) in temporary quarters shared with Intermediate School 70 at 333 West 17th Street.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FOUR-PART HARMONY
In the fall of 1992 Ross Crolius, a member of the Metropolitan Opera chorus for the last 11 years, decided that singers should do what many major symphony orchestra members have done: spin off chamber ensembles while retaining their steady jobs.
The result is the Songfellows, a male quartet that will perform today at 2:30 P.M. at the White Plains Library.


Business and Universities as Partners
More and more college and university presidents, like City University's chancellor, serve as paid members of corporate boards of directors, as American companies seek to build bridges to higher education.
A recent survey of 1,000 heads of colleges and universities showed that about 10 percent reported corporate membership, with many serving on one to three corporations.
But the City University chancellor, W. Ann Reynolds, who serves on five (she has said she intends to resign from one in April), faced criticism last week that her outside activities took her out of town too often.


Dance Invasion
Walk, walk, tap, step, triple step.
Keep that in mind when you do the sugar push, a basic move of West Coast Swing.
A growing number of New Yorkers are doing the sugar push, as well as side passes, tuck turns, whips and neck wraps.
West Coast swing, the sultrier, less frenetic but still rocking version of the East Coast's Lindy Hop and jitterbug, has been popular in California, Texas and elsewhere since the 1950's.
It has made it to New York City after 40 years.


SUNDAY, February 27, 1994; Rules of the Game
William E. Colby, former director of the C.I.A, is developing a CD-ROM game of international espionage.
Activision, the company that is making it, is as secretive as the C.I.A. itself.
It will not even give out the name of the game before early 1995.


Just Don't Ask Coleman
It was two hours after the New Jersey Nets gave power forward Derrick Coleman the contract that made him highest-paid player, per year, in the National Basketball Association, and Coleman was lacing up his sneakers for the game with the Magic.
Since the next four years of Coleman's life are guaranteed to produce $30 million in income, and $37.5 million if the Nets exercise an option for a fifth season, the question was obvious: Was he happy with the deal?
Coleman answered with obscenities.


Feb. 20-26: Cable TV Rates; The Merger's Off, Honey, but Let's See What Else Is On
It's pretty rare that a single Government action reverberates through both the corporate board room and the family rec room, but one did last week.
In ordering cable television companies to roll back the fees they charge customers by an average of 7 percent, the Federal Communications Commission not only did couch potatoes a favor; it also gave the executives trying to hash out the largest merger in history an added reason to develop cold feet.


A la Carte; A New Look or Two, Even a Sardinian First, on the East End
CARPENTERS on the East End are keping busy in the off season by building new restaurants and redecorating old ones.
When the weather warms up, Montauk and the Hamptons will be alive with innovative, interesting new eating possibilities, including what might well be the country's first Sardinian eating place, a combination restaurant and arts center and a casual rotisserie spot.


Satisfying Stews From Britain, France and the Greek Islands
WHEN the weather is brisk, it is hard to stick with a diet of salads and chicken without the skin.
As far as I'm concerned, nothing beats a good stew at this time of year, and it does not have to be a fatty dish rich in calories, either.
Rabbit, which is increasingly available in butcher shops and specialty stores, is low in fat, and it has more flavor than chicken.
It is especially good stewed because it does not dry out as is often the case when it is roasted or grilled.
The meat is simmered in a sauce flavored with tomatoes and onions, and tiny hard green picholine olives from the south of France (do not try to substitute canned Spanish olives: they do not taste the same).
This stew is good with wide flat noodles.


[ STOREFRONTS ] ; UNIFORM STANDARDS
Are your patrol shoes down at the heel?
Has your wallet badge worn thin?
Did you misplace your cuff key, collar brass or traffic whistle?
Is the lead in your blackjack peeking through?
All these essentials are for sale at New England Uniform Company in Danbury, Conn., where cops, firefighters and postal employees come to buy what they need.
Ordinary citizens can shop at New England Uniform, too, although a badge or ID is required to buy such things as billy clubs and bulletproof vests, shirts with police insignia and knit postal caps that can be pulled down and worn as masks for cold weather or for robbing a bank.
Ed McGee, the proprietor of New England Uniform, says there is no law actually preventing him from selling most of this merchandise to anyone who walks in the door.
Theoretically, John Q. Public could whip out a Visa card and march away dressed like a member of a SWAT team.
But McGee, who looks like Clint Eastwood when he smiles and has a handshake like an iron vise, says: "I'd rather lose the business than sell to a non-pro and feel sorry about it later. On the other hand, I don't want to scare off the street traffic. So I put the jackets and shoes and so forth up front, the 'blacks and blues' toward the rear."


Come and Meet Those Dancing Feet
CELEBRATION of tap dancing, complete with a film screening and live performances, is set for tomorrow night.
The event is to benefit Tap Extravaganza '94, an awards ceremony held in May in conjunction with National Tap Dance Day.
"We Dance and We Sing," a documentary about the NIcholas Brothers, is to be followed by a discussion of the film, with Harold Nicholas taking part.
The program will include performances by Savion Glover, Ted Levy, and Omar Edwards and Daniel Wooten of Toe Jam, as well as a champagne reception.
Interest in tap danceing has increased in the last few years, said Cynthia Kirk, a spokeswoman for the New York Committee to Celebrate National Tap Dance Day, which is sponsoring tomorrow's event.
The revival, she said, has been fostered in part by the success of Broadway musicals like "Jelly's Last Jam" and Hollywood films like "Tap." The committee has been presenting the Extravaganza since 1990; this year's will take place on May 25, the birthday of Bill (Bojangles) Robinson.
New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, between 76th and 77th Streets; 7:30 P.M.
Monday; $20 to $30; $20 extra for champagne reception; (718) 875-3502.


A SENSE OF PLACE
MEMO TO: Hollywood
FROM: New Jersey


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about honorific street names characterized the inventor Nikola Tesla incorrectly.
He did not receive the Nobel Prize.


Interim Chancellor for SUNY
A veteran administrator, Joseph C. Burke, was named last week as the State University of New York's interim leader as a search began for a successor to Chancellor D. Bruce Johnstone.
In Albany on Thursday, the SUNY board gave a tearful farewell to the 53-year-old Mr.
Johnstone, who is resigning effective March 1 after five years as head of the nation's largest public university system because he has inoperable cancer.


A Promise Not Kept
The 1917 Mexican Constitution basically guaranteed land to peasants who asked.
Section X, the land provision, was repealed in 1992.
This is a translation provided by the Mexican Embassy in Washington.


What's in a Hat?
"A hat," as the 1930's slogan went, "makes all the difference." It certainly did for Karl Lagerfeld, who sent out feather-trimmed, mask-like hats in his Chanel couture collection last month and was the butt of feminist fury.
"An insult to women!" came the cry from a fashion editor in The Independent, in London.
"Reduced to faceless blowup dolls!"


Don't Send in the Marines
Isolation is no longer possible or desirable," the President said. It was September 1901, the speaker was William McKinley and the subject of his address at the opening of the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo was the role the United States should play in the dawning 20th century.
McKinley's point was that modern technologies of transport and communications had abolished distance.
It was obvious even then.
So internationalism evolved into the dominant theme of American foreign policy.
Today, though, with the collapse of the Soviet Union, internationalism is losing its way as we stumble from the narrow and chaotic streets of Somalia to Haiti and, possibly -- after the mortar attack on a crowded Sarajevo market -- to the quagmire of Bosnia.


Feb. 20-26: Homo Erectus, Man; An Asian Fossil Confounds A Theory of Human Origins
Few sciences are so dogged by controversy and so dependent on enigmatic scraps of evidence as paleoanthropology, the study of mankind's distant roots.
Last week scientists put a new cat among the anthropologist pigeons by disclosing that human bone fragments found in Java are much older than previously believed.


The Soviet Empire Is Dead, but Its Sports Legacy Is Still Alive in Russia
Russian automobiles, cigarettes and champagne might not be ready for the international marketplace, but slightly more than two years after the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the new-age Russian athlete remains highly exportable.
Despite economic hardship, political instability and often chaotic training conditions, Russia's Winter Olympic team has won more gold medals (11) than any other nation in the Lillehammer Games and more medals (23) than every nation but Norway (25).
The four other former Soviet republics competing in the games -- Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan -- have combined for seven medals, including two golds.


Lawmakers Study Indian Point 3 Plant
THREE state lawmakers have begun an inquiry into economic and safety issues at Indian Point 3, the New York Power Authority's nuclear plant here.
Richard L. Brodsky, a State Assemblyman representing parts of Greenburgh, said last week that in the long run, keeping the plant open may not make economic sense, considering the cost of decommissioning the reactor and expenses associated with nuclear waste disposal among other things.


Muslim Militants Vow Revenge for Massacre
A Muslim militant group vowed today to step up its campaign of violence in an act of retaliation for the killings of Palestinians by a Jewish settler on Friday.
The Islamic Group, Egypt's largest and most active underground organization, said in a statement that it has ordered its armed units to increase attacks to avenge the killing of Palestinian worshipers in Hebron.


Milan goes pale
Amid a panorama of clothes that looked as if they were meant for Sicilian widows, prep school cheerleaders and vamps from everywhere, a few designers remembered that it's a saving grace to look at oneself in the mirror and feel beautiful.
To appreciate Jil Sander's pale Gothic illusions, Gianni Versace's spirited freshness, Katharine Hamnett's "One Touch of Venus" sorcery and Giorgio Armani's practical but unbowed femininity is to acknowledge craftsmanship guided by a respect for the innate power and mystery of women.
And that is why some of the most beautiful clothes of the season were those shown in Milan.  -- HAL RUBENSTEIN


Jinxed
N.P.
By Banana Yoshimoto.
Translated by Ann Sherif. 194 pp.
New York:  Grove Press. $18.


Carole Lee Wolf, Pedro Neuhaus
Carole Lee Wolf, a daughter of Dr.
Stanley I. Wolf of Bethesda, Md., and the late Harolyn O. Wolf, was married last evening to Pedro Moises Neuhaus, a son of Peter H. Neuhaus of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Miriam Neuhaus.
Rabbi Allen Secher performed the ceremony at the Willard Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Neuhaus was until recenlty a retail manager and an accessories buyer at the Galeries Lafayette department store in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father, an allergist, is the senior director of the Allergy Center and a professor emeritus of pediatric medicine at George Washington University, both in Washington.


WE ARE THE PRESIDENT
Maureen Dowd has absolutely "got him," in her incisive, entertaining and factual article.


Technology; Making Compost Double as Pesticide
IS the world ready for designer compost?
Jeff Gage, the recycling services coordinator for Land Recovery Inc. thinks so.
And so do Washington state officials, who with Mr.
Gage see an opportunity to take compost beyond its typical fertilizer function by turning it into pesticides and fungicides.


WHAT'S THE WORLD'S PRIORITY TASK?
By presenting apparently contradicting views on the subject of world population growth, it appears that there exist just two diametrically opposed camps: the demographers and the feminist groups.


Parents Demand Safer Schools
Parents of students at I.S. 52, in Hunts Point, one of the most violent schools in the city, say they can no longer stand by as their children's education and safety are being compromised.
Community Board 2 put a discussion of the school on its agenda for its regular meeting this month, and scores of parents and community leaders arrived to challenge school officials to improve conditions at the school.


Molding Is Useful, but Mounting It May Need Practice
ADDING molding can change a room as dramatically as painting or wallpapering.
Molding shapes, or profiles, can help define the character of a room.
The placement of molding can create, alter or emphasize reference points.
It helps to see a display of installed molding rather than small samples, but the samples are useful for understanding how moldings can be combined to produce an overall design.
An example is baseboard molding in which three or more strips are often layered to produce the complete profile.


The 'Quota Queen' Presents Her Story
Bill Clinton sat at her cafeteria table at Yale Law School, attended her wedding in 1986, spent hours reminiscing at a private dinner party a week after his inauguration last year.
On June 3, he withdrew her nomination for the top civil rights job at the Justice Department.
They haven't spoken since.


The Pequots
They really are palefaces under the neon lights, all these senior citizens and tourists playing the slot machines, blackjack tables and big-payoff bingo games at the Wisconsin Oneida tribe's casino.
The casino booms around the clock in the reservation woods near the luck-hungry bettors of Green Bay.
Rick Hill, with shoulder-length hair and a patient, earthen-hued outlook on life, reigns there, counting the wondrously gross receipts with the dedicated eye his ancestors once applied to tracking redcoats for George Washington.
Hailing good fortune's arrival on the rundown reservation, Hill first supplies its historical context -- genocidal defeats and the transcontinental retreat of his people, 27 broken treaties and six million lost acres in New York State alone.
Only then, against the bleeping and bonging of fortune's reversal, does he comment on Oneida casino revenues, which have risen to more than $375 million a year: "Compared to the previous 170 years, it's not a lot of money, and there are still third-world conditions on most reservations."


The American Economy, Back on Top
DURING the Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton often fretted that the United States economy was fast becoming the world's also-ran.
But more and more it looks as if he inherited a winner.
A 3 percent economic growth rate, a gain of two million new jobs in the past year and an inflation rate reminiscent of the 1960's make America the envy of the industrialized world.
The amount the average American worker can produce, already the highest in the world, is growing faster than in other wealthy countries, including Japan.
The United States has become the world's low-cost provider of many sophisticated products and services, from plastics to software to financial services.
And after years of decline, the nation's share of the world export market has been rising.


Surf 'n' Turf . . . 'n' Nova, Too
JOSEPH R. GURRERA is on the front line of the upper Broadway fish war, which he denies is a war and denies starting.
He is also on the front line of the upper Broadway butcher war, which -- well, you can figure out the rest.
Until last year, Citarella, the venerable market he owns at Broadway and 75th Street, sold fish -- the whole fish, fillet of fish, nothing but fish.
Then Citarella opened a takeout counter and started selling salads and sandwiches and smoked salmon -- many varieties of smoked salmon.
And then Citarella rented the store next door and opened a butcher shop.


Airborne Thai Tradition
Kite flying is a favorite pastime in Thailand.
But on March 26 and 27, kites from 17 other countries, including Italy, China and the United States, will fly alongside traditional Thai kites during the fourth Thailand International Kite Festival in Bangkok.
Kite flying in Thailand dates from the 13th century and reached peak popularity during the reign of King Chulalongkorn (1868-1910), who drew up the rules still used in kite-flying competitions.
For information, contact the Tourism Authority of Thailand, (212) 432-0433.
TERRY TRUCCO


Avery Fisher, Philanthropist, Dies at 87
Avery Fisher, the founder of the Fisher electronics company and a philanthropist who donated millions of dollars to arts organizations and universities, died yesterday at the New Milford Hospital in New Milford.
He was 87 and had homes in Manhattan and in Washington, Conn.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said his wife, Janet.


One Hospital's Share of the Squeeze
The city's Health and Hospitals Corporation is seeking jto close a $166 million gap in its $3.3 billion budget, trimming 1, 100 of its 49,000 jobs.
Although no doctors and nurses will be cut, the agency will trim managerial and staff positions at its central office and its 11 municipal hospitals, and will close some special medical units.
Here is how Harlem Hospital's $246 million budget will be affected.
Jobs Current: 3,200 After cut: 3,088 Job: Affiliation fees paid to Columbia Medical School Current: $51,000,000 After cut: $50,430,000 Job: Supplies and consulting budget Current: $60,000,000 After cut: $57,855,000 Job: Radiation therapy unit Current: $200,000 After cut: eliminated Job: Burn unit Current: $400,000 After cut: eliminated (Source: Health and Hospitals Corporation)


Special Today: Fashions of the Times
Magazine Part 2
New Views: From Paris, New York, Milan, spring looks that startle or seduce, including saucy suits and fantasy clothes that flutter.
Employment Advertising Section 11


Why a Tunnel Link Is Superfluous
To the Editor:
In your Feb. 20 article, "Bumpy Road to Easy Rides on Subways," you reported that construction of the 63d Street Tunnel-Queens Boulevard line connector would cause major disruptions of subway and street movements in Long Island City.
But you also presented the Transit Authority's argument that the project would result in "more trains, faster trips and less crowding." This assertion is subject to question: there is clear evidence that the plan gives little for a $645 million investment.


INSIDE
Mexico's Struggle Over Land
The story of Government stonewalling when one Mexican town tried to claim its land illustrates the country's historical struggle between landowners and peasants.
Page 10.
Health Plan's Winding Path
Before either house can vote on it, the health plan faces an arduous journey through five major committees with different personalities and several subcommittees.
Page 20.
Jersey Joe Walcott Dies
The boxer, who in 1951 knocked out Ezzard Charles to became the oldest fighter to capture the heavyweight title, was 80.
Page 37.
The Last Weekend
On the next-to-last day, Vreni Schneider won the women's slalom, and figure-skating judging stirred more debate.
SportsSunday, Section 8.


Twentysomething: Flatiron Environs
ABBY ++ (212) 725-2922; 254 Fifth Avenue, near 28th Street; $; all major credit cards
Judging by its popularity, this attractive and cheerful seven-month-old restaurant is a much welcomed addition to a gastronomically desolate stretch of fast-food places and electronics shops.
The dining room is warm and inviting with wood floors, ocher walls with colorful paintings and wooden booths.
But what really lures patrons is the spirited American fare.
Among starters are a salad of vegetables and quinoa grain with fresh herbs; herbed goat cheese ravioli with portobello mushrooms, and sauteed stuffed calamari with shrimp and ratatouille.
Entrees include tender seared duck breast with roasted carrots; seafood couscous combining clams, scallops, salmon and mussels in a spicy broth of vegetables, and roasted chicken with potato pancake, watercress and mushrooms. ($25 and Under: 7/30/93)


WAITING
In his understandable anxiety over having a normal baby, Robert Cohen made certain assumptions about his wife's prenatal screening (About Men: "Waiting," Jan. 16).
As a genetic counselor, I meet with couples in the Cohens' situation all the time.
The test that he and his wife "failed" is a screening tool that allows the reassessment of risks.
It is not designed to give a positive or a negative answer, and therefore cannot be passed or failed.
It was an indicator for further tests that revealed a normal (accurate) result.
JANICE L. BERLINER Berkeley Heights, N.J.


No Excuse
To the Sports Editor:
Is it right or is it wrong for an athlete to try to eliminate his or her rival through the use of criminal force?
Your letter from the psychiatrist as well as your story on Tonya Harding by Robert Lipsyte play around with this fundamental question, as if to offer some pre-emptory caveats.
I find it hard to sympathize with Harding despite the hard work of competitive skating, despite her meager financial history, despite her association with unsavory characters.


Q and A
Paris for the Young
Q.
My 18-year-old granddaughter, her mother and I expect to be in Paris in the middle of March.
Could you tell me the names and addresses of discos or other places that cater to young adults? -- E. Robinson, Pottstown, Pa.


Mission to Moscow: Preaching the Gospel of Business
"WE use mystery guests," Edward L. Roth, a successful motel operator and practicing Mennonite from Archbold, Ohio, population 3,440, said in explaining his motel business to an advice-hungry audience of Russian business people.
The Russian translator, searching for a word to convey that "mystery guests" are people whom Mr.
Roth hires to check up on motel employees, finally settled on "inspectors."


Cold Comfort: Battery Thefts
Serious crime has dropped in Brooklyn Heights during the last three years, the 84th Precinct recently reported.
But community leaders and the police say one type of crime has been increasing: the theft of car batteries.
Snow and freezing temperatures take their toll on batteries, putting new ones in demand and making them a target for thieves.


The World; Kennedy Inc. Opens Up A Franchise In Belfast
JOE KENNEDY stood before a courthouse on a raw wintry day last week and searched for just the right words to pledge the solidarity of his most famous Irish-American family with Paul Hill, his new Northern Irish brother-in-law, who is trying to quash a 20-year-old conviction in an I.R.A. murder case.
Gazing over an unruly scrum of pointed microphones and poised pens, with his mother Ethel and three sisters somewhere behind him, the youthful Congressman said with simple eloquence: "The one thing about Kennedys is there's a lot of us and there'll be more coming."
His boast is Britain's bane.
Inside Stormont Castle, the seat of the British Office of Northern Ireland, and inside the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London, it must seem that there are indeed an awful lot of Kennedys these days.
They keep turning up at the most inconvenient places and times -- and are a prominent factor in the strain in American-British relations as Prime Minister John Major visits Washington this week.


Secession Is the Talk of Rowayton
A VISITOR to Rowayton could understandably think of it as a picturesque coastal New England town.
It has, after all, a post office, a fire station, a cemetery, a school, a library, banks, churches, restaurants, a variety of stores, its own beaches, even a Civil War cannon.
Not to mention a scenic waterfront, complete with marina, boatyards and a ship chandlery.
Indeed, most of its residents perceive Rowayton as a separate community, a place with a special cachet and charm about it.
"There's always been a certain distintiveness about Rowayton; it's a special place," said Burton Shatz, a longtime resident and president of the Rowayton Civic Association.


At St. Mark's Church, the Scars Remain
The calm and stately Gothic facade of St.
Mark's Episcopal Church at Union Street and Brooklyn Avenue in Crown Heights belies the turmoil that has cost the church a priest who served it for 21 years and left its membership rolls depleted.
That pastor, Heron Sam, was stripped of his authority to perform any sacraments of the Episcopal Church after a church court decided he had engaged in sexual harassment and other improper acts.
Now Mr.
Sam is starting a church in Flatbush that does not fall under the authority of the Episcopal Church, his brother, Winston, said last week.


Not Just Worms
To the Sports Editor:
The worm Ira Berkow refers to in "A Steady Diet of Records on a Steady Diet of Worms" (The Times, Feb. 1) is only a very small part of a Chinese menu, similar to the snail on the French menu.
There is nothing to fuss about.


Is Duane Hanson the Phidias of Our Time?
IT SEEMED A REASONABLE IDEA.
For a while his work had been coming to mind unexpectedly in connection with a slew of younger artists who are as In as he is Out, artists like Robert Gober and Charles Ray and even Kiki Smith.
Then the Robert Morris retrospective opened at the Guggenheim and he again seemed relevant: wasn't he, like Morris, about the real and the anti-metaphorical in his sculptures, their presence and commitment to fact?
How much difference did it make if Morris was dealing with rolls of felt and he was dealing with Dacron slacks and jogging shorts?
Somewhere in there was another connection.
Finally, reading a book of interviews that the French critic Pierre Schneider conducted with various artists, I came across Giacometti's remark about visiting the Louvre: "What astonishes me, what really gets me, isn't the paintings and sculptures any more, but the people who look at them. Now I look only at the people who are looking." That, in turn, put me in mind of Thomas Struth's recent photographs of museum visitors.


Giuliani Plans Initiative To Curb Gun Violence
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the New York City Police Department are putting the final touches on a new campaign to control handgun violence by deploying more detectives to arrest gun traffickers and by updating the force's computer systems to track unregistered guns smuggled into the city better.
The scope of the program appears modest compared to the problem it tries to address, with few new funds expected to be allocated to the effort.
But city officials said they hope that their strategies would work together with new Federal handgun purchasing regulations to stem the influx of weapons from states like Ohio and Georgia, which have weak or nonexistent local gun controls.


Q and A
Forcing a Board To Hold a Meeting  Q. I live in a co-op that has had serious financial problems with the original sponsor that resulted in an auction sale of his shares in the co-op.
During this time the co-op board never kept the owners informed of what was happening.
The board does meet on a monthly basis, but the shareholders are not invited.
Further, there has not been an annual meeting of shareholders in almost two years.
Simply put, the shareholders have no idea what is going on in our building.


Four Couples Who Care
Citizens Committee for New York City, Waldorf-Astoria, Feb. 14.


Hugh Grant Makes Them Think of Cary Grant
UP TO NOW, Hugh Grant has not exactly had a high-profile career; when you mention his name, many people confuse him with another young English actor, Richard E. Grant, who starred in "Withnail and I" and "Henry and June." But Hugh's face is about to become a lot more familiar to moviegoers.
He appears in three films opening during the next two weeks: "Sirens," an Australian production with Sam Neill; "Four Weddings and a Funeral," a romantic comedy co-starring Andie MacDowell, and Roman Polan ski's "Bitter Moon," a study of sexual obsession.
At the recent Sundance Film Festival in Utah, where "Sirens" and "Four Weddings and a Funeral" were shown, the lanky, spruce, 33-year-old Mr.
Grant reflected on his sudden burst of activity.
He also used his skill at accents to impersonate several of his directors, including the flamboyant Mr.
Polanski and the phlegmatic James Ivory, who directed him in "Maurice" and "The Remains of the Day." Suddenly launching into a thick Polish accent and gesticulating wildly, Mr.
Grant imitated Mr.
Polanski's confounded response when the actor asked for his character's motivation in one scene of "Bitter Moon": "Oh, God, I don't know. I have no idea. You sort out the motivation and show it to me."


The Woodstock Nation Meets the 90's; Warily Revisiting a Cultural Icon, for Peace, Love and Profits
Dick Wrolsen wasn't at the first Woodstock festival 25 years ago.
But he said he had seen enough on television to know that its anniversary should not be celebrated this summer, as planned, here in the quiet town where he has lived for all his 61 years.
"You can expect to see urination, defecation and fornication on private property," Mr.
Wrolsen, a retired employee of International Business Machines Corporation, said over coffee recently.
"For the safety and welfare of the community at large, I believe the festival should not take place."


Wall Street; They're Not Exactly Batting .500
TAKE one New York sports figure , mix in a couple of penny-stock brokers, sprinkle with slightly tarnished Hollywood tinsel, and what do you get?
Celebrity Entertainment, a tiny company with a hot stock, a rocky past and very uncertain prospects.
But it does have founder David A. Johnson, better known as Davey, the former manager of the New York Mets who now performs that job for the Cincinnati Reds.
And as Lawrence Taylor proved last year with the offering of his All-Pro Products, sports figures can sure sell stocks.


Pierrepont Playground Expansion on Track
The city's budget woes notwithstanding, a plan to renovate and expand the chronically crowded Pierrepont Playground on the Brooklyn Heights Promenade is still on track, city officials said last week.
But whether a popular flower garden nearby and its stone thunderbird mosaic will survive the project remains to be seen.
The Brooklyn Heights Playground Committee and other residents have long urged the renovation of Pierrepont, one of the borough's most heavily used playgrounds.
The local City Councilman, Kenneth K. Fisher, won funds for the project in the budget for the current fiscal year, and work was scheduled to start before June 30.


Many Jobs on L.I. Pay High Salaries
The revelation by George Rand that Long Island's educators earn the highest teacher salaries in the nation should not come as a surprise  [ "Outrageous Salaries in Schools," Letters, Feb. 13 ] .
The real eye-opener is that Long Island also has the highest-paid physicians, lawyers and accountants, as well as top-salaried auto mechanics, plumbers, electricians and just about every other occupation.
Mr.
Rand might enjoy comparing the income of a $500,000 Long Island anesthesiologist with his medical colleague in, say, Sac County, Iowa.
Why single out teachers?


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GREENWICH VILLAGE  $715,000
38 West Ninth Street  (Portsmouth)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining room, manned elevator, fireplace, c/a; maintenance $1,252, 42% tax-deductible, listed at $795,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: Bellmarc Realty; Ambrose Mar-Elia)


Wishful Thinking
The summery, flower-printed long skirts and the veil-like skirts that women have been wearing on the coldest and snowiest days of winter summon visions of the first crocuses pushing through the snow.
The skirts in colorful pastels seem even more fragile when worn with heavy winter coats.
The drift of a transparent black chiffon skirt fluttering over the snow (far right) is fashion at its most whimsical.


Sports of The Times; Skate Junkie Confesses: 'Axel? Lutz?'
DON'T ask me about the judging.
I don't understand it.
Don't ask me about the scoring.
I hated math when I was in school.
Don't ask me about the jumps.
I can't tell one from the other.
Fortunately for me, we subscribe to a private checklist of the skaters' routines, including music changes and jumps.
The checklist says, "2:15. West Side Story. Double Axel-Double Toe Loop," and if the skater is circling around in her own private Odessa at that moment, I scribble, "No combo."


Dr. Elders Stamps on Cigarettes
Releasing the 23d Surgeon General's Report on Smoking and Health last week, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders was her usual forthright self.
Americans, she said, should "issue a warning to our young people that tobacco is addicting and that tobacco kills."
Every year 400,000 Americans die from illnesses related to smoking, and a million others give up cigarettes.
More adolescents, however, are picking them up -- and that, Dr.
Elders said, is a tragedy.
They believe that by smoking they are joining "The Five S Club" of the "slim, sexy, sociable, sophisticated and successful." In truth, they are joining a far more lethal organization -- one that will reward many of them, in time, with respiratory ailments, heart disease and lung cancer.
Dr.
Elders blamed the tobacco industry's advertising for making smoking so seductive to teen-agers; a spokesman for the industry promptly denied trying to recruit the young.
But with so many adults quitting, where can the industry go for new customers but to youth?
And who does the R. J. Reynolds Company think it is kidding with its Joe Camel -- and now Josephine Camel -- ads?
R.
J.
Reynolds has said they were designed for adults, but studies published in 1991 in The Journal of the American Medical Association showed that the ads reached children more successfully than they did adults, and that 6-year-olds were as familiar with Joe as they were with Mickey Mouse.
Millions of Americans -- those who have stopped smoking and those who haven't -- know how hard it is to kick the habit.
For half of them it is a habit acquired before they were 14 years old.
Dr.
Elders, like surgeons general before her, is wise to use her bully pulpit to talk about smoking and its consequences.


A Part of History, Too, Is Lost in Battle for Kabul


A Cabin in Alaska Was Once a Caboose
A red caboose that used to tag along on an ore train over the White Pass is now available for rent as a cabin situated five and a half miles from the north end of Skagway, Alaska.
The caboose, built in 1968 for the White Pass &amp; Yukon Railroad, has been permanently placed at the trailhead of the Denver Glacier Trail and can be reached by hiking, cross-country skiing and snowmobiling or, in the summer, by the restored narrow-gauge railroad during runs between Skagway and Lake Bennett.


The Case of Bill Clinton And 'The Concrete Blonde'
IT'S all very well for the White House to put out the word that President Clinton dotes on Marcus Aurelius and Gabriel Garcia Marquez and that he reads books in German.
It's something else again to catch our Chief Executive red-handed with something called "The Concrete Blonde."
Don't be surprised if you've not heard of "The Concrete Blonde," one of four novels that Mr.
Clinton picked up (on blind credit, having been short of cash and bereft of plastic) on a recent binge at Mystery Books in Washington.
This new police procedural by Michael Connelly won't be out until June; the advance copy was the store owners' gift to the President, who had expressed his satisfaction with the author's two previous novels, "The Black Ice" and "The Black Echo," which won an Edgar Award as best first mystery in 1993.


Anne Weedon, Pitt Petri Jr.
Anne Josephine Weedon, an advertising account executive at WIBV-TV in Buffalo, was married yesterday to Pitt Petri Jr., the president of Pitt Petri Inc., a tableware and home furnishings retailer there.
The Rev.
Tom Stewart performed the ceremony at Westminster Presbyterian Church in Buffalo.
Mrs.
Petri, 35, received undergraduate and M.B.A. degrees from the State University at Buffalo.
She is a daughter of Mary Braley Weedon of Jamestown, N.Y., and the late Fredrick R. Weedon Jr.
Her father was a vice president of Watson Manufacturing, a metalworks formerly in Jamestown.
Her mother is the director of community relations at W.C.A.
Hospital in Jamestown.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ASTORIA  A Picture Is Worth 1,000 Computer Bytes
The notion that pictures don't lie is among the assumptions that will be challenged in a series of three seminars starting on Saturday at the American Museum of the Moving Image.
The seminars will explore some of the ways visual effects are created and manipulated by new and developing computer technology.


Boys' Ballet Class Stresses Athletics
CHRISTIAN CLAESSENS stood at the barre, studying James Vento's feet like a gardener inspecting new seedlings.
"Bend your knees, use your toes," he told the 8-year-old dance student.
"The smallest muscles in your body are in your toes. We want to strengthen the toes so we can jump and land from high places without breaking our feet."
Mr.
Claessens, a director of the Scarsdale Ballet Studio, talks a lot about muscles and strength in his ballet classes for boys.
Ballet is hardly for sissies, said the 6-foot-1-inch dancer, who is married to Diana White, a soloist with the New York City Ballet and the co-director of the studio.
Ballet, he tells his students, is full of athleticism and discipline.
In fact, he said:


SARAJEVO MARKET BACK IN BUSINESS
His right hand in a cast and white bandages, Jamil Hurem was back at his old stand this morning, standing behind a small array of used plumbing connections, metal pipes with crude holes punched in them for gas burners, and a length of rubber tubing.
"I'm shaking," he said. "I'm really afraid."


Manhattan Community Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1: Battery Park, TriBeCa; third Tuesday of month; next meeting is March 15, call for time and location. (212) 442-5050.
Chairwoman: Anne Campoccia DISTRICT 2: SoHo, Little Italy, West Village; third Thursday of month; next meeting is March 17, 7 P.M.; St.
Vincent's Hospital 153 West 11th Street int he Cronin Auditorium, 10th floor; (212) 979-2272.
Chairwoman: Carol Feinman


METRO DIGEST
COMPASSION FATIGUE ON THE HOMELESS
In New York, the youths who used to give the old men cigarettes now curse them.
In Seattle, the homeless are fined for sitting on sidewalks.
Over time, the growing national impatience with the presence of dirty and desperate people has turned frustration to apathy and then anger.
A1.
New York's new commissioner for the homeless said she would keep trying to have nonprofit groups run the city's homeless shelters.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY  SEARCH OPPOSED FOR AIDS BABIES
A panel of New York State AIDS experts rejected a controversial proposal to identify newborn babies that test positive for H.I.V., amid concerns that it would jeopardize the privacy of mothers.
A1.
Washington is expected to waive a rule and let foreigners with the AIDS virus attend the Gay Games in New York in June.
B4.
JOB CUTS MAY FOCUS ON POVERTY AGENCY
The Giuliani administration has identified many of the city jobs it hopes to eliminate through a severance offer, and almost half of those would come out of the agency that provides services to New York City's poor, officials said.
B3.
PLAN FOR JOURNALIST'S MURDER RETOLD
An admitted murderer and double-crossing drug dealer testified in court that he had recruited a teen-ager to shoot Manuel de Dios Unanue to death without knowing that the victim was a muckraking anti-drug journalist.
B3.
GIULIANI CRITICIZES SUBWAY CENSORSHIP
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani criticized the Transit Authority for restricting the filming of violent movie and television sequences in the subway system.
He said attempts to screen the content of films raised freedom-of-speech questions.
B4.
SLIWA'S HIRING MAKES MONEY FOR STATION
The hiring of Curtis Sliwa as a talk show host on New York City's main public radio station has been a surprising fund-raising bonanza for the station, even though many longtime listeners have stopped donating as a result, WNYC officials said.
B3.
REGION  CUOMO PLEA TO WASHINGTON
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo went to Capitol Hill to urge New York's Congressional delegation to keep the fight for a formula that gives the state more Medicaid money at the center of its negotiations on President Clinton's health-care proposals.
B5.
CLUES SOUGHT IN VIRUS DEATH
Health officials began the painstaking medical detective work to explain the death of a Long Island college student last month from a mysterious virus spread through mouse droppings.
B5.
FISHERMAN SHOT IN HOLDUP AT HOME
Three gunmen, one of them masquerading as a police officer, entered the home of a 29-year-old fisherman in Bayville, L.I.
Wednesday night and shot him after he refused to give them money, the Nassau County police said.
B5.
Falling chunks of ice closed several bridges, jamming traffic in the region. B4.
Chronicle B4
Neediest Cases B2


Earth Tones
Gathering mushrooms takes wit, instinct, knowledge and a certain raw cunning.
Having surveyed a patch of autumn wood or the soft underbelly of a spring field, one spies a cap -- it could be a portobello, a porcini or it could be poisonous.
In any case, the sighting sends a tremor through the hand, not unlike the finger's twitch on the trigger of a gun.
To cut and run is to end one chapter and begin another, for cooking mushrooms, like gathering them, requires a steeliness of nerve.


Praise and Criticism for a Workplace Lawyer
To the Editor:
I take exception to Judith Vladeck's extraordinary arrogance when she responded to a multimillion-dollar settlement she reached with the City University of New York in 1983.
"If we were to calculate the real back pay in this case, they'd have to take Brooklyn College and City College and auction them off to pay the damages," she said after the settlement.
Is the quest for higher education secondary to legal torts?
The cavalier bias of Ms.
Vladeck, who herself graduated from Hunter College in the City University system, poorly serves the university community.
JIM ENGLISH  Astoria, Queens, Feb. 14  The writer is a researcher-reporter for Adweek magazine who graduated from Hunter College.


The Olympics Became A CBS Mini-Series
CBS's job in Lillehammer is almost done.
After tonight, the network packs up its galoshes, slow-motion machines and luge cams and waits for Nagano, Japan, in 1998.
Criticism -- lots of it -- has only toughened the resolve of CBS officials to say that their version of the Olympics performed as well as speed skater Johann Olav Koss.
Getting the best ratings in Olympic history emboldened them.


Margaret Allen, Raoul Rodriguez
Margaret Hale Allen, a daughter of Barbara G. Wilkins of Austin, Tex., and of James H. Allen Jr. of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Raoul Pablo Rodriguez, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Raoul P. Rodriguez of New Orleans.
The Rev.
James Hutchins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Cross Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Rodriguez, 29, until recently an assistant vice president at PNC Bank in Philadelphia, is scheduled next month to join the London office of the Northern Trust Company as a second vice president of marketing and sales.
She graduated from Drexel University.
Her father is a civil engineer for the City of Philadelphia.
Her mother is a registered massage therapist in Austin.


The Undoing Of a Diva: Why Here?
KATHLEEN BATTLE PICKED A STRANGE opera with which to overplay her hand at the Metropolitan Opera earlier this month.
There is something odd about a soprano's acting like a prima donna and being dismissed for unprofessional behavior while preparing for a role as innocent and effervescent as Marie in Donizetti's "Fille du Regiment."
The tantrums and egotism of a diva would be more expected in connection with a role that includes tantrums and egotism.
Who wants a Marie who acts offstage like a one-person regiment rather than a gracious vivandiere, who displays the manner of a commanding sergeant rather than a charming mascot?
There are onstage implications as well.
The stories of Ms.
Battle's temperamental outbursts may be exaggerated but they have found resonance in her performances: her remarkable voice has revealed a penchant for glossy self-display under the gorgeous velvet sound.


The Thing in Our Head That Thinks
THE MAKING OF MEMORY From Molecules to Mind.
By Steven Rose.
Illustrated. 355 pp.
New York: Anchor Books/Doubleday.
Paper, $12.95.


One Small Coup for Lotus
To the Editor:
Chalk one up for nifty marketing by the chief executive of Lotus, Jim Manzi ("Computer Keiretsu: Japanese Idea, U.S. Style," Viewpoints, Feb. 6).
About 1984, the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet software made a fundamental and spectacular contribution to the power of personal computers.
For two or three years, expectations were higher for Lotus than for Microsoft, but Lotus languished while Microsoft soared.
Now, at last, Lotus Notes is widely considered to be a worthy product, and Lotus is excited that it again has a product that has attained acclaim.


Hate Fliers Inflame Mayoral Race in New Orleans
Even by the standards of a city where politics has long been a brawler's sport, a pair of anonymous anti-black, anti-Semitic fliers that have circulated in the build-up to the March 5 runoff election for mayor have been particularly nasty.
The election pits State Senator Marc Morial, 36, the son of the late Ernest (Dutch) Morial, New Orleans's first black Mayor, against Donald Mintz, a 50-year-old Jewish lawyer with a long history of civic leadership and strong ties to the city's blacks.


Some Social Security Recipients Will Pay More for '94
SOCIAL Security recipients with significant income were spared a tax increase for 1993, but some of them will pay more this year.
To avoid penalties, additional estimated taxes will probably have to be paid in quarterly installments beginning April 15.


Beyond Denial: An 'Eldercare' Primer; Health-Care Rules Are a Dizzying Maze. It's Terribly Painful to Confront a Parent's Mortality. But Why Wait for a Crisis?
CAROL MAURO'S father lived happily and healthily on his own in a Manhattan walk-up apartment until last Father's Day, when, at the age of 82, he fell and broke his hip.
That injury, complicated by a heart attack, transformed his life, and the lives of his three daughters as well.
Caught unprepared, Mrs.
Mauro says, she and her sisters flailed about in their search for information, "all sort of tripping over each other in trying to be helpful." The months since have been a crash course in the elements of what has come to be called "eldercare" -- the runic regulations of Medicaid and Medicare, the relative benefits of home health care versus life in a nursing home.


In Search of a Buzz
To the Editor:
Until its last sentence, Michael Norman's two-part essay about Mark Richard's "Fishboy" is great news.
A powerful and respected editor goes all out for an original, somewhat inaccessible first novel; a vice president and associate publisher of a huge multinational corporation keeps plugging until she gets attention for the book in major media and through an ambitious tour; the novel then goes back to press not once but twice and is scheduled for release in paperback.


Mutual Funds; When Ads Exploit Investors' Fears
WITH mutual funds being created at a furious pace, and banks and other new entrants scrambling for market share, it is not surprising that competition among fund companies has become fierce.
Sometimes investors reap benefits amid this rivalry, particularly when companies cut prices to gain an edge.
But investors don't benefit when advertising gets out of hand, as it has in a new series of ads from Boston-based Putnam Investments that prey on investors' fears.


In Search of a Buzz
To the Editor:
One can sympathize with the travails of the novelist Mark Richard, the author of "Fishboy." The message in Michael Norman's essay, unhappily, is that unless a book shows promise of yielding a profit, it may never get into print regardless of its merit as literature.
When a publisher sees promise in a writer, it may chance a small printing, as in the case of Mr.
Richard's book, and hope that a second book will justify the gamble.


Novelist at Large
VISITING MRS.
NABOKOV And Other Excursions.
By Martin Amis. 274 pp.
New York:  Harmony Books.


Make Health Care More User-Friendly
To the Editor:
Re "What Is 'Universal' Is Center of Fight Over Health Plan" (front page, Feb. 16):


Palestinians Battle Israelis To Protest Hebron Massacre
Palestinians rioted and fought with Israeli soldiers across the occupied territories and in predominantly Arab towns in Israel today to protest the massacre here on Friday of at least 40 Arab worshipers by a Jewish settler.
Three Palestinians were reported to have been killed by soldiers today and at least 50 others were wounded as the expected Arab rage burst forth after the bloodiest day in Israel's nearly 27-year occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


The Complex Alternative Tax Will Snare More People
PLANNING for the alternative minimum tax was never easy, but the 1993 changes in the tax law have made the task even more difficult.
And because of the complex interaction between the A.M.T. and the new higher tax rates for the wealthiest Americans, the brunt of the alternative tax now falls hardest on upper-middle-income people who were never before subject to it.


Huskies Accomplish Their First Goal by Clinching Title
The Dream Season is no longer their nightmare.
This generation of Connecticut Huskies wrapped itself tightly in the center circle of the Hartford Civic Center tonight, secure at last in the knowledge that it could take its place, side by side, with a group that had established a nearly unreachable standard.


The Downside Of Protectionism
To the Editor:
In his article "The New Colossus: American Culture as Power Export"  [ Jan. 30 ] , John Rockwell too lightly dismisses the contention of Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of American, that European claims of concern for cultural hegemony at the GATT negotiations were merely a smoke screen covering a hard-nosed protectionist stance.


Tuning Up for Music, for Life
For the last decade, Michael Dadap and his wife, Yeou-Cheng Ma, have run a mom-and-pop operation from their house in Fresh Meadows: a world-traveling orchestra of youngsters.
It is called the Children's Orchestra Society, a 120-member ensemble of violinists, cellists, pianists, flutists and guitarists who are following in the bow strokes of the orchestra's most illustrious alumnus: Ms.
Ma's younger brother, the cellist Yo-Yo Ma.


Dr. Elders vs. Joe Uncool
The old admonition to kids used to be that smoking stunts your growth.
Now a new admonition is increasingly being directed at tobacco companies: Stunt your kiddie advertising.
The Surgeon General, Dr.
Joycelyn Elders, last week accused tobacco companies of employing deviously clever advertising to seduce teens into a lifetime of smoking addiction.


Restoring Cars to the L.I.R.R. After Ravages of Snowstorm
MORE than two weeks after the severest storm of the winter, politicians are debating the Long Island Rail Road officials' competence in the face of crisis, commuters are finding seats scarce on shortened rush-hour trains, and maintenance workers are working around the clock to repair the damage to nearly the electrical cars damaged by the storm.
At the Hillside Maintenance Complex in Hollis there is little talk of management decisions or new emergency plans.
The mechanics say there was little that could be done to save the electrical cars from damage.
When fine powdery snow whirls beneath cars traveling at high speeds, the mechanics add, it penetrates the housings protecting electrical switches, sweeps into the intake fans of traction motors and wreaks havoc with the connections and resistors.


Wendy Flanagan, Ralph Carmichael
Wendy Ronan Flanagan, the general counsel of B. G. Sulzle Inc., a manufacturer of surgical needles in Syracuse, was married yesterday to Ralph William Carmichael, a venture capitalist in New York.
The Rev.
William O'Halloran, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Hendricks Chapel at Syracuse University.
Mrs.
Carmichael, 28, is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred J. Flanagan.
Her father was the president and her mother, Lora S. Flanagan, was the executive vice president of Sulzle.
The bride graduated from Boston College and received a law degree from Georgetown University.


The Bat World's Superdad
He may be the ultimate model of the devoted father, though he is a bit webbed of paw: He's a bat with breasts.
Reporting in the journal Nature, scientists last week said they have discovered the first example of a wild male mammal that lactates: a fruit-eating bat called Dyacopterus spadiceus.


A SUITABLE IMAGE
Sassy, snappy, sharp as a march wind.
Spring suits are short on skirts, long on attitude.


Wendy Flanagan, Ralph Carmichael
Wendy Ronan Flanagan, the general counsel of B. G. Sulzle Inc., a manufacturer of surgical needles in Syracuse, was married yesterday to Ralph William Carmichael, a venture capitalist in New York.
The Rev.
William O'Halloran, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Hendricks Chapel at Syracuse University.
Mrs.
Carmichael, 28, is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred J. Flanagan.
Her father was the president and her mother, Lora S. Flanagan, was the executive vice president of Sulzle.
The bride graduated from Boston College and received a law degree from Georgetown University.


The Future, the Past
Helping children with learning disabilities, and the Lincoln and Soldiers Institute.


A Chip Off The Old Sitcom
FROM ITS FIRST WEEKS LAST fall, "Frasier" was a hit consistently among the top 10 shows on television.
Perhaps this does not surprise you; the sitcom, after all, grew out of one of the most beloved programs of all time, "Cheers." NBC could have put on Norm's putative wife, you say, and still have done good business.
Apparently you have forgotten "The Tortellis." That was the original "Cheers" spinoff, built around Carla's slimy ex-husband, Nick.
It ran for just four months in 1987.


Commercial Property/Connecticut; Plans Afoot for New Or Expanded Malls
AT LEAST a dozen major mall expansions or new malls are being planned across Connecticut, even though retail sales have been flat for five years.
Christopher J. Tennyson, senior vice president of Taubman Inc., said mall developers were looking to the future.
His company, based in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., has proposed a 381,000-square-foot expansion of the hugely successful Westfarms Mall, which straddles the West Hartford-Farmington line.
The million-square-foot mall has four anchor stores.


Manhattan Community Board Meetings
DISTRICT 1: Battery Park, TriBeCa; third Tuesday of month; next meeting is March 15, call for time and location. (212) 442-5050.
Chairwoman: Anne Campoccia DISTRICT 2: SoHo, Little Italy, West Village; third Thursday of month; next meeting is March 17, 7 P.M.; St.
Vincent's Hospital 153 West 11th Street int he Cronin Auditorium, 10th floor; (212) 979-2272.
Chairwoman: Carol Feinman


It's Never Too Early to Plan the Garden
THOUGH catalogue study continues, the days are drawing closer to decision-making time.
Seed orders should be on their way to the suppliers soon, and, yes, a change of seasons is coming.
Vegetable gardening should always be based on growing the food that the family enjoys.
There is no sense in growing a bumper crop of a vegetable if no one will even taste it.
Another caution: don't bother with crops that take up too much space and effort for the small amount of harvest they supply.
And further, if the local produce stand has a particular vegetable for sale that the whole family enjoys, why bother with intensive labor all summer long?


Corrections
An article on Feb. 20 about the Spanish film maker Fernando Trueba referred incorrectly to the movie "Belle Epoque." It is not his first release in the United States; "Opera Prima" was released here in 1982 and "Twisted Obsession" in 1990.


Weprin's Hometown Legacy
When Saul Weprin died on Feb. 11, he left an impressive statewide record as a powerful committee chairman and then as Assembly Speaker.
But in the divisive, competitive game of state politics, he also directed his power toward helping the people who elected him, the voters of Bayside, Whitestone, Little Neck and Fresh Meadows.
In Albany, where he ruled in the state's triumvirate with the Governor and Senate majority leader, Mr.
Weprin was remembered as a man nearly everyone liked, with firm stands on broad issues: opposing the death penalty, supporting abortion rights, pushing for gay rights.


Sons Pursue Vacant Posts
Like father, like sons.
Saul Weprin's death left vacant his posts as the State Assemblyman and Democratic Party co-leader in the 24th District.
His sons David and Mark are the first announced candidates for the posts, hoping for a succession they say their father had envisioned before his illness.
Mark Weprin, 32, a lawyer specializing in labor law for the firm Shea &amp; Gould, is seeking the Democratic and Liberal nominations for the Assembly, in heavily Democratic territory.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate 1.
Nomination: Vote to confirm Strobe Talbott as Deputy Secretary of State.
Approved 66 to 31, Feb. 22.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Yea  Lieberman (D) . . .
Yea  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Yea  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Yea  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Nay  Moynihan (D) . . .
Yea  House 1.
Condemning Anti-Semitism: Vote on a resolution condemning the "speech given by Khalid Abdul Muhammad as outrageous hatemongering" and condemning "all manifestations and expressions of racism, anti-Catholicism, anti-Semitism, and ethnic or religious intolerance." Approved 361 to 34, with 29 members answering "Present" and 2 members not-voting, Feb. 23.
Connecticut  1.
Kennelly (D) . . .
Yea  2.
Gejdenson (D) . . .
Yea  3.
DeLauro (D) . . .
Yea  4.
Shays (R) . . .
Yea  5.
Franks (R) . . .
Yea  6.
Johnson (R) . . .
Yea  New Jersey  1.
Andrews (D) . . .
Yea  2.
Hughes (D) . . .
Present  3.
Saxton (R) . . .
Yea  4.
Smith (R) . . .
Yea  5.
Roukema (R) . . .
Yea  6.
Pallone (D) . . .
Yea  7.
Franks (R) . . .
Yea  8.
Klein (D) . . .
Yea  9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Yea  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Nay  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Yea  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Yea  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Yea  New York  1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Yea  2.
Lazio (R) . . .
Yea  3.
King (R) . . .
Yea  4.
Levy (R) . . .
Yea  5.
Ackerman (D) . . .
Yea  6.
Flake (D) . . .
Absent  7.
Manton (D) . . .
Yea  8.
Nadler (D) . . .
Yea  9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Yea  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Nay  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Yea  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Yea  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Yea  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Yea  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Yea  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Yea  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Yea  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Yea  19.
Fish (R) . . .
Yea  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Yea  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Yea  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
Yea  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Yea  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Yea  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
Yea  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Yea  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Yea  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Yea  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Yea  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Yea  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Yea


Corrections
An article yesterday about Washington's expulsion of a Russian diplomat, after an American intelligence officer was charged with spying for Moscow, misspelled the diplomat's surname.
He is Aleksandr Lysenko.


Little Dishes Promise a Feast
IN APRIL, IF ALL GOES WELL, the United States will take a major step toward a new era of broadcasting.
Bypassing earth-based television stations and cable systems, direct satellite transmission in its most advanced digital form will span the whole country and most of Canada.
Backed by the technical and financial clout of General Motors and RCA, the Digital Satellite System will give Americans their first taste of the abundant information technology envisioned by the Clinton Administration.
With 150 channels to be available to anyone with the right satellite dish, the billion dollar venture holds unprecedented possibilities for distributing entertainment and text-based information and educational services.


For Now, All's Quiet At Mr. Fuji's
In the after-dark scene downtown, with its thumping all-night music, traffic jams and disorderly conduct, plenty of clubs are in the running for the title Nightspot Most Hated by Neighbors.
But these days the clear front-runner, according to the police and local officials, is Mr.
Fuji's Tropicana, at Fifth Avenue and 13th Street.
The firing of shots through Mr.
Fuji's door last month by an ejected patron was just one of several incidents that prompted the State Liquor Authority to suspend the club's license this month as a threat to public safety.
Unable to sell alcohol, the club has temporarily closed, and the owners are contesting the ruling.
They say officials are harassing them at the behest of a handful of neighbors.


Manning Scores 10 Points In His Debut With Hawks
Atlanta 118, Philadelphia 102
Duane Ferrell had 21 points and seven other Atlanta players scored in double figures last night as the visiting Hawks defeated the 76ers, 118-102.
It was Philadelphia's ninth straight loss.


Artful Anglers! Rapt Raptors! Happy Hunters! Outdoors Expo Offers All.
A visit to the outdoor exposition here this week might help to erase memories of the unusually bitter winter that is departing the Northeast so grudgingly.
The show, the largest of its kind in the state of New York, will be held Wednesday through Sunday at the Rockland Community College field house here.


Cue Anger! Cue Teeth! Get Kirk!
HE'S 77 AND SLIGHTER THAN HE seemed in "Spartacus" and "Detective Story." But Kirk Douglas retains the urgent voice, the clenched energy, the movie-star hair and, of course, the unmistakable dimple on the chin that have made him a favorite of caricaturists for decades. ("It's an angry imitation," he once commented, "bare teeth and all.")
"I used to lie about my age," he said slowly, savoring every word.
"I'd take off five or six years, but then I had to take five or six years off Michael's age. He began to get famous, and people would say, 'Hey, wait a minute. Didn't Kirk say that Michael was 25. Well, Michael just said he was 32.' " Mr.
Douglas's face lit up with a broad smile.
"I finally, reluctantly, gave up."


A New Genre In the Making?
To the Editor:
Those directors on salary before Alienation and Futility became credit courses understood the pulp nature of their films and wisely kept them to the point.
The original "Gun Crazy" clocks in at a furious 86 minutes, while "Out of the Past," "Foreign Intrigue" and "Double Indemnity" all hover around the 100-minute mark.


It's Never Too Early to Plan the Garden
THOUGH catalogue study continues, the days are drawing closer to decision-making time.
Seed orders should be on their way to the suppliers soon, and, yes, a change of seasons is coming.
Vegetable gardening should always be based on growing the food that the family enjoys.
There is no sense in growing a bumper crop of a vegetable if no one will even taste it.
Another caution: don't bother with crops that take up too much space and effort for the small amount of harvest they supply.
And further, if the local produce stand has a particular vegetable for sale that the whole family enjoys, why bother with intensive labor all summer long?


East Side Story


Wall Street; It's a Bit of a Plunge in Several Senses of the Word
FOR a long time, those who bought casino stocks did much better than those who patronized the casinos.
Now, in the ultimate accolade for an investment fad, gambling stocks are getting their very own derivative.
The Chicago Board Options Exchange last week announced plans to begin trading options on a new Gaming Index.
Since the beginning of 1992, that index has risen 157 percent, while the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 has risen just 12 percent.
But the gaming index is down 11 percent from its peak reached last October, while the S.&amp; P. has risen 1 percent in the same period.


Tuning Up for Music, for Life
For the last decade, Michael Dadap and his wife, Yeou-Cheng Ma, have run a mom-and-pop operation from their house in Fresh Meadows: a world-traveling orchestra of youngsters.
It is called the Children's Orchestra Society, a 120-member ensemble of violinists, cellists, pianists, flutists and guitarists who are following in the bow strokes of the orchestra's most illustrious alumnus: Ms.
Ma's younger brother, the cellist Yo-Yo Ma.


Wharton's Grave
To the Editor: The grave of Edith Wharton's friend Walter V. R. Berry lies four spaces from hers in equal dilapidation in the Cimetiere des Gonards in Versailles.
He predeceased her by 10 years, and about a year before her death, she wrote a memorandum of burial instructions stating her wish to have a marker like his, save for the Latin inscription, "the Cross Is Our Hope," to be on hers..
They were passionate, steadfast friends and expatriates.
He was her lawyer, mentor and companion.
Soon after he died in 1927, she retrieved 400 letters she had written to him and burned them.
In business life, he was president of the American Chamber of Commerce and practiced law in Paris.


Recognizing Fashion Acumen
The Lighthouse honors Elizabeth Tilberis at the Waldorf-Astoria, Feb. 15.


Baryshnikov &amp; Co.: 'We Don't Do Ballet'
THE SCENE, IN MANY WAYS, WAS familiar.
On a recent blustery afternoon, Mikhail Baryshnikov, the preeminent male dancer of his time, stood in a near-empty Manhattan studio, rehearsing a new dance by Jerome Robbins, the third Mr.
Robbins has choreographed for him over the years.
In black tights and a blue T-shirt, with his boyish shock of sandy hair, Mr.
Baryshnikov cut a lean, sculpted figure.
But this is 1994, 20 years since he left Russia's Kirov Ballet to dance in the West, 8 years since he last performed "Giselle," 4 years since he started the White Oak Dance Project, his modern-dance troupe.
And like the steps, the patter had changed.
"This iswhere I feel so sorry for myself, for my knee, for my age," Mr.
Baryshnikov said wryly, holding an arabesque as a cellist played a mournful saraband from Bach's Suites for Solo Cello.
The musician switched to a gigue.
Mr.
Baryshnikov responded, marking the first few bars, then breaking into a jazzy romp.
After a somersault, he essayed an immaculate string of turns, a reminder of his greatness in major classical ballet roles.
"You've got ballet steps in there," teased Rob Besserer, a charter member of White Oak.
Mr.
Baryshnikov punched him playfully.
"We don't do ballet," he replied.


Some Gifts to the Neediest Inspired by Donors' Grief
A woman from California gave to help very young children in memory of her little boy, who died shortly after birth.
A man from Brooklyn gave to help teen-agers who have lost parents after one of his co-workers died and left behind a 16-year-old son.
They are among the hundreds of people who have contributed to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund in order to do something very much in keeping with the spirit of the fund itself: to "turn sorrow and pain into positive action," in the words of one contributor.


The American Economy, Back on Top
DURING the Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton often fretted that the United States economy was fast becoming the world's also-ran.
But more and more it looks as if he inherited a winner.
A 3 percent economic growth rate, a gain of two million new jobs in the past year and an inflation rate reminiscent of the 1960's make America the envy of the industrialized world.
The amount the average American worker can produce, already the highest in the world, is growing faster than in other wealthy countries, including Japan.
The United States has become the world's low-cost provider of many sophisticated products and services, from plastics to software to financial services.
And after years of decline, the nation's share of the world export market has been rising.


Weprin's Hometown Legacy
When Saul Weprin died on Feb. 11, he left an impressive statewide record as a powerful committee chairman and then as Assembly Speaker.
But in the divisive, competitive game of state politics, he also directed his power toward helping the people who elected him, the voters of Bayside, Whitestone, Little Neck and Fresh Meadows.
In Albany, where he ruled in the state's triumvirate with the Governor and Senate majority leader, Mr.
Weprin was remembered as a man nearly everyone liked, with firm stands on broad issues: opposing the death penalty, supporting abortion rights, pushing for gay rights.


The Snowy Day And the L.I.R.R.
L.I.R.R. -- Long Involved Re-Routing
It is 3 P.M. on this snowy Friday, Feb. 11.
I am in my office in Manhattan by myself.
All my colleagues have left for the day -- to go to their homes in New Jersey, Connecticut, Westchester, Queens, Brooklyn.
I, however, unable to leave Penn Station as early as 11 A.M., cannot get home.
I have just returned from Penn Station and I hear on the radio about the horrors at Jamaica, where all passengers are being re-routed from Penn Station.
I decide to stay put.


Better, Brighter Space on a Tight Budget
IN a tight economy, an architect's job is particularly challenging: How to meet a project's objectives within strict budgetary guidelines -- and still create an exciting design.
Eight firms, having met those challenges, have been recognized by the American Institute of Architects, Connecticut, in its 31st annual design awards competition.


One of the Last Great Shelters
FOR almost a decade, the Federal low-income-housing tax credit has helped large corporations save millions of dollars by investing in the construction of affordable homes.
But the program can also provide a tax shelter for individual investors, particularly those with high incomes.
"It is not a product that has very much public awareness," said Georgia Murray, a senior vice president with The Boston Financial Group, which has sold tax credits to 28,000 people.


Rent Aid to Tai Chi to Meals-on-Wheels: A Program Guide
NEW YORK CITY is blessed with an abundant variety of programs for the elderly, reflecting the city's cultural mix.
But it is also cursed by a lack of coordination that makes it hard for people to find out what is available.
"People don't know what services there are," said Grace Harewood, executive director of the Fort Greene Senior Citizens Council in Brooklyn.
"I know a woman who worked full time and would race home on her lunch hour to cook meals for her parents. Then one day she saw one of our vans going through the neighborhood, and she called to see if she could get meals delivered to them."


The Nation: Film Noir It Isn't; Is Paris Burning? Not in My Movie!
In the hands of the New York City Transit Authority, the film "The Great Train Robbery," one of the country's first shoot 'em up cowboy films, would probably have been "The Great Train Ride," a bumpy, grainy travelogue.
But hotter heads prevailed and American filmmaking was on the track to the real-life adventure cinema that became its trademark -- only to be derailed in New York City's subway tunnels.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Colonia; Winding Streets and Easy Commuting
THE most desirable of the eight sections of Woodbridge Township, Colonia is known for large building lots with deep front lawns on wide, winding streets lined with old trees.
Because few communities within a 30-mile radius of New York City offer such properties, the Middlesex County hamlet is one of the hottest real estate markets in the New York metropolitan area.


Battered but Unbowed, Bronx Seeks Government Aid
In terms of economic aid for the Bronx, Borough President Fernando Ferrer has no bird in the hand.
But he is keeping several irons in the fire.
The Bronx has suffered a number of blows over the last year, ranging from the cancellation of a street and sewer reconstruction project for Hunts Point to the Giuliani administration's decision to drop a new Bronx-based police academy to George Steinbrenner's threats to desert Yankee Stadium.


Copy Norway
To the Sports Editor:
"Games Open Amid Pomp, Snow and Quiet Culture" (The Times, Feb. 13) not only well described the scene of traditional costumes, reindeer sleighs and Norway's Children's Choir singing to us from the five Olympic rings, it stood in striking contrast to last month's frenetic, costly midgame Super Bowl extravaganza: a barrage of sounds, uniforms, flashing lights and hyperactivity.
All of which left viewers numb rather than captivated or enlightened.


The Suburban Connection
"IF you build it, they will come," the philosophy expressed in "Field of Dreams," could serve as a history of Westchester County Airport.
Still using its "temporary" post-World War II quarters, and without any effort to lure new airlines or passengers, the airport has seen traffic increase, by fits and starts, almost fivefold since 1982.
"If you unbuild it, they will still come" would also work as a motto, because the long-awaited replacement of the Quonset hut terminal has begun, along with construction of a much-disputed parking garage, making life for the airport's passengers nearly impossible.
Yet the passenger figure for 1993 showed a rise from 1992, in contrast with the other suburban airports and New York's three big ones.


Major's Trip Tries to Mend the Atlantic Fence
Having found himself at odds with the United States during the last year over Northern Ireland and Bosnia, among other issues, Prime Minister John Major is to arrive in Washington late Sunday for a two-day visit intended in part to help him forge a closer relationship with President Clinton.
Mr.
Major is to meet with several top Administration officials, including Vice President Al Gore and Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
But the central event is an excursion, planned by the White House to inject a personal element to the visit, to Pittsburgh, where Mr.
Major's grandfather lived near the end of the 19th century.


Lawsuit Seeks to Limit Size of Hospital Expansion
To the Editor:
In regard to the Feb. 13 article "Community Group Sues to Stop a Hospital Expansion Project," we want to make it clear that the group that is leading the suit, Park Slope Action for the Environment, is not looking to simply stop New York Methodist Hospital's commercial development but rather to control the size and scope of the project.


Seed Planted in Brooklyn Blooms as Violence
Baruch Goldstein's journey through the West Bank settler movement ended singularly on Friday when he fired his assault rifle at a congregation of Palestinians.
But the journey began 11 years before in the same place as so many others have: the borough of Brooklyn.
Thousands of New Yorkers, many of them from Brooklyn and Queens, have moved into the white concrete houses and apartment blocks of the West Bank since the settler movement began after Israel captured the territories in 1967.
Some, like Dr.
Goldstein, who was born in Bensonhurst, have gravitated toward the extremes of anti-Arab furor, while others lead placid, less political lives, commuting from the territories to jobs inside Israel.


The Shopper's Friend
CAROL CHANNING, an avid listener, once called Joan Hamburg the Yellow Pages of the world.
Her knowledge of the city is encyclopedic, and the large loose-leaf notebooks that contain this lifetime accumulation of information have overtaken her two offices and the studio at WOR-710 AM, from which she broadcasts six days a week.
But it's probably more accurate to think of Ms.
Hamburg as a cross between Dear Abby and Betty Furness.
Anything that helps make life easier in New York gets pasted in the books: where to find the best hair cutter, who will paint a portrait of your dog, how to triumph over a bait-and-switch scam, where to find a man.


WAITING
The Top 10 worst things about genetic counseling:
10.
Being a victim of the medical establishment: one is truly in the belly of the beast.


No Valentine
To the Sports Editor:
I found George Vecsey's "Hey, Nancy, Baby, Wanna Getta Beer?" (The Times, Feb. 14) to be quite some valentine to Tonya Harding.
The image of Harding may not evoke a warm-and-fuzzy feeling these days, but the vitriolic attack of this column, where she was depicted as behaving churlishly, kicking off her wet boots in the living room of her Olympic dorm, puffing on a cigar and searching for beer, Beavis and Butt-Head, all the while terrorizing Nancy Kerrigan, is outrageous.
You can almost hear her belch.
STEVE ADNOPOZ  Chappaqua, N.Y.


Corrections
A map on Feb. 13 with an article about new casinos in Las Vegas located the MGM Grand Hotel incorrectly.
It is on Las Vegas Boulevard South at Tropicana Avenue, not at Flamingo Road.


MANHATTAN UPDATE
*
PENNSYLVANIA STATION: The City Planning Commission has voted 5 to 4, with 2 abstentions, against renewing a Penn Station video arcade's three-year permit.
The arcade, Station Break, also known as Time Out Amusement Arcade, has been attracting mostly young people to its 100 video games for 16 years.
Now the owners have 30 days to vacate the site, in the Long Island Rail Road concourse.


Meeting Mutineers' Kin
Whatever happened to the descendants of Fletcher Christian and his fellow mutineers on the H.M.S.
Bounty?
Approximately 700 of them are alive and well on Norfolk Island, a remote Australian territory 1,000 miles northeast of Sydney.
There they partake in the island's big businesses: fishing, tourism and the issuing of postage stamps.
And next fall, some will attend a cocktail party with participants on a tour of the South Pacific's distant reaches, organized by Travcoa.


Hollywood Is Casting; New York Stays Home
Seeking Hollywood's glamour and its dollars, representatives of governments around the country are gathering this weekend at a trade show in Los Angeles trying to persuade movie producers to film in their cities and states.
But there is a notable absence at the Location Expo.
New York City, with a vacancy at the top of its Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting, is not represented.


Come and Meet Those Dancing Feet
CELEBRATION of tap dancing, complete with a film screening and live performances, is set for tomorrow night.
The event is to benefit Tap Extravaganza '94, an awards ceremony held in May in conjunction with National Tap Dance Day.
"We Dance and We Sing," a documentary about the NIcholas Brothers, is to be followed by a discussion of the film, with Harold Nicholas taking part.
The program will include performances by Savion Glover, Ted Levy, and Omar Edwards and Daniel Wooten of Toe Jam, as well as a champagne reception.
Interest in tap danceing has increased in the last few years, said Cynthia Kirk, a spokeswoman for the New York Committee to Celebrate National Tap Dance Day, which is sponsoring tomorrow's event.
The revival, she said, has been fostered in part by the success of Broadway musicals like "Jelly's Last Jam" and Hollywood films like "Tap." The committee has been presenting the Extravaganza since 1990; this year's will take place on May 25, the birthday of Bill (Bojangles) Robinson.
New-York Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, between 76th and 77th Streets; 7:30 P.M.
Monday; $20 to $30; $20 extra for champagne reception; (718) 875-3502.


Molding Is Useful, but Mounting It May Need Practice
ADDING molding can change a room as dramatically as painting or wallpapering.
Molding shapes, or profiles, can help define the character of a room.
The placement of molding can create, alter or emphasize reference points.
It helps to see a display of installed molding rather than small samples, but the samples are useful for understanding how moldings can be combined to produce an overall design.
An example is baseboard molding in which three or more strips are often layered to produce the complete profile.


Sweaty Palms and Stomaches
PSYCHOLOGICALLY speaking, there are just two kinds of taxpayers.
The first are so cavalier they've skipped ahead to the sports section.
It's the others who need help: the ones who struggle with the ever-changing rules and who are often gripped by fear.
Confronted by the subjective nature of the law and its interpretation by one of the country's most insurmountable bureaucracies, the worrying types suffer every year.
Mostly, they have mild anxiety and misgivings, which take the form of nail biting and stomach knots.
But some people truly worry themselves sick.


Feb. 20-26: Internal Barriers; Immigration Service Faces A Bias Suit by 550 Blacks
As it has tried to stem a tide of illegal immigrants -- many of them black and brown -- the Immigration and Naturalization Service has had a reputation as one of the whitest of Federal agencies, especially in the supervisory ranks.
An internal report last June noted that despite efforts at diversity, the service "has been unsuccessful with respect to the recruitment, employment and advancement of African-Americans."
It may soon be forced to change: A judge's ruling, made last month and disclosed last week, makes I.N.S. the target of the largest discrimination case ever filed against the Federal Government.


Do 1990's Women Crumble?
To the Editor:
I would say after reading "Age, Beauty and Truth" (Jan. 23) that women have only themselves to fear and dislike, not men, not society or the cosmetics industry.


Editors' Note
A listing yesterday with articles about the West Bank massacre gave brief descriptions of violent incidents in the Middle East and the lives they claimed.


Beyond Denial: An 'Eldercare' Primer; Health-Care Rules Are a Dizzying Maze. It's Terribly Painful to Confront a Parent's Mortality. But Why Wait for a Crisis?
CAROL MAURO'S father lived happily and healthily on his own in a Manhattan walk-up apartment until last Father's Day, when, at the age of 82, he fell and broke his hip.
That injury, complicated by a heart attack, transformed his life, and the lives of his three daughters as well.
Caught unprepared, Mrs.
Mauro says, she and her sisters flailed about in their search for information, "all sort of tripping over each other in trying to be helpful." The months since have been a crash course in the elements of what has come to be called "eldercare" -- the runic regulations of Medicaid and Medicare, the relative benefits of home health care versus life in a nursing home.


It Will Cost a Bit More To Fly From Britain
Travelers leaving British airports will pay a departure tax starting in October.
For people flying within Britain and the European Union the tax will be $:5, or about $7.50 at current exchange rates. (On round trips to and from the same airport within Britain, the tax will be levied only once.) For passengers to all other destinations, including the United States, the tax will be $:10, or $15.
Passengers who just change planes in Britain are exempted from the tax.
Many countries levy similar taxes or fees, as do some cities and airport authorities in the United States.
But unlike Britain, which plans to use the proceeds for general government expenditures, they usually restrict use of the funds to a special purpose such as paying for airport operations, expansion or modernization.


WILLIAM T. VOLLMANN'S RISKY BUSINESS
Regarding your fascinating but all-too-brief profile of the writer William T. Vollmann: I'm awfully glad that someone is out there being William Vollmann, but I'm also kind of relieved that it doesn't have to be me.
TOM HUGHES Upper Jay, N.Y.


INTO THE WHITE IVORY TOWER
Regarding his stalking Saul Bellow, Staples writes, "I wanted something from him." But what Bellow had to offer was in his novels.
If after reading "Humboldt's Gift" and "Dangling Man" he wanted more, he should have turned to Bellow's other novels and left the man alone.
DAVID M. KAPLAN New York, N.Y.


Extra Work For Some Mets
Mets Manager Dallas Green and his coaching staff ended today's workouts at their spring training complex with a little extracurricular activity.
Green and his coaches -- some barefoot, some with sleeves rolled up -- grabbed rakes and went to work on the Thomas J. White Stadium field.


Editorial Notebook; The Artistry of George Tames
Newspaper journalism takes place within rigid stylistic guidelines.
Even so, there are a handful of writers and photographers who manage, within those strict limits, to create work that rises to the level of art.
George Tames, the Times photographer who died on Wednesday at the age of 75, was such a person.
Even into his 70's, George could run and gun with the best young shooters.
But every now and then his Nikon -- or, in the old days, his Speed Graphic -- would spit out an image that you knew would outlast the issue of the paper in which it appeared.


Sports of The Times; Holy Cow! The Scooter Is Going to Cooperstown
WHEN a Yankee game was about to go into extra innings several years ago, Phil Rizzuto stood and turned to his broadcast partner, Frank Messer.
"Want a cup of coffee?" Rizzuto asked.


Habitats/7,000 Square Feet for Sale in TriBeCa; A Sumptuous, Yet Austere, Loft
THE Venetian lady with the black ermine cloak stares down from the wall, defying the forced gaiety of her era -- the 1920's.
Her face is strong, austere and handsome and her sumptuous clothes and pointed black satin dancing pumps make it clear that she is very rich.
"Whoever she is, she is very scary," said Ippolito Etro, whose family owns the 7,000-square-foot loft in TriBeCa where the portrait presides over the oak-paneled reading room.
"Her eyes follow you around the room."


12 Women Call For Equality In Business
Like many struggling business owners, Sandra Sam has put everything into her restaurant, the Gadabout, on Fifth Avenue at 125th Street.
In September, she even sold her home to keep up with her bills.
"That was the only home my children knew, and believe me, they're not happy about this," she said.
"Right now I'm at the point that if my business closed, I'd have to go on welfare."


New York Apartment Rents Moving Up
BUOYED by a tightening of the market and an improvement in the regional economy, unregulated rents in Manhattan moved upward in 1993, reversing the previous year's downturn, real-estate agents and analysts said.
The increase, many of them said, was especially notable on the Upper West Side, where rental space is at a premium and which is rapidly becoming a magnet neighborhood for those interested in just that -- a neighborhood, and all that the word means.
Agents said that Greenwich Village, SoHo and TriBeCa were also booming.


Rage in a Village in Mexico Where Land Is Life
It is a possession so precious that it is hidden deep in the woods.
When it is needed an elder member of this communal farm in the state of Chiapas gallops away on a white horse, returning half an hour later with a portfolio.
Inside are the yellowed papers the Indian peasants of El Carrizal filed on April 7, 1983, to formally demand possession of the land on which they and their forebears had worked in virtual slavery since the turn of the century.
All over Chiapas there are groups of poor farmers like those in El Carrizal who have had faith in Mexico's singular system of land redistribution but have not obtained what they wanted.
Their frustration, anger and feeling of betrayal are held in common by the members of the Zapatista National Liberation Army, which attacked several cities on Jan. 1 and demands, among other things, the land that for them means life.


The Judges' Judge Says Baiul Deserves the Gold
The Swedish referee for women's figure skating said today that the 5-4 decision to award the Olympic gold medal to Oksana Baiul over Nancy Kerrigan was the most difficult she had encountered in her 30 years as a judge.
The official, Britta Lindgren, supervised the nine-judge panel during the two portions of the women's competition, which concluded Friday night.
She did not cast a vote herself but said she agreed with the narrow decision.
Several factors were in favor of Baiul, the 16-year-old Ukrainian, Lindgren said: a more artistic, balletic and engaging style, more dynamic spins and spirals, more intricate footwork and a triple lutz that was higher and more cleanly landed than Kerrigan's.


At Work; Coming Soon: Get a Life 101?
GIVEN the keen attention being paid to work-family issues at some of the so-called best-practices companies, it is not surprising that there should also be a boom of attention at business schools, which have a professional interest in the obsessions of the companies who hire their students.
More surprising perhaps is how little conversation on the topic flows back and forth between business and business schools.
The constituencies nevertheless managed to mingle fabulously earlier this month during a day-long meeting at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
A dozen and a half work-family experts, from corporations, universities and consulting firms across the nation, gathered in a campus seminar room and traded ideas on how to teach new generations of corporate leadership to have a career and a life.


Loren Bevans, William R. Pace
Loren Bevans, a costume designer, and William R. Pace, an independent writer and film maker, both in New York, are to be married today in Havana, Ill.
The Rev.
Daryl Fansler, a Methodist minister, will officiate at the Storefront Theater.
Ms.
Bevans, 31, will keep her name.
She is the resident costume designer for the T.W.E.E.D.
Theater Company and a draper's assistant at Donna Langman Couture.
Her two previous marriages ended in divorce.
She is the daughter of Jane Bevans of New York and the late Bradford H. Bevans.
Her stepfather, John Tauranac, is a map maker who designed the New York City subway map.
Her mother, a lawyer in New York, is also a painter of still life and figures.
The bride is a great-granddaughter of Carl Van Doren, the historian who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1939 for his biography of Benjamin Franklin.


Incinerators Again Testing A New Mayor
During his campaign for mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani expressed skepticism about plans for two large incinerators in Brooklyn, saying New York City should focus on recycling instead.
But a series of recent actions by the administration has worried opponents of incineration, who say they fear the plans will go forward.
The plans call for a new $450 million incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard to handle 3,000 tons a day and for upgrading an unused, smaller plant in Bensonhurst.
They have been promoted by previous administrations as vital to the city's efforts to end its reliance on the overflowing Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island.


A Pasta Specialist Tries Going It Alone
SOLO is small, friendly and visually attractive.
The menu at this stylish new cafe on Main Street in Smithtown says, "John is the boss." John Indrigo, chef and owner, who owned Pasta Pasta in Port Jefferson, recently sold his share in that enterprise.
Now he is having a solo turn at this new Smithtown address.
The tiny two-tiered storefront is dominated by a long bar on the upper level.
Over everything is a dropped oval ceiling painted sky blue with white wispy clouds.
The rest of the decor is a sharp mixture of the elegant and the rustic.
Chairs with rush seats and terra cotta floors harmonize with attractive pottery and an elaborate chandelier.


ACCESSORY of the moment; It's Better Worn On Top
The undershirt is no longer something to hide. It's this season's essential extra.


Leslie C. Cohen and Jeffrey I. Lang
Leslie Carolyn Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan J. Cohen of South Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Ira Lang, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel A. Lang of Monroeville, PA.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein performed the ceremony at Congregation Kehilath Jesurun in New York.
Ms.
Cohen, 31, is keeping her name.
She is the director of television program planning for the National Basketball Association in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
Her father is the president of Elias B. Cohen &amp; Associates, an insurance brokerage and consulting firm in Roseland, N.J.


Business Diary: February 20-25
COMPANIES Bell Atlantic and T.C.I.
Decide the Future can Wait Maybe everyone got carried away with this "information highway" idea; maybe things were moving too fast.
Because all the fancy talk got slammed into a wall of reality.
The Huge Merger planned by Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications was supposed to set off a fireworks-popping transformation of, well, the world as we know it - cable-television, communications, who-knows-what.
But last week, the two compnies said, Never mind: The numbers don't add up.
Why did the deal crash?
The F.C.C. lowering cable rates played a part, and T.C.I.'s aggreasive manner did clash with staid Bell Atlantic.
But more likely it just wasn't time for the cable industry to disappear into some labyrinthine, futuristic world.
Now, said one executive, cable "will not be folded into the telephone industry as quickly as people thought." cable stocks, though, looked better before.


POSTINGS: Accessible by Computer or Phone; Company Is Marketing Environmental Risk Data
Ever worry that the home you might buy could be on or near the next Love Canal?
Claritas, a private marketing research corporation based in Alexandria, Va., has created an environmental hazards database that can be accessed by computer or telephone to provide a risk report on any address -- or latitude-longitude point, census tract, Zip Code, county or state -- in the United States.
The reports cost $75 for each address and provide a list of every known toxic-waste site and type within one mile.
Larger scale and more detailed environmental risk reports can cost thousands of dollars more, however.


Architecture As Social Action, And Vice Versa
EARLY THIS MONTH, AT A lecture sponsored by New York's Architectural League, Frank Gehry took a shot at those who have been calling on architects to be more socially responsible.
It wasn't a cheap shot.
It was an honest, spirited defense of values that matter deeply to Gehry and should also matter to anyone who cares about the vitality of the art form he practices.
But as a critique of what is going on in architecture today, his comments somewhat missed the mark.
Not long ago, Gehry told the standing-room-only audience, he had turned down an invitation to join a panel discussion on "Star Architects and Social Responsibility." He was right to smell a set-up: the mere pairing of those two phrases is implicitly judgmental.
Stars, after all, aren't meant to be responsible.
They just twinkle.
Star architects like Gehry, went the unstated message, don't really give a damn about the homeless.
They just want to glorify themselves with snazzy artistic statements.


Vital Signs Improve for the Nursing Home Industry
AS with virtually all segments of the health care marketplace, change is sweeping through the nation's $70 billion nursing home industry.
What is different here, though, is that few in this highly fragmented business are complaining.
People in the business are smiling because, among other things, there is a rising tide of senior citizens to take care of, and there is a stagnant to declining pool of beds in which to put them.
Nursing home companies are also successfully competing with hospitals in taking care of patients who are recovering from surgery.


A Step-by-Step Guide to Coping With the Form 1040
FORTUNATELY, Congress has not yet reached its goal of simplifying taxes.
A really simple return could be reduced to two lines: How much did you earn last year?
Send it in.
The deductions, credits and exemptions that whittle down taxes lie in the nooks and crannies of the present complicated system.
To help taxpayers understand the system and structure their own finances advantageously, as well as file their 1993 returns, Jan M. Rosen of The New York Times in consultation with Daniel Caine, a tax lawyer and author of the popular program Taxcut from Meca Software, prepared this return for a hypothetical two-income New York family using Taxcut.


In Litchfield, Mongolian Artists Celebrate Their Country
IN the fifth century they were the Huns; pushing other barbarian peoples ahead of them, they reached Gaul.
If their king, Attila, had lived longer, they might have penetrated Italy to complete the destruction of Rome begun in 410 by Alaric I, the Visigoth.
Early in the 13th century they surged out of Asia as the Mongols, to establish the largest empire in history, stretching from the Black Sea to the coast of China and from Siberia to the Himalayas.
It was the era of the great Khans -- Genghis, Kublai and others -- and it lasted until the early 1400's.


NEW VIEWS
Talk about an incendiary season!
Many of the new spring fashions are so extreme they're destined to set off conflagrations, either of indignation or admiration.
Designers are expressing strong points of view, from the most aggressive edges of punk to the bustled and petticoated skirts of prettiness.
Women are barraged with definitive style choices.
If you're in a rebellious frame of mind, bleached-blond buzz cuts, nose and navel rings, undershirts and tattoos are there to flash your feelings.
Those obsessed with physical fitness will find that jock attire has been adapted for office and evening wear.
For the ones with no shame and nothing to hide there are slip-dresses that pretend to conceal but really reveal.
Workig women will find their standby suits all shook up: the jackets stretched downward, the skirts clipped higher, the shapes softened, sometimes almost to sloppiness.
Even familiar silhouettes, such as tunics with pajama pants, have been given a spring shakedown.
They are now rendered in the waftiest fabrics, shaded ivory, bisque, mist or palest peach.
Romantics will find drenchingly feminine, turn-of-the-century costumery.
Regressives can doll up in little girl dresses.
Sophisticated sylphs can sheathe themselves in 1930's bias-cut styles.
And those who yearn to fly high in the sky can find fashions so ethereal they could almost take wing.
About the only people left in the lurch are the traditionalists and the realists (which, of course, include most of us).


Trade Center Bombing Victims Remembered


BENEFITS
Roudabout Tribute MONDAY -- Gene Feist, The founding director of the Roundabout Theater Company, will be honored for his 30 years in the theater at a benefit at the Roundabout, 1530 Broadway at 45th Street.
Alan Arkin, Karen Allen, Philip Bosco, Geraldine Fitzgerald, Nancy Marchand and the Lar Lubavitch Dance Company will be among the performers at the benefit for the Roundabout Conservatory Ensemble Company, which trains young actors.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by entertainment at 8.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 719-9393.
Masked Ball for Purim
WEDNESDAY -- The Jewish Museum will hold its annual masked-ball benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria to celebrate Purim.
"The Gardens of Alhambra," the evening will include a tribute to the museum's Sephardic Heritage Society.
Cocktails at 6:30 will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Dress is black tie or costume.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 675-9474.
Celebrating a Space


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3
Think of Joan Hamburg as a consumer's aid society of the air, a cross between Dear Abby and Betty Furness.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4
This is not a story about a trade war along upper Broadway.
Just call it healthy competition.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14
Plover rescue in Breezy Point; Mozart's "Requiem" in the West Village. MOVIE CLOCK 15
What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday. GOOD EATING 16
The Flatiron and environs: Mediterranean in the main, with an oompah on the side.
SOAPBOX 17
Around a deathbed, life and love; a priest's story.
Plus Photographer's Journal and a rumination on car alarms.


A SUITABLE IMAGE
Sassy, snappy, sharp as a march wind.
Spring suits are short on skirts, long on attitude.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Two Palestinian Rivals Warn of Storm to Come
Sitting in a sunlit room in this town destined to become the base for the Palestine Liberation Organization, two Palestinian leaders from widely diverse ideological backgrounds said the West Bank and the Gaza Strip stood on the edge of a violent explosion once a three-day mourning period over the massacre in Hebron came to an end on Monday.
Both in their mid-30's, one belongs to Fatah, the mainstream faction of the P.L.O., and the other is an official of the militant Hamas movement, which opposes the P.L.O. agreement with Israel and which has attacked Jewish settlers.


County in Front Lines on Welfare Reform
WHILE the Administration and Congress prepare to wrangle in the nation's capital over welfare reform, Maureen Stevens, 39, quietly rises at dawn here, readies her two sons for school and -- dressed like the professional woman she once only dreamed of being -- hurries to catch the bus to work.
Ms.
Stevens, a former welfare recipient, recently graduated from a county work-study program and was hired as a full-time secretary.
She has since painted her apartment, redecorated the living room, purchased new wardrobes for Kenneth, 12, and Kyle, 7 -- and started waking in the morning with a smile.


WE ARE THE PRESIDENT
I'm amazed at Maureen Dowd's frivolous hand-wringing over President Clinton's complicated and sometimes hectic style of governance in her On Washington column "We Are the President" (Jan. 23).
Given the choice, would it be better, in the long run, for the country to have a constantly evolving, young activist president or some complacent old warrior in the White House?
I know my preference. J. KINGSTON PIERCE Seattle


State Laws On Where You Live And Earn
ALTHOUGH Federal tax returns get the most attention, it's state returns that cause some people to despair.
Live in one state and work in another?
Own a second home in a second state?
Real life is anything but tidy, and situations like these are pocked with tax pitfalls.
Take residency conflicts.
No matter what you consider your primary residence, a state might call you a resident if you own a home there.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Purchased the contract of Matt Stairs, outfielder, from Pawtucket of the International League.
Assigned Brian Conroy, pitcher, outright to Pawtucket and invited him to spring training as a non-roster player.


De-Cluttering The Sidewalks Of 34th Street
As part of a campaign to clean up 34th Street, the city's Department of Consumer Affairs and the Police Department have begun cracking down on stores that obstruct sidewalks with merchandise.
In the first sweeps, on Jan. 22, Jan. 28 and Feb. 5, the police visited 39 stores, issued 17 summonses and confiscated 20 bags of goods including umbrellas, watches and beads.
No violations were found on a Feb. 19 sweep, though officials said that bad weather could have been a factor.


Satisfying Stews From Britain, France and the Greek Islands
WHEN the weather is brisk, it is hard to stick with a diet of salads and chicken without the skin.
As far as I'm concerned, nothing beats a good stew at this time of year, and it does not have to be a fatty dish rich in calories, either.
Rabbit, which is increasingly available in butcher shops and specialty stores, is low in fat, and it has more flavor than chicken.
It is especially good stewed because it does not dry out as is often the case when it is roasted or grilled.
The meat is simmered in a sauce flavored with tomatoes and onions, and tiny hard green picholine olives from the south of France (do not try to substitute canned Spanish olives: they do not taste the same).
This stew is good with wide flat noodles.


Surf 'n' Turf . . . 'n' Nova, Too
JOSEPH R. GURRERA is on the front line of the upper Broadway fish war, which he denies is a war and denies starting.
He is also on the front line of the upper Broadway butcher war, which -- well, you can figure out the rest.
Until last year, Citarella, the venerable market he owns at Broadway and 75th Street, sold fish -- the whole fish, fillet of fish, nothing but fish.
Then Citarella opened a takeout counter and started selling salads and sandwiches and smoked salmon -- many varieties of smoked salmon.
And then Citarella rented the store next door and opened a butcher shop.


Bisexual Bravado Unto Death
WHEN THE FRENCH WRITER AND director Cyril Collard died of AIDS last year, 1,000 people showed up for his funeral at Pere Lachaise Cemetery -- the final home of pop icons like Edith Piaf, whose melancholy romanticism Collard echoed, and Jim Morrison, whose live-fast, die-young allure the film maker's own appeal vaguely resembled.
In the few years during which he was a celebrity in France, Collard was an ambiguous hero.
His first and only feature film, "Savage Nights," won a Cesar (the French version of the Oscar) for best film just three days after his death at the age of 35.
The autobiographical story of an H.I.V.-positive bisexual named Jean, played by Collard, the film turned him into both hero and villain.
"Savage Nights" opened in New York on Friday (after having been shown at last year's New Directors/New Films Festival).
Perhaps it will benefit from the commercial success of "Philadelphia," which has been surprisingly popular with audiences across the country, but the French film could not be further from any mainstream AIDS story.


The Grammys In a Word: Whitney . . .
WHEN THE 36TH ANNUAL Grammy Awards are handed out on Tuesday night, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences won't be worrying about embarrassment.
Hindsight hasn't been good to the Grammys.
Does anybody remember Christopher Cross, who swept the top awards for 1980?
The 1993 eligibility period (by Grammy rules, Oct. 1, 1992 to Sept. 30, 1993 was the kind of year the Grammys expect to comprehend. A big, gooey ballad -- Whitney Houston's version of "I Will Always Love You" -- dominated the pop charts, and rocking upstarts like Smashing Pumpkins and Dr. Dre had to share the Top 10 with familiar names like Billy Joel and Meat Loaf. So the academy's 9,000 members can cite commercial justification as they relegate genuinely current music to peripheral categories.


Frankfurt
To the Editor: "Frankfurt's Other Face" (Dec. 26) did a reasonable job of describing the museums on the Riverbank.
My favorite was the German Postal Museum, which not only had interesting interactive displays, but two other major pluses too.
There was a great sense of humor in the video piece showing, in the best slapstick tradition, what postal employees can do wrong.
And the gift shop is one of the best anywhere, with virtually all the items related to the post office or communications.


Grace Garguilo, Adam Buckman
Grace Garguilo, the president of GG Creative, a direct-mail advertising company in New York, was married on Friday to Adam Buckman, the television editor at The New York Post.
Justice James J. Leff of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the civil ceremony in his chambers.
The bride, who graduated from the State University at New Paltz, N.Y., is the daughter of John Garguilo of Clearwater, Fla., and the late Helen Garguilo.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Molding Is Useful, but Mounting It May Need Practice
ADDING molding can change a room as dramatically as painting or wallpapering.
Molding shapes, or profiles, can help define the character of a room.
The placement of molding can create, alter or emphasize reference points.
It helps to see a display of installed molding rather than small samples, but the samples are useful for understanding how moldings can be combined to produce an overall design.
An example is baseboard molding in which three or more strips are often layered to produce the complete profile.


Dialing Help At Any Hour
NEW YORK has hundreds of all-night services to meet the nocturnal needs of the sick, the tired, the unfortunate and the harried.
Here are some examples.


Getting Facts Right? Not So Elementary
I applaud your article on the Three Garridebs  [ "Holmes Fans Mark Birthday," Feb. 13 ] .
I have been involved in organized Sherlockian activities for more than 20 years and during that time have seen many newspaper stories about us.
Reporters assigned to them have invariably been ignorant of Arthur Conan Doyle's writings, and their stories have been sprinkled with errors.


SURFACING
MAGAZINES  Getting a makeover: Esquire, New York and Mademoiselle magazines have new editors -- and change has begun.
The current issue of Mademoiselle, for example, is markedly less hip than issues from the recent past.
CELEBRITY  Betty Page: This 1950's pin-up legend has become a kitsch icon among downtown clubgoers.
Now Playboy has released a limited-edition print of her photograph as Miss January 1955. (Photofest) ANIMALS  Dog massage: Lisa Veyka, a Manhattan masseuse trained in Swedish massage and shiatsu, specializes in post-injury medical massages for dogs; $50 an hour.


This Brake Stuff Just Won't Stop
AS we know, February's slop has produced turmoil in the eastern part of the country.
It also resulted in a blizzard of questions on antilock brake systems, and the queries resulted in a column on the pros and cons of ABS.
And that resulted in more questions and comments and . . . oh, just mush onward.
Dear Sir,
May I offer one additional thought on antilock brakes?


SUNDAY, February 27, 1994; Top Stocks
Remember Oct. 19, 1987?
Remember how fearful you were of the stock market, even though prices were low?
It has, in fact, been a bull market since Dec. 4, 1987, a month and a half later, when the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index hit its post-crash low.
From that date until the most recent peak on Feb. 2, the S.&amp;P. index rose 115 percent.


SUNDAY, February 27, 1994; Amateur Beans
Amateurism may be an Olympic fiction, but the public still thirsts for it in other arenas.
In Times Square, video stores advertise "amateur" pornography.
Television thrives on average folks who battle gladiators in newly invented games, or send in funny videos of themselves with their pants falling down.
Television news seeks out amateur footage, particularly of disasters, and shows cops arresting people who are ordinary enough in their way.


Reebok, Workers and Third World Economies
To the Editor:
In "Just Undo It: Nike's Exploited Workers" (Viewpoints, Feb. 13), Richard J. Barnet and John Cavanagh imply that Reebok is guilty by association of a hands-off attitude toward accusations of worker abuse in footwear factories in emerging economies.
The authors overlook or are unaware that Reebok is one of very few companies to employ a formal, uniform code of conduct -- the Reebok Human Rights Production Standards -- concerning the treatment of workers around the world employed by third parties with whom we do business.
Among other things, the standards call for fair compensation, freedom of association and a safe and healthy work environment.
They bar the use of child labor and forced labor.


Hit me with some colors, please
Hurray for hues!
Whether it's a shirt, skirt or simply an accent, color perks up spring clothes.


Ilene H. Rosenthal, Louis H. Geser
Ilene Hope Rosenthal, a vice president of Young &amp; Rubicam, was married last evening in New York to Louis H. Geser, a senior sector analyst at the Dreyfus Corporation.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun, which meets at the United Methodist Church of St.
Paul and St.
Andrew.
Ms.
Rosenthal, 36, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter Rosenthal of Jericho, L.I.
She graduated from Clark University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the chairman of the marketing department of Dowling College in Oakdale, L.I.
Her mother, Rita Rosenthal, is a social worker at the Milton L. Olive Middle School in Wyandanch, L.I.


The World: Letter From Mexico; How Peasants Lit the Fires Of Democracy
IT is clearly risky to talk about the Mexico before and after the "Zapatista" Indian uprising in Chiapas on New Year's Day.
So often in the past, dramatic moments -- the massacre of student protesters in 1968, the Mexico City earthquake in 1985, the fraud that marked the 1988 presidential elections -- have been proclaimed as political turning-points.
And the party that has ruled Mexico since 1929 is still in power.
Yet, as a former correspondent who knew Mexico in the 1970's and 1980's, I was quite unprepared for what I found when I traveled here this month.
Somehow, a few hundred Tzotzil, Tzeltal and other Indians from Mexico's poorest state had achieved in a few weeks what opposition parties had failed to do in years: they had thrown the entire political system into disarray and given Mexico a hefty shove toward becoming a real democracy.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
ASTORIA  A Picture Is Worth 1,000 Computer Bytes
The notion that pictures don't lie is among the assumptions that will be challenged in a series of three seminars starting on Saturday at the American Museum of the Moving Image.
The seminars will explore some of the ways visual effects are created and manipulated by new and developing computer technology.


12 Women Call For Equality In Business
Like many struggling business owners, Sandra Sam has put everything into her restaurant, the Gadabout, on Fifth Avenue at 125th Street.
In September, she even sold her home to keep up with her bills.
"That was the only home my children knew, and believe me, they're not happy about this," she said.
"Right now I'm at the point that if my business closed, I'd have to go on welfare."


BEST SELLERS: February 27, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
2
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
2
1
6
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
3
3
81
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
4
4
17
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
5
5
5
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
6
7
46
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
6
3
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
8
8
6
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
9
9
5
HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B.
Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) Three American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German activities in Buenos Aires in 1942.
10
10
27
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
11
1
SAREK, by A.C.
Crispin. (Pocket, $22.) The stormy life of Spock's father, an illustrious ambassador for the "Star Trek" Federation.
12
1
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
13
1
RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series about the voyage of a starship.
14*
11
10
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
15
18
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
42
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
10
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
3
7
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
4
7
25
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
5
4
27
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
6
5
21
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
7
8
15
SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $24.) More comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.
8
6
13
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
1
LEAVING HOME, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) From a childhood in foster homes to a column for The International Herald Tribune: the humorist's memoir.
10
9
2
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
11
1
ANN-MARGRET: My Story, by Ann-Margret with Todd Gold. (Putnam, $23.95.) The autobiography of the Swedish-born, Illinois-bred actress and entertainer.
12
13
19
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
13
10
30
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
14
11
21
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
15
12
81
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
40
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
18
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
4
31
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BINGO PALACE, by Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.
BRAZIL, by John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) In the vast, trackless wilds of a Brazil the author freely admits making up out of whole cloth, a tragicomic knight-errant and his dolly, madly in love, break all the rules of class and race.
EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs, by William Trevor. (Knopf, $23.) Not an autobiography but a series of sketches from the life of the marvelous Irish short-story writer; well mannered, persuasive, showing exceptional powers both of re-creation and forgiveness.
GOING NATIVE, by Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) A road novel that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.
HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life, by Joan D. Hedrick. (Oxford University, $35.) A substantive, scrupulously researched life of the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," with cogent analyses of the book and the moral universe that gave rise to it and to other controversial works by Stowe.
HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise, humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die, omitting none of the clinical detail.
IMAGES: My Life in Film, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.
THE LATE SHIFT: Letterman, Leno, and the Network Battle for the Night, by Bill Carter. (Hyperion, $24.95.) It wasn't as easy as offering Mr.
Letterman $1 zillion, as this detailed, gripping account by a Times reporter shows.
LIBERTY AND SEXUALITY: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v.
Wade, by David J. Garrow. (Lisa Drew/Macmillan, $28.) A monumental, insightful account of the profound transformation in American attitudes about sexuality that culminated in the 1973 Supreme Court decision that made abortion a constitutional right.
PARALLEL TIME: Growing Up in Black and White, by Brent Staples. (Pantheon, $23.) This memoir by an editorial writer for The New York Times is a complex work of vivid self-scrutiny, a portrait of the worldly education of a young black man who made it, haunted by the specter of a brother whose life was ended at 22 by gunshots.
RAISING THE DEAD, by Richard Selzer. (Whittle Books/Viking, $17.50.) The author, a former surgeon unusually sensitive to the contingency of life, describes his own near-death experience, an ordeal in which the only comfort was his survival.


Sleuth


11 in Texas Sect Are Acquitted Of Key Charges
Eleven Branch Davidians were acquitted of all murder and conspiracy charges today in the deaths of 4 of the 76 Federal agents who raided their compound near Waco almost exactly a year ago.
Seven of the 11 were convicted on lesser charges while four were acquitted of all charges after a trial in which most of the defendants argued that they had acted in fright and self-defense.
None of those convicted face more than 10 years in prison.


NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
SUNSET PARK An unlikely habitat for birds in Gowanus Bay is the focus of a campaign to block development near the Bush Terminal.
Tony Giordano, executive director of Sunset Park Restoration, a community group, is to meet on Wednesday with Community Board 7's land-use committee, seeking support for his plan to ask the state and Federal governments to prevent developers from encroaching on the area.


Sons Pursue Vacant Posts
Like father, like sons.
Saul Weprin's death left vacant his posts as the State Assemblyman and Democratic Party co-leader in the 24th District.
His sons David and Mark are the first announced candidates for the posts, hoping for a succession they say their father had envisioned before his illness.
Mark Weprin, 32, a lawyer specializing in labor law for the firm Shea &amp; Gould, is seeking the Democratic and Liberal nominations for the Assembly, in heavily Democratic territory.


Milan goes pale
Amid a panorama of clothes that looked as if they were meant for Sicilian widows, prep school cheerleaders and vamps from everywhere, a few designers remembered that it's a saving grace to look at oneself in the mirror and feel beautiful.
To appreciate Jil Sander's pale Gothic illusions, Gianni Versace's spirited freshness, Katharine Hamnett's "One Touch of Venus" sorcery and Giorgio Armani's practical but unbowed femininity is to acknowledge craftsmanship guided by a respect for the innate power and mystery of women.
And that is why some of the most beautiful clothes of the season were those shown in Milan.  -- HAL RUBENSTEIN


The World: Word for Word/Moscow's Nuclear Underground; The Players in This Shell Game Need Plutonium, Lead and Moxie
Crossing over to a market economy begins with crossing borders.
Budding businessmen from the small but proud and independent Baltic states were the first to understand this.
They started the flow of large quantities of scrap metal, timber, oil and salvage to the West in the last three or four years.
By 1992, tiny Estonia had become a huge exporter of scrap metal.
Its neighbors, Latvia and Lithuania, were forced to find new ways of procuring convertible currency because all their efforts to compete with Estonia had ended in failure.
After studying possible markets, the black marketeers found a product: radioactive materials.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Paul Johnson's OPERATION REMISSION (Nefyn &amp; Shaw, 19 Delaware Ave., Delhi, N.Y. 13753; paper, $12.95) must have been written before the recent revelations that the United States Government had subjected a number of Americans to radiation for experimental purposes.
But the book couldn't be more timely.
It is a remarkable novel, as much for its subject matter as for its literary flair.
It takes a close, understanding look at one segment of the American underground -- the ultra-left-wing descendants of 1960's radicals, who plot their own kind of revolution in the 90's.
Many are idealists, some of them are dishonest, others are cynics.
And they will stop at nothing.
Mr.
Johnson, the author of a previous novel, "Killing the Blues," brilliantly takes us into their world, realistically capturing their speech patterns and their anarchistic way of life.
In a lopsided kind of way, there is something admirable about it.


Viewpoints; Innovation: Medicine's Best Cost-Cutter
IN his State of the Union Message last month, President Clinton began the final stage of his courageous campaign for health care reform.
But neither his proposal nor any of the other leading proposals will yield the desired results.
They all fail to recognize the central importance of innovation in reducing health care costs.
The Administration's proposal does try to control costs; it just does it the wrong way.
It depends upon simplified paperwork, the greater bargaining power of new purchasing alliances and caps on prices.
But costs cannot be reduced enough with these measures, which are essentially ways to deliver today's health care more efficiently.
The savings from these efforts are possible and necessary, but the desire to widen access to health care, the growing health needs of an aging population and Americans' demands for the best treatments available will soon overwhelm the gains.


Manager's Profile
Matthew A. Weatherbie  Fund: Putnam Voyager, $3.7 billion in assets; 5.75 percent sales charge.
Manager since 1983. (Sponsor: Putnam Investments, Boston).


Uncircumspect Spies
To the Editor:
Your front-page Feb. 23 article on the Ames spy case leaves out an intriguing question: Why would Aldrich and Maria Ames, highly intelligent people employed by the Central Intelligence Agency, live far beyond their means in such a visible way?
You only state, "It was not clear why the C.I.A.'s own internal security failed to notice that the couple was living the high-rolling life style outlined in court documents."


Acting Group Bows at Wildcliff Center
THE tiny dressing rooms were lined with suits and sweaters and aprons and trench coats, costume changes that took up more space than the actors applying their makeup or going over their scripts one last time.
A leading lady lay on her back in a hallway, doing breathing exercises, while another actor paced in a dark corner, muttering lines.
The smell of greasepaint mingled with the acrid aroma of coffee wafting in from the backstage kitchen, where a table was set with the neatly labeled props that would soon appear on stage.
Then a voice called, "Going up in 10 minutes," and a recent night of theater at the Wildcliff Center for the Arts here was ready to begin.


INTO THE WHITE IVORY TOWER
If Brent Staples intended to sensitize the nonblack reader to the difficulties and affronts African-Americans are obliged to endure, he missed the mark.
Of the occasions for sympathy he catalogues, the most blatantly disingenuous is his gee-whiz astonishment at being regarded with suspicion and fear by the whites he encountered on the streets of Chicago.
I find particularly unsettling the ugly little retaliations he inflicted on anxious passers-by.


Long Legislative Route For Clinton Health Plan
"You can win. You will win. I'm going to do everything I can to help you win. There are going to be some bad days. Keep smiling and keep going."
That is the advice Representative John D. Dingell, Congress's longest-standing supporter of universal health insurance, offered President Clinton not long ago.
The Michigan Democrat was reminding the President that the legislative process is a long, arduous journey, taking the Clinton health plan through five major committees with different personalities even before either house can vote on it.


Luxe Boheme
HAPPY FAMILIES MAY ALL BE alike ("Anna Karenina," page 1), but Tolstoy never considered their decorating.
At least that's what comes to mind on visiting the Greenwich Village town house of Jacqueline Schnabel and her three boisterous kids.
The house literally overflows with furniture, art, dogs, travel mementos, books, plants, toys and games.
The impression is one of joyous spontaneity, though a closer look reveals an arrangement so confident that to try and decode it would be madness: "It's like playing the piano," says the former wife of Julian Schnabel, the artist, as if somehow that were inborn.
And to this Belgian esthete, who arrived in SoHo on the eve of the 70's art scene, a businessman's daughter, educated in Europe and cosseted in Spain, taste is as much about genes as it is about timing.
You can see it in her bedroom, with the mandarin Chinese robe, hanging from the mannequin next to the 50's chrome chair and silver-leafed mirror. ("I was told Gio Ponti designed it," she says of the mirror, " but I don't believe it.") You can see it in the George Condo painting perched insouciantly in the fireplace and in the velvet curtains draped in the bathroom.
And you can see it in the parlor, where a monstrously ornate daybed shares its airspace with two slim Alvar Aalto chairs, beneath a wrought-iron lamp salvaged from Luchow's.


Too Bad Lincoln Didn't Have a Personal Computer
WHEN the Federal income tax was instituted to cover the costs of the Civil War, President Lincoln misunderstood the law and overpaid his taxes by $1,279.15.
Mr.
Lincoln's confusion, reported now as "tax trivia" on the Compuserve information service, was understandable.
Unlike the current resident of America's most famous home office -- the guy who regularly gets electronic mail addressed to "president*whitehouse.gov" -- Mr.
Lincoln did not have access to the extensive array of tax services available to people with personal computers hooked into the growing information network.


Black Journeys: Many Travelers Along Many Roads
AS this year's version of the annual nod to black history draws to an end, it's hard to escape how often the well-intentioned focus on forgotten lives, legacies and achievements deteriorates into cliches: a nod to Harriet Tubman, Frederick Douglass and W. E. B. Du Bois, a bow to the Harlem Renaissance and the civil rights movement, then all are forgotten until next February.
Like all things rote, Black History Month misses the nuance and detail of real lives and undercuts the yeasty history of blacks in America.
It makes seamless what is rich with curlicues and furbelows.


And Where Are Their Feathered Friends?
From a vantage point at Liberty State Park, with the towers of lower Manhattan in the distance, members of the New Jersey Audubon Society from Franklin Lake searched the Hudson River and the skies above yesterday for signs of birds. (Dith Pran/The New York Times)


Leger's 'Walking Flower' Goes for a Stroll
"THE GREAT WALKING Flower" may become the first of Fernand Leger's monumental sculptures to be exhibited on a Manhattan street -- partially fulfilling the French artist's lifelong wish to make his creations more accessible to the public.
If the Metropolitan Transit Authority grants its approval, all bureaucratic hurdles will have been cleared and the brilliantly colored bronze, 20 feet tall and weighing well over a ton, will be shipped from Monaco to New York and planted on Park Avenue and 57th Street in early April.
The pinwheel-shaped sculpture, with its petals of white, black, red, green and purple, would then be on view for four months.


Battered but Unbowed, Bronx Seeks Government Aid
In terms of economic aid for the Bronx, Borough President Fernando Ferrer has no bird in the hand.
But he is keeping several irons in the fire.
The Bronx has suffered a number of blows over the last year, ranging from the cancellation of a street and sewer reconstruction project for Hunts Point to the Giuliani administration's decision to drop a new Bronx-based police academy to George Steinbrenner's threats to desert Yankee Stadium.


It's Not Quite Lillehammer, but a Grueling Science Olympiad
THE one to beat was Weber, a coach advised as he prepared his team for battle in Brookville.
Although almost 30 schools competed for the regional title, Weber, the lone junior high in Port Washington and the winner for the last two years, was likely to triumph again, the opponents were told.
The competition was the Western Long Island contest of the Science Olympiad.
In the showdown at C. W. Post last winter, the fears proved valid.
Weber won its third victory in a row and went on to win the state competition for the second straight year.
Now, as 22 teams train for the 10th Olympiad regionals for middle schools at Hempstead High School on Saturday, Weber is again the team to beat.


Let Fantasy Fly
Change is in the air.
Fashions so sheer, so soft, so cloudlike, they could sweep you right off your feet.


QUEBECER SEES U.S. AS A 'STABILIZER'
The United States could be a "stabilizer" in helping to normalize relations between an independent Quebec and the rest of Canada, says a top separatist leader who plans to make this point in Washington next week.
Many fear a painful separation that could result in trade retaliation by English Canada.
If Ontario were to block imports from an independent Quebec, for example, "it would break up what has been built over long years and which America takes for granted," said the separatist, Lucien Bouchard, who heads the Quebec separatist opposition in the House of Commons.


F.Y.I.
A Mystery Donor
Q.
Who is Rosalind P. Walter?
Her name appears on lists of financial supporters of so many programs on Channel 13.


Anna D'Aquino And Eric Dennis
Anna Maria Grazia D'Aquino and Eric Steven Dennis, partners in a translating and interpreting service in Rome, were married yesterday in New York.
Judge Kibbie Payne of the New York City Civil Court officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Dennis, the bridegroom's parents.
The bride, 35, a graduate of the University of Rome, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lamberto D'Aquino of Ciampino, Italy.
Her father retired as a marshall in the Italian Air Force.
She and her husband specialize in translating and interpreting English, Italian and Russian.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Allison Strauss And Bruce Katz
Allison Leigh Strauss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie G. Strauss of Dix Hills, L.I., is to be married today to Bruce David Katz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard H. Katz of Bay Terrace, Queens.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnick will officiate at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 27, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is a manager at Custom Word Processing Services, a temporary placement agency in New York.


North Carolina Finds A Perfect Warm Front
North Carolina 78, Florida State 75
Fourth-ranked North Carolina countered a four-guard zone defense with perfect 23-for-23 shooting from the frontcourt in a 78-75 victory over Florida State yesterday in Chapel Hill, N.C.
The Tar Heels shot a season-best 65.3 percent.


Satisfying Stews From Britain, France and the Greek Islands
WHEN the weather is brisk, it is hard to stick with a diet of salads and chicken without the skin.
As far as I'm concerned, nothing beats a good stew at this time of year, and it does not have to be a fatty dish rich in calories, either.
Rabbit, which is increasingly available in butcher shops and specialty stores, is low in fat, and it has more flavor than chicken.
It is especially good stewed because it does not dry out as is often the case when it is roasted or grilled.
The meat is simmered in a sauce flavored with tomatoes and onions, and tiny hard green picholine olives from the south of France (do not try to substitute canned Spanish olives: they do not taste the same).
This stew is good with wide flat noodles.


Lucerne
To the Editor: I was very pleased to read Paul Hofmann's informative story on one of my favorite cities, Lucerne ("What's Doing in Lucerne," Jan. 9).
The place seems to be surrounded by wonders and is certainly worth a visit.
Mr.
Hofmann did not mention Mount Pilatus, a huge rocky summit that I have visited twice.
My family and I went up by cable car back in 1958, when the summit seemed to be a jumble of tunnels carved in the ice.
The second time, in 1969, we went aloft in a kind of train and found the place had changed and now presented a broad promenade, with a magnificent view of Lucerne and the surrounding Alps, and even a cafe offering snacks.
We were amazed to look over the railing and see, making their way up the slope, two rather elderly folk, who had apparently walked all the way.


In Politics And on Ice, Neighbors Are Apart
The secession was peaceful, voted on and done.
The players are friends, former teammates, in many cases, on professional teams back home.
But no self-respecting breakaway republic wants to be trounced by the country it used to be part of, Olympic medal or no Olympic medal.
Robert Petrovicky of Slovakia heard of the talk back home in Bratislava.
"After we lost to the Russians, they said, 'O.K., forget about a medal; just beat the Czechs.' "


Career Mothers
To the Editor:
I am responding to Alice Kessler-Harris's review of "Working Women Don't Have Wives," by Terri Apter, and "Women Lawyers," by Mona Harrington (Jan. 30).
I agree that a career doesn't leave a woman time for a family life, whereas men are often able to have both because they have wives, but I take issue with Ms.
Kessler-Harris's use of the word "successful." She says that Ms.
Apter found "a startlingly high incidence of depression among successful women." In this sentence I believe the word "successful" is intended to mean "career-oriented." Right now I am successful in my life, but I don't have a career outside the home.


De-Cluttering The Sidewalks Of 34th Street
As part of a campaign to clean up 34th Street, the city's Department of Consumer Affairs and the Police Department have begun cracking down on stores that obstruct sidewalks with merchandise.
In the first sweeps, on Jan. 22, Jan. 28 and Feb. 5, the police visited 39 stores, issued 17 summonses and confiscated 20 bags of goods including umbrellas, watches and beads.
No violations were found on a Feb. 19 sweep, though officials said that bad weather could have been a factor.


Rangers Lose; Stars' Modano Hurt
A frightening injury to a star player marred a long, fierce game tonight between the Rangers and the Dallas Stars before a capacity crowd at Reunion Arena.
The Stars won, 3-1.
Clinching the victory for the Stars was Paul Broten, a former Ranger, who put his team up by two goals at 3 minutes 21 seconds of the third period by taking a rebound off the boards and putting it past Mike Richter.


STYLE on file; The Undershirt Comes Out
WHO WOULD HAVE THOUGHT THAT THE undershirt, modest and utilitarian from the start, would come out of the drawer as the high-fashion accessory of the season?
This spring, designers like Karl Lagerfeld, Calvin Klein, Bill Blass and Ralph Lauren, as well as many others, have transformed this humble piece of underwear into a surprising and versatile look.
Now worn as an outer as well as an inner garment, the undershirt communicates charm and sex appeal with an impact not felt since Marlon Brando wore one on Broadway in Tennessee Williams's "A Streetcar Named Desire."


Play Explores Cinderella Myth
IT'S a puzzlement.
People are calling the Playwrights Theater of New Jersey, where "Sally's Porch" opened Thursday, and asking, "Didn't I already see 'Sally's Porch'?"
Well, yes, they did but no, they didn't.
Ask John Pietrowski, the theater's artistic director and the play's director, and he'll answer: "But this is a full production -- with sets, costumes, lights -- all those atmospheric elements that evoke the meaning of a play, and now you'll finally see what it's all about."


THE LENO-LETTERMAN WAR
Give me a break.
Isn't it enough that Jay Leno and David Letterman are paid 50 times what they're worth?
Do we have to read about their so-called problems ("Behind the Headlines in the Leno-Letterman War," by Bill Carter, Jan. 30)?


WHAT'S THE WORLD'S PRIORITY TASK?
Both Charles F. Westoff's and Ellen Chesler's articles on human population were of interest ("What's the World's Priority Task?" Feb. 6).
But why does the burden always fall on women?
Vasectomy is not mentioned by either writer.
ELIZABETH BOTTOMLY Marblehead, Mass.


Professor's Suspension Prompts Debate on Speech
A professor's suspension for comments he made during a writing class has provoked bitter debate both at the University of New Hampshire and in the Legislature over free speech.
The university is struggling to devise a new code to combat verbal harassment on campus, while the Legislature is considering a measure that would prohibit the university from using such a code to restrict speech that is protected by the United States or the New Hampshire Constitutions.


Grace Garguilo, Adam Buckman
Grace Garguilo, the president of GG Creative, a direct-mail advertising company in New York, was married on Friday to Adam Buckman, the television editor at The New York Post.
Justice James J. Leff of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the civil ceremony in his chambers.
The bride, who graduated from the State University at New Paltz, N.Y., is the daughter of John Garguilo of Clearwater, Fla., and the late Helen Garguilo.


Adventures of the Well Connected
TALES OF YESTERYEAR By Louis Auchincloss. 230 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.


Quicksilver
They glitter, shimmer, shine and flash.
Evening wear shot with silver is the newest way to light up the night.


Massacre Leaves Israelis Shamed, Sad and Scared of What's Ahead
Finger-snapping and brisk-paced, Tel Aviv hardly stopped today, but it skipped a few beats as it wrestled with the Hebron massacre, a brutal blow that left many Israelis depressed, shamed, scared and yet faintly hopeful that good may come of it.
The scared said it was only a matter of time before Palestinians got even for the attack by a Jewish settler that killed at least 40 Arabs as they knelt in prayer on Friday.


Seeing the Bright Side Of the Normans in Rome
The last time the Normans dropped in on Rome in 1084, they wreaked havoc, essentially destroying a large part of the Eternal City's center.
This time the Norman civilization will be confined within the walls of the Museo Nazionale di Piazza Venezia, where a wide array of artifacts will be on display through April 30.
The exhibit, titled "The Norman Population in Europe (1030-1200)," features more than 1,000 items borrowed from 140 museums and aims to dispel the notion that the civilization that dominated Europe for almost 200 years was merely bellicose and culturally backward.
Rather, the nine sections which make up the exhibition will offer further insights into the Normans' conquests, as well as politics, culture, religious beliefs, art, architecture, handicrafts, lifestyle and legends.


Anne Weedon, Pitt Petri Jr.
Anne Josephine Weedon, an advertising account executive at WIBV-TV in Buffalo, was married yesterday to Pitt Petri Jr., the president of Pitt Petri Inc., a tableware and home furnishings retailer there.
The Rev.
Tom Stewart performed the ceremony at Westminster Presbyterian Church in Buffalo.
Mrs.
Petri, 35, received undergraduate and M.B.A. degrees from the State University at Buffalo.
She is a daughter of Mary Braley Weedon of Jamestown, N.Y., and the late Fredrick R. Weedon Jr.
Her father was a vice president of Watson Manufacturing, a metalworks formerly in Jamestown.
Her mother is the director of community relations at W.C.A.
Hospital in Jamestown.


Fashion Contrasts Fit for a Cover
To the Editor:
The front page of the Feb. 6 Styles section was quite a study: Calvin Klein, the master of lascivious advertising, clutching his clothing to himself, and below, Polly Mellen, apparently confusing herself with Kate Moss.
How amusing.
MARJORIE REILLY  Port Washington, L.I.


Behind The First Recording
To the Editor:
In Kenneth Furie's article "An Abnormal Symphony Tailored to Inhuman Times"  [  Jan. 30 ] , on the introduction of Shostakovich's Seventh Symphony to the wartime United States, he expresses surprise that the first recording of the work was made by the Buffalo Philharmonic under William Steinberg.
This development, however, is more easily explained in the climate of the time than the particular background of the conductor.


A Child's Fort Becomes a Novel's Setting
RICHARD WHITE made his way past the earthworks and stone foundations of Fort Griswold, built high above the west bank of Connecticut's Thames River during the American Revolution.
He gazed at New London harbor, across the river.
"I used to play in this fort," he said.
"On summer nights I'd escape from the house, sit on the earthworks, look down at the harbor, and imagine what it must have been like. And when I got older I thought, 'My God, here they came, 900 of them.' "


The Quest for Shops Below Bushwick El
ASIDE from the fact that the J train still chugs along on elevated tracks above his shop, Ben Stewart hardly recognizes the Broadway he knew when he moved his offset-printing business to the Bushwick section of Brooklyn 19 years ago.
He arrived two years before the Great Blackout of 1977.
The blackout set off a spree of looting and fires with effects upon Broadway's commercial life that linger to this day.
Many small businesses withdrew from the district, never to return.


Cuba Embargo Punishes Scientific Exchange; Only Politics Now
To the Editor:
Re "A Demeaning Travel Ban to Cuba" (editorial, Feb. 14), where you criticize the State Department for excluding travel to Cuba from its quite modest proposals to liberalize travel to embargoed countries:


Group of 7 Says Russia Must Do More to Get Aid
Finance officials of the seven most powerful industrial nations agreed today that economic aid to Russia could continue as soon as it began credible measures to control inflation and budget deficits, but that Moscow still had much to do, Western officials said.
"We urged them to strengthen their efforts to bring inflation under control," Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said.
"We told the Russians that a strong stabilization program is needed to trigger more support from the International Monetary Fund."


Mullen Follows His Heart Back to Ice
At some point in every athlete's career, a tough decision must be made: when to retire.
For some, like Magic Johnson, Lawrence Taylor and Michael Jordan, illness, injury and events conspire to give them an added push.
Then there are the athletes who fight through the pain and obstacles at any cost to continue playing, the Joe Montanas, Larry Birds and Brian Mullens.


Helping the Neediest
Tomorrow marks the end of the 82d appeal of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Despite hard times, our readers have been generous.
More than 12,000 donors gave about $4.5 million.
The money will go to seven private agencies that are dedicated to helping the city's most vulnerable citizens.
In this particularly bitter winter, that help has made a crucial difference to many lives.
For some it has meant a warm place to sleep, for others a meal.
For many children, it has made the difference between an intact family and one splintered by the stresses of economic hardship.


Deborah Gallant, Jonathan Lieber
Deborah Elaine Gallant, the daughter of Murray and Suzanne Gallant of Branford, Conn., was married last evening to Jonathan Ira Lieber, a son of Arthur and Sylvia Lieber of Forest Hills, Queens.
Rabbi Sue Ann Wasserman officiated at Bridgewaters in New York.
Ms.
Gallant, who is 34 and is keeping her name, graduated from Brandeis University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is an affiliate marketing manager at ABC Radio Networks in New York.
Her father is a vice president of Prudential Securities in New Haven.
Her mother is a craftswoman in Branford.
Her maternal grandfather, Herbert H. Schiff of Columbus, Ohio, and Longboat Key, Fla., was chairman of SCOA Industries in Columbus and is now chairman of the Wurzweiler School of Social Work at Yeshiva University.


The Americanization of Video Europe
To the Editor:
The report by Richard W. Stevenson ("Lights! Camera! Europe!," Feb. 6) tells of the rapid invasion of the European television industry by American entertainment interests as Europe moves away from "state ownership and boring programming to an age of commercial television."


Coney Island In a Season Of Stillness
Coney Island is a Mecca for millions in summer: cheap souvenir stands on the boardwalk vie with fast-food stands, music blares from carnival rides and a thousand boom boxes, and huge crowds seek relief from the grime and humidity of New York.
In winter a different Coney Island emerges.
An almost unearthly air of tranquillity envelops the area.
The only sounds are the screeching of sea gulls searching for food, and the whoosh of the sea washing onto the shore.


Public Invited To Forum on Anti-Semitism
THE Westchester Psychoanalytic Society, which does not often open its educational meetings to the public, is making an exception next month.
On March 7 the society, a group of 60 psychiatrists, will join with the Psychiatric Society of Westchester in presenting "Anti-Semitism: A Historic, Theological and Psychodynamic Exploration." The free meeting will take place at 8:15 P.M. in the main auditorium of New York Hospital-Westchester Division in White Plains.


The Latest Obsessions of the Obsessed
Just before the earthquake hit Los Angeles in January, while other, less violently seismic events were rocking the city (the Menendez trials, the firing of Shannon Doherty from Beverly Hills 90210, the Howard Stern book signing), I spent a few days on the edge myself: a four-day physical search for the echt-L.A. experience.
"Omigod, you've got to spin!" "Omigod, you're not going to spin, are you?" I heard over and over, with increasing confusion, from Angelinos of every shape and affinity, as soon as I landed in West Hollywood.
"Spinning" has been around for almost four years now, but in the past few months, it has taken on the same kind of heat that step classes had in the beginning, said Henry Siegel, a co-owner of the Voight Fitness and Dance Center.
But, he cautioned, it's not called spinning at Voight anymore; it's called "RPM's." A stationary cycling class, RPM's is a 40-minute experience that seemed beyond most Angelinos' powers of description.
"Just do it," said one, "I can't explain it to you."


Ilene H. Rosenthal, Louis H. Geser
Ilene Hope Rosenthal, a vice president of Young &amp; Rubicam, was married last evening in New York to Louis H. Geser, a senior sector analyst at the Dreyfus Corporation.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi J. Rolando Matalon performed the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jeshurun, which meets at the United Methodist Church of St.
Paul and St.
Andrew.
Ms.
Rosenthal, 36, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Walter Rosenthal of Jericho, L.I.
She graduated from Clark University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the chairman of the marketing department of Dowling College in Oakdale, L.I.
Her mother, Rita Rosenthal, is a social worker at the Milton L. Olive Middle School in Wyandanch, L.I.


Whitman Seeks Tax Plan Beyond State's Borders
When the New Jersey Assembly takes up the first round of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's proposed income-tax cuts on Monday, many members of the Republican majority will support the cuts in the belief that they are following in the footsteps of Republican tax cutters in Massachusetts, Michigan and Delaware.
During her campaign for governor and since her election, Mrs.
Whitman repeatedly held up the actions of Republican administrations in those states as examples of how bold tax cuts have begun to pay off with revived economies, just as the Governor believes that her tax cut will help New Jersey.


Better Shots Mean a Shot For Knicks
It has become much clearer recently why the Knicks tried to acquire Danny Manning.
The Knicks need to find more offense.
And now that the trade deadline has passed, their only option is to find a more effective way to use the personnel they have.


A Squall At Carnival
Magically excusing all excess, the golden rule of Rio's five-day-long pre-Lenten Carnival has always been "Everything ends on Ash Wednesday."
But after this year's festivities, Brazilians have had a hard time forgetting their President's Carnival flirtation with a samba princess, a 27-year-old Playboy magazine cover model who neglected to wear panties when she talked her way into the Presidential parade box.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Summertime Indoors
WITH a forehand that could put Steffi Graff to shame, Melanie Paticoff, 4, of Searingtown hit a tennis ball over the net and into a lamp.
Her next shot ricocheted off a chair and smashed into the window blinds.
"Good power!" her instructor, Harvey Kulchin, said.
"Try another one."
When you run a summer camp in the winter indoors, in a house, you can assume not everything will survive the event.
Mr.
Kulchin runs the Shibley Summer Day Camp in Roslyn, "summer, spring fall and winter," he said.
A recent winter session saw a game of kick-the-ball-as-hard-as-you-can send a picture flying off the wall.
Mr.
Kulchin laughed and put the picture back up.


Twentysomething: Flatiron Environs
ABBY ++ (212) 725-2922; 254 Fifth Avenue, near 28th Street; $; all major credit cards
Judging by its popularity, this attractive and cheerful seven-month-old restaurant is a much welcomed addition to a gastronomically desolate stretch of fast-food places and electronics shops.
The dining room is warm and inviting with wood floors, ocher walls with colorful paintings and wooden booths.
But what really lures patrons is the spirited American fare.
Among starters are a salad of vegetables and quinoa grain with fresh herbs; herbed goat cheese ravioli with portobello mushrooms, and sauteed stuffed calamari with shrimp and ratatouille.
Entrees include tender seared duck breast with roasted carrots; seafood couscous combining clams, scallops, salmon and mussels in a spicy broth of vegetables, and roasted chicken with potato pancake, watercress and mushrooms. ($25 and Under: 7/30/93)


One Hospital's Share of the Squeeze
The city's Health and Hospitals Corporation is seeking jto close a $166 million gap in its $3.3 billion budget, trimming 1, 100 of its 49,000 jobs.
Although no doctors and nurses will be cut, the agency will trim managerial and staff positions at its central office and its 11 municipal hospitals, and will close some special medical units.
Here is how Harlem Hospital's $246 million budget will be affected.
Jobs Current: 3,200 After cut: 3,088 Job: Affiliation fees paid to Columbia Medical School Current: $51,000,000 After cut: $50,430,000 Job: Supplies and consulting budget Current: $60,000,000 After cut: $57,855,000 Job: Radiation therapy unit Current: $200,000 After cut: eliminated Job: Burn unit Current: $400,000 After cut: eliminated (Source: Health and Hospitals Corporation)


Parents Demand Safer Schools
Parents of students at I.S. 52, in Hunts Point, one of the most violent schools in the city, say they can no longer stand by as their children's education and safety are being compromised.
Community Board 2 put a discussion of the school on its agenda for its regular meeting this month, and scores of parents and community leaders arrived to challenge school officials to improve conditions at the school.


Four Visions To Honor Burial Ground
In 1992, a year after the discovery of an 18th-century graveyard for black New Yorkers just north of City Hall, the African Burial Ground Competition Coalition was formed to preserve the site and memorialize those buried there.
The panel invited artists and architects to submit proposals and received 170 from around the world.
Four co-winners, along with 36 other entries, are on view in the exhibition "Reclaiming Our Past, Honoring Our Ancestors" at the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue at 51st Street, through April 20.
The show then moves to Washington.
The coalition is seeking Federal funds to build a memorial that would incorporate the winners' ideas.
Here is a look at them.
MARVINE HOWE WHAT: "A Wall of Persistent Acknowledgement," a five-story glass wall with 20,000 brass pins symbolizing shroud pins found in the burial ground.
BY: Lester Y. Yuen and Nana D. Last, architects in Cambridge, Mass.
WHY: "Each pin will be two feet long and have the words African-American and a number on its head, as a visible presence of the estimated 20,000 black people concealed by the construction of the city," Mr.
Yuen explained.
WHAT: "I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings," a seven-story stone wall engraved with Paul Lawrence Dunbar's poem "Sympathy" and, on a stone-paved plaza, a 180-foot-high obelisk, copper palisades and a reflecting pool with African masks in it.
BY: J. Timothy Richard, Katharine E.M.
Brendle and Robert L. Brendle, architectural designers in Portland, Ore.
WHY: "We tried to create a monumental space, inspired by indigenous African forms," Mr.
Richard said.
WHAT: "Walking Among African Graves, Speaking Through the Ground," a sidewalk mosaic with texts, provided by organizations and individuals, honoring the dead.
BY: Karen Bermann, architecture teacher at Iowa State University, and Jeanine Centuori, assistant professor of Architectural Theory and Design at Kent State University.
WHY: "We wanted to remind people this site is not only today's commercial zone but also a graveyard and, according to Africans, a sacred space," Ms.
Bermann said.
WHAT: "53 Elevators," a metal plaque with the words "You are now suspended above the African Burial Ground," which would be placed in all the elevators in the eight buildings within the four-block area covered by the original cemetery.
BY: Chris Neville, graduate student in Historic Preservation at Columbia University.
WHY: "This is the simplest approach to weave the significance of the site into the day-to-day lives of the thousands of office workers in the area," Mr.
Neville said.


Corrections
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about honorific street names characterized the inventor Nikola Tesla incorrectly.
He did not receive the Nobel Prize.


Reebok, Workers and Third World Economies
To the Editor:
Since their adoption less than two years ago, Reebok's Human Rights Production Standards have forced changes in employment and environmental practices by Reebok's contractors throughout Asia.


SUNDAY, February 27, 1994; Physically Correct
News for language cops: "Exercise" is out.
"Physical activity" is now the term of choice.


SUNDAY, February 27, 1994; Unacceptable Art
The Arts Council of Fairfax County, Va.  protects the public vigilantly.
It pulled two photographs (and several other works of art) from a recent show at the County Government Center because they violated its guidelines for exhibitors.
Why?
Were the works in question violent or pornographic?
Toni McMahon, the president of the Arts Council, didn't see the artworks but says they involved "cult activity." The two photographs were a shot of a church in Santa Fe, N.M., and the portrait below of the photographer's grandfather.


Padres Put on a New Face and Hope It Works
Out of the Phoenix, the ashes will rise.
That's the fervent hope of the San Diego Padres.
Preparing for the season after the most ignominious season of their history, the Padres no longer train at their remote outpost in Yuma, Ariz.
Scraping their remnants together, they have moved to a jewel -- or Phoenix -- of a spring camp.


The Executive Life; The Grape Escape From Silicon Valley
A GROWING number of high-tech executives are finding relief from one of the newest of industries by investing in one of the oldest: wine making.
Throughout California, they are are buying acreage to plant rows and rows of grapevines.
And, in returning to the soil, they are bringing the go-go techniques of making powerful electronics to their hobby.


MANHATTAN UPDATE
*
PENNSYLVANIA STATION: The City Planning Commission has voted 5 to 4, with 2 abstentions, against renewing a Penn Station video arcade's three-year permit.
The arcade, Station Break, also known as Time Out Amusement Arcade, has been attracting mostly young people to its 100 video games for 16 years.
Now the owners have 30 days to vacate the site, in the Long Island Rail Road concourse.


A Variety of Choices At Midweek Concerts
WEEKENDS are usually filled with many concert opportunities, but listeners with free midweek time are also in luck for a change, with matinee recitals available three days in a row.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M., the Hudson Valley Music Club presents an all-Rachmaninoff program at its 54 Clinton Avenue headquarters in Dobbs Ferry.
Many concerts last year marked the 50th anniversary of Rachmaninoff's death, but the club has come up with the idea of celebrating the 100th anniversary of the publication of the famous Prelude in C sharp minor.
Participating artists are the pianist Peter Vinograde, the cello-piano duo of Betsy Sadewhite and Dorothy Beach and the soprano Nelleke Palm.
For more details or driving directions, call 591-6851.


The Executive Computer; To Soup Up Their PC's, Speed Demons Take a RISC
IN Europe there are tweak shops that modify Ferrari Testarossas and Porsche Turbos to serve a clientele for whom the world's fastest cars simply are not fast enough.
For personal computer speed freaks who find Intel's powerful Pentium processor too pokey a vehicle for the information Autobahn, there is now a similar alternative: RISC PC's.
Like turbochargers, which were a common feature on racing automobiles for decades before Porsche and Saab introduced them on street cars, RISC chips have long played a central role in workstations, high-powered desktop machines favored by engineers, architects and scientists.
RISC stands for reduced instruction set computing, and RISC processors use a simple, highly optimized set of commands to achieve high performance at relatively low cost.


Mom and Pop and Their 128 Musical Children


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-19  YELTSIN ENEMIES FREED  Russia's former Vice President and Parliament Speaker, who had been imprisoned after the violent confrontation in the Parliament building, were freed.  1  The G-7 nations tied aid to Russia to inflation control.  12


Cold Comfort: Battery Thefts
Serious crime has dropped in Brooklyn Heights during the last three years, the 84th Precinct recently reported.
But community leaders and the police say one type of crime has been increasing: the theft of car batteries.
Snow and freezing temperatures take their toll on batteries, putting new ones in demand and making them a target for thieves.


The Voice of Resentment
GEORGE WALLACE American Populist.
By Stephan Lesher.
Illustrated. 587 pp.
New York: A William Patrick Book/ Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $29.95.


Four Visions To Honor Burial Ground
In 1992, a year after the discovery of an 18th-century graveyard for black New Yorkers just north of City Hall, the African Burial Ground Competition Coalition was formed to preserve the site and memorialize those buried there.
The panel invited artists and architects to submit proposals and received 170 from around the world.
Four co-winners, along with 36 other entries, are on view in the exhibition "Reclaiming Our Past, Honoring Our Ancestors" at the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue at 51st Street, through April 20.
The show then moves to Washington.
The coalition is seeking Federal funds to build a memorial that would incorporate the winners' ideas.
Here is a look at them.
MARVINE HOWE WHAT: "A Wall of Persistent Acknowledgement," a five-story glass wall with 20,000 brass pins symbolizing shroud pins found in the burial ground.
BY: Lester Y. Yuen and Nana D. Last, architects in Cambridge, Mass.
WHY: "Each pin will be two feet long and have the words African-American and a number on its head, as a visible presence of the estimated 20,000 black people concealed by the construction of the city," Mr.
Yuen explained.
WHAT: "I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings," a seven-story stone wall engraved with Paul Lawrence Dunbar's poem "Sympathy" and, on a stone-paved plaza, a 180-foot-high obelisk, copper palisades and a reflecting pool with African masks in it.
BY: J. Timothy Richard, Katharine E.M.
Brendle and Robert L. Brendle, architectural designers in Portland, Ore.
WHY: "We tried to create a monumental space, inspired by indigenous African forms," Mr.
Richard said.
WHAT: "Walking Among African Graves, Speaking Through the Ground," a sidewalk mosaic with texts, provided by organizations and individuals, honoring the dead.
BY: Karen Bermann, architecture teacher at Iowa State University, and Jeanine Centuori, assistant professor of Architectural Theory and Design at Kent State University.
WHY: "We wanted to remind people this site is not only today's commercial zone but also a graveyard and, according to Africans, a sacred space," Ms.
Bermann said.
WHAT: "53 Elevators," a metal plaque with the words "You are now suspended above the African Burial Ground," which would be placed in all the elevators in the eight buildings within the four-block area covered by the original cemetery.
BY: Chris Neville, graduate student in Historic Preservation at Columbia University.
WHY: "This is the simplest approach to weave the significance of the site into the day-to-day lives of the thousands of office workers in the area," Mr.
Neville said.


Dr. Roy Reierson, 87, A Retired Economist
Dr.
Roy L. Reierson, a former executive of and chief economist for Bankers Trust Company in New York City, died on Thursday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Dr.
Reierson, who was 87, lived in Granite Springs, N.Y.
The cause was complications following a fall, said his daughter, Kaari.


At 106, George Abbott Is Still Batting for 'Damn Yankees'
MORE THAN 80 years after he first appeared on Broadway, George Abbott is poised for yet another return.
A revival of "Damn Yankees," one of the triumphs of his extraordinary career, opens on Thursday at the Marquis Theater, and Mr.
Abbott plans to be there.
At the ripe old age of 106, he is curious to see if 1990's theatergoers will take to the tale of a diehard baseball fan who makes a Faustian bargain in hopes of winning the pennant.
"I don't know what audiences want these days," Mr.
Abbott said.
"Obviously one thing is spectacle and a cast that entertains. But if you get a big show like 'Cats,' you don't even need a name actor. You can just go on forever." "Damn Yankees," which Mr.
Abbott directed in 1955 and for which he co-wrote the book, stars Bebe Neuwirth as the seductress, Lola, and Victor Garber as the Devil. (Gwen Verdon and Ray Walston both won Tony Awards for the roles originally.) Jarrod Emick plays the young slugger into whom the aging dreamer is transformed.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
104.80
104.63
118.30
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7101
1.7143
1.6380
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3480
1.3435
1.2595
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4887
1.4620
1.4540
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$378.50
$380.30
$328.10
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Hit me with some colors, please
Hurray for hues!
Whether it's a shirt, skirt or simply an accent, color perks up spring clothes.


When an Italian Place Moves Upscale
ANOTHER Italian restaurant?
Yes, indeed, and when it is as good as Mare e Monte in Greenwich, there's reason to cheer.
The newcomer, subtitled "Ristorante Toscano," is on the site of Da Vinci's, an old-fashioned family-style pizza place and has the same ownership.
But the sweeping changes are all for the better.
Mare e Monte is stylishly cool looking, with white walls, black trim, mirrors, murals and deep-blue touches in chairs, table aprons and draperies.
The smoking and non-smoking sections seem to fluctuate as demand dictates, from the large main dining room to a smaller, cozy room near the bar.
Softly lighted at night, the main room is bright, light and cheery by day, with sunshine flooding in from the large front windows.


In Praise Of Beene
A retrospective of the work of Geoffrey Beene, at the Fashion Institute of Technology, Feb. 14.


Molding Is Useful, but Mounting It May Need Practice
ADDING molding can change a room as dramatically as painting or wallpapering.
Molding shapes, or profiles, can help define the character of a room.
The placement of molding can create, alter or emphasize reference points.
It helps to see a display of installed molding rather than small samples, but the samples are useful for understanding how moldings can be combined to produce an overall design.
An example is baseboard molding in which three or more strips are often layered to produce the complete profile.


Part 2: Trademark Feud Over the Pilates Method
Regarding the outlandish letter from Joan Breibart ("The Pilates Method and a Trademark Feud," Jan. 23), which was written in reaction to the Jan. 9 article "Old Fitness Plan Finds a New Clientele," it seems perfectly clear that if the Letters to the Editor column is to be used as a venue for legal debate, there are bound to be outrageous distortions.
The litany of Ms.
Breibart's distortions is too long for this rebuttal.
It is important to note, however, that she, who claims that the name can't be registered, tried to purchase it for herself just before I did.
Clearly, this inconsistency in her claim, as well as others, gives rise to natural speculation about her motives in attacking my legitimate ownership.


The Gunshot: A Morality Play With Chorus
THE following may be an urban fable, a tale constructed for stoop seminars on the practical and moral implications of carrying a gun.
It cries for a Socrates of the streets, probing, hectoring, making us think beyond our comfort zones.
The people who told me the story weren't convinced it was totally factual but seemed to think it was true in some larger sense.
It captured one of our recurring urban anxieties.
And while they all agreed that there were lessons in it, they couldn't agree on what those lessons were.


Streetscapes/The Convent of the Sacred Heart; A Matter of Reconciling Preservation With Patina
YOU don't use a power sander to grind down your 18th century highboy to make it "like new," for the patina of age is as much a part of the object's beauty as the intrinsic design.
So at the old Otto Kahn mansion at the northeast corner of 91st Street and Fifth Avenue, now the Convent of the Sacred Heart, the board of the independent girls' school run in the Roman Catholic tradition is caught in its effort to preserve the building between a desire to save the patina and the knowledge that it is destroying the building.


Kauai's Comeback
To the Editor:
In late October we returned from 10 glorious days on Kauai, foolishly thinking we could keep that heavenly isle and its wonderful people a secret.
But Lenore Magida's "Kauai Makes a Comeback" (Dec. 26) gave it all away.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE MARRIAGE OF CADMUS AND HARMONY By Roberto Calasso.
Translated by Tim Parks.
Vintage International, $13.
This Italian author retells a succession of Greek myths, commenting on the stories' significance as cultural icons.
Last year our reviewer, Mary Lefkowitz, compared his work to Ovid's "Metamorphoses," calling it "a serious entertainment, meant to be enjoyed."  SHYLOCK: A Legend and Its Legacy By John Gross.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $13.
Few literary characters have been as endlessly interpreted and reinterpreted as Shylock.
Analyzing the mythic stature of Shylock through the centuries, John Gross admires the complexity of Shakespeare's creation while also arguing that it unambiguously reflects the anti-Semitism of its day.
In this study, chosen one of the best books of 1993 by the editors of the Book Review, "Mr. Gross's reading of Shakespeare drops on a wilderness of sophistry like the gentle rain from heaven," Louis Simpson said here.


Data Bank/February 27, 1994
Data Bank/February 27, 1994
Consumer Confidence
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
1985=100
80.8
82.6
79.8
New Orders for Durable Goods
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Monthly percent change
3.7
2.1
2.3
Auto Production
Feb. 18
Feb. 11
Feb. 4
In units, weekly total
144,014
138,934
151,453
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
120,612
116,257
120,655
Weekly Jobless Claims
In thousands
385
360
359
3-Month Treasury Bills
Feb. 25
Feb. 18
Feb. 11
Rate in percent
3.36
3.27
3.24
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.58
3.47
3.38
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
6.71
6.62
6.40


On Sunday; Old Rivalries Die Hard, Or Not at All
NEW YORK politics may get a badly needed shot of verve and a chaser of quirkiness with the prospect of the Rev.
Al Sharpton and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan having it out in a Democratic primary.
The cut-and-thrust could rise above the dreary norm of speechifying, for both are acerbic of sound bite and nimble in riposte.
They have evolved in talkative ways from the powerful historic traditions of New York's blacks and Irish.
From the beginning, the worst of poverty and prejudice bedeviled both groups when, scrambling for sanctuary, they clustered 130 years ago as rival outcasts in the teeming city.
Across the decades, they proved doughty in building footholds separately through church faith and city politics.
They rose up from the meanest riverfront shantytowns where their frictions exploded lethally in a chilling bit of history that, now as ever, counts far too little in the crass metropolis of constant newcomers.


SUNDAY, February 27, 1994; Silence on the Lambs
Go ahead, ditch the mink.
You're sensitive to animal suffering.
But the tough question this winter is: Will you give up your shearling?
Mink.
Sheep.
They're both mammals.
You kill the mink.
You kill the sheep.
It seems pretty even on the face of it.


Tourists Steer Clear Of Southern Mexico
WHEN hundreds of armed rebels marched into this colonial city on Mexico's southern border Jan. 1, dumbfounded tourists watched from their windows.
A few days later the rebels were gone, and so were the tourists.
Mexico's first significant guerrilla uprising in 20 years substantially dampened tourism not only here but also throughout Chiapas, the site of Palenque and other Maya ruins.
Even tourists headed for other parts of Mexico grew nervous on hearing that the military had shot rockets at the rebels and that terrorists had attacked parts of Mexico City.


Clinton Aides Find New York Chillier
O, tempora!
O, mores!
O, lights and sirens!
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani takes pride in being a new Republican broom at City Hall, and it seems that at least some of the routine Democratic customs of former Mayor David N. Dinkins have indeed been swept away.
The other day, Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown visited New York City for a couple of events in Harlem with Representative Charles B. Rangel, one of the new Mayor's sharpest critics, and asked for a city police escort.
Mr.
Dinkins always extended that courtesy to Mr.
Brown, an old friend and former chairman of the Democratic National Committee.
But this time the Police Department's Intelligence Division, which handles escorts for dignitaries, refused, to the chagrin of former Dinkins aides.


Carole Lee Wolf, Pedro Neuhaus
Carole Lee Wolf, a daughter of Dr.
Stanley I. Wolf of Bethesda, Md., and the late Harolyn O. Wolf, was married last evening to Pedro Moises Neuhaus, a son of Peter H. Neuhaus of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Miriam Neuhaus.
Rabbi Allen Secher performed the ceremony at the Willard Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Neuhaus was until recenlty a retail manager and an accessories buyer at the Galeries Lafayette department store in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father, an allergist, is the senior director of the Allergy Center and a professor emeritus of pediatric medicine at George Washington University, both in Washington.


Cozy German
ROLF'S


Lawsuit Seeks to Limit Size of Hospital Expansion
To the Editor:
In regard to the Feb. 13 article "Community Group Sues to Stop a Hospital Expansion Project," we want to make it clear that the group that is leading the suit, Park Slope Action for the Environment, is not looking to simply stop New York Methodist Hospital's commercial development but rather to control the size and scope of the project.


Quicksilver
They glitter, shimmer, shine and flash.
Evening wear shot with silver is the newest way to light up the night.


YELTSIN'S TOP FOES IN OCTOBER BATTLE FREED FROM PRISON
Looking wan but gleeful, two of President Boris N. Yeltsin's most bitter enemies strolled out of a maximum-security prison today under an amnesty granted by the new Parliament to hard-liners who tried to overthrow his Government in October.
Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, the former Speaker of Parliament, was the first to emerge from Lefortovo Prison, appearing tired but relieved after a last-minute effort by Mr.
Yeltsin to block the release failed.


Bookshelf
THE CHILDREN'S HOUR.
By Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.
Illustrated by Glenna Lang.
Godine. $17.95. (Ages 5 and up) The illustrations to this edition of Longfellow's charming poem show "grave Alice, and laughing Allegra, and Edith with golden hair" in a pretty and happy Victorian home.
THE CHAMPION.
By Maurice Gee.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $14. (Ages 12 and up) A semi-autobiographical novel from New Zealand recalls the arrival of American troops during World War II and young Rex's discovery that his Yank visitor is a private and black.


In Colombia, Past Without Clues of Spy Charges
She has been implicated in the biggest spy scandal to strike American intelligence in decades, accused of betraying both her native country and her adopted one.
But the people who studied and worked with Maria del Rosario Casas Ames until she left her homeland in the early 1980's say nothing in her past would explain such an involvement.
Never, they say, did she ever express strong political convictions or demonstrate a flair for the sort of adventure and risk-taking that might have led her into espionage, either for the Central Intelligence Agency or for Russia.
Instead, they recall a shy, studious and essentially apolitical woman, more interested in ideas than material things, who lived with her mother until she was nearly 30 and whose only real passion was literature.


Let Fantasy Fly
Change is in the air.
Fashions so sheer, so soft, so cloudlike, they could sweep you right off your feet.


Allison Strauss And Bruce Katz
Allison Leigh Strauss, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie G. Strauss of Dix Hills, L.I., is to be married today to Bruce David Katz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard H. Katz of Bay Terrace, Queens.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnick will officiate at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 27, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is a manager at Custom Word Processing Services, a temporary placement agency in New York.


It's Back to the 1950's With 'The Taffetas'
FROM Dublin to Dorset to Metuchen: that's been the itinerary of a makeshift road version of "The Taffetas," a pickup production for the Forum Theater Group of a fictitious 1950's girl group revue.
The show replaces an originally scheduled new revue of 60's songs.
Subtitled "A Musical Journey Through the Fabulous Fifties," in its cabaret beginnings and Off Off and Off Broadway versions of 1988, all of which evolved from a specialty act, "The Taffetas" -- the name is based on the real Chiffons -- was conceived by Rick Lewis, and is here directed by Arthur Whitelaw, one of the original producers.


THE LENO-LETTERMAN WAR
There actually are savvy viewers who are interested in television goingson.
But since the publication of Ken Auletta's "Three Blind Mice," we behind-the-scenes television junkies have been left with only occasional snippets in the daily papers.


Praise and Criticism for a Workplace Lawyer
To the Editor:
The article about Judith P. Vladeck ("Workplace Discrimination? Don't Try It Around Her," Profile, Feb. 13) paid tribute to a very special lady.
In 1982, a small union of professional engineers was forced to go on strike at one of the largest corporations in the United States.
After three months, the union was financially broken and unable to pay Ms.
Vladeck's retainer.
The strike dragged on for two months more, and not once during this period did she broach the subject of her retainer.
She personally participated in the negotiating process, and I am convinced that the corporation finally agreed to a settlement when it became evident that Ms.
Vladeck would continue to represent the union.
ANTHONY Di DONATO  East Northport, L.I., Feb. 14  The writer was the president of the engineers union at American Bosch Arma in 1979-81.


SUNDAY, February 27, 1994; Heavy Metal
Toys for guns, sneakers for guns, concert tickets for guns.
Why not try a weapons exchange with the Serbs?
They give up their guns, and every Bosnian Serb gets a ticket to a giant "Give Peace a Chance/Save the Balkans" concert.
Of course, there's the question of who will perform.
And where.


Piano Teacher Is Found Slain In Upper East Side Apartment
A piano teacher who often provided visitors from her native Germany with a free place to stay was found in her Upper East Side apartment with her throat slashed on Friday evening, the police said.
Colleagues of the slain teacher, Ute Lohmiller, 38, began worrying when she had not appeared at the German School of New York, where she worked, since Wednesday, the police said.
When a supervisor stopped by Ms.
Lohmiller's apartment on East 82d Street after work Friday, he found the door unlocked and Ms.
Lohmiller's clothed body lying face down between the kitchen and the living room.


Lyris Rudick, Charles Mansoor
Drs.
Lyris Rudick and Charles Abraham Mansoor, both dentists in New York, are to be married today at the Park Avenue Synagogue in New York.
Rabbi Yaaqob Manasseh will perform the ceremony.
The bride, 26, graduated from the University of Southern California and received a degree in dentistry from New York University.
She is a resident in general practice at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.


The Galapagos
To the Editor: About reading before going to the Galapagos ("Where Man Meets Beast, a Conflict," Nov. 28):
One of Herman Melville's lesser-known works is a group of short pieces called "Las Encantadas," meaning "The Bewitched." This was the name given the islands by the Spanish navigator Tomas de Berlanda when they were discovered by his party in 1535.


North Korea Grants Nuclear Inspectors Visas
In another example of the brinkmanship that has characterized the yearlong dispute over its nuclear ambitions, North Korea has avoided a possible trade embargo at the last hour by agreeing to open some of its nuclear installations to international inspectors.
North Korea gave its assent to the inspections late Friday, only hours before the start of a process that could have resulted in a trade blockade against the Communist country.


Journal; After The Luge
I thought I would get through the whole thing without ever learning what a triple lutz is.
God knows I didn't care.
But like millions of other Americans who never thought twice about figure skating until this year, I got sucked into Lillehammania, and now I need help.
Not only have I become lutz-literate (sort of) and a devotee of apres-luge products, but I have strong opinions about Greg Gumbel and Verne Lundquist. (Don't worry -- I won't share them.) I made a fool of myself over David Letterman's mother, who reported from Lillehammer each night, though at least I had the good taste to do so in the privacy of my own home.


Cuba Embargo Punishes Scientific Exchange; Castro Started It
To the Editor:
In "A Demeaning Travel Ban to Cuba" (editorial, Feb. 14), you write of "the value of a free trade in ideas and information across international frontiers," which is being denied by United States policy that restricts travel during trade embargoes.


PLAN FOR IRELAND LEFT IN QUESTION
Gerry Adams, the leader of the I.R.A.'s political wing, said today that he was sure his party would resume peace negotiations with Britain, but did not accept or reject the deal offered him in the initiative.
Mr.
Adams, in a 90-minute speech to the annual conference of his party, Sinn Fein, acknowledged for the first time that the peace initiative "marks a stage in the slow and painful process of England's disengagement from her first and last colony, Ireland."


A Wordy Dark Comedy
IT is a bold thing the modest Rainbow Theater company is up to in Stamford, excavating "Children of Darkness," a play best known for being little known.
And no wonder.
Writing in a style more concerned with floridity than dramatic or comic awareness, Edwin Justus Mayer, an American playwright, reproduced, with considerable verbal facility, early 18th-century decadence and duplicity among London's incarcerated elite.


Claire Bloom Can't Sing, So If Opera Is Out, Melodrama Must Be In
CLAIRE BLOOM'S forthcoming performances of Benda's "Medea" with the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra may remind us of some similar events in the last two decades.
Who can forget Richard Burton's wonderful acting in Mozart's "Julius Caesar" or the magnificent efforts of Dame Edith Evans in Beethoven's "Measure for Measure"?
Perhaps Ms.
Bloom's performances will even rival John Gielgud's stunning Antony in Verdi's "Antonio i Cleopatra," which sold out the Metropolitan Melodrama House for three seasons.
If these works do not seem familiar, that's quite all right; they were never written.
And, alas, there is no Metropolitan Melodrama House.
Opera is the dominant form today, and melodrama seems but a poor stepchild.


Two Kings, Similar Dilemmas
To the Editor:
In his essay "What's Next for the King of Pop?"  [ Feb. 6 ] , Jon Pareles ponders the fate of Michael Jackson.
Shakespeare wrote of a similar dilemma in "Hamlet" (Act III, Scene III) when the King asks of himself:  May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?


Mom and Pop and Their 128 Musical Children


The Shopper's Friend
CAROL CHANNING, an avid listener, once called Joan Hamburg the Yellow Pages of the world.
Her knowledge of the city is encyclopedic, and the large loose-leaf notebooks that contain this lifetime accumulation of information have overtaken her two offices and the studio at WOR-710 AM, from which she broadcasts six days a week.
But it's probably more accurate to think of Ms.
Hamburg as a cross between Dear Abby and Betty Furness.
Anything that helps make life easier in New York gets pasted in the books: where to find the best hair cutter, who will paint a portrait of your dog, how to triumph over a bait-and-switch scam, where to find a man.


Marin's Mellow Coastal Towns
MARIN County was either named for a Miwok Indian chief or for the illegitimate son of a shipwrecked Spanish marino.
Or it could have been named after a seaworthy Indian who floated across San Francisco Bay a few hundred years ago like Moses, clutching a bundle of bulrushes.
The confusion is characteristic of a place where antecedents don't much matter and even last names seem vestigial.
Although Sir Francis Drake landed on the Marin peninsula in 1579, most settlers arrived within the past 50 years, after the Golden Gate Bridge hooked Marin to San Francisco, which may account for the county's legendary informality.
In fact, the 60's slogan "Be here now" could well serve as the local motto, which makes rather poignant sense when you consider that west Marin rests snugly atop the San Andreas fault.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Nunn Suffers an Upset  Nigel Benn followed the script and Steve (Lightning) Little didn't.
Little, a heavy underdog who hadn't fought in more than a year, upset plans for a major supermiddleweight unification bout this summer when he beat the World Boxing Association champion, Michael Nunn, in a split decision last night in London.
On the same card, Benn retained his World Boxing Council supermiddleweight title with a unanimous decision over the No. 1 contender, Henry Wharton.
The much-anticipated Nunn-Benn showdown took the heaviest blow.
The promoter Don King said he would have to review his next move in his effort to unite the major supermiddleweight belts. (AP)


Feb. 20-26: Yeltsin and Parliament; Bad Old Days Come Back To Haunt the Champion Of Russia's New Dawn
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia had enough trouble last week even without the United States' arrest of a C.I.A. agent as a traitor and the re-emergence of espionage as a troublesome issue between Moscow and Washington.
Returning to action after a prolonged absence (due, it was said, to a bad cold), Mr.
Yeltsin quickly found himself caught up in a recurrence of his, and Russia's, long-running nightmare.
The newly elected Parliament voted to grant amnesty to an assortment of his old foes -- including the men who last October instigated an uprising that ended with Mr.
Yeltsin's order to bombard the old Parliament building.


The Mighty Nell's
Perched on a red leather banquette, squeezed behind a hand-painted cafe table in the nightclub named after her, Laura (Nell) Campbell raised her arms and waved them from side to side.
"This is what I've heard they do," she said, "those rave people. They're all doing ecstasy and whole rooms full of them do this for hours on end."


Haitians, Thwarted at Sea, Look for a Back Door
With the United States Coast Guard still repatriating Haitians picked up in boats trying to flee to Florida, many Haitians are increasingly choosing other routes and methods in their attempt to escape, diplomats and human rights officials say.
With the political repression and economic hardship still severe, many Haitians are determined to leave.
Four boatloads of Haitian refugees have been picked up at sea north of Haiti since Feb. 4, the most in a single month since military leaders refused to resign to allow the return of Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Turner Is Tossed By Judges
The last couple of days had been no fun for Cathy Turner, the two-time gold medalist in Olympic short-track speed skating.
There were accusations that she was a dirty skater, a nasty note in her electronic mail and whispers that she would be taken down by Canadian or Chinese skaters.
Tonight she was disqualified from the 1,000-meter race for impeding another skater, and when Turner left the ice, she also said she was leaving the sport.


Two Northeast Hotels Fete the Grape
Wine is the lure used by two Northeast hotels to attract winter business.
The Boston Wine Festival, organized by the Boston Harbor Hotel, offers an array of some 50 events ranging from grand tours and receptions to brunches and dinners, scheduled to April 14.
The festival, which is in its fifth year, will feature wines from 11 countries.
All events are open to the general public.
Reservations are required, though hotel guests without reservations will be accommodated whenever space permits.
Prices range from $45 a person, including tax and tip, for a sampling of Italian wines to $160 for a four-course dinner preceded by a panel discussion.


At St. Mark's Church, the Scars Remain
The calm and stately Gothic facade of St.
Mark's Episcopal Church at Union Street and Brooklyn Avenue in Crown Heights belies the turmoil that has cost the church a priest who served it for 21 years and left its membership rolls depleted.
That pastor, Heron Sam, was stripped of his authority to perform any sacraments of the Episcopal Church after a church court decided he had engaged in sexual harassment and other improper acts.
Now Mr.
Sam is starting a church in Flatbush that does not fall under the authority of the Episcopal Church, his brother, Winston, said last week.


Corrections
An article on Jan. 23 about the marketing of corporate headquarters buildings misstated the size of the former Exxon Chemical Corporation building in Darien, Conn.
A reader's letter, received last week, points out that the building totals 71,400 square feet, not 214,200.


Never Again; An Ideology Takes Up Arms Against Peace
IN opening fire on Muslim worshipers in the West Bank city of Hebron on Friday, Dr.
Baruch Goldstein of Israel added a new weapon to the arsenal of memory that inflames the Middle East.
For Israelis, Hebron has always been remembered for the Arab riots that took nearly 70 Jewish lives there in 1929; now, Palestinians can enshrine the name along with past atrocities: Deir Yassin, Kfar Kassem, Sabra and Shatila.
The massacre could thereby corrode a fragile peace process that depends on the capacity of both peoples to face and overcome history.
And that is probably what Dr.
Goldstein had in mind.
Far from being the lone, demented criminal that Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin branded him, he was the product of an ideology, declaimed by the late Rabbi Meir Kahane, that has found fertile ground on the West Bank as an amalgam of anti-Arab bigotry, religious certainty and nationalist zeal.
Dr.
Goldstein may have acted alone, and he may, indeed, have been mentally ill.
But he existed well within the support network of Kahane followers and other extremists who have been drawn to the Jewish settlements by the free-wheeling, frontier environment that some Israelis dub the Wild West Bank.


If Hairdressers Were Insured
To the Editor:
It was with great interest that I read your article "Dueling Scissors" (Jan. 30).
Imagine, $275 for a haircut!
And I have to battle with insurance companies for $40 to save someone's life.
I guess that if insurance covered haircuts, those hairdressers would get $2.50 a cut also.
Come on, America, where are your priorities?
DR.
JEFFREY D. FELZENBERG  Oceanport, N.J.


NEW VIEWS
Talk about an incendiary season!
Many of the new spring fashions are so extreme they're destined to set off conflagrations, either of indignation or admiration.
Designers are expressing strong points of view, from the most aggressive edges of punk to the bustled and petticoated skirts of prettiness.
Women are barraged with definitive style choices.
If you're in a rebellious frame of mind, bleached-blond buzz cuts, nose and navel rings, undershirts and tattoos are there to flash your feelings.
Those obsessed with physical fitness will find that jock attire has been adapted for office and evening wear.
For the ones with no shame and nothing to hide there are slip-dresses that pretend to conceal but really reveal.
Workig women will find their standby suits all shook up: the jackets stretched downward, the skirts clipped higher, the shapes softened, sometimes almost to sloppiness.
Even familiar silhouettes, such as tunics with pajama pants, have been given a spring shakedown.
They are now rendered in the waftiest fabrics, shaded ivory, bisque, mist or palest peach.
Romantics will find drenchingly feminine, turn-of-the-century costumery.
Regressives can doll up in little girl dresses.
Sophisticated sylphs can sheathe themselves in 1930's bias-cut styles.
And those who yearn to fly high in the sky can find fashions so ethereal they could almost take wing.
About the only people left in the lurch are the traditionalists and the realists (which, of course, include most of us).


Sports of The Times; The Quest for Winning: It's Out of Focus, From Top to Bottom
THE John Chaney-John Calipari soap opera is apparently over.
There were hugs and handshakes at McGonigle Hall on Thursday night as Massachusetts defeated Temple on a last-minute shot by Mike Williams.
Afterward, each coach said he had got beyond the ugly incident on Feb. 13 when Chaney flew into a rage against Calipari during a post-game news conference, threatening the coach and players.
Unfortunately, the tears of pain soak deeper than apologies and acceptances.


Two Weeks Later, Sports You Still Don't Understand
We take you now, for one last time, to the ice skating arena in Hamar, Norway, where helmeted women are skating ferociously around the perimeter of the rink, occasionally bumping into each other and crashing into walls.
Inside the oval, other women are skating around and occasionally crossing into the outer circle to replace the original skaters.
Viewed from above the event, short-track speed skating, looks like one of those science-class models of the atom with electrons frantically spinning around a nucleus.
This continues for a while, then the medals are awarded, occasionally to a team that seemed to lose.
Now we switch to a hillside overlooking Lillehammer for that favorite pastime, mogul skiing.
A man in goggles is having a bumpy time of it, bouncing back and forth on an impossibly steep slope.
He is in the air -- it looks like, yes!
A double twist! (Whatever that is.) The time is good, we're told, and a series of numbers pops up on the television screen: 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.3!
And more numbers! 6.88, 6.80!


Don't Send in the Marines
Isolation is no longer possible or desirable," the President said. It was September 1901, the speaker was William McKinley and the subject of his address at the opening of the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo was the role the United States should play in the dawning 20th century.
McKinley's point was that modern technologies of transport and communications had abolished distance.
It was obvious even then.
So internationalism evolved into the dominant theme of American foreign policy.
Today, though, with the collapse of the Soviet Union, internationalism is losing its way as we stumble from the narrow and chaotic streets of Somalia to Haiti and, possibly -- after the mortar attack on a crowded Sarajevo market -- to the quagmire of Bosnia.


Career Mothers
To the Editor:
Alice Kessler-Harris's review is further evidence that the worst enemy faced by career mothers is other women, especially female social scientists who defame women as separate-but-equal nurturers whose sex determines their destiny.
Career mothers do not make a Hobson's choice between work and family.
The choice they make is to be viewed by their children as a paid-for-her-skills, equal-partner parent, not as the parent who picks up socks and defers to Dad.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  WEINSTOCK AMONG THE DYING  By Michael Blumenthal. Zoland, $22.95.


The Mole Who Never Was Takes On Flesh and Bone
AT the memorial service for James Jesus Angleton, the cruel father of American counterintelligence who died in May 1987, the poet Reed Whittemore recited T. S. Eliot's "Gerontion," in which the mind of a blind old man becomes lost in "a wilderness of mirrors."
That was Jim Angleton, who created and in part destroyed the Central Intelligence Agency's machinery for catching spies.
He shut himself away in his office most afternoons, a brace of martinis in his bloodstream, chain-smoking, blinds drawn against the light, searching, searching through the C.I.A.'s files for the spoor of the mole he believed had penetrated the agency's clandestine service.


Avery Fisher Dies


Play du Jour
The alarm jolts me awake: it's 6:55 A.M., I'm living in Paris, I wish I had an entirely new wardrobe -- yes, it's all coming back.
If I hustle, I'll catch last night's "CBS Evening News," broadcast in English (with French subtitles) at 7:00 on Canal Plus.
"Pinup," the screen reads in English.
But the 15 seconds that precede Dan Rather and Connie Chung speak silent French.
Will the girl of the day be dressed as a maternity-ward nurse, cradling a bouncing blue teddy bear, or as a geisha, in half-open kimono and dagger hairpins?
Or maybe we'll have a rerun of the milkmaid, a case of glass bottles in hand -- so old-fashioned she still delivers and so modern she doesn't bother to wear a shirt.
But no, the appeal of the thing is that you need never encounter a girl, or even the concept of a girl, twice.
She's a one-morning stand.


Investigation Into Rodent Virus on Long Island


A Furious Man
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER A Young Black Man in America.
By Nathan McCall. 404 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


The Native -- and Not So Native -- American Way; The Apaches
Arough camp is set up on the outskirts of Whiteriver, halfway up the White Mountains of Arizona and just below the point where terra cotta bluffs and junipers give way to the country's largest stand of Ponderosa pine.
Men chop wood and come and go in pickups.
Dozens of women tend large fires, preparing food for the opening rituals of a nine-day celebration of a girl's puberty.
Some bake bread and tortillas on open coals, fry steak or simmer a traditional corn brew; others, in the un-self-conscious blend of old and new so common among White Mountain Apaches, roll dough around hot dogs to bake on the fire or pack soda and beer into ice chests.
Two medicine-men-in-training, college bound in the fall, stretch inner tubing over metal bowls to make drums.


Feb. 20-26: Regrets on Both Sides; Long in Works, Timber Plan Still Leaves Axes Grinding
There's no way to tell how many trees were felled to print the 1,600-page document containing the Clinton Administration's plan for the forests of the Pacific Northwest.
But the blueprint, delivered last week in the form of an environmental impact statement, would drastically reduce the number of trees that could ever be cut from 24 million acres of public land in Washington, Oregon and California.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ARTHUR MILLER PREMIERE
The premiere of Arthur Miller's new play "Broken Glass," opens at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven March 9, with previews beginning on Tuesday.
Ron Rifkin, Amy Irving and Ron Silver have the leading roles, and John Tillinger is the director.
Rounding out the cast of six are Frances Conroy, Lauren Klein and George N. Martin.
The title was taken from Kristallnacht, or night of the shattered glass, when a 48-hour pogrom took place throughout Germany, in which Jews, their homes and businesses were destroyed on Nov. 9 and 10, 1938.
It brought to a head the systematic persecution of Jews that began with a 1933 law dismissing them from government service and from the universities, and prohibiting them from entering the professions.


STYLE on file; The Undershirt Comes Out
WHO WOULD HAVE THOUGHT THAT THE undershirt, modest and utilitarian from the start, would come out of the drawer as the high-fashion accessory of the season?
This spring, designers like Karl Lagerfeld, Calvin Klein, Bill Blass and Ralph Lauren, as well as many others, have transformed this humble piece of underwear into a surprising and versatile look.
Now worn as an outer as well as an inner garment, the undershirt communicates charm and sex appeal with an impact not felt since Marlon Brando wore one on Broadway in Tennessee Williams's "A Streetcar Named Desire."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Purchasing managers' index, Feb.
57.7
57.0
Existing-home sales, Jan., mils., ann. rate
4.49
4.20
Construction spending, Jan., pct. chg.
2.6
0.3
Wednesday
New-home sales, Jan., thous., ann. rate
862
750
Personal income, January, percent change
0.6
0.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
385
370
Factory-goods orders, Jan., pct. change
1.2
2.0
Auto sales, Feb., millions, ann. rate
7.3
7.0
Friday
Unemployment, Feb., percent
6.7
6.7
Nonfarm payroll, Feb., change in thousands
62
160
Leading indicators, Jan., percent change
0.7
0.3
This Week's Developments
Thursday
Bundesbank Council meeting


POSTINGS: 5 Stories on West 93d Street; New Columbia Grammar Middle School
The Columbia Grammar School, established in connection with Columbia University over a century ago, is erecting a new middle school on a vacant lot on the Upper West Side of Manhattan at 14 West 93d Street.
The K-12 private school is now in several nearby structures, including a 1907 building at 5 West 93d Street, several brownstones on West 94th Street and a 7-year-old building at 6 West 93d Street.
The new building will be for grades 7, 8 and 9.
The school will retain ownership of all the buildings.


Margaret Allen, Raoul Rodriguez
Margaret Hale Allen, a daughter of Barbara G. Wilkins of Austin, Tex., and of James H. Allen Jr. of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Raoul Pablo Rodriguez, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Raoul P. Rodriguez of New Orleans.
The Rev.
James Hutchins performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Cross Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Rodriguez, 29, until recently an assistant vice president at PNC Bank in Philadelphia, is scheduled next month to join the London office of the Northern Trust Company as a second vice president of marketing and sales.
She graduated from Drexel University.
Her father is a civil engineer for the City of Philadelphia.
Her mother is a registered massage therapist in Austin.


Tech Notes; A Kinder, Cheaper Scanner
MANY patients who have been trapped inside the hollow tube of a magnetic resonance imaging scanner would compare the experience to being buried alive.
And the high cost of the machines -- $2 million or so -- means M.R.I. exams are expensive.
Physicians who order them have come under pressure from insurance companies.
Now a small company on Long Island has sought Government approval to sell a new kind of M.R.I. scanner that would use a much less powerful magnet than most, cost about one-fourth as much and be small enough to fit inside a doctor's office.


Profile; It's Not I.B.M. and It's Not Big, But He's Got Big Ideas
IN the fall of 1991, George H. Conrades was seemingly at the pinnacle of a 31-year I.B.M. career.
He was running I.B.M.'s entire United States organization, with 100,000 employees and $27 billion in revenue.
Tall and suave, he was a marketing golden boy who had had great success at a variety of jobs on his way up the I.B.M. ladder.
He was on every short list of candidates to succeed John Akers as chief executive.
Last month, Mr.
Conrades was indeed named president and chief executive of a high-tech company, but it wasn't I.B.M.
Instead, shocking most of the computer world, Mr.
Conrades (pronounced con-RAID-us) joined Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman, a struggling pioneer of many kinds of technologies that has lately fallen victim to slackening government military spending and an inability to commercialize its research efforts.


Tearful Recollections At the Five and Dime
IF there is any doubt that theater on Long Island can be as exciting as theater anywhere else "Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean," the memory play by Ed Graczyk now at Studio Theater in Lindenhurst, will put those doubts to rest.
The play had its premiere in 1976 in Columbus, Ohio, and was produced Off Broadway in 1980 and on Broadway in 1982.
Although it always had its defenders, the play managed to stumble in production.
Either it was overdirected and underwritten or vice-versa or over- or underacted.


Judge Seeks Alternatives For Litigants
In an effort to curb the growing delays and costs in overburdened courts, New York State's Chief Judge has announced plans to use mediation, arbitration and other alternatives to traditional courtroom trials.
Though a few courts in the state already make use of such options, this is New York's first effort to come up with a statewide menu of court-sponsored alternatives for resolving cases, both civil and criminal.
Similar options are available in more than half of the states.


Tax Law, Weather Plague Restaurants
WESTCHESTER restaurants are having a bad time," observed M'el Eudes who, with her husband, Henri, owns Auberge Argenteuil, a French restaurant in Hartsdale. "Places are closing left and right.
Now the drop in the tax deduction for business meals is the last straw."
What Mrs.
Eudes was referring to was the change in the tax deduction for business meals and entertainment, which took effect on Jan. 1 and reduced the tax deduction to 50 percent from 80 percent.


Picturing the Holocaust
The elegiac AUSCHWITZ: A History in Photographs (Indiana University, $59.95) presents an astounding and comprehensive compilation of almost 300 photographs, along with maps, documents and artwork, from the archives of the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum.
First published in Polish in 1990, the book was edited by Teresa Swiebocka, a senior curator at the museum, with the English edition prepared by Jonathan Webber, who teaches social anthropology at Oxford University, and Connie Wilsack, the managing editor of the Littman Library of Jewish Civilization in Oxford.
Auschwitz, the largest Nazi concentration camp, was established in occupied Poland in 1940.
More than a million Jews perished there, along with 120,000 Poles, Gypsies, Soviet prisoners of war, Yugoslavs and homosexuals.
They died from starvation, disease, torture, hard labor and executions by shooting, hanging or gassing.
When the camp was liberated by the Soviet Army in January 1945, there were 7,000 survivors.
The horrifying photographs in this book depict gas chambers, barracks and crematoriums, as well as prisoners, dead bodies, arms tattooed with prison numbers and piles of teeth, glasses, human hair and artificial limbs.
Most stunning is the juxtaposition of photographs with the reproductions of drawings and paintings by former prisoners, some actually done in the camp.
The drawings and paintings are as intensely detailed as the photographs.
"The works represented here spell out an accusation," writes Kazimierz Smolen, a survivor of Auschwitz and former director of its museum.
"Each brushstroke and pencil mark is a condemnation of the Nazi system." Elsewhere, he writes: "We remember as part of our homage to the victims. If we fail to remember, then their suffering and death will have no meaning: history will be incomplete." SUSAN SHAPIRO


Another Powell Wants to Go to Washington
In recent days the phone in the East Harlem office of City Councilman Adam Clayton Powell 4th has been ringing more frequently and the stream of visitors has considerably thickened.
The interruptions come from people offering advice to Mr.
Powell as he considers whether to run for Congress against Representative Charles B. Rangel.
If Mr.
Powell does run -- something he admits he is seriously considering -- it would produce a political battle with passions that have smoldered for nearly a quarter-century.
It was 24 years ago that Mr.
Rangel unseated Mr.
Powell's father, Adam Clayton Powell Jr., ending the career of the man who was once the nation's most powerful black lawmaker.


Paris is a flutter
Down from its plinth in the Place de la Concorde steps a statue.
She is wearing one of those draped dresses that classical Greek goddesses favor -- a few white folds caressing the bosom and beyond.
And here is a crinoline lady, right out of a Gainsborough portrait, her skirts skimming the sidewalk below a skimpy bodice.
Has the Louvre come to life?
Has fashion gone mad?
No, it was just a monumental Paris season.
Beneath the arty clothes for spring 1994 is a message: Fashion has gone soft, feminine and pretty as a picture.
The new look starts with a dress falling in soft folds, in wispy fabrics, or cut to slither across the body.
Helmut Lang made a slip of a dress, as minimal as underwear -- so sheer you might need two, layered like tank tops.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption last Sunday about budget hotels misstated the name of a hotel on Broadway near 94th Street.
It is the Newton, not the Newtown.


Checking 'Bargains' In Co-ops
RICHARD GOLDSMITH, a retired salesman, never dreamed of becoming a co-op shareholder.
No wonder.
He was living in an attractive one-bedroom rent-stabilized garden apartment in Flushing, Queens, that cost him just $500 a month.
So in 1986, when he was offered his apartment for $48,825 during the period that the complex was going co-op, he wasn't interested.
He wasn't about to spend almost $50,000 on shares when his monthly maintenance charges would cost almost as much as his rent.


Weighing the Effect of Budget Cuts at Harlem Hospital
When officials of the city's fiscally strapped Health and Hospitals Corporation looked at Harlem Hospital Center's burn unit, they saw that two of its four beds were usually empty.
They decided to shut it down.
When union leaders and elected officials looked at the unit, though, they saw that two of the beds were usually occupied, and they are arguing that it is a service the community cannot do without.


The Illusion of 'I'
The nature of consciousness, to many people, is no big mystery.
The eyes, like television cameras, bring information to a little screen in the brain.
Nearby are levers that move hands and legs.
Floating there inside one's head is an "I," a vivid presence aware of all that goes on except when it's time for sleep and the little screen flickers out.
But scientists who study the brain have trouble with this explanation.
They can't find the slightest evidence of the tiny screen or its observer.
Even the latest scanning machines, subtle enough to detect by region the activity of the thinking brain, see no sign of a central command post, no site of willpower, no seat of consciousness.
But if there's no screen and no watcher, how is reality presented?
The answer seems to be: in symbols.


WILLIAM T. VOLLMANN'S RISKY BUSINESS
Madison Smartt Bell's article on William T. Vollmann (Feb. 6) failed to mention that Vollmann is a staff writer for Spin magazine.
Furthermore, in referring, in considerable detail, to Vollmann's buying and freeing a Thai sex slave, you neglected to inform your readers that this was for an assignment in Spin, published in our December issue, and that Spin bore all the expenses. (In fact, after Bill set up Sukanja, the freed 16-year-old, in her own sewing business, he and I personally gave her another $500 each, to capitalize her enterprise for at least the next year.) BOB GUCCIONE JR.
Editor and Publisher, Spin New York, N.Y.


F.Y.I.
A Mystery Donor
Q.
Who is Rosalind P. Walter?
Her name appears on lists of financial supporters of so many programs on Channel 13.


Above Schools, More Money For Education?
The New York City school system, caught between expanding enrollment and shrinking resources, is considering selling or leasing air rights over six Manhattan schools, among them P.S. 9 at 84th Street and Columbus Avenue.
But in the neighborhood there is worry that higher development over or adjacent to the elementary school could leave playgrounds in shadow.
Critics also fear the site would be used for market-rate or luxury development, instead of additional affordable housing that the Upper West Side needs.


Above Schools, More Money For Education?
The New York City school system, caught between expanding enrollment and shrinking resources, is considering selling or leasing air rights over six Manhattan schools, among them P.S. 9 at 84th Street and Columbus Avenue.
But in the neighborhood there is worry that higher development over or adjacent to the elementary school could leave playgrounds in shadow.
Critics also fear the site would be used for market-rate or luxury development, instead of additional affordable housing that the Upper West Side needs.


Robert I. Townsend Jr.; Lawyer, 53
Robert I. Townsend Jr., an I.B.M. lawyer for 29 years, died on Monday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
A resident of Bedford, Mr.
Townsend was 53.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son Christopher.


Malone Knows: Cable Has a Rocky Future
THERE are potholes on the path to the information superhighway.
And the markets noticed them before the investment bankers did.
The planned merger between Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications Inc., which collapsed last week, was foundering even before the Federal Communications Commission announced new rules to cut cable rates.
Investors, after a giddy initial reaction to the deal last fall, had begun to question the whole premise and had driven down the price of Bell Atlantic stock to the point that John C. Malone's exalted vision of what his company was worth could not be accomodated with a reasonable amount of Bell Atlantic stock.


A Yankee Is Facing Catch-22
If Joseph Heller had not invented the phrase "Catch-22," some frustrated young baseball player might have.
You know the sort.
A youngster who wants to be in the major leagues.
And he plays for an organization that may know full well that the player can play in the big leagues but worries about the quality playing time the youngster would get if all the club can promise is a backup position to some veteran.


Dialing Help At Any Hour
NEW YORK has hundreds of all-night services to meet the nocturnal needs of the sick, the tired, the unfortunate and the harried.
Here are some examples.


Cozy German
ROLF'S


The Joke's Up for Bret Saberhagen
Bret Saberhagen grew the mustache and goatee during the off season.
It is supposed to make him look grown up.
Saberhagen has always had a problem with facial hair -- it takes months to grow something decent on his baby face -- and this time he is adamant about keeping it.
He is now the new Bret, the mature Bret.
Problem is, he's still a kid inside.


WHAT'S THE WORLD'S PRIORITY TASK?
Charles Westoff is far off base in his indictment of the feminist agenda on reproductive issues.
The feminist agenda is exactly what is needed with regard to population issues.
Policies that promote the economic, social, political and civil rights of women infuse reproductive options with real meaning and effectiveness.


World Markets; An Emerging Emerging Market
HIDDEN in the Indian Ocean like a verdant dollop dripping from the southern coast of tropical India, Sri Lanka has lingered in geographical and economic obscurity.
It is a land that lures European tourists, is fighting a vicious but relatively contained civil war, and has quietly managed to attract interest from foreign investors and financial institutions.
Since the beginning of the year, the Colombo Stock Exchange -- tiny by global standards, to be sure -- has soared.
Before last week, it had been outperforming markets in every other country except Brazil.
Then, last Wednesday, the Sri Lankan all-shares index hit an all-time high of 1,373.48 and the market became the world's leading gainer for the year.
The market has risen more than 350 points in three months.


BENEFITS
Roudabout Tribute MONDAY -- Gene Feist, The founding director of the Roundabout Theater Company, will be honored for his 30 years in the theater at a benefit at the Roundabout, 1530 Broadway at 45th Street.
Alan Arkin, Karen Allen, Philip Bosco, Geraldine Fitzgerald, Nancy Marchand and the Lar Lubavitch Dance Company will be among the performers at the benefit for the Roundabout Conservatory Ensemble Company, which trains young actors.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by entertainment at 8.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 719-9393.
Masked Ball for Purim
WEDNESDAY -- The Jewish Museum will hold its annual masked-ball benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria to celebrate Purim.
"The Gardens of Alhambra," the evening will include a tribute to the museum's Sephardic Heritage Society.
Cocktails at 6:30 will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Dress is black tie or costume.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 675-9474.
Celebrating a Space


Uncovering Treasures of Ancient Nubia
THE awesome silence that pervaded the royal tombs of ancient Nubia for thousands of years now haunts an exhibition at the Newark Museum.
But here, the quiet is often broken by the sudden exclamations of visitors who admire a striking beaded necklace, ceramic pot ornamented with giraffes or an elegant blue-glass vase.
The excitement of discovery in these voices must surely echo the eager shouts of archeologists who first uncovered these handsome objects in digs at the beginning of this century and again in the 1960's.
In the last 95 years, salvage archeology, conducted by the Museum of Anthropology and Archaeology of the University of Pennsylvania, rescued more than 7,000 Nubian objects before the successive rebuildings of the Aswan High Dam in Egypt and the consequent expansion of Lake Nasser flooded the region.
The artifacts are now in the university's collection, as gifts of the Egyptian and Sudanese Governments.


Beware False Idols And Prophets
To the Editor:
I was disturbed by Russell Miller's article on Santeria, "A Leap of Faith" (Jan. 30).
First of all, that title was also used for the Steve Martin film in which he played a rogue preacher preying on the misery of a Kansas farm town.
To some readers, this very association might conjure up a similar point of view.


What Photos Say About Day Care
"Combining Tots and the Elderly in Day Care"  [ Jan. 30 ]  has major photographs that are very disturbing.
One photograph depicts three babies in highchairs along a barren wall and an elderly woman looking away from the children while sitting on a folding chair at a table.
The other photo shows the same woman unhappy and alone while unsupervised children are occupying themselves.
What a depressing and scary view of intergenerational day care!
No interaction is shown, and no caregivers are in sight!


Competitive Crying
There are fewer than 100 town criers in the United States and Canada.
But that's more than there were 20 years ago.
"I was the only town crier I knew of in North America when I started out in 1974," said Peter Cox, official town crier for Halifax, Nova Scotia.
Fortunately for the other contestants at the 1994 North American town crier competition, Mr.
Cox is not in the running for this year's title; he is coordinator of the event, which takes place May 21 at the Nemacolin Woodlands Resort in Farmington, Pa.
The competition is free.


The World; The Other Balkan Price: Lost Civilization
HERE in this once-Muslim village near the beautiful Drina River in eastern Bosnia, the mosque lies crumpled, the elan of its white minaret reduced to a twisted coil atop the rubble.
Elsewhere along the Drina, where Serbian savagery has been virulent, the eradication of Islam has reached a more advanced stage.
Where mosques once stood, there are dismal little town squares planted with saplings, or concrete car parks.
Churchill said the trouble with the Balkans was that the region "produces more history than it can consume." In the current war, the combatants' aim has been first to eliminate that history, then to rewrite it.
Mosques, the Orthodox Christian monasteries of Serbs and the Catholic churches of Croats have all fallen victim, for they suggest the uncomfortable truth that the story of the Balkans is of the mingling of many cultures.


2 Parolees Charged in Shooting of Officer
Two parolees were arrested yesterday and charged in the shooting of a police officer Friday near a Far Rockaway, Queens, housing project, the police said.
Darnell Pollard, 19, and Gregory Lide, 20, turned themselves in yesterday at the 101st Precinct police station in Far Rockaway.
A search of Mr.
Lide's apartment in the Redfern Houses produced the .22-caliber rifle used in the shooting, the police said.


Swiss Skiing Star Comes From Way Back to Win a Place in History
When Vreni Schneider of Switzerland looked down the steep, sunny mountain from her starting position this afternoon, the finish line and her medal chances in the women's slalom seemed quite a distance away.
She was in fifth place after the first run this morning, a relatively large 68-hundredths of a second behind the leader, Katja Koren of Slovenia.
And now Schneider faced the final run, and the last race of her Olympic career.
If she could win a fifth Olympic medal, it would make her the most decorated female skier in Olympic Alpine history.


Party Dressing
Downtown -- During the cocktail hour at the New York Academy of Art's TriBeCa Ball on Feb. 15, a skirt-sized Gianni Versace scarf wrapped around a young woman's waist loosened and fell to the floor.
It seemed an appropriate mishap at a benefit for the nation's only graduate school of art devoted exclusively to the human figure.
"Everything today is about conceptualism and abstract expressionism, so to be teaching the figure is very radical," Andre Balazs, the chic hotelier and academy board member, said of the 12-year-old school, which recently moved to a five-story building on Franklin Street between West Broadway and Church Street.
Meanwhile, nude models were posing in classrooms where students, covered in clay, paint and other substances that would require dry cleaning to remove, tried not to brush up against the expensive outfits of formally attired guests.


Don't Send in the Marines
Isolation is no longer possible or desirable," the President said. It was September 1901, the speaker was William McKinley and the subject of his address at the opening of the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo was the role the United States should play in the dawning 20th century.
McKinley's point was that modern technologies of transport and communications had abolished distance.
It was obvious even then.
So internationalism evolved into the dominant theme of American foreign policy.
Today, though, with the collapse of the Soviet Union, internationalism is losing its way as we stumble from the narrow and chaotic streets of Somalia to Haiti and, possibly -- after the mortar attack on a crowded Sarajevo market -- to the quagmire of Bosnia.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a letter last Sunday by Marian E. Lindberg about the breakup of the Bell System misstated the writer's comments on Judge Harold Greene's deliberations before he ordered the breakup.
Ms.
Lindberg was commenting on whether the judge's chambers were bugged; she was not commenting on actual discussions in his chambers.


SUNDAY, February 27, 1994; Sunday in the Park With . . .
You're a young dancer or singer with your eye on the Great White Way.
Why slog through the musical version of "The Oresteia" down on Avenue C when Cocoa Avenue beckons?
Hersheypark, of Hershey, Pa., the candy company's eponymous theme park held auditions recently at Radio City Music Hall for summer shows like the one at left (from last year).
And Hersheypark is just one of 26 big theme parks in the nation employing some 15,000 performers each summer.


Tonya Talk
To the Sports Editor:
The attack on Nancy Kerrigan was a stupid, vicious, intolerable act.
The perpetrators, including Tonya Harding's former husband, were part of the Harding entourage.
But that does not necessarily implicate her.
Harding may have little education, but I bet she has enough street smarts -- and too much to lose -- to be part of this kind of conspiracy.


INTO THE WHITE IVORY TOWER
I enjoyed the humor of Brent Staples's memoir of his time at the University of Chicago, especially his droll parody of Saul Bellow's style when he encountered his famous prey ("Into the White Ivory Tower," Feb. 6).
As a student at the university just before Staples's tenure on campus, however, I found fear a necessary companion for living in Hyde Park.
The lesson I carried away from this experience was that fear and its progeny, racial prejudice, grow out of a failure of the sense of community.
If I personally knew an individual, whatever his or her race, I felt comfortable.
Strangers, on the other hand, where the chance of being hurt is real -- and I had friends of both races who were hurt -- had to be evaluated warily as a matter of self-preservation.
In Hyde Park, the strangers who posed such a personal threat also happened to be predominantly black.
Recalling my experience, I laughed when I heard that Jesse Jackson had told an African-American audience that he had been walking down a street, heard footsteps behind him and felt relieved to see that the person following him was white.


On Broadway, Book Is Mightier Than the Car
Ending a debate that dates to the early 1970's, the city has decided to renovate a four-story garage on Broadway at 113th Street to make way for a branch of the New York Public Library.
For book lovers, the decision means more elbow room for a branch that has been housed since 1936 in a small room in the basement of Columbia University's Butler Library.


In Search of a Buzz
To the Editor:
As the marketing director at Alfred A. Knopf, I take exception to Michael Norman's characterization of publishers' sales representatives as commerce-over-culture heathens ("A Book in Search of a Buzz: The Marketing of a First Novel," Jan. 30; "Reader by Reader and Town by Town, a New Novelist Builds a Following," Feb. 6).
To the contrary, they are dedicated book lovers who passionately proselytize about good books to bookstore buyers, who in turn do the same to bookstore customers.
They are a vital, unheralded link in getting good fiction and nonfiction into the hands of readers.


Cuba Embargo Punishes Scientific Exchange
To the Editor:
Among those hardest hit by the refusal of the Clinton Administration to recognize an educational activity exemption for the travel ban on Cuba (editorial, Feb. 14) are scientists, researchers and academics.
Their efforts to maintain legitimate professional contacts, and to exchange scientific information and ideas, have been stymied by a shortsighted policy that ignores constitutional protections of free travel, expression and association under the guise of maintaining an economic embargo.


Intoxicated With Science
THE YOUNG SCIENTISTS America's Future and the Winning of the Westinghouse.
By Joseph Berger. 243 pp.
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. $21.95.


Holy Water


Counterrevolutionary Sex
RED AZALEA By Anchee Min. 306 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $22.


Suspect Plodded in Father's Steps at C.I.A.
When Aldrich H. Ames first went to work in 1959 at the headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency a few miles from his home, it was much like a son following his father in working at the local mill.
His father had been a longtime C.I.A. employee, and as a member of the agency's extended family Rick Ames had always been fascinated by the world of espionage and was expected to flourish in it.


The Latest Obsessions of the Obsessed
Just before the earthquake hit Los Angeles in January, while other, less violently seismic events were rocking the city (the Menendez trials, the firing of Shannon Doherty from Beverly Hills 90210, the Howard Stern book signing), I spent a few days on the edge myself: a four-day physical search for the echt-L.A. experience.
"Omigod, you've got to spin!" "Omigod, you're not going to spin, are you?" I heard over and over, with increasing confusion, from Angelinos of every shape and affinity, as soon as I landed in West Hollywood.
"Spinning" has been around for almost four years now, but in the past few months, it has taken on the same kind of heat that step classes had in the beginning, said Henry Siegel, a co-owner of the Voight Fitness and Dance Center.
But, he cautioned, it's not called spinning at Voight anymore; it's called "RPM's." A stationary cycling class, RPM's is a 40-minute experience that seemed beyond most Angelinos' powers of description.
"Just do it," said one, "I can't explain it to you."


The Ancient Relievers: No Ego, No Nerves and Often No Fastball
Two years ago, during another spring training in Arizona, Tony Attanasio decided to introduce two of his young pitching clients to one of his elderly pitching clients.
"Goose shakes their hands," the agent related the other day.
"Then he pounds them on the heart and says: 'This is where the game is played. It's not played here in the wallet and it's not played here in your head. It's played right here in your heart. If you don't have it, get out of the game because it's been too good to too many people. Don't ruin it.' "


Satisfying Stews From Britain, France and the Greek Islands
WHEN the weather is brisk, it is hard to stick with a diet of salads and chicken without the skin.
As far as I'm concerned, nothing beats a good stew at this time of year, and it does not have to be a fatty dish rich in calories, either.
Rabbit, which is increasingly available in butcher shops and specialty stores, is low in fat, and it has more flavor than chicken.
It is especially good stewed because it does not dry out as is often the case when it is roasted or grilled.
The meat is simmered in a sauce flavored with tomatoes and onions, and tiny hard green picholine olives from the south of France (do not try to substitute canned Spanish olives: they do not taste the same).
This stew is good with wide flat noodles.


High School Seeks a Place To Call Home
The new High School for the Physical City, which specializes in New York's infrastructure, is experiencing infrastructure problems firsthand in its efforts to find a home.
The school, one of 30 theme schools set up last year, focuses on the study of bridges, water tunnels and other elements of the city's inner workings.
It started last September (late, because of asbestos removal) in temporary quarters shared with Intermediate School 70 at 333 West 17th Street.


Why a Tunnel Link Is Superfluous
To the Editor:
In your Feb. 20 article, "Bumpy Road to Easy Rides on Subways," you reported that construction of the 63d Street Tunnel-Queens Boulevard line connector would cause major disruptions of subway and street movements in Long Island City.
But you also presented the Transit Authority's argument that the project would result in "more trains, faster trips and less crowding." This assertion is subject to question: there is clear evidence that the plan gives little for a $645 million investment.


Boroughs Squabble Over Building Project
Last summer, Representative Floyd H. Flake managed to slip a stipulation into a Federal appropriations bill to build a new regional headquarters for the Food and Drug Administration -- but only on a parking lot at York College in Jamaica, Queens.
Since that just happens to be in his district, he thought he had sealed a good deal for his constituents in one of the city's more depressed areas.
Instead, Mr.
Flake's legislative legerdemain -- in alliance with Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan -- opened a free-for-all that has tied up approval of the $180 million project altogether.
It would be the F.D.A.'s biggest laboratory outside its national headquarters in Maryland, testing bales of food, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, including samples from the tons of foreign goods that arrive each year at Kennedy International Airport.


No Headline
"This political amnesty will always remain a black page in the history of Russia, but there is nothing I can do to stop it. I cannot circumvent the law." ALEKSEI I. KAZANNIK, as he resigned as Russia's chief prosecutor.  [ 1:6. ]


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3
Think of Joan Hamburg as a consumer's aid society of the air, a cross between Dear Abby and Betty Furness.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4
This is not a story about a trade war along upper Broadway.
Just call it healthy competition.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14
Plover rescue in Breezy Point; Mozart's "Requiem" in the West Village. MOVIE CLOCK 15
What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday. GOOD EATING 16
The Flatiron and environs: Mediterranean in the main, with an oompah on the side.
SOAPBOX 17
Around a deathbed, life and love; a priest's story.
Plus Photographer's Journal and a rumination on car alarms.


Lots of Political Humor, and No Morton Kondracke
"POLITICALLY INCORRECT," a voluble half-hour roundtable of off-the-wall opinionizing, is seen on the Comedy Central cable channel, which is available in only one-third of the country's households.
Even among those households, the show scores a puny .2 rating -- about 60,000 homes watching.
Still, since it began in July it has drawn a lot of attention among comedians and political figures alike and has become, in the words of the channel's president, "the program that defines the network."
And the host, a 38-year-old comic named Bill Maher, finds himself perhaps the hottest property ever to emerge from a show whose audience is measured in decimal points.
This phenomenon in a teapot brings together such unlikely combinations as Dr.
Dre, gangsta rapper, and Gay Talese, celebrity author, or G. Gordon Liddy, convicted felon and far-right radio host, and the playwright Harvey Fierstein to discuss topics like the State of the Union, Nafta, AIDS and American policy in Bosnia.
For each show, a different panel is assembled, and the guest list seldom includes the Sam Donaldsons and Morton Kondrackes of the world.


Which Is the Language Most Spoken in Africa?
I read with interest the article "A Teacher With a Dream: Multiculturalism" (Jan. 2).
It mentioned that French, "the predominant language on the African continent," is being offered in a pilot program.
This comment sent me scurrying to my encyclopedia.
A quick mental review of the continent made me immediately question the accuracy of the statement.
By my calculations, Arabic is the second-largest official language on the continent of Africa.
French is third and certainly not first.
English is first by a long shot.


Weighing the Effect of Budget Cuts at Harlem Hospital
When officials of the city's fiscally strapped Health and Hospitals Corporation looked at Harlem Hospital Center's burn unit, they saw that two of its four beds were usually empty.
They decided to shut it down.
When union leaders and elected officials looked at the unit, though, they saw that two of the beds were usually occupied, and they are arguing that it is a service the community cannot do without.


Rediscovering What Musicals Are All About
ONE QUICK WAY TO characterize "Avenue X," the audacious, pocket-sized new musical at Playwrights Horizons: when the house lights come up at the end of the show, the members of the audience are sharing the same high that is clearly being experienced by the cast of eight.
"Avenue X" is not your average "happy" show; it doesn't wind up on a note of bogus hope.
Yet it's bursting with the kind of talent, wit and energy that separate the living theater from all entertainment that comes in a can.
It's shaded by melodrama, but it's a genuine upper.
What is "Avenue X"?
You can put the fear of God into your friends by describing it as an a cappella doo-wop musical set in 1963, making it sound like a production of "Grease" on the night the orchestra got lost.
It's not.
It's a joyfully performed, far more ambitious work that embraces not only doo-wop and rock-and-roll, but also gospel, blues, jazz, Afro-Caribbean rhythms, the birth of rap and, in one scathingly funny number titled "Palermo," all those catch-in-the-throat folk songs associated with Mario Lanza at his most overweight.


On Broadway, Book Is Mightier Than the Car
Ending a debate that dates to the early 1970's, the city has decided to renovate a four-story garage on Broadway at 113th Street to make way for a branch of the New York Public Library.
For book lovers, the decision means more elbow room for a branch that has been housed since 1936 in a small room in the basement of Columbia University's Butler Library.


Beethoven: Quartets and Symphonies
WORKS by Beethoven are in abundance this week starting at 8 P.M. on Tuesday when the Tokyo Quartet advances its complete string quartet cycle with the fifth of six scheduled recitals at Sprague Memorial Hall in New Haven.
On tap this time: Opus 127, and the First Razoumovsky, Opus 59, No. 1.
Three days later and down the street at Woolsey Hall, the Philharmonia Orchestra of Yale welcomes two other university ensembles, the Glee Club and the Camerata, for an 8 P.M.
Friday performance of the Ninth Symphony.
Tiffany Jackson, Jane Dutton, Matthew Polenzani and Bruce Baumer are the vocal soloists, with Gunther Herbig, music director of the Toronto Symphony, on the podium.
The number for reservations for these Yale events is 432-4158.


Leslie C. Cohen and Jeffrey I. Lang
Leslie Carolyn Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jonathan J. Cohen of South Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Ira Lang, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel A. Lang of Monroeville, PA.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein performed the ceremony at Congregation Kehilath Jesurun in New York.
Ms.
Cohen, 31, is keeping her name.
She is the director of television program planning for the National Basketball Association in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
Her father is the president of Elias B. Cohen &amp; Associates, an insurance brokerage and consulting firm in Roseland, N.J.


Spooked Again
Since the arrest of Aldrich H. Ames for spying, a cavalcade of former Central Intelligence Agency officials have appeared on television to say there is nothing really surprising about the case: spying will continue regardless of whether the cold war is over, and not much can be done about it.
This roll-over attitude is symptomatic of why the agency got taken so badly.
While there will always be spies, it is not true that nothing can be done about it.
In virtually every penetration of the C.I.A., there were signs that should have alerted the agency to a possible security breach, and in virtually every case when the agency's Office of Security got involved, it botched the job.


Arlene Beckles, Steve Imparato
On Valentine's Day, Arlene Beckles and Steve Imparato gave new meaning to the term "shotgun wedding." The couple, who met in 1988 while working as New York City Housing Authority Police officers, had been engaged for about three years but were in no rush to marry until she almost died in a gunfight.
Detective Beckles is the petite, soft-spoken 30-year-old cop who was sitting under a hair dryer at Salon La Mode Beauty Parlor in downtown Brooklyn on Feb. 5, when three armed robbers walked in.
She pulled out her off-duty revolver and shot at the intruders with such accuracy that she earned a new nickname, Dirty Harriet.
One of the robbers wrestled her to the floor and held a pistol to her face.
He pulled the trigger, but the pistol misfired.
He pulled again -- it jammed.


London Tickets
To the Editor: There's good news for Marilyn Ross, who complained about being "scalped" by a New York booking agent for London theaters (Letters, Nov. 15).
Since reading about it in The Times four or five years ago, I have been using a West Coast company, Good Show!
London Theater Information and Booking Service, with excellent results.
It also covers Stratford-Upon-Avon.


Japan's Bureaucracy: No Sign It's Losing Any Power
In the two weeks since Japan and the United States collided over trade policy and began threatening each other with sanctions and counter-sanctions, President Clinton has repeatedly identified the real source of the problem: Japan's entrenched, turf-conscious bureaucrats.
"There's a big fight going on in Japan now," he said the other day, describing a classic struggle between the mandarins who have run Japan's industrial and trade policies for four decades and the reformers, led by Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, who are fighting to open an economy now choking on overregulation.


For Now, All's Quiet At Mr. Fuji's
In the after-dark scene downtown, with its thumping all-night music, traffic jams and disorderly conduct, plenty of clubs are in the running for the title Nightspot Most Hated by Neighbors.
But these days the clear front-runner, according to the police and local officials, is Mr.
Fuji's Tropicana, at Fifth Avenue and 13th Street.
The firing of shots through Mr.
Fuji's door last month by an ejected patron was just one of several incidents that prompted the State Liquor Authority to suspend the club's license this month as a threat to public safety.
Unable to sell alcohol, the club has temporarily closed, and the owners are contesting the ruling.
They say officials are harassing them at the behest of a handful of neighbors.


Henryk Gorecki
He's an immediate gusty presence, a broad-shouldered man with closely cropped silvery hair, bundled up against the cold: green turtleneck, tweed jacket, loden overcoat, houndstooth cap.
Somehow one imagines the first classical composer to outsell the pop stars and dominate the classical charts as well to emerge from a more urbane setting than Katowice, a sooty city in southern Poland.
Somehow one expects Henryk Gorecki (pronounced go-RET-ski), this voluble man with a thrusting baritone voice and gruff manner, the composer of the soaring, haunting laments of Symphony No. 3, to be less earthy, less elemental.


Symphonic Gamut


Criticism of a Review Board Official Mounts
Three more members of the City Council have joined Councilman Thomas K. Duane in calling for the resignation of a member of the Police Civilian Complaint Review Board who has been sharply criticized for writing that AIDS could be spread during the Gay and Lesbian Olympic Games, scheduled to be held in New York in June.
Their call was also joined by a member of the review board.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he would not call for the resignation of the board member, the Rev.
Ruben Diaz.


A newsletter treats the adventures of Ross Perot as more than just political entertainment.
ROSS PEROT, according to Micah L. Sifry, may be either the catalyst for an important new social movement or "a dictator in waiting." Either way, Mr.
Sifry figures, there ought to be a market for a newsletter ($15 for four issues a year) about the billionaire and his movement.
The result: The Perot Periodical, a quarterly that The Columbia Journalism Review recently called the classiest of a new crop of niche political publications.
Others include The Clinton Chronicle, a monthly tantrum against the Commander in Chief, and Stephanopouletter: The Official Newsletter of the George Stephanopoulos Fan Club.


Six Firefighters Hurt at Four-Alarm Fire in the Bronx


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Bethlehem Steel Corp., Bethlehem, Pa., 13.8 million common shares, 10.2 million in the United States and Canada.
Salomon Brothers.


Smith, Harper Leaving A Void
Even if Coach Pat Riley shuffles the Knicks' starting lineup, it may not matter if some of their key players do not perform more consistently.
The Knicks expected Charles Smith to emerge as a consistent offensive force this season.
But he struggled again during Sunday's 92-78 loss, which left the team only two games -- one in the loss column -- ahead of Orlando in the Atlantic Division's Eastern Conference.


Accounts
*
Checkers Drive-In Restaurants Inc., Clearwater, Fla., to the Martin Agency, Richmond, to handle its estimated $5 million account, which had been at the Morrison Agency, Atlanta, until Morrison resigned earlier this month.
Martin was awarded the account after a review that also included Ayer Inc., New York, and Chiat/Day, New York.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A realignment by Colgate-Palmolive furthers a consolidation at big shops with global reach.
THE Colgate-Palmolive Company, in one of the largest realignments and consolidations of global agency assignments so far during the 1990's, has shifted responsibilities for important brands including Colgate oral-care products and Mennen toiletries.
The changes, disclosed on Friday, shuffle Colgate's products on a category basis, so that all soap brands, for instance, from venerable names like Palmolive to newer entries like Irish Spring, will be handled by a single shop around the world.
Though neither Colgate nor the agencies would disclose the billings involved, they are estimated at $175 million to $200 million out of total worldwide ad spending in 1993 that exceeded $500 million; Colgate plans to raise spending significantly this year.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Willie Randolph Becomes a Rookie Again
THE Yankees haven't changed that much.
Terry Mulholland is the new left-hander and Luis Polonia is the new left fielder.
Other than that, this team is basically the same as last year's except for a new but old face in the third-base coach's box.
Willie Randolph has succeeded Clete Boyer, now in the dugout as Buck Showalter's bench coach.
"It's a whole new perspective for me," Randolph was saying.
"It's like being a rookie again."


WINTER OLYMPICS: Olympic Lightning Strikes Twice More Before Torch Goes Out; Hard-Charging Tomba Rallies To Win Silver
Tomba being carried on the shoulders of local women in gorgeous Norwegian sweaters.
Tomba being pulled in a sled, like the monarch of the mountain.
Tomba grabbing an Italian flag from his fans and running wild in the snow.
Tomba doing a front body flip, and landing firm on his feet.
What better, more appropriate way could there be for a stunning Alpine program, and Alberto Tomba's record-setting Olympic career, to reach a dramatic end?


INSIDE
Dispute on Mexico Talks
The Government negotiator and a mediator reported agreement on outlines of an accord, but a rebel leader later said there was none.
Page A3.
The Mayor Gives Advice
As he takes charge of the city, Mayor Giuliani has been spelling out his conservative social philosophy and his belief in self-reliance.
Page B1.
Placing Blame in Waco
The jurors in the Texas cultists' trial sent one unmistakable message with their verdicts: there was significant fault on both sides.
Page B6.


Islamic Figure In New Tirade Against Jews
Khalid Abdul Muhammad, the Nation of Islam speaker who ignited a furor in recent weeks with a vitriolic attack on Jews, Catholics and others, has delivered a harsh new tirade against Jews, blaming them for the death of Jesus and saying he prays "that God will kill my enemy and take him off the face of the planet Earth."
Addressing a black women's group in Baltimore nine days ago, Mr.
Muhammad defended and repeated many remarks in his speech at Kean College in Union, N.J., last November, when he called Jews "bloodsuckers of the black nation," labeled the Pope a "no-good cracker" and urged black South Africans to kill all whites.


Olympics Close But Not Before Stirring Final Acts
The XVII Winter Games ended yesterday with some of the most dramatic moments of these Games, and with a closing ceremony haunted by the 10th anniversary of the Sarajevo Olympics.
"Dear Sarajevo, we do not forget you," said Juan Antonio Samaranch, the International Olympic Committee president.
"We will continue to support you."


CHRONICLE
It may be a time of flux in the world of book publishing, with companies being taken over, merging or folding, but that has not kept LENA TABORI from returning to the publishing house she helped found in 1980: Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang.
The house, which publishes illustrated books on art, photography, home design, gardening and cooking, almost collapsed last year and was put on the market by its owner, Brant Publications.


First Ejection, Then Dejection as the Knicks Fall Again
The Knicks lost -- again.
Charles Oakley may be lost for their next game.
And Coach Pat Riley admitted he had lost patience with the Knicks, who are mired in the longest slump of his tenure.
Continuing their alarming nose dive, the Knicks suffered their fourth consecutive loss, 92-78, to the Phoenix Suns at the America West Arena.
It marked the first four-game losing streak during Riley's three seasons as coach.
The tumbling Knicks have lost 8 of their last 12.


Review/Music; Persuasive Voice Adds Depth and Intimacy To Subtle Songs
The songs of Schumann's "Dichterliebe" have the quality of conversation, less declarations of love than confessions of it.
Duparc's songs -- he left behind only 13 in a life that stretched to 85 years -- live or die on the smallest of gestures, harmonic or melodic turns of phrase that convert the commonplace into elegant surprise.
How does a single singer convey these elements to 2,800 listeners in a performing space nearly a city block deep and several stories high?
Certainly one solution is reaching out; another, the one Jose van Dam and his pianist, Maciej Pikulski, chose on Friday night, was to make Carnegie Hall sound smaller, not the singer larger.


Corrections
A brief report yesterday in The City, section 13, about a series of readings on dissident writing, misstated the date of an appearance by the poet Joseph Brodsky.
It is tonight at 7, not Saturday, at Rosenthal Library at Queens College.


For New York Magazine, a Push to the Past
Following in the footsteps of Tina Brown at The New Yorker and Edward Kosner at Esquire, Kurt Andersen, the new editor of New York magazine, says he will remodel his magazine on its earliest years.
Mr.
Andersen, former editor at large at Time magazine and, before that, co-founder of Spy, took over at New York three weeks ago.


Russia's Vicious Circle
The political rearrangement in Russia that began with the governmental reshuffling of mid-1992 has come to an end.
The departure of the Cabinet's leading economic and political reformers last month erased all doubts.
Until then, despite reactionary successes in the December parliamentary elections, it was possible to believe that the necessary reforms would continue, even if only in half-measures.
But now it is clear that there will be no reforms, not even bad ones.
Under the guise of social welfare policies, a planned economy will be re-established.
Its executors will be Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin and his allies.
President Boris Yeltsin has become merely decorative.
If reform is to come, the work will be done by others.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The F.B.I. chief says Americans must be willing to give up a degree of privacy, in exchange for safety and security, in an era of computer communications and digital telephone calls.
Louis J. Freeh is defending proposed legislation that would enable law- enforcement agents to gather a wealth of personal information by monitoring citizens' calling patterns and credit-card transactions over the phone network.
Critics say the legislation would turn the telephone network into a vast surveillance system.  [ Page D1. ]


Woman's Vanishing Engrosses a City Redolent of Mystery
Getting lost in New Orleans has long had a certain cachet.
The people who live here say the city is unique -- the food spicier, the music livelier, the mysteries stranger.
But the mystery of a missing Italian traveler is distinctive even by New Orleans standards.
The main characters are a former American matinee idol's granddaughter and a mesmerizing street musician.
The scene is the waterfront and the streets of the French Quarter.
Swirling in the background is the blend of Spanish, French and African cultures that has drawn writers like Lafcadio Hearn and William Faulkner.


Executive Changes At Two Agencies
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide and Ally &amp; Gargano have made changes in top management.
At Saatchi, Bill Muirhead, chief executive of Saatchi Europe in London, has been named chief executive of Saatchi North America in New York.


Laurence C. Craigie, Dies at 92; First Military Jet Pilot for U.S.
Laurence C. Craigie, a retired Lieutenant General in the Air Force who was the first military jet pilot for the United States, died yesterday in the hospital at March Air Force Base in California, the Air Force reported.
He was 92 years old.
General Craigie's career in military aviation began when the Army had a fleet of propeller-driven biplanes and there was no separate Air Force; it ended in the age of supersonic jets.


Executive Changes At Two Agencies
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide and Ally &amp; Gargano have made changes in top management.
At Saatchi, Bill Muirhead, chief executive of Saatchi Europe in London, has been named chief executive of Saatchi North America in New York.


Remedies for Cheating Create More Problems
To the Editor:
In "Code of Dishonor" (Op-Ed, Feb. 19), Josiah Bunting 3d's remedies for cheating at the United States Naval Academy -- pass-fail grading and block courses -- are unsound.


Where Giuliani Is Aiming the Knife. . .
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has portrayed New York City's municipal work force as a wasteful, uncontrollable beast that has slowly strangled the economic life of the city.
Enough! the Mayor declared as he presented his preliminary budget plan in early February, vowing to cut 15,000 jobs over the next year and a half.
All that, he insists, without seriously disrupting essential services. (What services are essential remains to be defined.)


Correction
An article by Rose Styron on Wednesday about the British justice system in Northern Ireland misstated a finding in a new report by Amnesty International.
The report found mounting evidence of collusion between the security forces and armed Loyalist groups, not between the security forces and armed groups including the Irish Republican Army.


Review/Theater; An Iconoclastic Look At a Boys Town Product
For Father Flanagan, the founder of Boys Town in Omaha, there was no such thing as a "bad boy." Caring, education and a good dose of American principles, he believed, could turn troubled youths into upstanding, productive citizens.
Barnaby Spring, who lived there from the age of 10 to 18, isn't so sure.
His one-man show, "The Mayor of Boys Town," which opened last night at the American Place Theater, paints a dark picture of the institution that most people know from the uplifting 1938 film "Boys Town," starring Mickey Rooney and Spencer Tracy.


Felipe Who? St. Raymond Takes Crown
Duane Dingle converted a 3-point play with 17 seconds left and Kareem Reid hit two foul shots 9 seconds later as St.
Raymond overcame a 12-point deficit in the final four minutes yesterday to beat Rice and Felipe Lopez, 71-69, to win the Archdiocese of New York basketball championship.
Playing before a standing-room crowd at Fordham's Rose Hill Gymnasium in the Bronx, St.
Raymond defeated Rice for the second time in three games this season.


Woman Engages Police in Standoff On Upper East Side
A woman fired a gun at police officers, then engaged the police in a lengthy standoff, possibly holding hostages, at an Upper East Side apartment house last night, the police said.
At 1:30 A.M., six hours after the shooting, the woman, whom the police would not identify, and at least two other people remained in the apartment at 1751 Second Avenue at 91st Street, the police said.


WINTER OLYMPICS: Sports of The Times; From Inside and Out: Tusen Takk, Norway
Put on my last Hawaiian floral shirt, my spiffiest pair of chinos and loafers with no socks and sauntered over to the figure skating arena.
There was a sign on the door: All the Lovely European Female Skaters Have Gone Home.
You Go Home, Too, Dirty Old Man.
Actually, there was no sign like that, but I did get the feeling the 1994 Winter Games had taken on a new tone.
They had gone outdoors on me.
Well, it was never too late to sample the other side of the Winter Games.
For 15 days, all of us on the Nancy-Tonya-Oksana-Katarina watch had seen only indoor ice.
Now it was time to see outdoor snow.
I was going to sample one of Norway's greatest sporting passions, the 50-kilometer cross-country skiing.


Treasury Sets Weekly Sales
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.36 percent; a six-month bill was 3.58 percent.


Don't Sell Out WNYC
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's threat to sell all or part of New York City's public radio and television operations may be just the kick in the pants that was needed.
If the threat of sale pries more contributions out of listeners who have been tuning in for free -- which it seems to be doing -- there is hope.
But the sale of these irreplaceable assets to reduce the budget deficit would be a terrible loss, and a foolish mistake for the new administration.
The city owns WNYC-AM, WNYC-FM and WNYC-TV.
In distinctly different ways, they serve an audience of millions with non-commercial, high-quality news, culture and public service broadcasts that would surely cease if the stations were "privatized." Instead, they should be "not-for-profitized" -- an arrangement for smart lawyers to devise, where the stations would be self-supporting under the control of the not-for-profit WNYC Foundation that does the fund-raising now, or a reconstituted version.


First Lady to Visit Hospital
With the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee at her side, Hillary Rodham Clinton is to take her campaign for universal health care to Kings County Hospital on Monday.
She will be escorted by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat whose committee will be crucial to passage of the Clinton Administration's health-care legislation.


Town Evacuated After Derailment and Explosion


A Wrongheaded Amendment
When the Senate votes tomorrow on a constitutional amendment, proposed by Senator Paul Simon of Illinois, that would require Congress to balance the Federal budget, the outcome will be close.
Such an amendment would be a political mistake.
It would allow a mere 40 out of 100 senators and a similar minority in the House to block legislation that would create a deficit.
And because the amendment includes no enforcement procedure, it would drag courts where they do not belong -- into routine budget disputes.
Fiddling with the Constitution could be defensible if a mighty public purpose were at stake.
But Mr.
Simon's amendment, and substitute versions also up for voting, would engrave into the Constitution a standard -- zero deficits -- that makes little economic sense.
The deficit, as measured by Congress, takes no account of inflation, no account of growth, no account of recession and no account of the value of public investment.


CHRONICLE
It's TOMMY TUNE's birthday (No. 55) today, and one way he will mark the occasion is by posing with a replica of the logo for his new musical, "The Best Little Whorehouse Goes Public." A model of a 30-foot woman in Western gear is behing hoisted above the marquee of the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, where Mr.
Tune, the choreographer, director and dancer, will join her while admirers sing "Happy Birthday."
"Isn't it embarrassing?" Mr.
Tune, who is 6 feet 6 inches tall, said the other day.
"I have always quested in life for someone to look up to, but I didn't know it would come in the form of a 30-foot working girl."


After Triple Slaying, Survivors Face Life and Fear; At a Bronx Restaurant, Where Kin and Workers Were Slain, a Task of Rebuilding
For Genaro Parra, memory returns with every glance at the putty-filled bullet holes that dot the blue Formica counter in his restaurant.
Nancy Burgos sidesteps her memory of a brother by taking another route to work.
One of Mr.
Parra's cooks cannot walk through a back room without seeing visions of bodies and blood.
One night last March, a gunman walked into Mr.
Parra's seven-seat Mexican luncheonette, known as the Lena, in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx.
The man yanked down the security gate, ordered the cashier to hand over the $100 in the till, then shot four people.
Three were killed; the fourth, a teen-ager, was shot in the head but survived by pretending to be dead, and was left partially blind.


Essay; Peacemaking After Hebron
The fanatical doctor from Brooklyn who murdered scores of Muslims at prayer was the best ally of the Hezbollah and the worst enemy of Jewish settlers in Israel's disputed West Bank.
Perhaps he thought he was avenging the Arab massacre of Jews at Hebron seven decades ago; or the murder of his mentor, the extremist Rabbi Kahane, a few years ago; or killings of a couple of Israelis he treated a few weeks ago.


2 Killed and 4 Are Hurt as Fishing Boat Capsizes
A 69-foot fishing trawler capsized before dawn yesterday in New London, Conn., a few hundred yards downstream from its dock on the icy Thames River, killing two crew members who were trapped below decks, Coast Guard officials said.
The blue-and-white steel vessel, the Lady Lynn, was returning with six crew members from a 30-hour fishing cruise, its hull laden with about two tons of fish, when it turned over, said Petty Officer Van DuBose, a spokesman for the Coast Guard.


No Headline
We have to get over the idea that this is a partnership.
This is a tough rivalry, and that is an important distinction to make. -- SENATOR RICHARD LUGAR, Republican of Indiana, describing the relationship between America and Russia.  [ A1:4. ]


Don't Lecture Kids Who Lack Opportunity
To the Editor:
The other day the Mayor of New York City, Rudolph W. Giuliani, stood before high school students in Brooklyn, many of whom may die violently before they reach adulthood, and lectured them about life, about looking "at what is there and taking advantage of it" (news article, Feb. 16).


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A HOSPITAL GRAPPLES WITH DECAY
In a city where even many private hospitals are old and crumbling, Kings County Hospital has been a symbol of inefficiency and decay, even to the medical personnel who remain dedicated to the place and to the many poor or uninsured, for whom it is the only sure way to gain access to CAT scans or chemotherapy.
A1.


Programs to Cut Risks of Diabetes Surprisingly Fail to Lure Patients
Six months ago, the nation's diabetes experts made a sensational announcement.
By following a strict medical regimen, they said, diabetics can measurably slow the onset and maybe even prevent the dire complications of the disease.
The threat of blindness, kidney failure, heart attack or amputation, they proclaimed, could be greatly reduced or virtually eliminated.
Diabetes centers across the nation geared up for an onslaught of patients wanting to begin the new treatment.
They hired more staff members, added telephone lines, prepared educational materials and ordered the home monitoring devices that would allow diabetics to test their blood sugar 4 to 10 times a day.
The blood sugar tests are a crucial part of the tight regimen that the study, which followed 1,441 patients with Type I diabetes for nine years, found to be clearly beneficial.


Exports
The North American Free Trade Agreement will see exports from the region to Canada and Mexico continue to rise, state and federal trade officials say.
Exports have already risen sharply in recent years, helped by the free trade pact the U.S. and Canada signed in 1989 and Mexico's signing of the GATT accords in 1987.
Experts say New Jersey's and Connecticut's chemical industries stand to benefit from Nafta; before its passage the Mexican state oil monopoly had been the sole chemical importer.
Computer exports from all three states to Mexico are also expected to increase.
And New York's financial services industry may benefit.
Under Nafta, U.S. banks and securities firms will be able to establish wholly owned subsidiaries in Mexico.


Review/Rock; Attitude From Wonder Stuff
The Wonder Stuff won't startle anyone with its originality.
At Irving Plaza on Thursday night, the English band sounded like at least half a dozen other groups, from U2 to Dexys Midnight Runners to the Soft Boys to INXS to Midnight Oil to the Hollies.
What holds the band's music together is its consistent nervous energy -- ballads are rare -- and an attitude that's bratty and cynical, steeped in pessimism but willing to spare a bitter laugh.
Miles Hunt, the band's singer and lyricist, doesn't mince words as he bawls them.
He lashes out in all directions; during the set, songs denounced radio disk jockeys, pedophiles, deceitful lovers, a would-be "disco king" and the singer himself.
Most songs have a chip on their shoulder, even when it's not clear exactly who the target is.
But Mr.
Hunt attacks with a defiant grin, backed by all sorts of ringing guitar riffs, moving from folk-rock to the verge of hard rock, sometimes allowing a rural touch with the fiddle or mandolin of Martin Bell.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Working His Magic  Shaquille O'Neal, playing on a sore knee, scored 21 points and had 11 rebounds and 5 blocks as the Orlando Magic defeated visiting Charlotte, 114-103, yesterday for its seventh straight victory.
Nick Anderson added 18 points and 8 rebounds for the Magic while Anfernee Hardaway had 15 points and 9 assists.
Charlotte has now lost five in a row and 13 of 14.
Dell Curry led the Hornets with 26 points. (AP) Timberwolves 107, Warriors 100: Isaiah Rider scored 25 points as Minnesota overcame a 32-point, 16-rebound effort by another rookie, Chris Webber, in Minneapolis.
Chris Smith scored 21 points and made 6 free throws in the final 14.7 seconds as the Wolves snapped a five-game losing streak despite 10 turnovers by Christian Laettner. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Jaspers Beat Niagara  Brenton Birmingham had 5 of Manhattan College's school-record 15 3-point baskets and a game-high 24 points yesterday to lead the Jaspers past visiting Niagara, 102-58.
Jason Hoover added a career-high 21 points and Ted Ellis had 12 for Manhattan (17-9, 10-4 Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference), which secured second place heading into the conference tournament next weekend in Albany.
Its previous record for 3-point baskets was 14. (AP) Connecticut Women Win: Rebecca Lobo had 24 points and 11 rebounds as No. 4 Connecticut clinched its fourth Big East Conference women's title in six years with an 85-40 rout of St.
John's on Saturday, the same day the men's team clinched a title.
Jamelle Elliott added 16 points for the visiting Huskies (24-2, 17-1), who finished the regular season with the second-best record in Big East women's history.
Miami holds the record with its 18-0 finish in 1991-92. (AP) AUTO RACING  Meet Mr.
Goodwrench  Ford or Pontiac, Rusty Wallace knows how to win at North Carolina Motor Speedway.
Wallace, who switched from Pontiac to Ford during the winter after winning 10 races last season, dominated on the way to victory in yesterday's Goodwrench 500 on the 1.017-mile oval at Rockingham, N.C.
The Daytona 500 winner, Sterling Marlin, finished second, his Chevrolet Lumina trailing Wallace's Thunderbird across the finish line by 5.15 seconds. (AP) TENNIS  Graf Routs Coetzer  Top-seeded Steffi Graf routed No. 6 Amanda Coetzer, 6-0, 6-4, yesterday to win the Evert Cup championship in Indian Wells, Calif.
Graf, of Germany, needed only 25 minutes to blitz South Africa's Coetzer in the first set.
She ended the match in 57 minutes.
Graf lost only 3 points in the three games she served in the first set, and she won the last 14 points of the set.
"I had to concentrate on every point," Graf said.
"She's the kind of player who makes you play the points." (AP) Agassi Defeats Mattar: Andre Agassi, playing in his first tournament in nearly five months, defeated Luiz Mattar of Brazil, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday to win the Nuveen Championships in Scottsdale, Ariz.
Agassi, seeded fifth, had been sidelined since Sept. 24 with a wrist injury that required surgery Dec. 20. (AP) GOLF  Stadler Wins at Home  Craig Stadler trudged up the 18th green to roaring cheers yesterday, waving a club to acknowledge his first PGA victory before a hometown crowd in San Diego.
Stadler, one of the tour's more popular players, shot a closing 6-under-par 66 to beat Steve Lowery by one stroke in the Buick Invitational.
Stadler, 40, whose 10 previous tour victories did not include the San Diego tournament, finished 20 under par at Torrey Pines, where he had played daily as a high school golfer.
He came to the final green with a two-shot lead over Lowery.
Lowery birdied the hole, and Stadler missed a two-and-a-half-foot birdie try, but he only had to tap in for the victory.
With cards of 67-67-68-66, Stadler earned $198,000 for his first victory since the World Series of Golf in 1992.
Lowery got what is by far his biggest paycheck, $118,800. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 ISRAEL TO RESTRICT SETTLERS Israel ordered tough measures to restrict the activities of militant Jewish settlers, responding to Arab anger and international concern after the slaying of more than 40 Palestinians in the West Bank.
A1 THE PATH TO THE MOSQUE Dr.
Baruch Goldstein prayed in the Cave of the Patriarchs the night before he returned there and opened fire on Arab worshipers.
He was beaten to death by the crowd.
A1 The U.S. criticized an offer for U.N. help to protect Palestinians.
A8 Yasir Arafat said Israel's actions did not go far enough.
A8 An explosion in a church killed nine people in Lebanon.
A9 Syria, Jordan and Lebanon broke off talks with Israel, diplomats said.A9 TIES WITH RUSSIA FRAGILE The tension between the United States and Russia over Bosnia and over Russia's spying have made it clear that the post-cold-war partnership between the two countries seems to be crumbling.
A1 U.S.
PACKING UP IN SOMALIA The United States troops are preparing to leave Somalia, and the mood is considerably less upbeat than when they arrived because the country is caught between a fear of anarchy and hope for a political solution.
A3 DISPUTE ON MEXICO TALKS The Mexican Government negotiator and a mediator reported agreement on outlines of an accord, but a Zapatista rebel leader later said there was none.
A3 A U.S. human rights official met with China's top dissident.
A2 Altdorf Journal: The Swiss put up roadblocks to European union.
A4 The Red Cross plans to call for the ban of anti-personnel mines.
A6 National A12-14, B6-8 THE HEALTH CARE STRUGGLE In the pushing and pulling over health care, Representative Jim Cooper is the leading figure going in one direction, while Representative Jim McDermott is the main one yanking in the other.
A1 DIABETIC PROGRAM ATTRACTS FEW Despite the announcement that with a strict medical regimen diabetics can measurably slow the onset and maybe even prevent the dire complications of the disease people have been slow to respond.
A1 PREPARING FOR A NEW S.A.T.
Jittery about a new version of the Scholastic Assessment Test, high school students are attending coaching sessions in record numbers, even as educators debate the effectiveness and fairness of the preparatory courses.
A12 OLLIE NORTH EMBATTLED (AGAIN) Opposition to Oliver L. North's candidacy for the United States Senate has been more intense than even the most partisan Democrats may have imagined, and it has been joined by a number of Republicans.
A12 JURY SEATED IN DOCTOR'S KILLING A jury of seven women, five men and two female alternates was sworn in and sequestered in the trial of a man accused of murdering a doctor at an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Fla., last March.
A13 WACO VERDICT DEEPENS MYSTERY At the end of the seven-week trial of 11 Branch Davidians, the jury sent an unmistakable message that there was significant fault on both sides, issuing a verdict that will only deepen the mysteries of Waco.
A14 Two of the acquitted seem bemused by the fuss.
A14 TARGET OF RECALL EFFORT A recall effort has begun in California against State Senator David A. Roberti, who infuriated gun owners and conservatives with his push for a ban on assault weapons.
B6 MISSING IN NEW ORLEANS Getting lost in New Orleans has long had a certain cachet.
But the mystery of a missing Italian traveler is distinctive even by New Orleans standards.
B6  Metro Digest B1 A THROWBACK HOSPITAL In a city where even many private hospitals are also old and crumbling, Kings County Hospital has been a symbol of inefficiency and decay, even to the medical personnel who remain dedicated to the place.
A1 Business Digest D1 Sports C1-10 Baseball: Orioles have high expectations for Fernandez.
C8 A turning point for Franco.
C8 Basketball: Suns trounce Knicks.
C2 Nets topple Mavericks.
C2 Indiana loses by 50 points.
C3 Columns: Vecsey on the Olympics C5 Anderson on Willie Randolph C8 Hockey: Keenan looking for grit.
C9 Olympics: Sweden wins hockey gold in dramatic fashion.
C1 Tomba rallies to take silver.
C1 U.S. bobsled team disqualified.
C4 Obituaries D9 Arts/Entertainment C11-18 The state of Russian films.
C11 Chaplin's 'Circus' with the original score.
C11 Theater: "The Mayor of Boys Town." C15 Music: Jose van Dam.
C11 Korean funeral rituals.
C14 Wonder Stuff.
C16 Music from Lebanon.
C18 Critic's Notebook C18 Books: "Zlata's Diary." C15 Television: Dennis Byrd's story.
C16 "In Search of Human Origins." C16 Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17 Editorials A wrongheaded amendment.
Don't sell out WNYC.
Russia's struggle within.
Letters Anthony Lewis: A new ball game.
William Safire: Peacemaking after Hebron.
Yuri N. Afanasyev: Russia's vicious circle.
Neediest Cases B3 Chronicle B4  Bridge C14 Crossword C15


Water Main Breaks Beneath Canal Street
A water main break in lower Manhattan opened a yawning hole in Canal Street yesterday, forcing partial closure of the street and promising traffic headaches for at least two days.
The 12-inch pipe burst under the south side of Canal between Hudson and Greenwich Streets at about 1 P.M., said Ian Michaels, a spokesman for the New York City Department of Environmental Protection.
A short time later the pavement caved in, leaving a hole 25 feet across, with water burbling up from it and onto the street and sidewalk.


Bridge
For anyone who owns a set of duplicate boards -- eight will do in a pinch -- it makes sense to gather eight players for a social evening of home duplicate.
You can play a straight head-to-head team game, or four pairs can, in effect, play three short team games, or players can have an individual, which requires knowledge of the appropriate movement.
Scoring is always by imps, and a modest stake is normal: either on a per-imp basis, or a fixed sum into a kitty.
The diagramed deal from such a game was played in the Los Angeles area in early 1993.
It was reported by Larry Markes, who was one of the instructors at the Card School before he moved West.
In one room he sat South and was the declarer in four spades.
A club was led to the ace, and East shifted to the heart ten.


16 Days in Lillehammer Burn With the Memory Of Adversity Overcome
It is destined to become the signature moment of these just-concluded Winter Games, Dan Jansen skating around the rink with his infant daughter in his arms and the pressure of the world off his shoulders.
A tiny flag rippled in Jansen's left fist and then, cradled in her father's right arm, as if she sensed his moment of redemption, 10-month-old Jane Jansen began smiling and waving her tiny hand.


Review/Music; The Little Tramp to a Different Tune
When the Little Tramp finds out that the girl he loves is enamored of the tightrope walker, the film score to Charlie Chaplin's 1928 film "The Circus" quotes from "I Pagliacci," the melodramatic tale of another clown's unrequited affections.
When the Tramp is trapped in a lion's cage and puffs himself up with confidence, we hear the strutting strains of the Toreador song from "Carmen." There are also quotations from Gounod and Scott Joplin, Rudolf Friml and Irving Berlin, along with fragments of popular songs and dances of the early decades of this century.
Film scores are usually meant to be heard but not listened to, but this one is somewhere in between, seeming almost post-modern, commenting slyly on the action, even coaxing the audience to recall the words to once-familiar melodies.
It was rediscovered in 1992, when the conductor and historian Gillian Anderson found it in the Chaplin archives in Vevey, Switzerland, along with the original scores to "The Gold Rush" and "A Woman of Paris." It was heard for the first time in New York on Friday night at the Metropolitan Museum of Art with Ms.
Anderson leading 10 members of the Manhattan School of Music Chamber Sinfonia, accompanying a sterling print of the 90-minute silent film.


Y.&amp; R. Appoints London Executive
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. has promoted a senior executive to head its troubled British agency after abandoning plans to combine forces in London with Gold Greenlees Trott P.L.C.


Questions Linger After 11 Cultists' Trial
John C. Willis lost his only son, Steven, a 32-year-old agent with the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, one year ago Monday.
But after months of painful searching for the truth of what happened on the Texas prairie that day, even he saw something appropriate in the mixed verdict delivered by a Federal jury on Saturday in the trial of 11 Branch Davidians accused of murdering his son.
The jury acquitted all 11 of murder and conspiracy, but it found seven guilty of the lesser but still serious charges of manslaughter or illegal-weapons possession.
Four cult members were completely acquitted.


Critic's Notebook; Bruckner: A Non-Nazi Perspective
A picture of Adolf Hitler in an uncharacteristically reverential pose was posted outside the Dana Concert Hall at Connecticut College here recently.
Dressed in full Nazi regalia, with hat in hands, Hitler was standing a respectful distance from a giant white bust of Anton Bruckner.
The photograph was taken in 1937 during meetings of the International Bruckner Society and the Bavarian Nazi Party Congress.
The Austrian composer was being posthumously inducted into the Nazi equivalent of the Hall of Fame, a marble replica of the Parthenon that was called Valhalla.


1 Goal Down, 2 to Go for the Huskies
Jim Calhoun had said that his fifth-ranked Connecticut Huskies had gotten away from thinking about the goals they had set for themselves at the beginning of the season.
That was Saturday morning.


Viacom's Blockbuster Pact Faces Growing Opposition
Institutional investors and analysts have been showing increasing opposition to Viacom Inc.'s buyout of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation on the eve of Viacom's purchase of Paramount Communications Inc.
One analyst who follows Blockbuster, Craig Bibb of Paine Webber Inc., said yesterday that it seemed increasingly unlikely that the merger would go through as currently structured.


Suit Weighed Against Banesto
Two American institutional investors in the Banco Espanol de Credito, the troubled Spanish bank commonly known as Banesto, are considering whether to sue the bank over their losses in its stock, which they bought last summer as part of a capital-raising effort led by J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.
But neither the General Electric Company nor the Northwestern Mutual Life Insurance Company, both of which are direct and indirect shareholders in Banesto, would say late last week how close they were to deciding whether to file suit against the bank.


Regulators Mute Their Fears Over Derivatives
The nation's top financial regulators are having fewer nightmares about a potential crisis from the explosive growth of a new category of financial transactions known as derivatives.
At a three-day conference here sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, which ended on Saturday, about 100 Government officials, academics and financial executives agreed that the complex web of new derivatives transactions, which have a face value of more than $7 trillion, is forcing changes in everything from accounting standards to the training of bank regulators.


Russia's Mission: The Struggle Within
Boris Yeltsin's abrupt intervention in Bosnia is seen by unreconstructed cold warriors in Washington as a dangerous reassertion of Russian nationalism.
They suspect that Mr.
Yeltsin's side deal with the Serbian aggressors is not the act of an evenhanded peacemaker but the adventurous gambit of an opportunist eager to resume a big-brother role in Serbia.
And they argue that the time has come for President Clinton to get tough with Moscow and slow his efforts to construct a more cooperative relationship.
This is a prescription for trouble that springs from a misreading of Russia's politics.
It is true that Mr.
Yeltsin is under pressure from ultranationalists like Vladimir Zhirinovsky.
It is also true that he cannot easily domesticate renegades from the military and the K.G.B. who seek to reassert themselves in Moldova, Georgia and the rest of the former Soviet empire.


Juliet S. Saunders, 86, Ex-School Head, Dies
Juliet Sieveking Saunders, a former New York City school district superintendent whose doctoral dissertation became the basis for a handbook for the city's elementary school principals, died on Saturday at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn.
She was 86.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Jack Bloomfield, a friend.


Dance in Review
'A Tribute to Pola Nirenska'  Schandelmeier and Company St. Mark's Church
When Laura Schandelmeier was a child in Washington, she lived next door to a choreographer, who encouraged her to dance and eventually became her teacher.
On Saturday night, Ms.
Schandelmeier, who is now based in New York, honored that mentor with "A Tribute to Pola Nirenska," which was offered as a presentation of the St.
Mark's Danspace Project.


Market Place; Wellcome may be past the worst of a long spell of bad news.
EVEN by the standards of the pharmaceutical industry, which has been buffeted by efforts in the United States and around the world to rein in medical costs, Wellcome P.L.C. has been a dismal investment of late.
But now there are signs that the worst of a long spell of bad news may be past for the British company, which is best known for Zovirax, an anti-herpes medication, and AZT, the AIDS-fighting drug it sells under the brand name Retrovir.


Hopes Are High Once More For Expansion Candidates
Major league baseball officials won't say when, but little doubt exists that they are heading toward the addition of two teams, one in Phoenix, the other in St.
Petersburg-Tampa, Fla.
During their meetings at a Scottsdale resort this week, club owners are expected to form a new expansion committee to look at the best sites and the best timing for the addition of the 29th and 30th teams.
With 15 teams in each league, five in each of three divisions, interleague play would become part of the season schedule for the first time.


A Day Trip to the Aquarium


WINTER OLYMPICS: Olympic Lightning Strikes Twice More Before Torch Goes Out
O Canada! O Sweden! Oh, boy!
In the game for the Olympic hockey gold medal this afternoon, there seemed no end to the drama, or the game.


Blast in Lebanon Church Kills 9 and Injures 60
A bomb explosion ripped through a Maronite Catholic church during a Sunday service today, killing at least 9 people and wounding 60 others.
No group claimed responsibility for the bombing at the Notre-Dame de la Delivrance Church.
The bomb exploded under the altar while worshipers were at the altar rail receiving communion.
Security officials said five other explosive devices had been found in the church, where 200 to 250 people, including many children, were worshiping.


U.S. Trade Delegates, Alas, Oversimplify Japan
To the Editor:
The "failure" of the latest round of United States-Japanese trade talks shows the simplistic and self-centered approach the United States often takes toward its "most important" international partner: unrealistic demands such as numerical targets, failure to obtain agreement or fulfillment, followed by threats to retaliate or a retaliatory action.


Panels on Publishing In Electronic Future
Two panel discussions, led by the authors Gay Talese and Maureen Howard and the publishing executive Harold Evans of Random House, are to take place this evening to examine the future of book publishing in the electronic age.
The discussions are sponsored by the PEN American Center.
Also on the panels will be Michael Jacobs, executive vice president of Simon &amp; Schuster; Marian Wood, executive editor of Henry Holt &amp; Company; Phillip Lopate, author; Virginia Barber, literary agent; Anne Messitte, marketing manager of Knopf Publishing Group; Mary Pope Osborne, a writer and the president of the Author's Guild; Wendy J. Strothman, director of Beacon Press, and Robert B. Wyatt, president of Wyatt Books, an imprint of St.
Martin's Press.


Mexico Mediator Sees Progress, but a Rebel Disagrees
Despite indications by the mediator between Government and peasant rebel negotiators that the parties had reached the broad outlines of a settlement, the rebels insisted tonight that the Government had refused to meet their most important demands.
At a news conference this evening in the mustard-colored cathedral where he often says Mass, the mediator, Bishop Samuel Ruiz Garcia of San Cristobal, said the two sides had come to "a significant agreement" that resolved at least 22 of 34 demands presented by the insurgents.


Earle Palmer Brown Gets Ketchum Units
Earle Palmer Brown has, as expected, acquired the Philadelphia offices of Ketchum Advertising and Ketchum Public Relations and merged them with its office in that city.
The terms were not disclosed.
Jeb Brown, chief executive of Earle Palmer Brown, said on Friday that after consolidating his agency's offices to 5 from 13 during the last couple of years, "now we want to expand our core offices." He added that 40 to 50 of Ketchum's 60 employees would join his office in Philadelphia, raising the total number of employees there to 160 to 170.


Ticketmaster Depends on Part-Time Workers
To the Editor:
"Health Care Squeeze" by Bob Herbert (column, Feb. 13) notes that Ticketmaster's part-time workers, according to the collective bargaining agreement negotiated by labor and management, do not receive health insurance benefits.
This is a policy driven by economic necessity, one that is inevitably followed by the overwhelming proportion of American companies and accepted by nearly all unions.


Freed Cult Members Begin Life Without Their Leader
Hours after being acquitted of murder and conspiracy charges in the deaths of four Federal agents, Clive J. Doyle sat in Polo's Bar of the Fairmount Hotel with the man accused of being his conspirator, Woodrow Kendrick, and ordered a light beer.
"I'm just too weak for the heavy stuff," he said.


At Morgan, New Markets and a Rohatyn Emerge
In 1988, Nicolas Rohatyn asked J. P. Morgan &amp; Company to bring him back from Tokyo to run its small Latin American debt department, which sold the defaulted loans that Morgan and other banks had made to developing countries.
Today, that department has branched out to include emerging markets in Asia and Eastern Europe as well as in Latin America.
And it has grown from 7 people to 200, who now underwrite, trade and sell securities, as well as loans.


Bigger Role For Intuition Seen at Fed
The Federal Reserve, having dropped its reliance on the money supply figures that made markets soar or swoon in the 1980's, is increasingly basing interest rate decisions on an approach best summed up as banker's intuition.
When Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Fed, gave his semiannual testimony before Congress on Tuesday, the only section of his written testimony that he did not bother to read aloud concerned money supply measures like the M-2, which represents the total of cash, checking accounts, savings accounts, certificates of deposit of less than $100,000 and several other financial instruments.


Highest U.S. Rights Official Meets With Leading Chinese Dissident
The State Department's top human rights official met privately today with China's most prominent dissident in the first such encounter with a Clinton Administration official since the dissident was freed last year after serving 14 1/2 years in prison for advocating democracy.
The official, John Shattuck, an Assistant Secretary of State, agreed to take a message from the dissident, Wei Jingsheng, to President Clinton urging him to maintain economic pressure on Beijing as the best way to win the release of political prisoners.


Corrections
A front-page article on Saturday about the Jewish settler who massacred Palestinians in a mosque in the West Bank referered incorrectly to the size of his home settlement, Qiryat Arba.
It is not the largest Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank; Maale Adumim is.


For Giuliani, the Message Is Making It on Your Own
Speaking at a junior high school in the bleak streets of Brownsville recently, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani gave a conservative twist to the words of John F. Kennedy to preach self-reliance to the students.
They should, he said to an audience of black and Hispanic teen-agers, ask "not what somebody else can do for you but what you can do for yourselves."
And ever since that Brooklyn school visit, Mr.
Giuliani has repeatedly used a naive question asked by one girl to build a morality tale of how students have unrealistic expectations of what government can, in fact, do for them.
She had asked why there couldn't be scholarships granted irrespective of grades to allow people like her to go away to college.


At the Museum, Not Every Seat Is Available


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about the Woolworth Corporation's announcement that it would post a fourth-quarter loss misstated the company's plan for reporting audited financial results.
A spokeswoman for the company said the results would be released sometime this week, but not necessarily on Tuesday.


Patents
WILL the advent of interactive technology make a home gambling network possible?
A Florida inventor is betting it will.
Henry Von Kohorn, president of Response Reward Systems, holds several patents for interactive television and radio systems that award coupons or cash prizes to people playing game shows.
But so far his inventions are waiting for interactive television to take off.
When it does, he hopes armchair gamblers will switch on the television and bet on sporting events, beauty contests or lotteries to win cash or credits for merchandise.


Review/Television; Football Hero Triumphs After His Final Game
In sports events, it is always reassuring to see the good guys win, to have people like Dan Jansen and Nancy Kerrigan come out on top, one way or another.
In the best movies about sports, however, the true triumphs usually take place in private struggles off the playing fields.
From "Pride of the Yankees" to "Brian's Song," audiences have been riveted, and reduced to tears, by the courage displayed in intensely personal struggles.
The latest entry on that list, holding its own nicely, is "Rise and Walk: The Dennis Byrd Story" on Fox tonight.
Known as Byrdman to his football teammates on the New York Jets, Dennis Byrd is the defensive end who had his neck and spine crushed during a 1992 game as it was broadcast on national television.
The consensus among top doctors at New York City hospitals was that he would never walk again.
But combining fierce determination with his deep religious faith, he did.
The inspirational story is the stuff television movies covet and this production pushes all predictable buttons, but I dare anyone not to be moved.


In the Dead of Winter, Keenan Longs for Grit
Even before the regular season, after an exhibition defeat on Long Island in late September, Ranger Coach Mike Keenan was blunt about what his team needed.
"I've suggested we need more 'physical' players," Keenan said, using a hockey synonym for toughness.
Neil Smith, the president and general manager, said at the time that he was doing everything he could to acquire them.
Five months later, with the season almost three-quarters complete, the Rangers have the best record in the 26-team National Hockey League.
Some see them as favorites to win the Stanley Cup for the first time since 1940.


Russia Surprises Russians
It was a fine Winter Olympics for the United States -- which won a record 13 medals -- but it was an even better one for Russia, which ended up with 23 medals, including 11 gold.
Russia's athletes baffled all those who had forecast the fall of the great Soviet sports machine.
Television commentators here led off their coverage of the Games several days ago by wondering whether Moscow would have enough cash to reward all its gold medalists.


Gun Enthusiasts Seek to Remove Legislator Early
After California became one of the first states to impose limits on how long politicians can stay in office, State Senator David A. Roberti, a lawmaker since 1966, knew his legislative days were numbered.
He has resigned himself to leaving office this December, as the new law requires in his case, and has begun laying plans to run for State Treasurer.


Earle Palmer Brown Gets Ketchum Units
Earle Palmer Brown has, as expected, acquired the Philadelphia offices of Ketchum Advertising and Ketchum Public Relations and merged them with its office in that city.
The terms were not disclosed.
Jeb Brown, chief executive of Earle Palmer Brown, said on Friday that after consolidating his agency's offices to 5 from 13 during the last couple of years, "now we want to expand our core offices." He added that 40 to 50 of Ketchum's 60 employees would join his office in Philadelphia, raising the total number of employees there to 160 to 170.


Altdorf Journal; Swiss Give New Meaning to the Word Roadblock
In a country where issues great and small are routinely decided by referendum, the Swiss seem to take special pleasure in overruling anyone who needs to be reminded of just who is in charge here.
Now they have given new meaning to the notion of power to the people.
Approving measures to protect their fragile Alpine hills and valleys from pollution in a referendum on Feb. 20, the Swiss not only rebuffed their Government, but also threw the European Union's entire transportation policy into disarray.


Everyone Gets Into the Act as Nets Romp
Too bad the Nets had the game well in hand by the time Dallas's Jamal Mashburn erupted for 22 of his game-high 32 points in the fourth quarter because this could have been exciting late matinee drama for the 12,344 fans who showed up at the Meadowlands today.
Instead it turned out to be a 117-90 ensemble romp for the New Jersey Nets.


Does Talmud Contain Roots of Racism?; No Ties to Princeton
To the Editor:
This is in response to Harold Brackman's Feb. 14 letter, which quotes my publication, where I have shown that the Talmud in no way invented or taught racialism.


New S.A.T. Sets Students Cramming
Jittery about a new version of the Scholastic Assessment Test that will be introduced on March 19, high school students are packing coaching sessions in record numbers, even as educators debate the effectiveness and fairness of the preparatory courses.
About 180,000 students, according to industry estimates, are expected to sign up this year for the coaching sessions, which cost up to $700 and occupy as many as 13 Saturday mornings.
Tens of thousands of various test-preparation manuals are being sold.
Worried that the performance gap between affluent and low-income students will widen as only those who can afford it enroll, some school districts are providing courses for little or no money.


Review/Television; The Scientific Mystery Of a Lady Called Lucy
Looking for a guide to the missing link, the prehistoric creature who was not quite human but was no longer just an old-fashioned ape?
At your service is Donald C. Johanson, the anthropologist who in 1974 found the famed Lucy, a three-million-year-old combination of apelike and humanlike features.
Dr.
Johanson, who heads the Institute of Human Origins in Berkeley, Calif., makes an amiably informative companion on "In Search of Human Origins," the three-hour documentary that begins tonight on "Nova."
The opening hour, devoted largely to the discovery of Lucy, tells how anthropologists, geologists, archeologists, forensic scientists and others brought their particular skills to bear in deducing that she was not, as expected, a smart ape that walked on all fours, but a small-brained little one that stood up.
"This," Dr.
Johanson declares, "was the creature we'd been looking for."


At Home Abroad; A New Ball Game
"The road to any solution in Bosnia now runs through Moscow." A senior diplomat here thus summed up the dramatically changed landscape faced by Western governments trying to design an end to the Bosnian conflict.
When Russia intervened two weeks ago, offering a hand to the Serbs, it became an essential player in the diplomatic game -- with President Boris Yeltsin personally involved.
That sharply limits what the United States and the Europeans can do on their own.
But it also offers an urgent opportunity for Russo-American action.


Red Cross to Urge U.N. to Adopt A Complete Ban on Land Mines
The International Committee of the Red Cross, at a meeting of the United Nations Disarmament Committee on Monday in Geneva, plans to call for a complete ban on the use of antipersonnel mines.
The meeting, the first of three, is to prepare for a 1995 conference to consider changes in the 1980 Geneva Convention on limiting the use of weapons deemed to be "excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects."


Review/Pop; Notes Evoke Lebanon With a Dash of the European
A few bars into Simon Shaheen's violin introduction, opening the second half of "The Music of Lebanon" at Washington Square Church on Friday night, the memories of the first half began to dissipate nicely.
Mr.
Shaheen, originally from Lebanon but now living in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, exudes excellence.
He snapped his rhythms percussively and stretched them out.
He made notes insinuate all sorts of things; he played cadences out of the European classical tradition, then nudged his notes from above and below, using the Arabic tradition to make them cry.
The first half of the concert presented rural tunes played for marriages, parties and funerals.
The two main performers, Ali Jihad Racy on various flutes and string instruments, worked with Mansour Ajami, a singer and poet who also performed on the oud, a lutelike instrument.
They were backed by two singers and a percussionist and for the most part they performed sedate music that probably needed a marriage or a party or a funeral to get it charged up.
It's beautiful, often simple music based on a chord or two and repeating melodies, all embellished with trills and wavering melismas.
Mr.
Ajami clearly likes his fun, and by the end of the first half he broke a bit of a sweat, and the performance began to coalesce.


Before Killing, Final Prayer and Final Taunt
On the night before he killed more than three dozen Muslims at prayer in the dimly lighted Cave of the Patriarchs, Dr.
Baruch Goldstein himself prayed in the cave, on the Jewish side of the shrine.
He was there to participate in services marking the Jewish holiday of Purim.
But when Arab worshipers on the other side of the partition began to taunt the Jews, Dr.
Goldstein seemed particularly distraught, other settlers said.


At Kings County Hospital, Remnants of a Bleak Past
Last week on the C1 floor at Kings County Hospital, half a dozen men lay on a hodgepodge of ancient stretchers in an open eight-bed ward.
A lattice of metal rods hung from the ceiling, bearing tattered blue and green curtains falling off their hooks, which provide the only semblance of privacy afforded to these patients, all victims of trauma.
There is one huge porcelain sink at the end of the room, but for showers or a bathroom, the patients must leave the wing; there are typically six toilets for the 60 patients on such floors.


Review/Music; Passing From One World to the Next
A departing soul gets an all-night send-off in Korean shamanism: Hon Sikkim Kut, the ritual of cleansing the spirit.
The nine-hour ceremony of music and dance as performed on Chindo Island has been designated as Important Intangible Cultural Property No. 72 by the South Korean Government.
It was abridged to an hour and a half by the 12-member Chindo Sikkim Kut Preservation Group for performances over the weekend at the Asia Society.
On Saturday night, the ritual was striking, both musically and visually.
The performers all wore white; the group's five women had white winged hats, while the seven men had tall black ones.
In stately dances, women gestured with a bunch of paper streamers in each hand, looking (to a Westerner) like cheerleaders with a higher purpose.
Women also sang the main melodies; in Korea, 99 percent of shamans are female.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Farm Prices . . .
Feb.
Tuesday  Revised G.D.P. . . . 4th Qtr.
Construction Spending . . .
Jan.
Wednesday  Personal Income . . .
Jan.
New-Home Sales . . .
Jan.
Thursday  Factory Orders . . .
Jan.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Employment . . .
Feb.
Leading Indicators . . .
Jan.


Islanders Climbing Toward Playoffs
What did you expect?
Another shutout at home?
So many things are going well for the Islanders right now, another shutout wasn't completely out of the question.
The Islanders defeated Quebec, 5-2, tonight at the Nassau Coliseum.
In winning four of their last five games, it isn't too late for them to seriously believe that they can make the playoffs.
With Florida (62 points) and Philadelphia (62) off tonight, the Islanders (58 points, 26-29-6) are just 4 points from the final playoff spot in the National Hockey League's Eastern Conference.


Can the Unhittable Fernandez Become a Hit?
Baseball teams, executives and managers always expected the world of Sid Fernandez when he was young.
Now, the Baltimore Orioles expect even more.
Fernandez is the left-hander with the oft-times unhittable stuff, the pitcher who is unparalleled among moderns when it comes to holding batters to minuscule averages (.204 for his career, lowest among active pitchers with a minimum of 750 innings).
For years, he both bedazzled and baffled National Leaguers, those who opposed him and those who played alongside him with the Mets.


A New Radio Music Format: Rock for Prosperous Adults
A new radio format is taking shape from San Francisco and Seattle to Austin, Tex., Nashville and East Hampton, L.I.
About 50 commercial stations, and an equal number of noncommercial ones, have converted to what the industry calls adult album alternative, or A.A.A., although neither name is as euphonious as the sound the stations seek.
"I don't like the word 'alternative,' " said Steve Richards, the program director at WEHM-FM, in East Hampton, which changed to the format in October.
"It's sort of rock. No, I don't like the word 'rock'; that connotes head-banging. It's geared for adults, but no pop."


Redmen's Spurt Isn't Enough
It was just another college basketball game, one with 10 redundant minutes left to play, Syracuse ahead and cruising.
Then St.
John's, the most pitied but not the most inept team in the Big East, suddenly found its shots swishing through the net while those of Syracuse were hitting the rim and bouncing away.
The Redmen, 10 points behind at 67-57, spurted.
They tied the score twice, 73-73 and 75-75 with 4 minutes 25 seconds and 2:58 left.
They even went ahead by 3 points, 79-76 and 81-78, with 1:52 and 1:19 to play, before losing yesterday's game, 82-81, in front of 14,573 fans at Madison Square Garden.


JURY SEQUESTERED IN MURDER TRIAL
A jury of 12 plus 2 alternates was sworn in and sequestered today in the trial of a man accused of murdering an abortion doctor last March.
Opening statements will begin on Monday.
The panel chosen to judge the fate of Michael F. Griffin, 32, is composed of seven women, five men and two female alternates.
Sixty-nine prospective jurors were questioned over five days.


Not Red, but Still a Bear; Russia, No Longer an Ideological Enemy, Remains a Power With Its Own Interests
The tension between the United States and Russia over the war in Bosnia and Russia's spying in Washington has raised the question in the minds of many: Just what is the relationship between America and Russia today?
Allies?
Not exactly.
Enemies?
Not really.
Acquaintances?
That's not it either.
Across Washington last week, officials, diplomats and lawmakers struggled with that question as Russia has engaged in more and more behavior that seems hostile to American interests.


American Troops Count Hours to End of Mission in Somalia
For more than a year, they were the most feared and powerful symbols of the American military presence here, but now the last Cobra gunships and reconnaissance helicopters are being rapidly and neatly packaged to go home.
They sit in rows at the port and on the transport ship like Thanksgiving turkeys, every inch shrink-wrapped with white plastic.
Nearby, American soldiers spend hours spray-washing tanks and Humvees so that they pass standards to enter the United States.


At Morgan, New Markets and a Rohatyn Emerge
In 1988, Nicolas Rohatyn asked J. P. Morgan &amp; Company to bring him back from Tokyo to run its small Latin American debt department, which sold the defaulted loans that Morgan and other banks had made to developing countries.
Today, that department has branched out to include emerging markets in Asia and Eastern Europe as well as in Latin America.
And it has grown from 7 people to 200, who now underwrite, trade and sell securities, as well as loans.


Franco Must Confront Some Hard Facts After A Season of Soft Pitches
It wasn't smart of Joe Vitko, the minor league Mets pitcher, to arrive at the team's spring-training complex only minutes away from the first team meeting of the day.
Not when John Franco happens to be an early bird, in the clubhouse hours before workouts take place.
And not when Franco has a locker right across the way.
Tact never has been one of Franco's virtues -- particularly not in the Mets' clubhouse, where he believes that a healthy dose of embarrassment serves as a good teaching tool.
And so one spring-training morning, when Vitko overslept, or ate a late breakfast, he found himself the target of a little verbal abuse.


Interfaith Prayer for Peace
The imams and rabbis took turns praying for peace and Christians bowed their heads as many faiths gathered yesterday at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in upper Manhattan to pray that the killings of dozens of Muslims by a Jew in Hebron would not drive a wedge of hate into the Middle East peace talks.
As the words drifted down from the altar in English and Latin, Hebrew and Arabic, 300 heads bowed.
Among the congregants were Louis Fleming and Russ Kully, a retired newspaperman and a lawyer, Episcopalians from Pasadena, Calif.


Everyone Gets Into the Act as Nets Romp
Too bad the Nets had the game well in hand by the time Dallas's Jamal Mashburn erupted for 22 of his game-high 32 points in the fourth quarter because this could have been exciting late matinee drama for the 12,344 fans who showed up at the Meadowlands today.
Instead it turned out to be a 117-90 ensemble romp for the New Jersey Nets.


The Bobsled Is Hot, but That's Bad News for U.S. Team
It was difficult to decide which of the four-man American bobsled teams had a tougher time today, the one that was disqualified for hot runners or the one that actually raced and finished 15th, behind the Jamaican team.
The new, high-tech Bo-Dyn sled driven by Brian Shimer never made it to the starting line after race officials determined that three of its four steel runners exceeded the allowable temperature.
Although such a disqualification is not unheard of in bobsled racing, it was the first time it had happened in the Olympics.


Where Giuliani Is Aiming the Knife. . .
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has portrayed New York City's municipal work force as a wasteful, uncontrollable beast that has slowly strangled the economic life of the city.
Enough! the Mayor declared as he presented his preliminary budget plan in early February, vowing to cut 15,000 jobs over the next year and a half.
All that, he insists, without seriously disrupting essential services. (What services are essential remains to be defined.)


A Roundabout Benefit
Gene Feist, the founding director of the Roundabout Theater Company, is to be honored with a special performance tonight at 8 o'clock at the Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
Philip Bosco, Theodore Bikel, Tovah Feldshuh, Tammy Grimes, Irene Worth and the Lar Lubovitch Dance Company are among those scheduled to take part.
The event, a benefit for the company's conservatory ensemble, will feature dramatic readings, singing and dancing.
Tickets are $50.
Information: (212) 719-9393.


Judge Backs Competition In Trash-Hauling Industry
In a decision that helps pry open New York City's private garbage-collection industry, a State Supreme Court justice has ruled that a large Houston-based company should be allowed to compete with local trash haulers, which have tried to block its entry into the market.
For more than 250,000 businesses, from corner delicatessens to big corporations, the decision may mean more choice and sharply lower prices for garbage collection.
For decades, law-enforcement officials say, the local industry has been dominated by organized crime, discouraging competition, sometimes by force, and giving New York the highest garbage-collection prices in the nation.


Corrections
A caption yesterday with an article about the mayoral race in New Orleans misstated the location of a candidate, Marc Morial, in the picture.
He was second from the right.
In some copies, the caption also misstated Mr.
Morial's first name; Ernest Morial, a former mayor, was his father.


Up to End, Neediest Gets Gifts
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund ends its 82d annual appeal today even as the mail continues to bring in checks from dozens of last-minute donors.
While the campaign had been lagging somewhat behind last year's appeal and significantly behind the 1991-1992 appeal, it now appears that a recent contribution of more than $135,000 from Wall Street companies and additional income from some estates and trusts will push it past last year's total when the donations have been counted.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a Quebec separatist leader misidentified Canada's main opposition party.
It is the Bloc Quebecois; the Parti Quebecois is the main opposition party in Quebec.


U.S. Prosecutors Widen Inquiry Into Prudential
Federal prosecutors are investigating whether Prudential Securities intentionally misled clients about their legal rights to recover money they lost in soured limited partnerships, people involved in the inquiry said yesterday.
The development is a new chapter in the growing criminal inquiry into Prudential's limited partnership scandal, as prosecutors move from examining the sale of those investments in the 1980's to the manner in which the firm dealt with customers as their losses mounted in the 1990's.


Business Backs Weicker On Reduction of Taxes
Business leaders and municipal officials came to the Capitol this week to say they support Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s call for the state to reduce local property taxes, but they disagreed over which taxpayers should benefit.
In a meeting with Mr.
Weicker and in testimony before the General Assembly's Finance, Revenue and Bonding Committee, business leaders supported his proposal to eliminate the personal-property tax, which towns and cities assess on motor vehicles and business equipment.


A Push for Surveillance Software
In the age of computer communications and digital telephone calls, the American people must be willing to give up a degree of personal privacy in exchange for safety and security, the head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.
In an interview on Friday, Louis J. Freeh, the F.B.I.
Director, defended proposed legislation that critics say would turn the nation's telephone network into a vast surveillance system.
He said taxpayers would be asked to pay up to half a billion dollars to develop and deploy the necessary network software.


In an Uneasy Bosnia Peace, a Pause for a Moment of Quiet Prayer in Sarajevo


3 Arab Nations Are Said to Break Off Israel Talks
Syria, Jordan and Lebanon informed the Clinton Administration today that they were breaking off peace talks with Israel scheduled for this week in Washington, American diplomats said.
American and Israeli officials sought to play down the gravity of the announcement, indicating that they interpreted the Arab withdrawal more as a symbolic gesture than a perilous breakdown in the talks.


Dividend Meetings


Smirnov's Long Race and Wait Are Over
They have been on their feet for the last fortnight, cheering and ignoring the elements, and the final day of their very wintry Olympics was no exception.
More than 15,000 Norwegians spent the previous night in tents near the Birkebeineren Ski Stadium, and more than 100,000 were in full voice today for the marathon of cross-country skiing, the men's 50-kilometer classical race.
But by the time the final Nordic event of these Games came to an end in this Nordic nation, the crowd was no longer relying on its lilting language.


Republican Meeting Fails to Achieve Gubernatorial Unity
Meeting at an Italian restaurant on Long Island on Saturday night, the power brokers of the state Republican party failed once again to bury their differences and forge a consensus around a candidate for governor, leaving the party still directionless as it heads into a campaign ripe with possibility.
Like previous such gatherings, the session between Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato; Ralph J. Marino, the State Senate majority leader; Joseph N. Mondello, the Nassau County Republican leader, and William D. Powers, the state Republican chairman, ended without an agreement, Mr.
D'Amato said in a telephone interview.


Hoosiers Humiliated: Worst Loss in 89 Years
Minnesota 106, Indiana 56
There were no outbursts, no tirades, not even a mild flare-up from Bobby Knight, who was witnessing the low point of his 22 seasons as Indiana's coach.


World Economies


Competing Plan Is Stuck Offstage In Debate Over Better Health Care
If the struggle over health care is a struggle for the soul of the President and his party, Representative Jim Cooper is yanking in one direction and Representative Jim McDermott is pulling in the other.
Mr.
Cooper of Tennessee, young tribune of the New Democrats, urges President Clinton to go slow, to turn away from the lure of big government even if it means forsaking the goal of universal coverage.


Dance in Review
Brooklyn Dance Consortium  Brooklyn Academy of Music
The Brooklyn Academy of Music has attempted in recent years to reach out to artists throughout the borough.
Its latest effort, a series called Brooklyn Dances, opened this past weekend with work by members of the Brooklyn Dance Consortium, a service and producing organization.
The program lived up to its description as a mixed bag, as Kathleen Laziza, the president of the consortium, rather charmingly put it in a curtain speech on Saturday night.
There was nothing exalted and only one total misfire.
But the attempt was made, successfully, to include a variety of styles.


Books of The Times; Another Diary of a Young Girl
Zlata's Diary  A Child's Life in Sarajevo  By Zlata Filipovic  Illustrated.
Introduction by Janine Di Giovanni.
Translated with notes by Christina Pribichevich-Zoric. 200 pages.
Viking. $16.95.
A child's diary from war-ravaged Sarajevo, dating from September 1991 to October 1993, a time of some of the worst bombardment.
The very idea of reading such a document is heart-rending.
And either Zlata Filipovic, who turned 11 shortly after she began keeping her diary, or her editors know well how to ring the changes on our pity and terror:


Israel Orders Tough Measures Against Militant Settlers
Seeking to defuse Arab anger and allay international concerns over the Hebron massacre, the Israeli Government today ordered some of the toughest measures ever taken against militant Jewish settlers in the occupied territories.
The actions, which were accompanied by the creation of a commission to investigate the massacre and by the planned release this week of up to 1,000 Palestinian prisoners, affect a relatively small number of settlers for now.
At his headquarters in Tunis, Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, quickly rejected them as "empty, hollow" gestures.  [ Page A8 ]


Reality Conspires to Undo Russian Films
The mood at Mosfilm is downright gloomy, as film makers and administrators describe the agonies of this giant 15-acre complex of studios and sound stages once known as the Hollywood of the Soviet Union.
"The Black Jubilee" was how some film writers wanted to label the studio's 70th anniversary last month, amid predictions that this year no more than a dozen films would be produced here, compared with about 60 a year in the studio's heyday.


U.S. Trade Delegates, Alas, Oversimplify Japan; Tell It to the Jobless
To the Editor:
"Big Trade Deficit With Japan: Some Think It's No Problem" (front page, Feb. 15) quotes Robert M. Solow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology defending the proposition that the Japanese "may be giving American exporters a hard time, but the bilateral deficit is not evidence of it." However, neither you nor he explains why the laws of cause and effect are suspended in United States-Japanese trade relations.


Oliver North Finds Himself A Candidate Under Siege
When Oliver L. North announced his candidacy for the United States Senate a month ago, his starring role in the Iran-contra scandal and his hard-right politics were expected to excite his loyalists and incite his opponents.
But the reaction against Mr.
North since then has been far more vociferous than even the most partisan Democrats might have hoped for, and his critics include a surprising number of Republicans, like Virginia's Republican Senator, John W. Warner.
Even Robert C. McFarlane, Mr.
North's boss in the White House under Ronald Reagan, denounced his onetime aide last week, writing in The Richmond Times-Dispatch, "The word that comes closest to describing him for me is 'fanatic.' "


Does Talmud Contain Roots of Racism?
To the Editor:
In "Jews Had Negligible Role in Slave Trade" (letter, Feb. 14), Harold Brackman denies the claim by Louis Farrakhan, head of the Nation of Islam, that Mr.
Brackman's 1977 Ph.D. dissertation proved that the Talmud's compilers " 'invented' racism by concocting the so-called 'Ham myth.' " According to Mr.
Brackman, "None of my conclusions correspond to this vicious libel."


U.S. Voices Annoyance Over U.N. Chief's Offer to Send Observers
The Clinton Administration expressed irritation with the United Nations Secretary General today after learning he had written to the Israeli Prime Minister suggesting the United Nations send observers to the occupied territories to help insure the security of Palestinians.
"We don't think the Secretary General's suggestion is particularly helpful or useful," James P. Rubin, spokesman at the United States Mission to the United Nations, said in a statement.


