RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Survives in Japan  Top-seeded Pete Sampras, ranked first in the world, had his hands full in beating his fellow American Jeff Tarango yesterday in the Salem Open in Osaka, Japan, surviving, 7-6 (7-2), 7-6 (7-4).
Fourth-seeded Ivan Lendl was not as fortunate, losing to an unseeded Frenchman, Lionel Roux, 6-3, 6-3.
Fifth-seeded Andre Agassi trounced a fellow American, Chuck Adams, 6-3, 6-3, and sixth-seeded Aaron Krickstein downed Alex Antonitsch of Austria, 7-5, 6-4. (AP) Another Upset Victim: Wayne Ferreira of South Africa was upset by Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland, 7-6 (7-4), 5-7, 6-2, in the South African Open in Sun City. (AP)


Spring's Glory Is Easter's Trumpet


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the beating death of a 4-year-old girl in the Bronx misidentified the building where she lived.
The building, at 760 East 183d Street, is called Twin Parks Northeast, not Twin Parks West; it is privately owned, not a public housing project.


Bill to Require H.I.V. Counseling for Pregnant Women Gains in Albany
The chairmen of the Health Committees in the Assembly and the Senate announced today that they have agreed on a bill that would require H.I.V. counseling, but not mandatory testing, for pregnant women and new mothers.
The Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, also supports the bill, suggesting that it may be pushed along by the most influential member of that Republican-dominated house.
But Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan, has not committed himself either to the counseling bill or to a competing bill that would require mothers to be notified of the results of H.I.V. tests already being performed on newborns.
Anonymous Testing
Those tests currently are performed anonymously so that the State Health Department can compile statistics about the prevalence of H.I.V. in newborns.
Under a state law intended to protect the privacy rights of mothers, parents cannot be notified of the results unless they ask to be, meaning that infected babies may go without treatment.
A positive result in a newborn's H.I.V. test indicates the presence of antibodies, not necessarily that the baby has the virus that causes AIDS.
A positive result always means that the mother is infected, however.


Making Refugees Pay
The Immigration and Naturalization Service is moving ahead with its plan to make potential refugees from political persecution pay to seek asylum.
It has now published regulations that will require refugees to pay a filing fee of $130 and to wait six months for work permits.
People who seek asylum in the U.S. because of a well-founded fear of persecution in their homelands often find themselves victimized again by a chronically understaffed I.N.S.
The number of specially trained hearing officers has more than doubled in three years, from 90 to 185, but they cannot keep up with the volume of claims.
The Clinton Administration now proposes to double the existing corps and to increase the number of judges who hear appeals of applicants who are turned down.


H. Frelinghuysen, A Philanthropist, 78
Henry Osborne Havemeyer Frelinghuysen, a philanthropist, civic leader and breeder of thoroughbred horses, died on Wednesday at his home in Far Hills, N.J.
Mr.
Frelinghuysen, who also had a home in Northeast Harbor, Me., was 78.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Dollar Falls on Concerns Over U.S. Stocks and Bonds
The dollar fell against most leading currencies yesterday as weakness in the stock and bond markets and uncertainty ahead of a holiday weekend prompted investors to sell.
Stocks and bonds were lower for much of the day although they recovered somewhat near the close.
Analysts said this weakness was enough to drive the dollar lower.


A Good Start on City Job Cuts
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has engineered a constructive first step toward deficit reduction -- a buyout offer to trim New York City's public payroll without layoffs.
Avoiding a rancorous showdown with city unions, he has reached an agreement with the unions' leaders that could yield substantial permanent savings and invaluable harmony.
Starting today, some 80,000 city employees are being offered severance pay that ranges from $3,500 or two weeks' pay -- whichever is greater -- for employees with the least seniority, to $15,000 for those with the most.
They have three weeks to sign up.
City Hall hopes to find 9,500 takers, and -- after necessary replacements -- to reduce the payroll by 7,600, to save $250 million next year and more thereafter.
But the effect cannot be measured in advance, because it depends on personal job decisions by the thousands of affected employees.


Investment Funds Are Liquidated
Three private investment funds that had assets of $2 billion two months ago were liquidated in a series of fire sales on Wall Street yesterday, virtually wiping out the holdings of a group of wealthy individuals and big corporations.
The funds, managed by Askin Capital Management, used sophisticated strategies to invest in complex securities based on packages of home mortgages.
Like many such aggressive investment pools, known as hedge funds, the Askin funds borrowed $2.50 for every dollar invested.


As Thaws Come to Pennsylvania Farms, Stockpiled Manure Becomes a Hazard
A spring thaw and soft rains have finally put an end to one of the harshest winters in recent Pennsylvania memory, and the piles of manure that have accumulated in barnyards for months tower over dwindling banks of snow.
As the snow melts, the rivulets running off the farms and into nearby rivers pose a serious environmental problem, not only in local waters like Yellow Breeches Creek, this town's well-known trout stream, but all the way down the Susquehanna River and into Chesapeake Bay.


Only the Great Ice Hope, Gretzky Himself, Can Help the Rangers Now
It may be as late as game time tomorrow night against the Devils before we find out the fate of the Rangers.
Unless the National Hockey League's Owners' Assembly votes to allow the Rangers to trade Adam Graves and Brian Leetch for Wayne Gretzky, we might as well kiss the Cup goodbye.
Call this the longest day.
One can only imagine the promises and payoffs flying around like loose pucks.
On one side is the so-called Ice-Agers, the traditional old guard of Canadian-oriented owners, led by Toronto and Montreal, who believe that a championship in New York will anchor the league against the rising tide of parvenu glitz-kriegers who want to turn it into a white N.B.A.


New York Denies Blue Cross A Raise in High-Risk Rates
Ending a long pattern of granting rate increases for Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, state regulators yesterday turned down the company's request to raise health insurance premiums for nearly a million New Yorkers.
The proposed 8.8 percent rate increase would have affected those who have the most trouble getting health insurance: small businesses and individuals who must buy insurance on their own, groups that include many of the oldest and sickest New Yorkers.


CHRONICLE
Put together E. L. DOCTOROW, ARTHUR M. SCHLESINGER JR. and JOHN CHANCELLOR, and what do you have?
Quite possibly, even probably, an interesting trialogue -- or at least that's the devout hope of INGER McCABE ELLIOTT.
In March, Mrs.
Elliott inaugurated "Conversations at Sotheby's," a monthly series exploring the creative process in areas ranging from politics and music to art and history, and, as she put it, to "juxtapose interesting ideas and interesting people."
Mrs.
Elliott, an author and a consultant to Sotheby's, conceived the series to celebrate the 250th anniversary of the auction house.


Jets Make Offers and Wait by Phone
The Jets are playing a waiting game with the contract offers they have extended to quarterback Steve DeBerg, an unrestricted free agent from Miami, and kick returner Brian Mitchell, an unrestricted free agent from the Redskins.
The Jets would not divulge the terms of the offers they have made to DeBerg and Mitchell.
DeBerg, who started last season with Tampa Bay and finished with Miami, is also negotiating with the Dolphins.
Jets General Manager Dick Steinberg said that the DeBerg deal, if it is done, will not be a "heavy deal" that will adversely affect the team's salary-cap situation.


No Headline
"This is a landmark experiment. It's the Kitty Hawk of gene therapy." DR.
JOHN KANE of the University of California.  [ A16:2. ]


Georgia Executes Murderer After Brief Stay From Court
William Henry Hance, a former Marine convicted of the 1978 murder of a prostitute in Columbus, Ga., was executed in Georgia's electric chair this evening despite a juror's sworn statement that she did not vote for and does not support his death sentence.
Mr.
Hance was put to death after Supreme Court Justice Anthony M. Kennedy lifted a temporary stay that had delayed the execution originally scheduled for 7 P.M.
He was pronounced dead at 10:10 P.M.


Rangers Make Their Home Thoroughly Modern Texan
The Ballpark in Arlington.
The name may be a tad obvious since the new home of the Texas Rangers lords over much of this Texas city.
It cannot be missed from just about any vantage point in an area otherwise occupied by mostly one- and two-story structures in an area that still has an Old West flatlands feel.
That this park stands out so, with its outer walls topped by a crown of arches, is no mistake.
Even though the American League team insisted that its brand-new facility be a traditional "people's place," a cozy park as opposed to a cold, impersonal stadium, it's still big-hearted enough to make it quintessentially Texan.


Panel Urges Changes in Broadcasts to Cuba
An independent panel set up by Congress today called for widespread changes in United States Government television broadcasts to Cuba to avoid jamming and allow prime-time programming.
The panel urged the Government to convert TV Marti's transmissions from VHF, channels 1 through 13, to UHF, channels 14 through 69 -- a move that would make it far harder for the Cuban Government to jam the broadcasts.


Review/Film; Making Magic And Miracles Amid Politics
AS a film that revolves around the cruelty of a patriarchal South American senator, "The House of the Spirits" rightly indulges in some ruthlessness of its own.
Even for those who counted on a deeper and more faithful rendering of Isabel Allende's sweeping novel, this handsome, none too reverent film -- the intimate, star-crossed story of a powerful family, played out on an epic scale -- has the appeal of the unexpected.
Purists, beware: this is not a by-the-numbers screen version.
Nor is it as politically charged as Ms.
Allende's story.
Nor does it even retain the flavor of her setting, which here seems oddly European at times.
But it does take daring chances with a book that could not have been adapted otherwise, using extraordinary actors to rise above its occasional lapses.
The lack of fidelity is often offset by intelligence of a subtler kind.


Taxi Panel Rejects Call For Fare Rise
The New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission rejected yesterday cab owners' request for their first fare increase in four years, saying the owners were providing poor service and depriving drivers of a fair share of the profits.
Before any increase is considered, the commission said, taxi owners would have to agree to a sweeping set of improvements, including giving drivers raises and better English classes, providing higher insurance coverage against accidents and allowing only new cars to be added to the current fleet as taxis.


Inside Art
Is Architecture Art?
Should architecture be considered art?
In Culver City, Calif., the answer from the City Council is yes, depending on the situation.


For Many, Buyout Offer Is Too Small, Workers Say
In the corridors and offices of government buildings throughout New York City, municipal workers expressed skepticism yesterday over the severance packages that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is offering as a way to cut the size of government, saying the size of the money offers was unappealing.
But a few said they would jump at the chance to leave their jobs; some older workers saw it as an opportunity to retire early, while younger ones saw a chance to pursue other career goals.


No Clouds In the Sky, No Stars In Sight
Since this is a women's tennis tournament, and since Steffi Graf isn't playing in it, that forlorn person cowering over by the splendid stadium court at the Family Circle Magazine Cup, clipboard in hand, must be Dede Patterson, the tournament's addled director.
One minute she had a full deck of talent headed by Graf and supplemented by the likes of Martina Navratilova and Gabriela Sabatini, with Tracy Austin tossed into the mix for the nostalgia quotient, and the next minute she felt her efforts reduced to a mere house of cards.


Dow Rises In Volatile Session
Wall Street was shaken by astounding volatility yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average repeatedly reversing field -- first up, then down, and finally up.
In a normal session, there are about 50 to 75 points of up-and-down movements in the Dow, but yesterday there were more than 380 points of swing.


Clinton Offers Reassurance
Seeking to reassure investors whose nervousness has sent the stock market plunging, President Clinton expressed confidence today that the economy remained strong.
Mr.
Clinton urged investors not to "overreact" to the weeklong fall of share prices and said he hoped the market would "rebound quickly." He said there was no reason to believe that the drop in the market represented more than a periodic correction.


A Hunt for Treasured Trinkets
SOUVENIRS, according to the conventional line of thinking, are junk.
They serve no practical function, they are cheaply made and they exist solely to prey upon the wallets of vulnerable tourists.
Nobody really needs a six-inch-high green plastic Statue of Liberty with a gold-painted torch, or an Empire State Building salt shaker with a matching King Kong pepper shaker, or a copper-colored ashtray with the Twin Towers embossed in the bottom, or an Ellis Island enamel pin.
Snow domes: who dreamed those up?
Who decided to make action pens with pieces that float up and down inside the handle?
Well, they may be useless, but they are sold by the thousands, every day.
When people come from all over the world to visit the major tourist attractions in New York City, they want to go home with some evidence.
Weeks or years later, when they are sitting at their drab office desk or wandering listlessly about the house, their eyes will fall on their souvenir and the memory of that visit will sweetly return.
If souvenirs are indeed useless, they are far from meaningless.
They are symbols of the places they came from, in the same way that the Statue of Liberty or the Empire State Building is a symbol of some larger, greater thing.


Serbs, Angered by Attacks, Step Up Assault on Enclave
Nationalist Serbs, chafing from diplomatic pressure and angry about increased attacks by the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army, have stepped up their assault on Gorazde, a Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia, and may be preparing to drive thousands of Muslims from the town, United Nations officials report in confidential assessments.
Bosnian counterattacks have been vigorous, the United Nations adds.


Sports of The Times; Here Comes Big Monday Once Again
EXACTLY a year ago, in this very space, I made three observations: the Yankees had an interesting mix of players; the Mets looked horrendous, and the Wildcats from the Commonwealth of Kentucky would win the Final Four.
Two out of three's not bad.


Hundreds of Jews Gather To Honor Hebron Killer
In a steady stream, they came by the hundreds today to recite afternoon prayers at the grave of Baruch Goldstein, many bowing deeply to kiss the tombstone of the Hebron mass killer and to proclaim him a holy man.
They were a small group from among 10,000 or more Jews who descended on this Israeli settlement to rally against the Government for agreeing to post foreign observers in neighboring Hebron and for raising the possibility of moving the 450 Jews who live in that tempestuous West Bank town.


Most Markets Closed Today
The stock and bond markets in the United States will be closed today in observance of Good Friday.
Many overseas markets will also be closed.
The futures markets in New York will not operate.
The Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange will have limited trading in some financial contracts, including futures on Treasury securities.
But there will be no trading in agricultural contracts.


Mets Full Of Depth Up Middle
Over the winter, the Mets spent a great deal of time worrying about their lack of a shortstop.
Now they have four.


Books of The Times; Such a Successful and Generous Man, or Not
Master of the Game
Steve Ross and the Creation of Time Warner
By Connie Bruck.
395 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
To the reader of "Master of the Game," Connie Bruck's lively new book, it's clear that the late Steven J. Ross -- entrepreneur, deal maker and chairman of Time Warner -- saw himself, or wanted others to see him, as a kind of Fitzgerald character, Jay Gatsby or Dick Diver perhaps, a dispenser of joy and largess, a romantic who saw the world as an endless series of infinite possibilities.


People
Dan Rosenberg was named publisher at Video Store magazine, Santa Ana, Calif. succeeding David Allen Shaw, who was named group vice president of its parent, Advanstar Communications.
Mr.
Rosenberg previously was executive vice president at the Video Software Dealers Association, Moorestown, N.J.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side rules are suspended today through Sunday because of religious holidays.


Whistle-Blower Gets $22.5 Million
In the latest sign yet that the Federal whistle-blowing law is climbing higher up the corporate ladder, a former chief financial officer of the United Technologies Corporation has been awarded $22.5 million for exposing fraudulent billing practices for helicopters bought by the Defense Department in the 1980's.
Douglas D. Keeth, a former corporate vice president for finance at United Technologies, which is based in Hartford, had participated in an internal investigation of the wrongdoing when the company first learned that its Sikorsky Aircraft division was billing the Pentagon for work it had not yet performed.


COMPANY BRIEFS
MAGIC RESTAURANTS INC., Yonkers, completed the acquisition of the American Cafe restaurant chain for $3.5 million in cash and notes from W. R. Grace &amp; Co., Boca Raton, Fla.


Review/Film Festival; Black, 12 and Complex: More Than Role Models
In addition to being the most commercially viable film to come out of this year's New Directors/New Films series, Boaz Yakin's "Fresh" is likely to be the most controversial.
"Fresh" is the story of the title character, an impassive black 12-year-old who is first seen stopping off to visit an elderly couple on his way to school.
The woman busily offers him milk and cookies.
Fresh delivers her supply of drugs.
Fresh (Sean Nelson) has two important men in his life.
One is Esteban (Giancarlo Esposito), the seductive drug dealer who employs him as a courier without realizing that Fresh is actually quite an independent-minded little entrepreneur.
The other is Sam (Samuel L. Jackson), Fresh's father, an indigent chess whiz who does what he can to discipline his son.
He can't do much.
When Sam scolds the boy for casually using the word "nigger," Fresh makes it clear he's not about to take orders from any no-income, chess-playing old man.


From Bonnets to Bunnies
Easter comes a bit too early this year for magnificent outdoor displays of flowers in bloom, but there are seasonal concerts and plays, an Easter bonnet competition and, of course, the traditional Easter Parade on Fifth Avenue.
Here is a sampling of the events in New York City this weekend: Today  STABAT MATER, Church of the Epiphany (Roman Catholic), Second Avenue at 22d Street, Gramercy Park.
Lassus' Stabat Mater; Gail Archer, organist and director. 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 475-1966.


Man, 28, Says He Was Shot By Panhandler
A Bronx man was shot entering a midtown subway station in Manhattan early yesterday morning and he told the police he was shot by a panhandler after he refused her request for money.
The man, Suknanan Darsan, 28, was shot in the side at about 4:30 A.M. when he and a co-worker were entering a subway station at the intersection of 53d Street and Broadway, said Lieut.
Robert J. Valentino, a spokesman for the transit police.
Mr.
Darsan was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center, where he underwent surgery and was listed in stable condition.


Branch Libraries Slight Books That Endure
To the Editor:
There is no question that the underfunding of the New York Public Library is appalling and deprives the public of materials and services essential to a civilized city.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  EMERGENCY RULE IN ZULU FIEF  South Africa's President declared a state of emergency in the Zulu homeland and ordered troops to control violence ignited by opponents of the country's new political order.
A1  ISRAEL AND P.L.O.
END IMPASSE  Israel and the P.L.O. agreed to allow foreign observers into the West Bank town of Hebron and resumed talks on introducing Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and Jericho.
A1


For Children
'The Passion Play'
Park Performing Arts Center  560 32d Street  Union City, N.J.  (201) 865-6980  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Through April 24
Hordes of theatergoers pour out of buses and cars to see this play, calling to mind crowds flocking to Lourdes.
In fact, "The Passion Play" is now in its 80th year at this gigantic theater, which says it is the home of the longest-running Passion play in the United States.


7 Exposed to Radiation in U.S. Lab Accident
In a highly unusual accident at a research laboratory here, equipment for a complicated physics experiment caught fire early this morning, releasing radiation inside and outside a nuclear reactor building and contaminating seven workers.
The incident, at the Brookhaven National Laboratory, triggered investigations by the Federal Department of Energy, which owns the lab, and the State Department of Health.


In Chile, Intimations of the Earth's Mortality
To the Editor:
"Patagonia Fortunes Fade in Cloud of Volcanic Ash" (front-page, March 19) misses the most significant lesson of the Hudson Volcano, which began spewing ash in the Chilean Andes in August 1991.


Saatchi Board Tries To Calm a Dispute
The board of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C. has interceded in a growing squabble between Maurice Saatchi, the chairman, and Charles Scott, the chief executive.
The board, inessence, told the two to work better together and said it would hire a third top executive to serve as a buffer between the pair.
The board met on Wednesday, then issued a statement yesterday declaring that it has "resolved that the interests of the company are best served by the continuation" of the two executives "in their present roles." The board also decided to reinstate an executive committee, to be made up of Mr.
Saatchi; Mr.
Scott; Wendy Smyth, the finance director, and the heads of the company's principal divisions.


Home Video
These days everybody in the entertainment business seems to be leaping into "multimedia," the catchall term for, among other things, five-inch disks called CD-ROM's.
Actually, big producers like the movie studios are cautious about CD-ROM's, but that doesn't stop some disk makers from getting into position.
For example, Xiphias, a Los Angeles computer software publisher, reached an agreement last week with Paramount Home Video to distribute Xiphias's CD-ROM "Mighty Morphin Power Rangers," a series of disks based on the popular Fox television show.


A New Labor World; With Accord, Giuliani Rewrites Rules That Bound Workers to New York City
By reaching an accord with the municipal unions on a severance package Wednesday night, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani made a breakthrough in labor relations, bringing the unions in as a partner in his plan to scale back the government and winning a potentially crucial tool to make the shrinkage manageable.
Mr.
Giuliani came away from the talks with the right to offer cash packages to try to cut 7,600 jobs from the city payroll over the next month.
But in what could end up as a more significant precedent, he also won the right for 15 months to break from traditional union strictures and redeploy the workers who remain from one agency to another.


IBM Japan Says It Lost $200 Million in 1993
In a sign that it is being hit by the same problems as its parent company, IBM Japan today reported a net loss of more than $200 million in 1993, the first unprofitable year in memory.
The loss was caused by a special charge to cover reductions in its work force.
IBM Japan, which accounts for more than a sixth of its parent company's revenues, has long been one of I.B.M.'s most profitable units and has largely escaped the huge losses and employee cutbacks that have hit I.B.M.'s American and European divisions.
In part, this is because the Japanese have been slow to shift from large mainframe computers, I.B.M.'s forte, to networks of personal computers, work stations and other smaller machines.


2 Men Charged in the Killing Of Japanese Students for a Car
Two reputed gang members were arrested late Wednesday for killing two Japanese college students in a carjacking a week ago, the police said.
The suspects, Raymond Oscar Butler, 18, of San Pedro and Alberto V. Reygoza, 20, of Long Beach will be arraigned on Friday on charges of murder and robbery, the police said.


Yankees Start With Committee Of Closers
The questions that have hovered over the Yankees like annoying storm clouds this spring were partly resolved on the team's final day in Florida.
In the bullpen, the Yankees will have more than one closer, they probably will not have starting center fielder Bernie Williams on opening day and their 25-man roster seems set.
For now.
Manager Buck Showalter made the hardly shocking announcement today that the Yankees would use more than one closer, a decision that became obvious during spring training after they failed to sign the free agents Steve Farr and Gregg Olson or acquire Florida's Bryan Harvey in the off season.


U.S. and China Reach Accord at U.N. on Korean Nuclear Issue
The United States and China agreed on a Security Council statement tonight that calls on North Korea to allow inspectors to complete an investigation into whether North Korea is secretly building nuclear weapons.
The statement obliquely warns the Government in Pyongyang that it faces a trade embargo if it does not cooperate.
The statement represents a compromise between the United States, which had favored sending this message in a weightier Security Council resolution, and China, which wanted a milder statement.


TV Weekend; A Biblical Patriarch For a Time of Worship
Unlike Christmas, the Easter-Passover season doesn't inspire a glut of treacly television specials.
There's no Santa Claus to promote gift sales.
This season is more partial to biblical epics.
Cecil B. DeMille's 1956 version of "The 10 Commandments" can be seen yet again this Easter Sunday, on ABC.
And TNT offers the premiere of "Abraham," a four-hour production being presented on Sunday and Monday evenings.
"Abraham," filmed in Morocco with an international cast directed by Joseph Sargent, is grandly ambitious.
And in the Italian manner of its technical crews, it is stunningly beautiful.
One problem: It is ponderously dull, despite a powerful bravura performance by Richard Harris in the title role.
The film simply runs on too long.
Three hours, even two, would have been ample.


At the Bar
In 1971, when President Richard M. Nixon seemed poised to place Herschel Friday on the Supreme Court, a local civil rights lawyer, Philip Kaplan, called Mr.
Friday "the wrong man for the wrong job at the wrong time." As a prominent Arkansas lawyer, Mr.
Friday, in the late 1950's, had represented the school districts of Little Rock and several other towns that resisted the pace of desegregation, and Mr.
Kaplan had not forgotten.
Last month, after Mr.
Friday was killed in the crash of his private plane near his home here, Mr.
Kaplan was among the 1,400 mourners at his funeral.
The ceremony was but one part of a community's extraordinary farewell to a man who practiced law in Little Rock for almost 50 years.
Over the last 23 of them -- a period when Mr.
Friday saw Mr.
Kaplan regularly around town but never mentioned his criticism -- Mr.
Kaplan came to reassess Herschel Friday.


For Messier, Good Health Is the Goal
Although the Rangers held an optional workout today, Mark Messier, who hasn't scored a goal in a month and a half, thought it was mandatory that he lace up his skates and put himself through a number of tedious scoring drills.
Messier, plagued this season by a variety of injuries, was the last man off the ice today, shooting pucks into an empty net, trying to regain the special touch that 50-goal scorers are blessed with.


INSIDE
Big Award to Whistle-Blower
United Technologies' former chief financial officer has been awarded $22.5 million for exposing fraudulent billing practices for helicopters bought by the Defense Department in the 1980's.
Page D1.
Trade Offender No. 1.
The U.S. named Japan as the worst offender among countries with egregious trade barriers.
But officials said new sanctions against Tokyo were not being considered.
Page D1.
States Flout Abortion Order
Several states said they were flouting a new Federal order to pay for abortions for low-income women in cases of rape or incest.
Page A20.


A New Agency In San Francisco
A senior creative team at Hal Riney &amp; Partners of San Francisco has left the agency to joint two other executives in opening Odiorne Wilde Narraway Groome.
The new shop, also in San Francisco, opens with an anchor account from Electronic Arts, San Matgeo, Calif., with $8 million to $10 million in billings.
Jeff Odiorne, 28, formerly a senior copywriter at Riney, and Michael Wilde, 29, formerly a senior art director, have joined Andy Narraway, 31, former general manager at Unisource Financial Group in San Francisco, and Harry Groome, 30, former advertising manager at Electronic Arts.
Mr.
Odiorne and Mr.
Wilde will retain their previous titles and add the title of creative director.
Mr.
Narraway becomes general manager and Mr.
Groome becomes head of account services.


April, Fooling
It is April, the month the old quatrain says is all girlish laughter (sun) followed by girlish tears (rain).
Yet even now, even as the occasional bulb is pushing a timid shoot out of some very sodden soil, two words still appear in the weather forecast.
"Possible flurry." The heart sinks.
True, the weather over the last few weeks hasn't been the sort that has had people lifting their faces to the sky.
Not unless they wanted a wet face, anyway.
But what are puddles and the beat-beat-beat of the raindrops compared with icy sidewalks and blinding blizzards?
Which is the greater nuisance, wet feet or a broken hip?


Suppliers Given Warning On Woolworth Shipments
One day after the Woolworth Corporation announced that its board was investigating allegations of accounting irregularities, factoring companies and credit rating agencies were advising clients against shipping goods to the retailer.
Several factoring companies said their calls to Woolworth yesterday seeking information went unanswered.
The lack of information about the allegations, combined with pre-existing concerns about Woolworth's struggling business, made them nervous, they said.


A Few Dozen People of Power
The National Law Journal, which every three years consults with legal affairs experts across the country to come up with a listing of the most influential lawyers in America, is out with its latest triannual crop.


Johnson Is Purdue's Ms. Inside in Final Four
Lin Dunn, the women's basketball coach at Purdue, remembers the day well.
"I drove from campus to Fort Wayne in a snowstorm because my assistant said there are two players there you had to see," she said.
"Here was this packed gymnasium for a game for girls in the sixth and seventh grade, 12 or 13 years old. That's the first time I saw Leslie Johnson, and I knew from that moment she would be a major factor in girls' and women's basketball."


Expulsion Is Advised For 29 Naval Cadets
Following an inquiry into the worst cheating scandal in the history of the United States Naval Academy, Navy officials recommended that 29 midshipmen be expelled and that 42 others be punished for their roles in acquiring or using an engineering final exam in 1992.
The investigation also exonerated 35 midshipmen.


Abroad at Home; Self-Inflicted Wounds
Over the nearly 27 years that Israel has occupied the West Bank and Gaza, some American supporters of Israel have often described the occupation as "benign." It was a wishful notion, a reassuring illusion.
Now the illusion is over.
In the months since Baruch Goldstein murdered dozens of Palestinians at prayer in Hebron the real nature of the occupation has become clear to anyone with eyes to see.


Sharp Staff Cuts Planned At Public-Hospital Office
New York City's Health and Hospitals Corporation will cut its central office staff in half by July 1995 as part of a major reorganization of the public hospital system, its president announced yesterday.
Dr.
Bruce Siegel, the agency's president, said streamlining the central office would save $17 million over the next 15 months.
Pointing to a chart, Dr.
Siegel said the cuts would also eliminate the kind of bureaucratic overkill that made each request for a capital project a 37-step process.


TRANSACTIONS
Auto Racing
SCCA PRO RACING, LTD. -- Named Kevin M. O'Brien vice president of marketing, effective April 18.


U.S. Reverses Position at U.N. On Sending Troops to Balkans
Changing its position at the last minute, the Clinton Administration blocked the Security Council today from sending the full contingent of some 10,000 new peacekeeping troops to oversee the evolving settlement in the former Yugoslavia, saying it was not sure Congress would agree to pay America's share of the extra cost.
Instead the Council approved a compromise resolution under which it authorized the deployment of about 3,500 new peacekeepers to help police the cease-fire agreements in Sarajevo, in central Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia, calling that a first step toward full deployment of the additional forces.
It agreed to review the situation at the end of the month.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about the Pacific Telesis Group's move to spin off some operations into a separate company, misstated the plans of the company's chairman and chief executive, Sam Ginn.
He will become chairman and chief executive of the spinoff, Air Touch Communications, and not remain at Pacific Telesis.
Replacing him as head of Pacific Telesis will be Philip J. Quigley, now president of the company's Pacific Bell unit.


Art in Review
Leonardo Drew
Barbara Toll Gallery
146 Greene Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through April 9  Thread Waxing Space  476 Broadway (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through April 23


Gene Experiment to Reverse Inherited Disease Is Working
The first effort to reverse an inherited disease permanently by altering the genetic makeup of a patient's cells so far shows all the signs of a real, if modest, triumph.
In results to be published on Friday in the journal Nature Genetics, researchers said they had partly corrected a devastating cholesterol disorder called familial hypercholesterolemia by supplying the patient, a 30-year-old woman from Quebec, with copies of an essential gene she lacks.


On Stage, and Off
Correctness and 'Carousel'
The opening of "Carousel" last week, with actors of color in 13 out of 44 roles (including 2 major ones), has reopened the nontraditional casting debate with regard to Broadway.
Most of the reviews chose not to mention the fact, a sign that acceptance is nigh, at least among critics, for performers who are cast against conventional expectations of sex or ethnicity.
There were, however, some exceptions: " 'Carousel' has been made so politically correct with interracial casting it becomes both jarring and a nuisance," Robert Osborne wrote in The Hollywood Reporter.
And John Simon echoed him in New York magazine: "This directorial choice (which also makes one of the heavenly messengers a woman) in some ways militates against the meaning of the work."


Sheik Says He Wants Wife Brought to U.S.
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Egyptian cleric charged in an assassination conspiracy and bomb plot that targeted major New York City sites, told a Federal judge yesterday that either the Government should bring his wife and family to the United States from Egypt or he should be allowed to "marry over here too."
"It is important that my wife and family should visit me at the expense of the American Government," Mr.
Abdel Rahman said.


Times Sq. Has a Start on a Hall of Fame
To the Editor:
In the reclaiming of Times Square, it seems a lovely monument is being overlooked.
On the northeast corner of Seventh Avenue and 46th Street, on the second-story level, are statues of four women who were leaders in the performing arts in the 1920's costumed as characters they were famous for playing.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; With a cock-a-doodle-doo, Seiko adds spice to the sleepy business of selling watches.
SEIKO TIME and its new agency are using a rooster to sound a wake-up call, literally and figuratively, in the often somnolent, sometimes narcoleptic realm of watch advertising.
In a broadcast and print campaign, the first by DDB Needham New York since being awarded the Seiko Time account in November, the watch line gets a new theme, "Built for life," replacing a stolid, stodgy slogan, "The future of time," penned by its previous agency of 25 years, AC &amp; R Advertising in New York.


Art in Review
Jack Whitten  Paintings from the 1970's
Daniel Newburg Gallery  43 Greene Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through April 9 Jack Whitten  Recent Paintings
Horodner Romley Gallery  107-109 Sullivan Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through April 9


In Michigan School-Tax Shift, the Poor Lose; New Mexico Did It
To the Editor:
A March 17 front-page report calls Michigan's shift in public school financing a "venture into uncharted terrain." Not quite.
New Mexico has not relied on property taxes as a significant source of revenue for public schools for more than 50 years.


Salesman Pleads Guilty in Fraud Scheme on L.I.
One year after the owners of an armored car company were charged with stealing as much as $38 million from their customers, a company salesman today pleaded guilty to taking part in a scheme to defraud at least four businesses that stored money in the company's warehouse.
The salesman, Anthony Triolo, 55, of Smithtown, admitted this morning in Federal District Court here that he had paid bribes to representatives of a number of customers from 1989 to 1993 to insure that they would continue to use Revere Armored Inc. in Bohemia.
The bribes apparently occurred during the period that prosecutors say Revere officials were looting the deposits of dozens of businesses and banks.


When Should Lawyers Omit, Misstate or Lie?
To the Editor:
I was quoted in a March 21 article on lawyer billing practices in connection with the Armand D'Amato fraud conviction appeal.
My comment responded to specific questions posed by your reporter on the telephone.
He told me a Bar Association amicus brief took the position that, to accommodate a client's wish, lawyers should be free to misstate facts about the legal services they provided.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6-6.25
6-6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
3.36
3.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.47
3.46
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.79
3.77
2.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.73
6.76
6.05
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.08
7.09
6.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.95
7.95
7.89
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.26
6.03
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


B.U. Reaches Final, but Harvard Doesn't
Boston University won efficiently if not easily and Harvard lost in overtime in the semifinal games today of the National Collegiate Athletic Association hockey championships.
The Terriers, aiming for their first national championship in 16 years, defeated Minnesota, the Western Association champion, 4-1, after Lake Superior State outlasted Harvard, 3-2.
The Lakers' winning score, 4 minutes 16 seconds into overtime, came on a solo dash by the all-America center Clayton Beddoes that ended with his 15-foot shot between the legs of Aaron Israel, the Crimson goaltender.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "AVENUE X," Playwrights Horizons, Wilder Theater, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
An a cappella musical by John Jiler and Ray Leslee, set in 1963 Brooklyn, about two friends who unleash racial tensions when they try to present an interracial singing act.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


Repaying the Piper
The last week's declines in bond and stock prices generated a momentum of their own, divorced from the economy's generally upbeat performance.
The momentum was fed in large part by big investors who had borrowed heavily to buy securities, gambling incorrectly that interest rates would stay down.
As rates rose instead, the investors have been forced to sell their securities to cover their debts.
While the American economy has been healthier in the last six months than at any time since 1989, no one could tell that from the way the markets have behaved.
Half a dozen factors, most of them unrelated to the economy and some accidental, have dragged down the markets.
Losses by American investors in German bonds played a role.
And tensions over trade with Japan and China made the markets nervous.
But these are small-fry factors.


The Spoken Word
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"In a Classical Vein," by Marisa Kayyem, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82d Street.
Today: "Portraits of Power," by Shirley Glubok, 11 A.M.; "A Closer Look: Bronzino's 'Portrait of a Young Man,' " by Pearl Ehrlich, 12:30 P.M.; "A Woman's Touch: Art and Craft in America," by Ellen Handy, 3 P.M.; "Roman Female Portraits," by Nancy Thompson, 6 P.M.; "17th-Century Dutch Painting," by Marvin Schwartz, 7 P.M.
Tomorrow: "Images of Merriment and Mischief: The Genre Paintings of Frans Hals," by Dennis P. Weller, 11 A.M.; "The Metropolitan Museum of Art: Architectural History in Cultural Context," by Matthew Kennedy, 7 P.M.
Sunday: "Easter Imagery: The Resurrection," by Daniel Kletke, 11 A.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Review/Film; An Italy of the Past Obsessed With the Future
"It's Happening Tomorrow," Daniele Luchetti's elegant and witty meditation on modern history, imagines 19th-century Italy as a land dotted with eccentric intellectuals and mad scientists who share an obsession with the future.
In the most magical scene from the film, which sees the world as a kind of surreal international exposition of quaint notions, the founding genius of a utopian farm community dazzles his flock with a crude demonstration of electric light.
Moments later, a group of coal workers, who feel threatened by the display, set fire to the place, which despite its name, New Harmony, perpetuates its own version of the class system.
These and other unusual events are seen through the eyes of two Tuscan cowherds, Lupo (Paolo Hendel) and Edo (Giovanni Guidelli), who are fleeing the law after a botched robbery attempt.
In hot pursuit are three Austrian mercenaries and the son of the landowner they tried to rob.
It is 1848, the year of several European revolutions.
As Lupo and Edo make their way through the gorgeous Italian countryside, they are drawn into one strange scenario after another.


Miscellany
The actress Debra Winger will be features ina radio commercial for the United Jewish Appeal's Operation Exodus campaign, which focuses on Jews living in the former Soviet Union.
The 60-second spot, created by Worldwide 1 on 1, New York, begins running on Monday.





Jubilant French Students Celebrate Wage Victory
To shouts of "We won! We won!" tens of thousands of students marched through Paris and other French cities today to celebrate their victory over the conservative Government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur in a dispute over the minimum wage for young people.
Repeating scenes that have become familiar here this month, however, after the Paris march ended in the Place Denfert-Rochereau this afternoon, a few dozen vandals began a rampage, breaking some shop and restaurant windows, setting fire to several parked cars and damaging dozens of others.


Review/ Theater: The Tragedy of Richard II; A Director's Stylized Vision Of Shakespeare
ALTHOUGH he never sets foot onstage, the most visible person in "The Tragedy of Richard II" at the Joseph Papp Public Theater is the English director Steven Berkoff.
He has left his mark everywhere: on the biggest scene and on the tiniest detail.
Like a mad graffiti artist, he seems obsessed with eliminating blank space from the stage and replacing it with his signature.
Not a speech is spoken or a gesture made that doesn't somehow say "Berkoff was here." The cast is composed of 18 performers, but they are all doing strictly his thing: you might as well be watching puppets.


Russian Aide Voices Doubts on Joining NATO Group
Pouring ice water over the expectation that Russia will join a loose alliance with NATO in April, a spokesman for Boris N. Yeltsin said today that the President wanted to weigh the disadvantages of membership and that a final decision could take six months.
The President's press secretary, Vyacheslav V. Kostikov, said the planned alliance did not correspond to the "political role and military might of Russia."


The Muted U.S. Outcry Toward Japan
The Government released its list of countries erecting egregious trade barriers today, singling out Japan as the worst offender.
But senior officials said they were not, for the moment, contemplating any new sanctions against Tokyo.
The Clinton Administration has decided to give the Japanese more time to flesh out their sketchy offer, made earlier this week, to break the trade deadlock.
This restrained response by the Administration to a Japanese trade package deemed wholly insufficient is in striking contrast to some of the tough language of recent months.


Father's Workplace And Mom's Fungoes Helped Shape Segui
David Segui considers it a competition.
The batter wants a hit.
Segui wants to deny him.
Any ball on the right side of the field is fair game.
There are those he can't stop, and those make him a little frustrated.
There are those he should have stopped, and those drive him nuts.
And if others make errors, well, that's the worst.


Executive Changes
BEAR, STEARNS &amp; COMPANY, New York, named Gary McLoughlin head government bond trader, succeeding Ronald Connors, who became a partner at Moore Capital, New York.
RUBBERMAID INC., Wooster, Ohio, named Gary E. Kleinjan president and general manager of the office products division in Maryville, Tenn., succeeding John L. Mariotti, who resigned.


Police Accuse Harlem Officer Of Shakedowns
An officer assigned to community policing in East Harlem was arraigned late Wednesday night on charges he shook down several merchants for about $2,000 by threatening them with arrest or with being ordered to close.
The officer, James Corey, 29, who has been at the 25th Precinct for the last five of his six years in the department, pleaded not guilty to 14 charges of grand larceny and one count of attempted grand larceny at his arraignment in Criminal Court in Manhattan.
He was released on his own recognizance.


In Michigan School-Tax Shift, the Poor Lose; Give Her the Credit
To the Editor:
Your March 17 front-page article on Michigan's revolution in financing public schools reports the last step, a ballot referendum on alternative revenue plans, but omits the genesis of this revolution.


Review/Film; A Romance Of Missed Connections
"A Tale of Winter" was shown as part of the 1992 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 2, 1992.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at the Lincoln Plaza, 63d Street and Broadway.
No matter how Eric Rohmer classifies his films, whether as "Moral Tales," "Comedies and Proverbs" or "Tales of the Four Seasons," which is the title of his current cycle, each film comes down to the same thing: a most singular woman.
She is always young, usually very pretty, sometimes beautiful, with a capacity to enchant that is equaled only by her maddeningly stubborn, sometimes wayward pursuit of destiny as she sees it.


Art in Review
Egon Schiele  'Nudes'
Gagosian Gallery  980 Madison Avenue (near 77th Street)  Through April 16
It's not for nothing that Egon Schiele's name is closely linked with a strange and distinctly Viennese fin-de-siecle eroticism.
A sizable part of his career (he died in 1918, at 28, of influenza) was spent painting and drawing nudes, mostly female ones, sometimes for patrons of salacious images of pubescent girls and of lesbian couples, sometimes as studies for his own, more exalted, allegorical works.


On My Mind; The Pope as Bricklayer
The American entrepreneur, born in Hungary, had just returned from one of his many visits to Budapest.
He spoke with anguish of the upsurge of anti-Semitism he found there.
"Well anyway," he said, "at least it is not as bad as in Romania and Poland."


Talks Resumed In the Mideast; Pact on Hebron
Five weeks after the massacre of Muslims in Hebron, Israel and the P.L.O. resumed talks today on introducing Palestinian self-rule in Gaza and Jericho.
The talks were reopened after the two sides signed an agreement earlier in the day to allow foreign observers into Hebron, on the West Bank.
The accord calls for Hebron to be patrolled by a force of 160 lightly armed observers from Norway, Italy and Denmark.
Western diplomats said the observers would start arriving in a week to 10 days.


Diner's Journal
A Legend Imported
For more than 100 years, La Mere Poulard has been famous for omelets.
They are wonderful creations: huge, flavorful puffs that somehow taste as if they were made of more than butter, air and eggs.
The omelets are so good that they are worth the sometimes arduous trip to Mont-St.-Michel in Normandy.
Given that, they are certainly worth a trip over to East 56th Street in Manhattan.
The local outpost of La Mere Poulard opened just last week on the site once occupied by Laurent.
It is a vast space whose walls are now covered with memorabilia from the restaurant on Mont-St.-Michel.
Everybody who was anybody went to La Mere Poulard: the Roosevelts (Theodore, Franklin and Eleanor), Trotsky, Lindbergh, Hemingway, Rita Hayworth, Yves Montand, Maurice Chevalier, Margaret Thatcher, Coco Chanel.
The posters, pictures and drawings alone are worth the price of admission.


David Van Vactor; Composer Was 87
David Van Vactor, a flutist, conductor and composer, died on March 24 at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 87.
The probable cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Virginia.


Pro Bono Accounts
Long Island Children's Museum, Garden City, L.I., to Welch &amp; Nehlen Advertising, Garden City, as the first agency to handle projects for the new museum.


Accounts
Meccano Inc., New York, the manufacturer of Erector sets, to Media Inc., New York, to handle the broadcast media buying portion of its estimated $8 million to $10 million account, previously handled by Creative Media, New York.
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., Basking Ridge, N.J., said a sixth finalist, Worldwide 1 on 1, New York, would compete in the review for its consumer long-distance direct marketing account, currently divided among several agencies, with billings estimated at $200 million to $300 million.


Review/Design; The Line That Helps to Define Fashion
It would have been hard to predict the hysterics that resulted when Cristobal Balenciaga introduced the chemise in 1957.
American women in particular protested to stores that they didn't want to hide their waistlines.
Cabdrivers, interviewed by reporters, said they would not let their wives wear chemises.
Cartoonists had a field day.
In the United States, chemises languished on the racks.
What caused this upheaval was simply a dress that did not have a belt, or even a seam, to mark the waistline.
The ups and downs and ins and outs of the waistline have served to define the fashionable figure over the last 200 years.
Hemlines have been in the news in the last few years, but before that it was the waist that attracted attention.


Bill Travers, 72, Actor Who Starred In Film 'Born Free'
Bill Travers, who played the tallest, strongest man in the Scottish Highlands in the 1956 film "Wee Geordie" and became a star in the 1966 movie "Born Free," died on Tuesday at his home in Dorking, England, south of London.
He was 72.
He died in his sleep, according to the Born Free Foundation, the animal charity with which he was associated.


Art in Review
Kristin Oppenheim
303 Gallery  89 Greene Street (at Spring Street)  SoHo  Through April 23
Kristin Oppenheim is a firm believer that less is more.
She makes installation pieces that involve nothing but sound, and her sounds tend to be remembered, even rather approximate fragments of popular songs that she sings over and over in a pale, lilting voice without accompaniment.
This sounds a lot less like a stuck record than you might imagine.


Berlin Journal; Torch Is Passed, and the Past Is in German Hands
When the United States Army completes its pullout from Germany this year, it will turn over to the German authorities an archive of 25 million Nazi Party documents, a treasure that Germany has for years been reluctant to accept.
The archive, officially known as the Berlin Document Center, is an invaluable source of information for scholars and Nazi-hunters.
It also includes chilling evidence of how Nazi leaders sought to develop scientific principles to help them breed a "master race."


Restaurants
The woman at the next table is wearing a hat.
A black one that makes her look as if she left her horse at the door and strolled in after a ride around the plantation.
She slides into her seat, takes a sip from her friend's glass and looks down at the menu.
She smiles and says, "Oh, I adore this!"
She says it in French.
This does not distinguish her from the other people in the room, half of whom are speaking French.
On an ordinary afternoon, Le Colonial looks like a lazy tropical restaurant and sounds like the Champs-Elysees.


State Dept. Steps Back on Effort to Court Syria
As the Administration gropes for ways to reward Syria for recent positive actions, the State Department has reversed itself and decided to keep Syria on the list of countries that have not cooperated in anti-drug efforts, Administration officials said today.
The reversal came after the White House and some senior State Department officials objected to the politically delicate proposal.


Economist, And Now A Politician
Foreign investors got what they wanted when a classically trained economist was selected to replace the governing party's slain presidential candidate in Mexico, but now they are concerned that the candidate's great strengths in handling the economy may turn out to be a weakness in handling the country.
Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon has a doctorate in economics from Yale and such extensive experience in Mexico's central bank and its budget ministry that if he is elected president on Aug. 21, as expected, he would become one of the most economically skilled heads of state in the world.


Grumman Concludes Its Closed-Door Auction
Rejecting a one-day-only premium of $70 million to merge with the Northrop Corporation, the Grumman Corporation concluded its closed-door auction today, but it could not be learned whether the Martin Marietta Corporation or Northrop, two rival suitors, placed new bids.
Robert Harwood, a Grumman spokesman, declined to comment on the auction, except to say that it had ended as scheduled at 5 P.M., Eastern time, and that Grumman would announced a winner on Monday at 9 A.M., Eastern time.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The declines in stocks and bonds have taken on a momentum of their own -- divorced from the economy's health and fed in large part by big investors who had borrowed heavily to buy securities and are now selling to cover their debts.
News Analysis.  [ Page A1. ]


Doctor Says He Falsified Cancer Data to Help Patients
Dr.
Roger Poisson, a prominent Montreal surgeon who has admitted falsifying data in a major North American breast cancer study, said today that he might have broken some rules but did so out of devotion to patients whose inclusion in the research qualified them for state-of-the-art treatment.
He berated his critics, chiefly in the United States, who he said wanted him to blindly obey rigid research guidelines.
He accused the critics of persecuting him and "taking the same attitude towards me as the States had against Somalia and Vietnam."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
First National Bank of Boston, a subsidiary of Bank of Boston Corp., is selling $100 million of floating-rate notes due in 1995 at a price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The notes, which float at 3 basis points above the three-month London interbank offered rate, currently at about 3.9375 percent, are noncallable and rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A- by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Haitians on Both Sides Assailing U.S.
After months of broken commitments, diplomatic reverses and an intense wave of political repression and deepening economic misery, influential Haitians on both sides of the stark political divide have begun to condemn United States policy on Haiti, calling it everything from confused and uninspired to cynical and half-hearted.
Increasingly, Haitians who seek the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, say they no longer have any faith in an American diplomacy they describe as a woeful series of zigzags, while Father Aristide's opponents now say openly that they have nothing to fear from Washington after a long string of unfulfilled threats.


Bans on Cigarette Machines Are Upheld
Saying that "ready access to cigarettes on the part of minors is a legitimate government concern," the New Jersey Supreme Court today upheld the right of municipalities to ban cigarette vending machines within their borders.
The decision upholds an ordinance adopted in 1990 by East Brunswick, and could signal quick approval of similar ordinances adopted in Cherry Hill, Princeton Borough and Princeton Township that are still making their way through court challenges.


Grass-Roots G.O.P. Group With Big-Company Backing
A nonprofit offshoot of the Republican Party that was formed last year to seek the ideas of ordinary Americans is being financed by big corporations and millionaires whose donations are not subject to Federal restrictions that apply to most political groups.
Since its creation last June, the organization, the National Policy Forum, has been criticized by groups that monitor campaign finances because it has refused to disclose the identities of its donors.


One Game vs. Seven, College Game vs. Pros
Four teams vying to be No. 1 is my favorite time -- my dipsy-doo, babaloo, Mary Lou, dunkeroo -- of the college basketball season.
When the N.C.A.A. men's tournament dawns with 64 teams, I'm in awe of those who digest these massive hoops injections.
Well, not awe.
I'm more aghast that anyone can fixate on teams he knew nothing about an hour before tip-off.
Turn off "Wheel of Fortune," here comes the College of Charleston game!


The Path to Liberty Is Growing Ever Wider


Expulsions Urged in Navy Cheating Case
A Navy inquiry into the worst cheating scandal in the history of the United States Naval Academy recommended today that 29 midshipmen be expelled and 42 others be punished for their roles in acquiring or using an engineering final exam in 1992.
The investigation also exonerated 35 midshipmen.
And in a step aimed at repairing the credibility of the tarnished institution, which was rocked by a sexual harassment scandal four years ago and more recently by the cheating episode, the Pentagon is recommending that a four-star admiral, Charles R. Larson, be installed as the academy's next superintendent.
The post is usually filled by a two-star officer.


The Final Four Is Also a Starting Point
Presidents did not go to the Final Four.
Football was Presidential.
Bowl games.
Army-Navy.
Or Opening Day in Washington, posing with the managers and throwing out the first ball of the baseball season -- that's how Presidents appeared like regular guys.
There was no need to hob-nob with people in short pants.
When the times were simpler, the arenas smaller and the profit not so great, you think any phone call from the Oval Office encouraged some basketball coach to press full court?
So just when you think the Final Four has crested, the organizers of the event are making room for President Clinton.
Just when you wonder if this event has squeezed out every ratings point that a bunch of guys playing ball could possibly inspire, just when you say the games between Arizona and Arkansas and Duke and Florida on Saturday, with the winners meeting Monday night, have created the toughest ticket ever, this business has gone political.


CHRONICLE
There are still a few places in the city where BARBARALEE DIAMONSTEIN-SPIELVOGEL hasn't lectured, moderated, had a photographic exhibition or signed books.
And there are organizations that haven't feted or honored her for various reasons.
Not many, it's true.
But one more will be knocked off the list when the Pratt Institute honors her on Monday night with a dinner at the Plaza Hotel.
The institute will present her with its 1994 Founder's Award, the first woman to be so honored.
The award recognizes philanthropic, community and educational commitment, and previous winners include Brendan Gill and Frank Macchiarola, the former New York City schools chancellor.


Man of the Law, and of Letters as Well
More than a century ago Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. told a group of Harvard undergraduates: "The law is not the place for the artist or the poet. . . . The law is the calling of thinkers."
Whatever merit history may have bestowed on the second part of that assessment, it has offered a fair share of exceptions to the first.
Archibald MacLeish, a Harvard Law School graduate, wrote four books of poems.
And a San Francisco lawyer named Charles Reznikoff wrote an entire book of them, "Testimony," that was based on actual court records.
Then there was Wallace Stevens, who was a surety bond lawyer.
And Edgar Lee Masters, author of "The Spoon River Anthology," was a law partner of Clarence Darrow.


DE KLERK ORDERS ARMY TO PROTECT VOTE IN ZULU AREA
President F. W. de Klerk declared a state of emergency in the Zulu homeland today and ordered troops to control the raging violence ignited by opposition to the new political order.
The move set the stage for a showdown with the Zulu nationalists led by Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, who reject the elections scheduled in four weeks as an assault on their King and on their national pride.


Review/Photography; Soft-Focus Portraits Yield to Hard Images Of Depression Poverty
In 1930 Dorothea Lange was a genteel portrait photographer in San Francisco, producing slightly soft-focus, moodily lighted images in a style recalling that of her teachers, the well-known pictorialists Arnold Genthe and Clarence White.
Over the next five years, though, Lange traveled a remarkable distance in her work, turning from polite portraits to the searing, unforgettable images of migrant workers and rural poverty that cemented her fame.
This shift is the unstated subject of the fascinating if somewhat jumbled show of Lange's photographs now at the Houk-Friedman Gallery.
This show includes some of Lange's most famous images, including "Migrant Mother," the classic 1936 photograph of a woman, her face lined with worry, whose children press themselves to her body.


Frank Schreider, 70, Who Wrote Of World Travels, Dies on Boat
Frank Schreider, a determined explorer who lived his dream of roaming the rough edges of the earth and supporting his wanderlust by his pen, died on Jan. 21 in his boat off the island of Crete in the Mediterranean.
Mr.
Schreider, who maintained a home in Santa Fe, N.M., was 70.


Manning Won't Go West
DANNY MANNING will miss the Atlanta Hawks' three-game West Coast trip because of a staph infection in his right elbow.
The Hawks, who are battling the Knicks for the best record in the Eastern Conference, expect to have him back when they play host to Boston on Wednesday.


Eagles Add Fuller to Defense
The Philadelphia Eagles have signed WILLIAM FULLER, an unrestricted free-agent lineman.


Boy Killed in Hit-and-Run
A 10-year-old boy was killed last night by a hit-and-run driver in Coney Island, Brooklyn, the police said.
John Pimentel was walking with a cousin when he was hit at 6:50 P.M. at Neptune Avenue and West 15th Street, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
He died at Coney Island Hospital.
A witness provided a possible license number of the car, and investigators located a Buick Riviera with the number, Sergeant Mohrmann said, but one had been arrested.


A Final Season for Heathcote
JUD HEATHCOTE announced Wednesday that his next season as Michigan State coach will be his last.


METRO DIGEST
CORTINES REJECTS MAJOR BUDGET CUTS New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he would dismiss only 700 Board of Education employees, far less than the 2,500 that Mayor Giuliani had sought.
A1.
BLUE CROSS IS DENIED HIGHER RATES Ending a long pattern of granting rate increases for Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, state regulators turned down the company's request to raise health insurance premiums for nearly a million New Yorkers.
A1.


Corrections
An article on March 20 about the Clinton Administration's efforts to finance its welfare program referred incorrectly to a proposal to cut low-income energy assistance.
That proposal is part of the Administration's budget for the 1995 fiscal year and is among many domestic cuts intended to provide more money for other domestic programs.
There was no money in the budget for the Administration's welfare program, which has not yet been formally proposed.


G.M. Recalls 2,500 Natural Gas Pickups
The General Motors Corporation, searching for clues as to why tanks in two natural gas-powered pickup trucks exploded during refilling, offered today to buy back or exchange the approximately 2,500 natural gas pickups it sold in the last two years.
G.M. also said it had canceled for now any plans to sell natural gas-powered cars or pickups in the 1994 model year, pending further development of tanks and other equipment.


Treasury Aide Denies Pressure To Intervene In S.&amp; L. Case
A senior Treasury official told a Federal grand jury here today that he did not believe he was being pressured by the White House to intervene in an investigation of the savings and loan at the heart of the Whitewater case, people involved in the inquiry said today.
Last week the White House acknowledged that George Stephanopoulos, a senior adviser to President Clinton, called the Treasury official, Joshua Steiner, on Feb. 25 and angrily complained about the decision of a regulatory agency to hire a former Republican prosecutor, Jay B. Stephens, to investigate the collapse of the Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan Association.


Investors in Mutual Funds Are Staying Relatively Calm
Mutual funds, which hold more than $2 trillion in stocks and bonds, remained relatively calm yesterday despite the nail-biting performance of the stock and bond markets.
As the markets gyrated in price, raising concerns of an impending bear market for all kinds of securities, mutual fund investors appeared to take the day's events in stride.
For the first time in months, sales exceeded purchases of shares in stock and bond funds, but at a modest rate.
Telephone calls were up, many mutual fund companies reported, as investors peppered fund companies with questions.
Many investors switched their money into short-term money market funds, to protect against potential further losses.
But, in general, most fund companies said that small investors appeared to be sitting tight. 'Concern, but Not Panic'
"We see concern, but not panic," said John Brennan, president of The Vanguard Group, the third-largest mutual fund.
"People call up and check to make sure things are fine. We see money going out of stock and bond funds, but it is not in any dramatic way."


Review/Film Festival; Odd, Odder and Oddest
The fashionably affectless Japanese film "Down the Drain" follows the mishaps that befall a math-loving schoolgirl once her life turns unexpectedly bizarre.
The schoolgirl, Junko (Saori Serikawa), is buffeted from one strange event to the next, never registering much more than worry or mild surprise.
The director, Shinobu Yaguchi, concentrates on absurd coincidences, eccentric minor figures and long, studied shots in which characters look woebegone and do nothing.
One of the few genuine insights provided by Mr.
Yaguchi is that these days Jim Jarmusch must be the most eagerly imitated film maker in the world.
But it takes perfect deadpan timing, like Mr.
Jarmusch's, to get this right.
And "Down the Drain" lacks most of the necessary aplomb.
Mr.
Yaguchi's film begins promisingly with its first set of accidents, but its pacing eventually grows wearisome and slack.
The events are crazy without being crazy enough.
They seem to have their own kind of sameness after a while.


Police Station Becomes a Cash Station
Inside the Seventh District police station, just down the hall from the handcuffed gang member and the battered wife with nowhere else to hide, Shawna Jackson came to do her banking.
A few months ago, in an experiment to bring more financial services to the poor and to cut down on the muggings that make the South Side police district one of Chicago's toughest, the city and a local bank installed an automatic teller machine in the lobby of the police station.


Pearson Enters Multimedia Software Arena
The multimedia software industry may be a fledgling business with an uncertain future, but the money continues to pour in.
The most recent big spender, Pearson P.L.C., one of Britain's largest publishers, announced yesterday that it would pay $462 million to buy Software Toolworks Inc., a Silicon Valley producer of multimedia programs.


Review/Art; Works From a Dark Era By a German Modernist
Those who like the idea of watching a great painter at work should make haste to the Michael Werner Gallery on East 67th Street.
On view is a remarkable exhibition of more than two dozen paintings and drawings and five sculptures by Max Beckmann, perhaps the most important German artist of the century.
The show has an illuminating intimacy that penetrates the stiff, distancing layers that history and reputation so often give an artist, providing a glimpse of the inner workings of his mind and eye.
Beckmann died in 1950 in New York City at the age of 65, three years after he immigrated to the United States from Amsterdam, where he sat out World War II, and 13 years after he left Nazi Germany.
Until 1933 he had been one of his country's most respected artists, with a room devoted to his work at the National Gallery in Berlin, but Hitler's rise to power and campaign against modern art changed that.
Almost immediately, Beckmann, though not Jewish, was dismissed from the Stadel Art School in Frankfurt, where he had taught since 1925.
Soon his paintings were yanked out of German museums, along with those by other members of the European avant-garde, to be placed in the Nazi's "degenerate art" exhibition of 1937.


U.S. Youth In Singapore Loses Appeal On Flogging
In a move that threatens to disrupt relations, the Chief Justice of Singapore rejected appeals from President Clinton today and ordered that an American teen-ager be flogged for spray-painting cars and other mischief in this prosperous, order-loving city-state.
The case of Michael Fay, 18, of Dayton, Ohio, raises the prospect of a rift between the United States and one of its closest allies and trading partners in Southeast Asia, and American diplomats immediately protested the decision by the Chief Justice, Yong Pung How, to uphold the flogging sentence.


Maytag in India Venture
The Maytag Corporation will produce Hoover home appliances in India in a joint venture, Suneel Vyas, chief executive of Modi Hoover Ltd., said today.
Maytag will hold 40 percent of the joint venture.


Honoring a Killer Whom Some Jews Call a Hero


Nets, Now Streaking at Home, Are Ready to Face the Magic
Now that Jayson Williams seems to be recovered from the bruised kneecap that kept him out of four games, Coach Chuck Daly of the Nets seems to have nine dependable weapons to use against the opposition.
It's a good thing, too, because eight did not seem like enough to go against the likes of Orlando's Shaquille O'Neal.
He brings his Magic show into Meadowlands Arena tonight, where the franchise record for home sellouts in a season is likely to grow to 15.


A Winter of Red Ink Cancels Simulcasting
They pulled the plug yesterday on the great simulcasting experiment, which was supposed to rescue New York from the ravages of racing in wintertime.
And after 70 days of betting on mixed programs of live races at Aqueduct plus televised races from Florida, the general reaction seemed to be: Who needs winter racing, anyway?
The weather didn't help.
During the three months the experiment was allowed by the Legislature, 15 racing dates were wiped out by snow and ice, attendance plunged from 8,250 a day last year to 6,339 this year (down 23 percent) and betting dropped from $2.1 million a day to $1.8 million (down by nearly 16 percent).


New Coach at Creighton
DANA ALTMAN, who coached Kansas State to the semifinals of this year's National Invitation Tournament, was named the new coach at Creighton University yesterday.
He was 68-54 in four season at Kansas State, whose season ended Wednesday with a loss to


Review/Film; A Man as a Boy In Devil's Clothing
Bankruptcy has been kind to "Clifford," a gimmicky film in which Martin Short plays an excessively polite, extremely demented 10-year-old.
Originally meant to be released two years ago and delayed because of Orion Pictures' bankruptcy, Clifford's obsession with dinosaurs now seems like a shrewd, post-"Jurassic Park" move.
A less lethal version of the bad seed, Clifford is seriously disappointed when his Uncle Martin (Charles Grodin) postpones a promised visit to Dinosaurworld, a theme park whose most thrilling ride, Larry the Scary Rex, Martin happened to design.
Clifford, as usual, confides his plans for revenge to Steffen, the toy dinosaur he carries around.
The dinosaur angle may not have been what the film makers had in mind, but at this point they should take what they can get.
"Clifford" is more a stunt than a movie.


Angelo Pinto, 85, Painter and Teacher
Angelo Pinto, a painter who taught for nearly six decades at the Barnes Foundation in Merion, Pa., died on March 11.
He was 85.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter, Jody Pinto.


Honors
Raymond W. Smith, chairman and chief executive of Bell Atlantic Corp.; J.W.
Marriott Jr., chairman and president of Marriott International Inc., and Jay Van Andel and Rich DeVos, founhders of Amway Corp., were named this year's recipients of the Edison Achievement Awards form the American Marketing Association.
The awards will be presented on April 14 at a dinner in New York.


People With AIDS Set Up 'Death Watch' Outside City Hall


In Michigan School-Tax Shift, the Poor Lose
To the Editor:
As you indicate in "Fairer Schooling for Michigan" (editorial, March 18), the school reform measure in Michigan -- to finance public schools by sales and other taxes, rather than property taxes -- was successful because there was something in it for both conservatives and liberals, or so they believe.


A Bittersweet Graduation as Fallen Firefighters Are Mourned
The red-and-white fireboat drifted southward, a tiny dot hundreds of feet from the pier, spraying seven plumes of water that feathered into spindrifts and fell faintly into the Hudson River.
At the same time, the fireboat blew long, low notes on its horn.
Officially, the fireboat was part of the festivities yesterday at a graduation ceremony for 200 new firefighters for New York City.
But three days after a fire in SoHo killed two firefighters and critically injured a third, it was not hard to imagine that if the boat was shooting up water for the living, it was wailing for the dead.


In Michigan School-Tax Shift, the Poor Lose; To Raise, Not to Lower
To the Editor:
"Fairer Schooling for Michigan" (editorial, March 18) states that, "On average, the proportion of school aid coming from the states has gradually increased from about 40 percent to 50 percent, while the proportion of aid coming from localities has dropped from 50 to 40."


Review/Film; A Gullible Reporter And a Seductive Killer
Will Patton, an actor who specializes in playing angelic-looking rebels with twisted psyches, has a role that seems almost custom-made for him in Howard Libov's "Midnight Edition." In this moody but confusing psychological thriller, Mr.
Patton portrays Jack Travers, a hot-headed journalist for a small-town Georgia newspaper.
No sooner has Jack returned to his sleepy Georgia hometown from a two-year job in Miami than he happens onto a career-making story.
Shortly after Darryl Weston (Michael DeLuise), a disturbed 19-year-old, slays a family of three for no apparent reason, Jack pounces on the case.
After Darryl is apprehended, tried and sentenced to the electric chair, Jack approaches him on death row for a series of soul-baring interviews.
In one of those details that lend the movie a fine naturalistic edge, Darryl agrees so long as Jack brings him his favorite dish, broiled shrimp with garlic butter, on each visit.


Mideast Peace, Back on Track
Yesterday's agreement in Cairo between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization promises to recapture the lost momentum toward peace.
The two sides agreed to resume peace talks, deploy international monitors in troubled Hebron and speed the Israeli troop withdrawals from Gaza and Jericho as provided in the September framework peace accords.
Extremists on both sides protested.
Militant Palestinians object that some 450 Jewish settlers are still permitted to live amid the 80,000 Arabs of the Hebron area.
Hard-line Israelis worry about the precedent set by admitting outside observers to territory where Israel claims authority.
Months of delay and violence have clearly swelled the ranks of skeptics on both sides.
Yet if violence and delay have become the main threats to peace, the security measures and accelerated timetable worked out in Cairo are the right response.


Spring Ritual In Albany: Lots of Talk, No Budget
New York State began its fiscal year this morning without a budget, the 10th consecutive year that has happened, as negotiations between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Legislature remained deadlocked over a broad range of issues.
Despite a full day of furious negotiations yesterday, Mr.
Cuomo and leaders of the Democratic-controlled Assembly and Republican-controlled Senate could not agree on even the broad outlines of a budget by midnight, as they had hoped.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Hillary Rodham Clinton's profits from commodity trading in the 1970's misstated the nature of margin trades in commodities.
Trading on the margin in commodities means putting down a small percentage of the value of the contract as a deposit on the contract, not buying the contract with borrowed money.


Twins Release Larkin
GENE LARKIN, whose 10th-inning, pinch single won the seventh game of the 1991 World Series for Minnesota, was released by the Twins from a minor league contract.


Art in Review
Mitch Epstein
Julie Saul Gallery  560 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through April 9
The people in Mitch Epstein's new color photographs, taken in Vietnam, Cambodia and Japan, seem always lost in reverie.
For the most part, Mr.
Epstein forgoes attempts to explain life in that country in favor of images of people alone, glimpsed on the street or in stores or homes.


Smith, With Brace, Expected to Return Soon
Charles Smith is equipped with a new knee brace and is almost ready to return to action.
The question is: Do the Knicks need him right now?


Play Me or Pay Me: A Young Quarterback Sues
Hyperbole is part of the fabric of sports.
Claims that a collegiate basketball player is the next Michael Jordan reflect the outsized hopes of a coach.
In baseball, Sparky Anderson, the Detroit Tigers' manager, has long been a master at puffing up the skills of young players.
And if reality fails to fulfill the billing -- if the coach later concludes that the player he described as a priceless diamond is really just zircon, or simply that the team has someone better -- so what?
After all, the savior-turned-benchwarmer can't sue, can he?


In the N.F.L., It Is Now First Down and the Coaches Go
A pro football owner and his coach clashed.
The owner thought the coach talked too much.
The coach thought the owner talked too much.
Often they talked at each other instead of to each other.
Bruised feelings simmered.
The coach had to go.


CHRONICLE
JULIAN OSTROVER said that he "very possibly" had entered his name in a drawing at the Park Avenue Cafe, but that quite honestly, he couldn't remember doing so.
Well, if that's what happens with lapsed memories, let's all line up.
Mr.
Ostrover's name was plucked yesterday from among 10,000, making him the winner of a weeklong expense-paid trip for two to Paris and the wine country of France.
The drawing was open to patrons of the Upper East Side restaurant who during 1993 had ordered a swordfish chop.


6 or More States to Flout New Federal Law On Paying for Incest or Rape Abortions
At least a half-dozen states said today that they were flouting a new Federal order to pay for abortions for low-income women in cases of rape or incest.
The Clinton Administration said there would be no immediate penalty for violating the law, which went into effect today.
Ray Hanley, the chairman of the State Medicaid Directors' Association, said that Arkansas, South Dakota, Louisiana, Kentucky, Utah, Oklahoma and an unknown number of other states were not covering abortions for rape or incest.
Mr.
Hanley is also the Medicaid director of Arkansas.


Cortines Rejects Giuliani Request On New York School Budget Cuts
Refusing to meet Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's target on budget cuts, New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday said that he would dismiss only 700 Board of Education employees, far less than the 2,500 the Mayor had sought.
Mr.
Cortines also said he would save money by eliminating busing for sixth graders and cutting back on school lunches, both proposals that contradicted City Hall's request that no services affecting children be trimmed.


Archivist Candidate Withdraws
Robert L. Hardesty, once a White House aide to President Lyndon B. Johnson, has withdrawn his candidacy as Archivist of the United States in the face of protests from professional historians and archivists who opposed his appointment as political.
"I met with senior staff at the White House early this month and we discussed some of the opposition to my candidacy," Mr.
Hardesty said in an interview Wednesday.
"I told them I didn't want to make life any more difficult for President Clinton."


Review/Opera; Wagner's Dutchman, Anguishing At the Met
Winter Storm No. 18 or thereabouts roared through the Metropolitan Opera House on Wednesday evening with the return of August Everding's dark, chill production of Wagner's "Fliegende Hollander." Coming just as the winter outside was beginning to recede into cursed memory, all the ice and snow and fog and wind seemed exceedingly cruel.
The production, introduced in 1989, was last seen two years ago.
Hans Schavernoch's sets rely on a few bold strokes: first, large icy cliffs, and then the vast metal prow of the Flying Dutchman's ghost vessel looming behind the glazed platform of Daland's ship; a ceiling in Daland's house seemingly pulled low by pillars to suggest domesticity despite great size.


Philip Morris Blocked '83 Paper Showing Tobacco Is Addictive, Panel Finds
In 1983, five years before the Surgeon General declared that nicotine was an addictive substance, researchers for a tobacco company drew the same conclusion.
Their paper was accepted for publication in a scientific journal, but the company forced the author to withdraw it, the journal's editor said today.
The study, which tested addiction in rats, was done by Dr.
Victor J. DeNoble, who was working at the Philip Morris Companies, and his colleagues, and was to be published in the journal Psychopharmacology.
Experts on nicotine and addiction said the paper would have been the first and best of its kind at the time, an important addition to research on the addictive properties of nicotine.


Review/ Recital; Coaxing Out The Music That's Hiding In the Chaos
Sometime during Marc Ponthus's performance of Karlheinz Stockhausen's "Klavierstuck X" on Wednesday night, at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater at Columbia University, something happened that is all too rare in performances of Mr.
Stockhausen's works: the music began to make sense.
This wasn't because Mr.
Ponthus had succeeded in revealing the almost esoteric order that Mr.
Stockhausen gave his 10th piano piece; that order remained hidden, unclear to the ear.
Instead, Mr.
Ponthus, equipped with fingerless cloth gloves to protect his hands from the composition's unruly demands for pianistic sweeps and slides, made that order seem simply irrelevant.


Body of Man Suspected of Killing His Heiress Wife Is Discovered
Three months after Anne Scripps Douglas, an heiress to a newspaper fortune, was bludgeoned to death, a decomposed body found on the Bronx bank of the Hudson River was identified as that of her husband and accused murderer, Scott S. Douglas.
The discovery closed a case that had surprised Bronxville, where the Douglases lived, and also brought relief to Mrs.
Douglas's relatives.
They had said at several news conferences and in interviews that they believed Mr.
Douglas was still alive and might reappear to hurt them or kidnap the Douglases' 3-year-old daughter, Victoria.


Easter's Coats of Many Colors; The Nuances of Culture Reflect the Ritual of Rebirth
It is Eastertime.
And so there will be a taste of Latin American tradition in the streets of East Harlem, where the faithful will walk the Way of the Cross.
Many of Polish descent will not eat their kielbasa and bread without the blessing of their pastor.
On Sunday, a church in Chinatown will be draped in banners of white and gold.
And a Dominican woman named Ana will baptize her youngest child.
All because they say He has risen.
Easter Sunday is the most important holiday on the Christian calendar.
This week, more than 1.5 million New Yorkers will celebrate the day they believe Jesus Christ rose from the dead after being crucified at Calvary.


Companies Cut Back New Issues
Frightened by the prospect of rising interest rates and economic uncertainty, American corporations' appetite for cash from the public markets decreased in the first three months of this year, and in turn, investment firms saw their fees drop.
The pullback, while slight, is the first after 13 quarters of increasing demand for public cash and is perhaps the strongest sign yet that Wall Street's biggest and longest payday in history may be drawing to a close.


Disabled to Get an Extra Chance for S.A.T.'s
Justice Department officials yesterday announced a settlement with the company that administers the S.A.T. to give disabled students an extra chance to take the revised test this school year.
The settlement, which gives disabled students two additional test dates, came just weeks after the Clinton Administration began an investigation into whether the New Jersey-based Educational Testing Service and the College Entrance Examination Board, which owns the test, were in violation of the Americans With Disabilities Act.


Addington Resources Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Reviews/Film Festival; A Satire And Comic Thriller From Chile
"Johnny 100 Pesos" is a Chilean "Dog Day Afternoon" with less flamboyant characters.
A nervous teen-ager named Johnny Garcia walks into a video rental club in a high-rise building.
The club is really a front for an illegal foreign-money exchange, and Johnny is no innocent himself.
He pulls a gun out of his brightly colored school backpack and lets several older, more obviously threatening cohorts into the room.
Before they can escape with the cash, the police are alerted, the robbers become accidental hostage-holders and the entire incident is broadcast live on television.
With armed police on the streets and venomous reporters at the door, Johnny flirts with Gloria, the money-changer's seductive secretary and lover.
Based on an actual botched-and-broadcast robbery that took place in Santiago in 1990, the film is an effective satire of the news media and even makes some glancing political comments.
But "Johnny 100 Pesos" works best as a smart thriller with dark comic undertones.


Scandal Threatens Japan Premier's Hold on Power
With his coalition Government already pulling apart at the seams, Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa has been plunged into a new crisis over questionable financial transactions that pose an increasingly serious threat to his precarious hold on power.
For days now Mr.
Hosokawa, who was elected last year because of his image as a clean outsider ready to change the corrupt world of Tokyo politics, has been forced to answer questions about his financial dealings while he was governor of one of Japan's southern prefectures.
There are widespread suspicions, which Mr.
Hosokawa denies, that he received a $1 million loan from a trucking company now in the center of other political scandals and diverted it to a secret political fund.


Aracruz Celulose S.A. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


'Jeanne d'Arc' Oratorio
Honegger's rarely heard dramatic oratorio "Jeanne d'Arc au Bucher" is to be given three performances by the New York Philharmonic, Wednesday through Friday at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The work, a setting of Paul Claudel's poem, was completed in 1936 with a prologue added after World War II.
Featured will be the Swiss actress Marthe Keller in the speaking role of Jeanne and David Wilson-Johnson as Frere Dominique.
The singers are Heidi Grant Murphy, soprano; Wendy Hoffman and D'Anna Fortunato, mezzo-sopranos; John Aler, tenor, and Nathaniel Watson, bass-baritone.
The concerts will be conducted by Kurt Masur and are to begin with a monologue, "Literary Aspects of Joan," read by the actress Claire Bloom.
Tickets are $10 to $55.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


German Pressure on Europe Unsettles 2 Partners
With the French and British governments weakened by domestic political troubles, German pressure to restore momentum toward closer European union has helped drive Prime Minister John Major's Conservative Government into crisis and made French officials nervous.
German willingness to use diplomatic muscle in recent weeks has shown that despite its own economic weakness and a national election looming in October, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government is determined to advance Germany's interests in Europe, even if that makes its weaker neighbors uneasy.


Osgood to Replace Kuralt
Charles Osgood is to replace Charles Kuralt as host of the CBS News program "Sunday Morning," the network announced yesterday.
Mr.
Kuralt is stepping down after tomorrow's broadcast and retiring after 37 years with CBS News.
Mr.
Osgood, who has been an anchor and correspondent with CBS television and radio for 23 years, is to take over the program on April 10.


Zulu Men Train for a Battle South Africa Hopes to Avoid
After a month camped among the thorn trees alongside the world's most famous rhinoceros sanctuary, the eager Zulu men were piling into trucks and buses, taking their new skills home.
"Normally we have a ceremony," apologized Philip Powell, the white South African who commands the training camp, 25 miles from the capital of the Zulu homeland.
"Under the circumstances, these people really want to get back to their communities to do what they were trained to do."


Classical Music in Review
Andreas Klein Pianist Kathryn Bache Miller Theater


CHRONICLE
The model CHRISTIE BRINKLEY had a brush with disaster yesterday, when the helicopter carrying her and five others crashed near Ophir, Colo., about six miles south of Telluride.
Ms.
Brinkley suffered minor injuries.
The party was trapped 12,800 feet up on a mountain for five hours before a rescue helicopter could make it through the strong winds.
One man in the group, who was not identified, was taken to a hospital in Grand Junction.
The others, Ms.
Brinkley, who is married to the singer Billy Joel; SANDRA CARRADINE, the ex-wife of Keith Carradine; the pilot; a guide, and another skier, were flown back to Telluride.


Jobs Data Push Rates Up Sharply
Long-term interest rates climbed to their highest point in 14 months yesterday, as traders rushed to sell Treasury securities after the Government reported that the growth in jobs in March was far stronger than expected.
Trading was very thin in a short Good Friday session, exaggerating the price moves.
Several analysts called the selloff an overreaction and were quick to question how much the surge in interest rates reflected the market's underlying sentiment.


Saving More Children
Could Shayna Bryant have been saved?
Her parents have been charged in the death this week of the 4-year-old.
But even before a jury determines guilt or innocence, officials are asking whether New York City's Human Resources Administration protected Shayna to the best of its ability.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has sought a review of the case.
And, in a welcome departure from some previous administrations, the H.R.A. has acknowledged that it is conducting an internal investigation.
But even if it wanted to publicize the results, the state's confidentiality law prohibits disclosure -- and inhibits accountability.
Mr.
Giuliani could provide a better legacy for Shayna Bryant by campaigning for reform.


County Seeks Gag Order for Lawyers in Rail-Shooting Trial
Several weeks after the lawyers William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby brought their high-profile approach to the defense of Colin Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people aboard a commuter train, the Nassau County District Attorney has requested a gag order for all lawyers involved in the case.
In a memorandum to the court, the District Attorney, Denis Dillon, said Mr.
Kunstler and Mr.
Kuby have "fueled the media's interest" in the case and "sought to influence public opinion by publicizing 'their side of the story.' "


Business Digest
The Economy  More Americans found jobs in March than in any month in six years, the Labor Department reported.
The economy generated 456,000 new jobs in March, nearly twice the growth that analysts had expected.
The price of the long-bond dropped, but the decline may have been exaggerated by the absence of many investors on Good Friday.
There is still time to put money into a tax-deferred retirement plan.  [ 34. ]


Corrections
An article yesterday about the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission's refusal to grant a fare increase to cab owners described the requested increase incorrectly.
The owners requested 16.4 percent, not an unspecified amount.
The article also misstated the commission's age.
It is 23, not 33.


Many Markets Were Closed
The stock market was closed in the United States yesterday in observance of Good Friday.
Many overseas markets were also closed.
There was limited trading in the cash and futures markets for Treasury securities.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Classical Music in Review
New Juilliard Ensemble  Juilliard Theater
With the breaks required for complicated reseatings between pieces, the six works presented on Thursday by Joel Sachs and the New Juilliard Ensemble made for a long evening.
So it may seem odd to complain that Henrik Strindberg's "Etymology," of 1990, came up a little short.
Mr.
Strindberg's inventiveness and structural sense made much of an unpromising conceit: trying to find musical equivalents for computer terms.
But after two strong, longish movements, the piece tailed off into a motley, suitelike series, including solos for piano and harp.


Trico Products Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Research on Animals Saves Human Lives
To the Editor:
Bina Robinson says (letter, March 19) that we can glean nothing more from animal experiments than that a foreign substance has, under given conditions, produced a certain reaction in an animal.
She should tell that to the millions of diabetes patients whose lives insulin has saved.


GIULIANI SECURES UP TO $200MILLION FOR BUYOUT PLAN
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani pledged yesterday to cut 15,000 jobs in the next 15 months, and in exchange the Municipal Assistance Corporation gave him $200 million to finance his severance plan to get about half of those workers to leave.
By winning the use of the $200 million surplus, Mr.
Giuliani did what his predecessor, David N. Dinkins, and other officials had not been able to do since the surplus developed in 1990.
In fact, the corporation has until now resisted several efforts to use the money, including a plan by Mr.
Dinkins to pay for early retirements for workers in 1992 and a proposal by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to use it for education.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ANDOVER BANK, a wholly owned subsidiary of Andover Bancorp Inc., Andover, Mass., has completed its acquisition of Community Savings Bank for undisclosed terms.
COMMUNITY FIRST BANKSHARES INC., Blountsville, Ala., has completed the acquisition of Bank of Spooner, Spooner, Wis., the Ada National Bank, Ada, Minn., and Grand National Bank Colorado, Fraser, Colo.
Terms were not disclosed.
WARNER BOOKS, New York, a unit of Time Warner Inc., has acquired a 25 percent stake in Reference Press Inc., Austin, Tex., a business and economic reference software concern.
Terms were not disclosed.


A Bypass Trust Provides for a Widow, Then Children
Dr.
Charles E. Huggins, a physician, hospital administrator and teacher in the Boston area, learned a few years ago that he had an incurable form of cancer.
As part of an estate plan, he set up a will with a bypass trust.
He had multiple goals; to provide tfor the education of his grandchildren, to supply a steady income for his wife of two years, Garreth W. Huggins, and to preserve some of his estate for his children after her death.
Finally, he wanted to minimize estate taxes, which top out at 60 percent.


Two Rookie Pitchers Make Dodgers' Staff
Two rookie pitchers, CHAN HO PARK and DARREN DREIFORT, have made the Los Angeles Dodgers' opening day roster, General Manager FRED CLAIRE said last night.


Giving Russians a Taste of Jackpots
Ross B. Scheer and Michael R. Siegel wince every time they hear another story about the risks of doing business in the former Soviet Union.
It only makes it that much more difficult to convince potential investors that gambling itself, specifically their enterprise of running instant lotteries, stands a good chance of hitting the jackpot.
"I've never seen a region so accepting of such activities; there are no moral or legal inhibitions," said Mr.
Scheer, a 63-year-old Brooklyn native whose resume includes 15 years with the Bally Manufacturing Corporation marketing slot machines and other gambling products in America, Australia and Asia.
"This could be a $1 billion business in five years," he added. 20 Million Tickets Sold
That sounds like an unbelievable annual take from a collection of states currently riven by conflict and poverty, not to mention being tangled in bureaucracy and corruption that routinely undermines the investment strategies of the world's most powerful multinational corporations.
But Mr.
Scheer and Mr.
Siegel, who set up the International Lottery and Gaming Corporation here about a year ago, say they have already managed to sell nearly 20 million tickets in 150 communities in the former Soviet Union.
And their market projection is conservative, says the 50-year-old Mr.
Siegel, who is International Lottery's president, chief operating officer and landlord (his suburban Chicago home is the company headquarters).
"To put it in perspective, the Illinois Lottery gets $1.5 billion from a population of 12 million, or about $2 per person per week," Mr.
Siegel said.
"We figure on getting the equivalent of 4 cents per person per week."
The story of how two entrepreneurs got this far -- and where they dream of going -- might dismay those who believe that the struggling former Communist states need innovative gambling about as much as they need cancer-promoting Western cigarettes.
But it also provides a revealing glimpse of the power of Western-style marketing and the way in which skillful business people can find opportunities where corporate giants sometimes struggle.
International Lottery advertises unique prizes, like trips to the United States or electronic goods, that are otherwise hard to obtain in many of the areas where its tickets are sold.
And although fewer than 2 percent of players win a prize worth more than their tickets, which cost from about 25 cents to $1, two-thirds of the tickets win something, compared with about one-fourth in a typical instant-winner American state lottery.
The percentage of the proceeds paid out, about 50 percent, is about average for an American lottery.
The International Lottery tickets that do not win a prize still have a residual value as coupons that can be redeemed, albeit in large quantities, for small items like toothbrushes.
The Beginning
International Lottery is 51 percent owned by International Business and Communications Inc., a privately held television, telecommunications and trading concern in Los Angeles headed by Robert Block, whom Mr.
Scheer knew from his Bally days.
Mr.
Block called Mr.
Scheer when one of his subsidiaries was asked by Russian partners to help set up television-based lotteries and game shows in the Russian city of Tyumen.
Mr.
Scheer, who had just sold a gambling-technology business developed with Mr.
Siegel to the Gaming Group in Los Angeles, quickly concluded that the region's telecommunications and distribution infrastructure was too unreliable for such a venture.
But Mr.
Scheer was convinced that a lottery business could be built by starting with simpler instant-winner ticket games, and he quickly recruited Mr.
Siegel.
"It's theirs to run," Mr. Block said.
International Lottery and Gaming chose Chelyabinsk, a formerly closed city at the base of the Ural Mountains in the heart of Russia's electronics region, as the headquarters for a test run of two million tickets.
The local partners, owning 50 percent of the venture, were led by the Globx-Urals Medical and Health Company, a hospital designated by the provincial government to represent its interests and receive a portion of the proceeds.
Even before the experiment was finished, International Lottery had embarked on similar joint ventures with influential local groups across the region.
Its partner in Belarus is the state railroad; in Armenia, the powerful teachers' union; in Latvia, a large publisher, and in St.
Petersburg, a local manufacturer run by a former district attorney.
In Uzbekistan, the local ownership group includes the state bank.
The local partners were not the only ones impressed by International Lottery's plans.
Last spring, Mr.
Scheer and Mr.
Siegel chartered a jet and took a group of officials from Philips N.V., the big consumer electronics company in the Netherlands, to several cities.
Mr.
Scheer and Mr.
Siegel, in return for featuring Philips products as prizes, wanted Philips to help outfit ticket redemption centers where prize winners could look through catalogues and trade up for more expensive products like television sets and compact disk players or buy goods on their own.
"What we saw was more or less what they said," said J. H. Van Zijl, the Philips regional manager who signed a preliminary agreement to test the concept in Chelyaminsk and Gomel, a city in Belarus.
"They had the contacts. If certain volumes are reached, we'll nominate their local people as nonexclusive agents." Links to Retailing
Philips sees the arrangement as an unorthodox but potentially attractive way to accelerate its penetration of the former Soviet Union.
International Lottery sees the relationship with Philips as a way to show other potential partners how retailing could be linked to the lotteries' sales and distribution network.
International Lottery has invested more than $2 million so far, according to Mr.
Scheer.
It says it has employed more than 20,000 people, most as sales personnel who get a 10 percent commission.
Some of the lotteries provide a portion of their revenue to the local police to use in buying equipment, to hospitals for medicine and to charities.
International Lottery expects its own cut of the proceeds will average at least 10 percent.
Much of the $2 million investment will be lost though unless International Lottery gets the new capital needed to continue growing.
As other businesses have, International Lottery has found that getting money out of the region is not a straightforward process.
Revenues were returned from Uzbekistan by way of a deal in which International Lottery bought Soviet tractors that the Uzbekis wanted but had not been able to obtain, then traded them for Uzbeki cotton purchased with lottery revenues.
The cotton was sold for rubles which were then converted to dollars.
Mr.
Scheer and Mr.
Siegel are not the only entrepreneurs out to cash in on the escapist fantasies of the beleaguered citizens of the former Soviet Union.
Global Casinos Inc., a publicly traded company based in Dallas, has opened casinos in Kyrgyzstan and Sochi, a Russian vacation town on the Black Sea, and has others under construction in Russia and Belarus.
Capital to develop the entertainment and gambling market is also pouring in from Europe.
Some Worries
Some experts warn that the explosion in gambling, apparently driven in part by local mobsters, contains the seeds of its own destruction.
"A political backlash is building," said Stephen F. Cohen, director of Russian studies at Princeton University.
So far, though, there is no sign of that in the lottery sector, where International Lottery's main competitors are old-line state-run games that have a reputation for being both rigged and staid.
"Russians tell us the commissar's daughter always seems to win," Mr.
Scheer said.
Mr.
Scheer says security has not been a problem to date, in part because several lotteries make donations to local police forces.
To avoid any possibility of corruption in the ticket printing process, International Lottery has all tickets printed at a plant in Bellwood, Ill., that handles similar jobs for American lotteries.
"You may have to give a forklift operator a few rubles to get the tickets off the plane quickly but we really haven't had to pay anyone off," Mr.
Siegel said.
"If our partners are doing anything like that, we don't support it and we don't know about it."


For a Few Lucky Motorists, Guidance by Satellite
You couldn't get lost in Larchmont, not with Jim Shevlin on the other end of the cellular phone.
Even if you had never been here before, even if you couldn't tell the Hutch from the Cross County, the Taconic from the Tappan Zee, Mr.
Shevlin could make you feel like a Magellan of the interstates, at ease on Westchester County roads whose names you did not know.
"O.K., now you're on North Chatsworth," Mr.
Shevlin reported with uncanny accuracy from his computer console in an office 20 miles away.
"Come down approximately three-tenths of a mile, and we're going to get you to an intersection by the New England Thruway, heading north."


Empirically, Lady Techsters Favored
The college basketball season runs from the end of November until, for those good enough and lucky enough to survive, the first week of April.
But for Louisiana Tech, a perennial power in the women's game, this season could have ended before Christmas.
Eleven days apart, the Lady Techsters lost by 22 points to Alabama and 34 points to Tennessee.
But instead of letting his team fold, Coach Leon Barmore has rallied it to 24 victories in a row.
Now it is 30-3 and two victories away from the national championship.


Tobacco Politics Falters Even in Congress
Representative Jack Brooks, the Texas Democrat who heads the House Judiciary Committee, ran a recent committee meeting with expansive waves of a big cigar.
Smoking may be politically incorrect in many places, but Capitol Hill is not one of them.


Who's on Third? Velarde. Who's in Left? Velarde.
After Don Mattingly, Randy Velarde is second in seniority on the Yankees, a fact that means something on a club where the future is always now.
"It's kind of humbling, I'd have to say," the infielder/outfielder/emergency catcher said today before the Yankees played the Boston Red Sox in a night exhibition game in the Superdome.
"My versatility by far is my strongest asset, and I'm sure it's a big reason I'm still here."


Budget Deal in Albany
Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders announced an agreement on the outlines of a $34 billion state budget, but broke for the holiday weekend without actually enacting it or even providing details of their plan.
Article, page 22


Ritual Killer? Or an Officer Wronged?
With his tough-guy mustache and reflecting sunglasses, Sgt.
James Brown was always on the prowl for criminals in this East Texas town.
When someone stole $100 of brisket from the Bodacious Bar-B-Q, Sergeant Brown tracked down the culprit -- and the beef -- within hours.
When a man pulled a knife at the Stop A Minit convenience market, Debbie Little pushed the panic button under the counter.
Sergeant Brown sped to the scene and chased the suspect on foot through town.
"He came back all muddy," Ms.
Little recalled, "but he got the guy."


Review/Music; Mahler's 9th: Just a Matter of Time
The regret I felt after Thursday night's performance of Mahler's Ninth Symphony, led by Kurt Masur in Avery Fisher Hall, was that I had heard the first New York Philharmonic concert devoted to this endlessly astonishing piece, and not the ones being offered tonight and Monday.
There was so much that worked in the performance, so much that was taut and magnificently rendered, that it seemed a shame that the whole did not quite cohere.
But it also seemed that all that was needed was a few more performances to work out matters of detail, tone and structure.
The promise of these concerts could be heard in the final movement, Mahler's most haunting Adagio, which invokes kitsch and sentimentality, sarcasm and mockery, only to subsume them into an extended hymn that in its final pages can suspend the motion of time.
Here Mr.
Masur shaped arching, heartfelt phrases, allowing the movement to become a long, tragic sigh.
There was no straining for effect; the music emerged with a straightforward sincerity.


After Fed Moves, the Quarter Ends Badly for Many Stocks
After playing host at a three-year party for the stock market, the Federal Reserve Board in the first quarter did what its former chairman, William McChesney Martin, once said the central bank inevitably had to do: It took away the punch bowl.
Not surprisingly, stocks were not ready for the music to stop when the Fed on Feb. 4 nudged up short-term interest rates, making it more expensive to borrow money.
A second move by the Fed to raise short-term rates on March 22 only made it worse.


N.C.A.A. Tournament; Four Teams With One Goal Yet to Go
They have heard, for years, about The Road to this place.
They watched teams of the past make similar journeys, all the way to the climax of the college basketball season, and wondered what the trip would be like.
And now that they have survived to this point in an unpredictable season -- with Arkansas, Arizona and Florida in search of their first national championship and Duke trying for a third one in four years -- four semifinalists are left with the hope of a memorable weekend.
Arkansas will meet Arizona late Saturday afternoon (Channel 2 at 5:42 P.M.), before first-time semifinalist Florida opposes Duke to determine the Monday night finalists of the national collegiate tournament.
Metal Detectors at the Gates
An event that did not become the anticipated coronation of the 1993 champion North Carolina Tar Heels includes just one of the four teams seeded No. 1 in the regionals -- the Razorbacks of Arkansas, who are expected to receive the support of President Clinton.
The involvement of the President, who watched the Razorbacks win the Midwest championship last Sunday in Dallas, has given this tournament a fan of unusually high profile, and has created the need for metal detectors at the gates of the Charlotte Coliseum.
"As long as he shakes my hand, it'll be all right," said Reggie Geary, a sophomore guard from Arizona and one of the defensive strengths of the Wildcats.
"I just want to meet him."
The Razorbacks, 29-3, are a more experienced version of the young team that made 12 of 20 3-point shots to overcome Arizona's zone defenses in an 86-80 victory over the Wildcats in December 1992.
"I don't think you'll see zones tomorrow," said Damon Stoudamire, the junior guard who directs the Wildcat offense.
"They just killed us. They hit a lot of 3-pointers. They had quick hands. Their press kind of affected us a little bit. We really didn't play that well. I think with the team that we have this year, it's totally different." High Speed and High Scoring
Arizona, 29-5, overcame several recent tournament disappointments to become convincing winners of the West Regional.
With Stoudamire and Khalid Reeves emerging as one of the leading backcourt combinations in the country, the Wildcats have won 12 of their last 13 games by making 49.7 percent of their shots and holding the opposition to 39.6 percent.
Their quick-paced, full-court approach could challenge an Arkansas team that has been comfortable at that speed and could result in a game that threatens the record of 197 combined points in a national semifinal game. (The record was set in 1965 in U.C.L.A.'s 108-89 victory over Wichita State.)
Florida, 29-7, has extended the greatest season in its 75-year history by filling the void created by North Carolina's unexpected second-round defeat.
The first Final Four appearance of the Gators, just seven years after they reached this tournament for the first time, came as a result of East Regional victories over Connecticut and Boston College.
Not long after Coach Lon Kruger took over a program known more for its rules violations and improper conduct of players, he has established a team now recognized for its similarities to the respected Duke program led by Mike Krzyzewski.
The Message Is What Matters
"Any similarities would be interpreted as a huge compliment," Kruger said.
"We're playing a game. But he uses that opportunity to really develop and get across messages to his players that they can benefit from for the rest of their lives.
"That is the significance of what we're doing," Kruger said.
"Certainly, this is nice. This is big. This gets a lot of attention. But the experiences of our players from these opportunities, and how they use those later on, are really important." Capel Rushes to the Rescue
The Blue Devils, 27-5, were expected to take some time to adjust to the loss of graduated point guard Bobby Hurley.
Senior Grant Hill and freshman Jeff Capel have played key roles in the adjustment.
"We've had a good team without knowing who our guards were," said Krzyzewski.
"Whenever I've had a problem, I've always put Grant in that position. For a lot of the year he has been that guard, but you wouldn't really call him a guard. So now with Jeff emerging as he has, even though we're in the tournament, we're changing a little bit."
Krzyzewski chuckled at the idea, then added: "And I'm giving him a little more responsibility, because I think he can handle it now. And I think that's been the strength of our program. We've been willing to change, even late in the year and in the N.C.A.A. tournament to take advantage of the strengths of our players. Now we have the best guard play we've had all year, and we actually have people that we call guards." Stronger by the Game
Led by Hill, the all-America, Duke became stronger in the last several weeks because of the improved play of center Cherokee Parks and forward Tony Lang, as well as the emergence of Capel.
"We haven't really had a true center," Krzyzewski said.
"So Cherokee has taken more of a normal progression to become an outstanding player. I've seen him, in the last month, be more vocal. You'd be surprised at all levels at how little big guys talk. And so if they can talk, and say something that's really good for their teammates, it has a tremendous impact on the team."


Like Father, Like Son: It's Set in Cement


Tillman Is Bound for Bears
Barring a last-minute development, the Giants have lost running back Lewis Tillman, an unrestricted free agent.
He has all but signed on the dotted line of a three-year, $2.85 million contract with the Chicago Bears, according to several people close to the situation.
Tillman made just under $500,000 with the Giants last season.
It is a big blow for the Giants, who lose some depth at the position, but the team cannot be expected to match such an offer for a player who would be a backup to the Pro Bowl runner Rodney Hampton.


Bomb Suspect Admits Guilt In Plea Bargain With U.S.
Earl Gant, one of 15 men charged in a conspiracy to bomb landmarks in New York City, pleaded guilty yesterday to a single charge of conspiring to carry explosives across state lines knowing they would be used to injure people or property.
At a hearing in Federal court in downtown Manhattan, Mr.
Gant, a stocky, 27-year-old vendor from Philadelphia who was considered a minor figure in the case, said that another defendant had called him last May and asked him to get "a large quantity of gunpowder."


Trans World Airlines Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Observer; They Egged Him On
I never believed in the Easter Bunny.
Even when I was just six months old and should have been extremely gullible, I knew that rabbits didn't lay hard-boiled eggs.
Too many people had already carried me out to the back yard where the chickens lived, and into the henhouse where the eggs had just been laid.
Those eggs were laid by chickens.


Jan Bell Marketing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Public Relations Lures Largely for Glamour
To the Editor:
Your article on the lure of a public relations career for students at journalism schools (March 17) reflects what I have discovered as an adjunct professor at one of these schools after 40 years as a public relations foot soldier: These students really are interested in the glamour of appearing on camera and want an acting career.
They have no concept of the talent, experience and hard work it takes to grind out effective annual reports, newsletters and press releases for products and services, which are the bulk of this work.
Many can't write, spell or punctuate properly.


Suspect in Manhattan Rapes Is Arrested in Miami
A suspect in a series of rapes that terrorized women in and around Stuyvesant Town this winter was arrested yesterday as he was visiting his sister in Miami.
Informers led the police to the suspect, Anthony Managas, 36, a Manhattan resident who had spent 10 years in jail in Dade County, Fla., for previous rapes, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Consumer's World page in The Home Section on Thursday about used exercise equipment misattributed a quotation about the current high supply of used exercise bikes and high demand for used Nordictracks and treadmills.
It was made by Frank Lotti, the owner of Replay Sports, an equipment resale shop in Groton, Conn., not by Robert E. L. Lennie, the vice president of Grow Biz International.


A Troubled Daughter Returns, Followed by Torment; Addict Whose Parents Kept Her in Chains Is Welcomed Home -- and Then Arrested
It is going on a month since Linda Marrero went home again.
On a weekend visit, she swore to stay out of trouble for good and begged her parents to let her stay.
And despite advice from counselors at the residential school for drug users where Linda had spent the last two years, Maria and Eliezer Marrero could not resist their 17-year-old daughter's pleas.
They wanted their baby back.


United Stationers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CHRONICLE
At Brown University they're planning a non-Brown event.
The administration is transporting a version of its famous Campus Dance to Grand Central Terminal on April 12.
The dance, which honors the graduating class, regularly attracts thousands of alumni, parents and other Brown partisans.
The idea of the traveling party is to raise funds for scholarships, VARTAN GREGORIAN, the president of the university, said yesterday from his office in Providence, R.I.
But why the move?


An Ex-Minister Atones To Return to Sikh Fold
Nearly 10 years after events at the Golden Temple in Amritsar enraged Sikhs across India and led to the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, one of the most powerful officials in Mrs.
Gandhi's Government has won forgiveness from the Sikhs' religious leadership by touring Sikh shrines performing menial acts of penance.
In a country where social and economic privilege is buttressed by a caste system, the acts of contrition performed by the former Home Affairs Minister, Buta Singh, have drawn widespread attention.
For eight weeks, he has swept floors and courtyards, washed dishes and dusted shoes at the Golden Temple and other Sikh shrines in northern India.


Topics of The Times; In Lowell Weicker's Wake
Connecticut Democrats had a brush with political death four years ago when their candidate for governor got just under 21 percent of the vote, in the three-way contest that elected Lowell Weicker.
Connecticut election law defines a "major party" by its tally in the last gubernatorial election.
By winning 20 percent of the vote, a party qualifies for automatic placement on the ballot for the next four years; anything less, and its candidates must round up thousands of signatures to get on by petition.


Flowers Before the April Showers


Hockey; Nothing to It: Richter Erases Giacomin's Record
The Rangers have a hot man in goal.
And they will need him as they battle the Devils for the most points over all and the best record in the National Hockey League.
Mike Richter recorded his fifth shutout and his 38th victory of the season -- breaking a 25-year-old club record held by Ed Giacomin -- as the Rangers defeated the Dallas Stars, 3-0, last night at Madison Square Garden.


Judge to Rule on Mets' Sign
Like a hapless base runner caught in a rundown between third and home plate, the New York Mets went to court yesterday to seek a way out of conflicting obligations to the city and Philip Morris in a longstanding dispute over a Shea Stadium billboard for Marlboro cigarettes.
The billboard in left-center field, an eyeful for television viewers and fans in the stadium, is a target of anti-smoking advocates.
They sued last year to force the city, as the owner of Shea Stadium, to remove it, saying it teaches children to associate smoking with athletic prowess.


An Earful The Public Didn't Hear But Guessed
When "Late Show With David Letterman" booked Madonna as a guest this week, "we all thought she was going to have fun with the lines Dave has gotten off about her," said Robert Morton, one of the show's executive producers.
"We certainly didn't expect what we got."
What Madonna delivered on Thursday night was a string of obscenities that had the CBS censors working overtime.


Leader of Italian Neo-Fascists Praises Mussolini
Four days after watershed elections brought his party into Italy's political mainstream for the first time, the leader of the neo-Fascist group within the victorious right-wing alliance was quoted today as praising Mussolini as "the greatest statesman of the century."
The remark by the party leader, Gianfranco Fini, in a published interview seems certain to deepen fears of a Fascist resurgence half a century after the enforcement of Mussolini's race laws and the deportation of thousands of Italian Jews to Nazi death camps in World War II.


Robert Doisneau Dies at 81; Photos Captured Gallic Spirit
Robert Doisneau, whose elegant black-and-white photographs seem the perfect embodiment of Gallic wit and romance, died yesterday at a hospital in Paris.
He was 81 and lived in Paris.
Mr.
Doisneau died of "acute pancreatic complications" after a heart-bypass operation on Oct. 7, said Evelyne Daitz, the director of the Witkin Gallery in Manhattan, which represents Mr.
Doisneau.


Hebron Plan for Foreign Force Sniped at From Two Sides
A planned force of lightly armed foreigners to patrol volatile Hebron was criticized today by many Israelis as going too far and by Palestinians as not going nearly far enough.
Palestinians across the political spectrum dismissed the agreement reached by Israel and the P.L.O. on a temporary force of 160 Norwegians, Danes and Italians as a palliative that will not provide real protection for residents of the West Bank town.


Amstar Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


American Greetings Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


A N.Y. Homecoming For Mets' Vizcaino
It's a wonder Jose Vizcaino didn't spend the day waiting for someone to shout "April Fool." Because, without a doubt, the shortstop's life has taken on a surreal quality in the two days since he learned that the Cubs had traded him to the Mets.
First, Vizcaino's elusive dream of winning a starting job went from improbable to certain with just one transaction, the one that sent Anthony Young to Chicago for Vizcaino on Wednesday.


Former Film Commissioner Is Named New Film Commissioner
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday brought back a former commissioner of the Mayor's film office in the Koch administration to head the office a second time.
The Mayor asked Patricia Reed Scott, a writer and former mayoral press secretary who ran the Mayor's Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting from 1983 to 1990, to step into her old job again at a time when a battered local film industry has begun to see signs of a recovery.


Blacks, Jews and Jazz
The American Symphony Orchestra is to present a concert exploring the musical links between blacks and Jews.
The program, on April 15 at 7:30 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall, is called "Common Ground: Jazz, African-American and Jewish-American Composers," and includes works by Ulysses Kay, Morton Gould, Florence Price, Louis Gruenberg, George Gershwin and Duke Ellington.
The featured soloist is the pianist Marcus Roberts; Leon Botstein conducts.
Tickets are $18 to $35.
A panel discussion on the concert's theme, free to ticketholders, is scheduled for 6 P.M. in the Bruno Walter Auditorium of the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Crime Levels Fell in 1993, Report Says
Contradicting a widespread perception that New York City is more violent than ever, the Police Department released its official 1993 crime statistics yesterday, which show that reported incidents of violent crime in the city decreased modestly for the third year in a row.
The 4 percent overall decline in seven major crime categories roughly follows the national trend, in which crime rose steadily through the 1980's, peaking around 1990.
Reported incidents of violent crime have declined about 10 percent across the country since 1990, but remain at much higher levels than 15 years ago, when the current, largely drug-induced crime wave began.


Review/Pop; From the Band, the Name and Sometimes the Sound
The chorus of Bruce Springsteen's "Atlantic City" declares, "Everything dies baby, that's a fact/But maybe everything that dies someday comes back." When the Band sang it at the Beacon Theater on Thursday night, it took on new resonances.
The Band officially retired with the 1976 concert and recording session of "The Last Waltz." Its main songwriter, Robbie Robertson, has severed connections with the group, and Richard Manuel, the Band's pianist and other songwriter, died in 1986.
But Levon Helm on drums, Rick Danko on bass and Garth Hudson on keyboards have held on to the Band name, and with three other musicians they released "Jericho" (Pyramid/Rhino) last year.
Longtime fans filled the Beacon, where they accepted songs from "Jericho" and stood and cheered for songs by the original Band.


Budget Deal Announced But Details Are Lacking
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders announced today that they had reached an agreement on the broad parameters of a $34 billion state budget, but then broke for the holiday weekend without actually enacting the budget or even providing details of their plan.
So for the 10th consecutive year, the state fiscal year started today without a budget in place, and there was no clear indication of when one would be adopted.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  REPORT OF HAITI VIOLENCE  International human rights observers say that a wave of political violence is accelerating in Haiti, and that it dates to the perceived failure of diplomatic efforts to restore democracy last fall. 1


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6-6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.56
4.18
3.13
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.60
3.47
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.91
3.79
2.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.93
6.73
6.15
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.26
7.08
7.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.95
7.95
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.36
6.36
6.04
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Headline
"What has changed in the last several years is the ascendance into power of younger Congressmen in key positions who are firmly on the side of the anti-smoking lobby." -- REPRESENTATIVE CHARLIE ROSE.  [ 1:2. ]


CHRONICLE
This is surely a banner year for JUDITH RODIN, the provost of Yale University.
On July 1, she will become president of the University of Pennsylvania, the first woman to head an Ivy League school.
On April 30, she will marry PAUL VERKUIL, the president of the American Automobile Association.
Her plans were divulged on Wednesday in The Daily Pennsylvanian, the campus newspaper.
Automobiles aside, the couple have a lot in common: he was president of the College of William and Mary and dean of the Tulane Law School.


In El Paso, a Reluctance To Buy Mexican Shares
WHEN David J. Lemaster, the manager of the Dean Witter office here, suggests that his clients get their feet wet in foreign markets, they could act on his advice by walking about 10 minutes south, the Rio Grande border patrol permitting.
But many in El Paso, having already invested in their own Mexican business ventures, are reluctant to place their savings on the same bet.
"Maybe because we've lived with some of the problems Mexico has experienced over the last 20 or 30 years," Mr.
Lemaster said with the calm, slow emphasis of one who's seen it all, "we might be more skeptical."


Walking and Praying for Peace


Women Continue Serving Up the Upsets
The sun continued to smile, the seeded players continued their steady drop toward oblivion, and the Family Circle Magazine Cup, which was never intended to be a showcase event for the stars of the future, continued to produce the unheralded at the expense of the familiar.
Only one of the top five players, Conchita Martinez, has successfully negotiated this minefield of upset artists and survived the quarterfinal round.
The second-seeded Martinez, who considers clay a comfort zone and has thus far found hers here this week, had little difficulty slipping, sliding and topspinning herself past an overmatched Ginger Helgeson, 6-1, 6-2.


A Childhood Past Is Woven Into a Robbery Plot of Now
The Slovenian film "When I Close My Eyes" doesn't aspire to much, but its reach still exceeds its grasp.
Made awkwardly in the manner of a psychological thriller, it presents the lonely Ana (Petra Govc), who becomes fascinated by the man who has robbed the post office where she works.
After she witnesses the robbery, Ana pockets some money the robber left behind and proceeds to get a better haircut and flashier clothes.
Razor-sharp police investigators notice this.
"Nice chick!" says one.
"But I've got a hunch she's mixed up in this."


Baker Gets Extension
DUSTY BAKER, named National League manager of the year in 1993 after leading the San Francisco Giants to 103 victories in his first year as a manager in the major leagues, signed a two-year contract extension yesterday that commits him to the team through 1996.


456,000 Jobs Added in March, Largest Payroll Gain in 6 Years
Rebounding strongly from the effects of harsh midwinter weather, the economy generated 456,000 new jobs in March, the largest expansion of employers' payrolls in more than six years and nearly twice the growth that analysts had expected, the Labor Department reported today.
At the same time, the unemployment rate, which is calculated from a separate survey of the nation's households, was unchanged at 6.5 percent, the department said.


Mayor Derides Cortines's School Cutbacks as Inadequate
A day after New York City Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines offered a new plan to cut costs at the Board of Education, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani derided the proposal, saying it did not attack the board's "bloated overhead" with sufficient vigor.
Aides to Mr.
Cortines, meeting yesterday to formulate responses to the Mayor's vehement remarks, said they were searching for new cost-cutting measures that would allow them to comply fully with Mr.
Giuliani's request for a $332 million decrease in the board's $7.5 billion budget.
But they repeated their contention that few additional reductions beyond cutting about 700 jobs and eliminating 500 vacant posts could be made at the board's central headquarters organization without throwing schools into chaos.


A Latin Strategy for Spain's Telephone Company
Barely three years ago, Spain's giant telephone monopoly looked like another corporate dinosaur facing extinction, as inevitable competition imposed by the European Union loomed in 2003.
Instead, Telefonica de Espana took a modest international subsidiary that once sold hardware, injected it with $824 million in capital and built it into a major player in the international communications world.
The subsidiary, Telefonica Internacional, has been snapping up Latin American acquisitions as soon as they come up on the privatization block and transforming them from chaos to profit-generating enterprises.


Review/Dance; 'Cinderella' for Youngsters
The New York Theater Ballet's production of "Cinderella" has returned to Gould Hall, where it will be performed through today as part of the company's 15th-anniversary Family Series.
The ballet will be followed in early May with performances of Edward Henkel's new "Magic Rose: A Tale of Beauty and the Beast." Both are aimed at young audiences.
The "Cinderella" story and Prokofiev score have been streamlined without losing important detail.
And the children at Gould Hall on Wednesday afternoon were clearly concentrating on the ballet before them.
There was a loud "yuck" from the audience when the Stepsisters kissed each other by mistake.
The sisters' outlandish party dresses drew some murmured commentary from the fashionably dressed youngsters, and the curtain calls drew a few careful cries of "bravo." But the ballet's intended audience was otherwise a model of quiet approval.


New York City Gained 92,000 Jobs Last Month
Employment in New York City increased sharply in March, but was little changed in New York State and New Jersey, the Labor Department said yesterday.
The employment data for the region reflected a less vigorous rate of economic expansion than for the nation as a whole.
Only in New York City, which gained 92,000 jobs, were the employment gains similar to the surge experienced nationally.
The department said 456,000 jobs were added nationwide last month.


Review/Film Festival; A Hero, 12, of Many Ambiguities
The title of "Child Murders" has a chilling double meaning.
A child is killed in this bleak and affecting film from Hungary, but the story also suggests how children's spirits can be deadened early on.
The hero, a somber 12-year-old boy named Zsolt, lives a hopeless life caring for his ailing grandmother in their tiny apartment.
When he takes violent action, is he acting out of some innate immorality?
Or is he another victim of a society that abandoned him?
The director, Ildiko Szabo, has created a precise and moving route to these larger questions.
The scenes of Zsolt painstakingly bathing his grandmother, singing to her and helping her put on her wig and makeup each morning are presented with an eerie fascination.
"It's morning," reads a sign Zsolt leaves on the blackboard for her.
"Everything is on the table." Each scene evokes pathos without sentimentality.
And the stark black-and-white photography creates the right mood for the child's painfully circumscribed condition.


Bridge
If students are majoring in bridge and something else, it is of some interest to know what the somethings are.
There are no statistics for North America but there are for Europe.
Fifty-five students competing in the European Community University Bridge Championship in September in Antwerp, Belgium, were polled with the following result: engineering 13; mathematics 10; economics 10; law 5; computing 5; earth sciences 4; medicine and chemistry 2 each; philosophy, languages and cinema 1 each.
None, be it noted, for business, architecture, psychology, history or literature.
An American poll would surely produce different results.


Sports of The Times; Ill-Defined Road to Glory
THE three days are the best 72 hours college basketball has to offer as fans descend on Charlotte to watch the four surviving teams battle to determine a national champion.
This afternoon, Coliseum doors open early and fans pour in to watch the teams work out: parents bringing sons and daughters, businessmen taking a break from work, the city alive handling the crush of a national championship gala.


China Arrests Leading Dissident For the Second Time in a Month
Seven carloads of Chinese security agents today stopped and arrested Wei Jingsheng, the most prominent dissident in China, as he was trying to return to Beijing by car after a month of self-imposed exile from the capital.
It was the second time Mr.
Wei has been taken into custody in a month.
Starting on March 4, he was held for about 30 hours.
It was not known how long he would be held this time.


Reults Plus
GOLF  Rookie With a Record  Dennis Paulson, a 31-year-old tour rookie, set a course record and tied the tournament record today with a 10-under-par 62 to take a one-stroke lead in the Freeport-McMorRan Golf Classic in New Orleans.
Jose Maria Olazabal and Ben Crenshaw were a stroke back after two rounds. (AP) Floyd, Gilbert, Coody Atop Board: Raymond Floyd and Gibby Gilbert took radically different routes in The Tradition in Phoenix yesterday to reach the same place at the top of the leader board with Charles Coody.
Floyd, who led Gilbert by one stroke after one round, shot a 70 and became the only player to make it through two rounds of the Senior PGA major tournament without a bogey.
In six holes starting with No. 6, Gilbert made five birdies, then gave back four shots on Nos. 12 through 14.
Coody's 67 made it a three-way tie. (AP) TENNIS  Sampras Helped by Serve  Top-seeded Pete Sampras slammed 14 service aces in upending Guillaume Raoux of France, 6-3, 6-3, yesterday to advance to the semifinals, and Michael Chang, seeded No. 2, was knocked out of the $650,000 Salem Open in Osaka, Japan.
Unseeded Henrik Holm of Sweden defeated Chang, 2-6, 7-5, 6-3, in another quarterfinal. (AP) Gimelstob Gains Final: Justin Gimelstob shook off injuries and advanced to the final of the boys' 18's division with a 6-2, 7-5 victory over his fellow United States national team member Ryan Wolters, seeded fifth, at the PowerAde Easter Bowl Junior Championships yesterday in Miami.
The third-seeded Gimelstob, from Whippany, N.J., hobbled with an ankle injury and a pulled stomach muscle, will play top-seeded Cecil Mamiit of Los Angeles today.
In the girls' 14's final, the Russian-born Olivia Dubovikov, a Staten Island resident and seeded second, fell to top-seeded Jessica Lehnhoff of Cooper City, Fla., 3-6, 6-2, 6-3.
N.B.A.
Barkley Leads Suns  Charles Barkley had 25 points and 13 rebounds last night, helping the Phoenix Suns weather their worst half of the season and defeat the visiting Atlanta Hawks, 93-77.
A Shutout for Fuhr  Grant Fuhr stopped 31 shots and the Buffalo penalty killers outscored Boston's power play last night, leading the Sabres to a 5-0 home victory. (AP) Lightning 4, Blues 3: Chris Joseph scored a goal and had two assists and J. C. Bergeron had 26 saves to lead host Tampa Bay past St.
Louis. (AP)


Republican Was Hired For Inquiry For a Reason
The Republican lawyer whose appointment to head part of the Whitewater investigation prompted cries of outrage from the White House got his job in part because the agency conducting the investigation was worried about appearing too lenient, officials at the agency said today.
The lawyer, Jay B. Stephens, is a former Republican prosecutor and critic of President Clinton.
Officials at the agency that hired him said they had chosen him to examine the Madison Guaranty Savings &amp; Loan Association as a defensive maneuver.
As one official put it, the agency, the Resolution Trust Corporation, "bent over backwards" so it could not be viewed as being soft on the White House.


Corrections
An entry in the Business Digest on Thursday and a front-page contents listing about the stock market's activity misstated the severity of the 63.33-point drop in the Dow Jones industrial average on Tuesday.
It was the worst since Feb. 4, when the index lost 96.24 points; it was not the worst decline of the year.


British Reject Smith
The people who run British boxing are taking no chances with JAMES (BONECRUSHER) SMITH.
Smith, who turns 41 on Sunday, was denied a license to box on medical grounds yesterday in London, forcing the former world heavyweight champion to pull out of next week's bout against HENRY AKINWANDE, the European champion.


Prepaying Mortgage Adds Up to Big Savings
Michael and Maria Walters, like millions of other Americans, refinanced their mortgage last year, paring their monthly payments and saving thousands of dollars in interest.
But they didn't stop there.
The Walters are adding $134.46 to their new monthly payment of $902.44 to reduce the loan principal.
At this pace, they will pay off their $127,500 fixed-rate, 30-year mortgage in 20 years and save $76,019 in interest over the life of their new loan.


Turgeon Line Gives Islanders New Hope
The Islanders ended their season last year by losing to Montreal in the Wales Conference final.
And had they not come out with a victory tonight at Nassau Coliseum against the Canadiens, the Islanders could have pretty much considered this season ended.
It was only fitting that right wing Steve Thomas scored his 39th goal of the season midway through the third period to give the Islanders a 5-2 victory because the other two members of his line -- the Islanders' most productive one -- also had goals.
Pierre Turgeon scored his 34th and Derek King his 30th to help revive an offense that had stalled while the team needed a playoff push.


Conservative Territory Offers Clinton a Respite
As a respite from Whitewater woes and other cares of office, this Pacific Ocean outpost has given President Clinton a week of sweet indifference to matters that made for a tortuous March.
By most measures, Coronado should be hostile territory for a Democratic President.
But if its retired admirals and affluent conservatives did not welcome Mr.
Clinton with open arms, its golden beach suffused him in an easy informality.


INSIDE
New York City Crime Drops
Contradiciting a perception that New York City is more violent than ever, the police released figures showing reported crime down in 1993.
Page 21.
A Troubled Daughter Still
Two years after a couple was arrested for chaining up a teen-age daughter to save her from drugs, the family's problems remina.
Page 21.
Sweet Retreat for Clinton
As a respite from Whitewater and the cares of office, Coronado, Calif., has offered President Clinton political and emotional sancturay.
Page 8.
In Italy, Factions and Fear
Causing more trouble for Italy's new governing coalition, the head of one faction praised Mussolini and another backed off a commitment.
Page 6.


Marquette Picks Coach
MIKE DEANE, who coached Siena to third place in this year's National Invitation Tournament, was introduced yesterday as Marquette's basketball coach.
Deane replaces KEVIN O'NEILL, who went to Tennessee after taking Marquette, located in Milwaukee, to two straight National Collegiate Athletic Association tournaments.


Even Now, It's Possible To Reduce Bills for '93
MANY taxpayers still have one way to reduce their 1993 tax bill: contribute to a tax-deferred retirement plan.
"Clients are always looking for a last-minute deduction," said Avery E. Neumark, a partner in Weber, Lipshie &amp; Company, a New York-based accounting firm, "and especially this year, since tax rates were increased retroactively to the first of last year but withholding was not."


Macedonians Ask Recognition, Not Greek Land; Fears for Kosovo
To the Editor:
The Serbs are playing the tragic role of an occupier in Kosovo, ultimately denying freedom, honor and dignity to generations of Albanian Kosovars in their own homeland.
Continued Serb policing of Kosovo should not be accepted by anyone committed to freedom, honor and dignity.


Mayflower Group reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Macedonians Ask Recognition, Not Greek Land; Inequality of Albanians
To the Editor:
In "The Other Balkan Mess" (Op-Ed, March 17), the Wall Street financier George Soros states, "radical Albanians want parts of Macedonia joined with Albania." Not so.
None of the Albanian political parties in Macedonia support secession.
A majority of Albanians in Macedonia supports the republic's sovereignty.


TCG Int'l reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Macedonians Ask Recognition, Not Greek Land
To the Editor:
In contrast to your balanced March 8 editorial calling for an end to the Greek blockade of the Republic of Macedonia and your well-researched March 12 report from northern Greece, "End the Intransigence," the March 19 letter from the press counselor of the Consulate General of Greece in New York, contains inaccurate and misleading statements.


Novell Is Expected to Name Successor to Retiring Chief
The software giant Novell Inc. is said to be on the verge of announcing the successor to its chief executive, Raymond J. Noorda, who plans to retire.
But industry handicapping today was divided over whether his replacement would come from I.B.M. or Hewlett-Packard.
Although Novell had been expected to disclose the decision internally today, that apparently did not happen, according to people at the company, which is based in Provo, Utah.
Novell officials would not comment.


Frank M. Campbell; Executive, 75
Frank M. Campbell, a retired president of J.P.
Duffy &amp; Company a building-supply company in Long Island City, died on Wednesday at his home in Surfside, Fla.
He was 75.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, John.


A Flogging in Singapore
For spray-painting cars and other vandalism, Singapore has sentenced an American teen-ager to six lashes of a bamboo-like cane.
This is no minor corporal punishment.
The cane delivers skin-splitting whacks so excruciatingly painful that strong men pass out in a state of shock.
If Michael Fay, the convicted 18-year-old, does lose consciousness, standard practice would be to revive and re-tether him to complete a flogging certain to leave permanent scars on body and spirit.
Singapore, an ultra-modern, order-conscious city-state, has the undoubted sovereign power to carry out this brutal punishment on a young visitor who engaged in mischief.
But it would shock many Americans and people everywhere who value humane punishment.
President Clinton has rightly reached out to seek some form of clemency.


U.S. and South Korea Defer Setting Maneuvers
To avoid provoking North Korea, the United States and South Korea have deferred a decision on when to hold a joint military exercise.
"We are leaving the door open for a dialogue and negotiated settlement of the issue," the South Korean Foreign Minister, Han Seung Joo, said today after meeting with Defense Secretary William J. Perry.


Cornell Cornucopia: Fraternity's Theft Booty
The locked room in the basement of the Sigma Phi fraternity house here was decorated with skeletons dressed as pirates, stuffed animal heads wearing blindfolds and a coffin.
But the decor was more than just a reflection of college students' eclectic tastes.
The authorities said this week that it reflected more than 50 years of thievery by fraternity members, who had collected booty from various Cornell University buildings and other fraternities.


William D. Kaplan Radiology Professor, 56
Dr.
William D. Kaplan, a professor of radiology at Harvard Medical School, died on Wednesday at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.
Dr.
Kaplan, who lived in Newton, Mass., was 56.
The cause was colon cancer, his wife, Susan, said.


MONTHS OF TERROR BRING RISING TOLL OF DEATHS IN HAITI
Hundreds of supporters of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide and other civilians have been killed in Haiti in recent months in the bloodiest wave of political terror since the army overthrew Father Aristide as President two and a half years ago.
Human rights experts say the violent campaign gained momentum last fall, after the military recognized that diplomatic efforts to restore Father Aristide to power had failed.
The violence accelerated this year, with 50 or more bodies turning up in the streets of this town each month.
Many were badly mutilated or bore clear signs of torture.


Where the Buoys Should Be


Poll Shows 4 Nations Differ On the Main Threat to Peace
Showing widely divergent views of the world, people in the United States and Britain say the Middle East poses the biggest threat to world peace, Germans say the former Soviet bloc nations pose the major threat, and Japanese are split over whether the United States or Russia is the biggest menace to peace.
In Japan, one of the four countries surveyed in the first half of March, 21 percent of the respondents said Russia "posed the biggest threat to world peace," while 22 percent cited the United States as the major threat -- evidently a reaction to America's huge military might and to what the Japanese see as frequent bullying by Washington.


Dixie Luck Wins the Comely
At the time of year when star colts are being scouted and sighted at the races, a 3-year-old filly named Dixie Luck blossomed as a star yesterday when she won the Comely Stakes at Aqueduct.
It was her fourth victory in five starts in an almost flawless career.
Thus, she staked out a strong position for the Triple Tiara series for fillies in New York, which opens with the Acorn Stakes on May 8.
And she arrives with major credentials.
She is a dark brown daughter of Dixieland Band; she is owned by Allaire duPont and trained by Allen Jerkens, and she has missed the winner's circle only once.


Crystal Brands Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 1


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  Mayor Giuliani pledged to cut 15,000 jobs in the next 15 months, and in exchange the Municipal Assistance Corporation gave him $200 million to finance his severance plan to get some of those workers to leave.
Page 1.
LOST?
PHONE THE SATELLITE There is something eerie about picking up a car phone and having a voice describe your location to within a few feet.
But that is exactly what Jim Shevlin and his staff can do for drivers whose cars are equipped with an antenna that can connect the vehicle with a satellite and allow the technicians to find it anywhere it goes.
Page 1.
MAYOR DERIDES SCHOOL CUTBACKS A day after Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines offered a new plan to cut costs at the Board of Education, Mayor Giuliani derided the proposal, saying it did not attack the board's "bloated overhead" with sufficient vigor.
Page 22.
METS CAUGHT IN A RUNDOWN Like a base runner caught in a rundown, the New York Mets went to court to seek a way out of conflicting obligations in a dispute over a cigarette billboard at Shea Stadium.
Page 23.
SUSPECT IN BOMB PLOT PLEADS GUILTY Earl Gant, one of 15 men charged in what the authorities say was a conspiracy to bomb landmarks in New York City, pleaded guilty to a charge of conspiring to carry explosives across state lines.
Page 23.
The parents of Shayna Bryant, who died on her fourth birthday from what the authorities said was a series of brutal beatings, were indicted on murder charges.
Page 22.
Mayor Giuliani brought back a former commissioner of the Mayor's film office in the Koch administration to head the office again.
Page 23.
A suspect in a series of rapes that terrorized women in and around Stuyvesant Town in Manhattan this winter was arrested as he was visiting his sister in Miami.
Page 23.
REGION  DEAL IN ALBANY LACKS DETAILS Governor Cuomo and New York's legislative leaders announced that they had agreed on the broad parameters of a $34 billion state budget, but then broke for the holiday weekend without providing details of their plan.
Page 22.
WHITMAN PLAN DEPENDS ON RETIREE COSTS Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's budget for New Jersey alarmed the unions that represent state and local government employees.
They charge that putting aside less for the pensions they will eventually collect -- and nothing at all for the health care they will eventually need -- must inevitably cost the state much more tomorrow.
News analysis.
Page 25.
GAG ORDER SOUGHT IN SHOOTING CASE Several weeks after the lawyers William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby brought their high-profile approach to the defense of Colin Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people aboard a commuter train, the Nassau County District Attorney has requested a gag order for all lawyers involved in the case.
Page 25.
FRATERNITY'S THEFT BOOTY IS UNCOVERED The locked room in the basement of the Sigma Phi fraternity house in Ithaca, N.Y., was decorated with skeletons dressed as pirates, stuffed animal heads wearing blindfolds and a coffin.
The authorities said it reflected more than 50 years of thievery at Cornell University.
Page 25.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 23


Nets Stop And Stare As Hardaway Beats Them
Shaquille O'Neal gets all the press and may be a better rapper, but perhaps the Orlando Magic's best player is guard Anfernee Hardaway.
He is a rookie-of-the-year candidate who tonight beat the Nets all by himself, thanks to a spectacular move down the lane with only 1.6 seconds left.
Make that move on the playground, and it would be talked about for years.
It cost the Nets as they lost to the Magic, 98-96, ending an eight-game home winning streak that tied a franchise record.


Carena Developments reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Prosser Back at Xavier
SKIP PROSSER, an assistant at Xavier for eight years before he became head coach at Loyola of Maryland, is returning to the Cincinnati-based university as head coach.
The 43-year-old Prosser left Xavier for Loyola last year.
He returns to replace PETE GILLEN, who left Wednesday after nine years as Xavier's coach to accept the vacant position at Providence. (AP)


Q&amp;A
Foreign Shares in an I.R.A.
Q.
With an I.R.A. that has an investment in an A.D.R., can the foreign tax credit be utilized against future withdrawals, and if so, how?
RALPH EPSTEIN, Brooklyn, N.Y.
A.
An individual retirement account is considered to have received the net dividend on American depository receipts, after the foreign tax is withheld.
Therefore the foreign tax credit, which reduces taxes dollar for dollar, is lost.
"The I.R.A. is not a tax-paying entity and, as such, cannot utilize the foreign tax credit," Peter A. Weitsen, an accountant in East Brunswick, N.J., said.
"However, because the dividend is reduced at the source by the foreign withholding tax, there will be less assets in the I.R.A. available for eventual distribution. This will result in a lower tax."
A Tax Loss Is Denied  Q. Can you take capital losses on municipal bonds if you pay a premium and they are redeemed at face value?
ELEANOR ALBERT, Madison, Wis.
A.
Complex tax considerations govern municipal bonds investments, whether purchased at a premium or a discount.
But generally, if you buy a tax-exempt municipal bond for, say $1,100, and then redeem it at its face value of $1,000 at maturity, you cannot claim a tax loss of $100.
On the other hand, if you purchase this bond for $900 and later redeem it for $1,000, your $100 increase is taxable.
"When buying a tax-free bond, discounts and premiums must be taken into account when figuring your ultimate yield to maturity," said William K. Joseph, senior vice president of Smith Barney Shearson.
"These complexities often cause investors to avoid premium bonds, which can result in lower prices and higher yields."
Spousal Social Security  Q. A divorced wife of a worker has been receiving spousal Social Security benefits, while his current wife is receiving benefits based on her own work record.
If the man dies, is his current wife entitled to widow's benefits?
VIRGINIA BAY, Easton, Conn.
A.
Any benefits received by a divorced wife based on the Social Security record of her former husband do not affect the benefits payable to his current wife.
So if the current wife is getting payments based on her own Social Security record, and her husband dies, she would be entitled to whichever benefit yields the higher amount: her benefit as a worker or her benefit as a widow.
Both women can receive payments as widows from the same husband, as long as the divorced wife had been married for at least 10 years and the current wife had been married for at least one year.
"If the current wife who had been receiving benefits as a worker never applied for a wife's benefits, she would have to file an application in order to receive widow's benefits," Peter DiSturco, New York regional commissioner of the Social Security Administration, said.
"Spousal benefits received by the first wife, however, are automatically converted to widow's benefits. And only the second widow is entitled to the lump-sum death payment of $255."


Couples to Miss Masters
FRED COUPLES, suffering from a herniated disk in his lower back, will not play at the Masters, it was announced yesterday.
Couples, the 1992 Masters champion and two-time P.G.A. player of the year, has withdrawn from the first of golf's four major tournaments, scheduled to begin Thursday in Augusta, Ga. (AP)


Technology Wins, as Pacific Stocks Lose
The risk-takers have won so far in 1994.
Unexpectedly strong earnings bolstered the stocks of technology companies and carried over to small company and aggressive growth funds, which tyically own a chunk of technology issues.
The biggest losers have been Pacific stock funds, pummeled by the sharp downdraft in the Southeast Asian markets early this year.


Transactions
Baseball  American League BOSTON RED SOX -- Traded John Flaherty, catcher, to the Detroit Tigers for Rich Rowland, catcher.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Steve Sax, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Designated Ruben Amaro, outfielder, for assignment.
Optioned Brain Barnes, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.
Added Steve Farr, pitcher, to the 25-man roster.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed Glenn Davis, first baseman, to a contract with Omaha of the American Association.
Sent Curtis Wilkerson and Rico Rossy, infielders, and Russ McGinnis, catcher, to their minor-league camp for reassignment.
National League LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Purchased the contract of Chan Ho Park, and Darren Dreifort, pitchers, and Jeff Treadway, infielder.
Announced that Kip Gross has cleared waivers and accepted outright assignments to Albuquerque of the Pacific Coast League.
NEW YORK METS -- Announced that Josias Manzanillo, pitcher, and Tracy Sanders, outfielder, have cleared waivers and accepted outright assignments to Norfolk of the International League, and that Greg Olson, catcher, has cleared waivers and become a free agent.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Sent Jose Sandoval, infielder, outright to Buffalo of the American Association.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Signed Dusty Baker, manager, to a two-year contract extension through 1996.
Basketball  National Basketball Association DALLAS MAVERICKS -- Signed Morlon Wiley, guard, for the remainder of the season.
Placed Greg Dreiling, center, on the injured list.
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Signed Isaac Austin, center, to a second 10-day contract.
WASHINGTON BULLETS -- Activated Michael Adams, guard, from the injured list.
Football  National Football League GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Extended the contract of Ron Wolf, general manager, through 1999.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Named Don Lowery director of public and community relations.
Canadian Football League LAS VEGAS POSSE -- Signed Andre Carron, linebacker, and Len Gomes, nose tackle.
College  GEORGIA SOUTHERN -- Announced the resignation of Jim Vargo, men's and women's cross-country coach.
KENT -- Named Lou West, Charles Molnar and Gerry Lasko assistant football coaches.
MAINE -- Announced the resignation of Mike Ploszek, athletics director.
MARQUETTE -- Named Mike Deane men's basketball coach.


A McDonald's Goes the Way Of the Edsel
The nation's oldest McDonald's, with its sweeping old-fashioned golden arches and winking sign with a mascot named Speedee, has probably served its last Big Mac.
The McDonald's Corporation said on Thursday that it had decided not to renew the lease on the 41-year-old restaurant, in Downey, 15 miles south of Los Angeles.
McDonald's closed the landmark building after the Jan. 17 earthquake, saying repairing the damage was not worth the cost.


Busia Journal; Where Uganda and Kenya Collide
Busia has only one paved street, rutted and lined with scores of teen-age hawkers and beggars and squalid one-story brick hotels, but it is Uganda's main lifeline to the outside world.
Two sets of worn metal gates and a hundred feet of no man's land separate Kenya and Uganda in this dusty town, which straddles the border.
The town has closely reflected relations between the two neighbors, sometimes tense but recently friendly.


Hockey; Baker Award Lands in the Land of Lakes
Chris Marinucci, an Islander draft choice in 1990, was named the winner of the Hobey Baker award today as college hockey's player of the year.
Marinucci, a senior left wing, played for Minnesota-Duluth of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association and his considerable efforts caught the attention of the selection committee, which cast its votes before the start of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament.
That tournament ends here Saturday with the national championship game between Boston University and Lake Superior State.


Records Show Mrs. Clinton Took Big Risks in Trades
Hillary Rodham Clinton apparently took huge risks to earn profits in the early phase of her commodities trading, an analysis of her trading records indicates.
She made purchases that had to be sold the same day because she would probably have been unable to put up the money required by the commodity exchange to allow her to hold the investments overnight.
The White House disclosed this week that beginning in October 1979 she made a $100,000 profit over 10 months of commodities trading, after starting with a $1,000 investment.


Editors' Note
A front-page picture yesterday showed a group of Israeli Jews paying homage at the grave of Baruch Goldstein, who was killed after he killed at least 29 Palestinians at a mosque in the West Bank in February.
In some editions, the heading under the picture began, "Jews Honor a Killer."


Company News; 10 Japanese Chip Makers To Cooperate
Japan's leading semiconductor companies, worried that they are falling behind their American competitors, are planning a collaborative research institute aimed at improving their technology and competitiveness, industry officials said today.
Ten companies are expected to join the Semiconductor Industry Research Institute Japan when it is established in early May, said Hisashi Saito, a spokesman for the NEC Corporation, Japan's largest chip maker and a big supporter of the plan.


Knicks Face Lineup Change
For the first time since they began their 14-game winning streak on March 1, the Knicks are looking at a change in their starting lineup.
Anthony Bonner, a starter since Coach Pat Riley shook up the starting five after the Knicks had a season-high four-game losing streak to end February, missed practice for the second consecutive day with a pulled abdominal muscle.


Charlotte's Downtown Manages To Stay Up Late for Tournament
It's been called Potemkin Village with a drawl.
Whatever it is, the basketball fans and corporate bigwigs flocking to this shiny banking center for college basketball's Final Four weekend are enjoying a new dimension in disposable culture -- an instant downtown as permanent as a movie set.


Giuliani And Rangel Strike a Deal On U.S. Aid
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Congressman Charles B. Rangel said yesterday that they had reached an agreement on the boundaries of a Federal inner-city development program that has become the focus of a bitter political tug-of-war.
The program, the Government's largest inner-city development effort in a decade, is expected to bring $100 million in Federal money for job training, drug treatment and other social services to parts of the city.
In recent weeks, Mr.
Rangel and the Bronx Borough President, Fernando Ferrer, have been battling over whether the money would go to the Bronx or Harlem.


Classical Music in Review
'St. John Passion'  Carnegie Hall
Next to his "St. Matthew Passion," Bach's setting of the Gospel according to St.
John is an altogether more brooding, private and shadowed work.
The first, with its double chorus and brighter timbres, is panoramic and theatrical.
The "St. John Passion" is full of tortured chromaticism and a sense of loneliness.


Water's Sentinels Felt Winter's Pain, As Well


Review/Pop; Tori Amos, Rebellious Balladeer
From Laura Nyro to Rickie Lee Jones to Kate Bush to Tori Amos, pop music since the late 1960's has held the door open for female performers whose poetic effusions are as enigmatic as they are fiery.
Ms.
Amos, who appeared solo on Wednesday evening at Symphony Space, is lyrically as obscure any of them, perhaps more so.
A minister's daughter from North Carolina, she flaunts the sensibility of a classic rebel from a strict puritan background.
Her roomy, stream-of-consciousness songs reflect on sex and religion, sometimes deliberately mixing them up, in imagery that is often tormented and usually defiant.


Bassett Furniture (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Bosnian Serbs Are Accused Of More 'Ethnic Cleansing'
United Nations and Red Cross officials accused Bosnian Serbs today of killing at least 19 civilians since Wednesday in the Serbian-held town of Prijedor in the worst wave of "ethnic cleansing" in the area in 18 months.
The killings of 17 Muslims and 2 Croats were part of a coordinated two-year campaign of violence and intimidation to empty the northwestern Bosnian region of non-Serbs.


Hockey; Last-Minute Defeat Slows Devils' Charge
The pregame talk had been of the one-game-at-a-time nature, but the Devils were unable to earn the 2 points they needed tonight to stay even with the Rangers heading into Saturday night's showdown for first place.
When Kelly Miller scored for Washington with just 45.8 seconds left in the third period, the Devils not only suffered a 2-1 defeat, they fell 2 points behind the Rangers in the run for the best record in the National Hockey League.
Playing without Stephane Richer, who fell victim to a stomach virus, and with the Rangers' score being posted on the USAir Arena scoreboard as they progressed toward a 3-0 victory, the Devils (45-22-11) exhibited little of the fine play that had sparked them to a seven-game unbeaten streak and a 13-1-3 record since Feb. 26.
The result gave the Capitals a tighter hold on seventh place in the Eastern Conference, 5 points ahead of Florida.


Keeping Alive a Dream Snatched Off the Streets
JUST as Huberta Schroedel, a deaf educator, was about to seize her dream and open a newsstand where she could train deaf students to run their own businesses, someone stole the kiosk.
In mid-Manhattan, on Tuesday, in broad daylight, somebody took the entire structure in which Ms.
Schroedel had invested more than $25,000 and years of effort.


Tenor in Farewell Recital
The Italian tenor Carlo Bergonzi is to give his American farewell concert on April 17 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
Accompanied by Vincenzo Scalera, Mr.
Bergonzi is to sing works by Verdi, Bellini, Schubert, Tosti and others.
The concert is being presented by the Opera Orchestra of New York.
Tickets are $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Cipsco Inc. reports earnings for 12mos to Feb 28


Beliefs
Who buried Jesus?
It is not a question most Christians are apt to think about, even during that strange blank time between the sorrow of Good Friday and joy of Easter.
For one thing, they think they know the answer: all four Gospels name one individual, Joseph of Arimathea.
For another, they don't think it matters much.
It is true that the ancient professions of faith included Jesus's burial as a basic belief: "He was crucified under Pontius Pilate, died and was buried." But right from the beginning, the great controversies have not been about whether Jesus was buried but whether he stayed buried, or really died before appearing to be buried.


Police Shoot Man to Death
An unidentified man was shot to death last night in a gunfight with two police officers in East New York, Brooklyn, the police said.
The officers spotted the man firing into the air about 10 P.M. near the intersection of Fulton and Cleveland Streets, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
"He was stumbling on the street and brandishing a pistol when the officers arrived and witnessed him firing shots," he said.
"They challenged him, and he turned and fired at them. They returned fire." The officers, who were not identified, were not hit, the sergeant said.


Budget Assumptions; Whitman's Planners Base Projections On Lower Pension and Health Costs
When Christine Todd Whitman presented her budget for New Jersey last month, she seemed to be getting something for nothing.
Committed to financing a $549 million personal income tax cut on top of a looming $2 billion gap between projected outlays and revenues, the Governor outlined a plan that promised remarkably little pain.
How was that possible?


Another Chance for North Korea
North Korea is bristling like a porcupine caught in a trap.
But it also may be looking for a way out of the confrontation over its nuclear programs.
Thursday's action by the United Nations Security Council pushes the North in the right direction by urging it to open its nuclear sites to international inspections, with an oblique hint that failure to do so might lead to consideration of economic sanctions.
China's acceptance of the U.N. formulation demonstrates just how diplomatically isolated North Korea now is.
In mid-February North Korea reached agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency on inspections to assure that no diversion of nuclear material took place during the past year.
But the North reneged in mid-March, preventing inspectors from completing their rounds.


Man Arrested in Hit-and-Run Death of Boy
The police arrested a Brooklyn man last night in the death of a 10-year-old boy who was killed on Thursday night in a hit-and-run accident in Coney Island, Brooklyn.
The man, Joe Russo, 64 years old, of 1518 Neptune Avenue, was arrested on charges that he left the scene of a fatal accident.
He was being held at the 60th Precinct station house, where witnesses had identified him in a lineup, the police said.


Company News; 3,500 Workers Strike Stainless Steel Maker


To Spend With Sense
To the Editor:
In "Off Balance" (Op-Ed, March 19), Robert Eisner is, of course, right that we owe the national debt mostly to ourselves.
Therefore, a high national debt is not harmful by itself.
However, having no limit on the debt enables legislators to spend money on programs that improve their chances for re-election -- whether or not such programs are good for the country.


Stride Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


CUNY Board Has Examined and Backs Chancellor's Activities
To the Editor:
"Abdication at CUNY" (editorial, March 23), about the 1993 calendar of Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds, erroneously states that the board of trustees is unwilling to examine her schedule.
Nothing is further from the truth.


Children Say Parents Scalded a Sister Who Died
A shaking, weeping Sherain Bryant appeared in Family Court yesterday and learned that two of her young children had accused her of pouring scalding water over their sister Shayna, who died on her fourth birthday Tuesday from what the police said was a series of brutal beatings.
The child's mother and her father, Orlando Bryant, were indicted yesterday on murder charges.
The medical examiner found that Shayna's body bore scars from cigarette burns and injuries in various stages of healing.
She died from blunt impact injuries to her face and torso, the culmination of a pattern of injuries that the medical examiner labeled child abuse syndrome.


Joseph Kaplan, 98; Put Color in Shower
Joseph A. Kaplan, a Russian immigrant who prospered by devising and promoting colored shower curtains, died on Tuesday in Beth Israel Hospital.
Mr.
Kaplan, who lived in Manhattan, was 98.
The cause was a stroke, said his son, Harold.


Topics Of The Times; Shelf Life
When Georges Duboeuf, the king of Beaujolais, suggests that his delicious and light-bodied 1993 Beaujolais Villages be drunk young so as to relish its perfume and fruitiness, he makes sense.
Now Pepsi-Cola, the No. 2 soft-drink maker, has gotten into the vintage act, less persuasively.
Despite little public interest in soft-drink freshness, it has decided consumers should worry, and has begun to stamp legible drink-by dates under Diet Pepsi cans.
The drink, consumers are told, will reach its zenith in 12 to 14 weeks.
Soon regular Pepsi, with a six-month horizon, will follow.


Robertson-Ceco Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Film Noir, 'Tweener' or Flub?
IN THE WORLD OF independent film making, a film's route to its audience can often be circuitous.
In the case of "Red Rock West," a film directed by John Dahl that will open on Friday at the Cinema Village, that route was fraught with twists, turns and perilous cul-de-sacs.
Most movies go from theater to television to home video.
"Red Rock West" turned that order on its head, because of the vagaries of film distribution and marketing.
A neo-noirish thriller set in Wyoming, the film stars Nicolas Cage, Dennis Hopper, Lara Flynn Boyle and J. T. Walsh.
Mr.
Cage plays an ex-Marine who becomes involved in a man's plot to kill his wife and the wife's counterplot to kill her husband.


When Renovation Erases the Past
Its expansive oval courtyard was once anchored with a stone fountain, and the entrances to its four interconnected buildings were flanked by ornate cast-iron lamps.
Inside, the large apartments often had brass sconces, oak kitchen cabinets, mosaic foyer floors and multiple fireplaces.
It was designated a landmark in 1981.
The Landmarks Preservation Commission called it "one of the significant achievements in the development of the luxury apartment house in New York."


Verdi: You Can Have It Both Ways
SEEING THE METROPOLITAN OPERA'S NEW production of Verdi's "Otello" a few days after watching the Swedish Folkopera perform "Don Carlos" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music was like changing positions at a fun-house mirror.
The Swedish company made one of the grandest of grand operas small: choosing voices of lyric quality, editing texts to provide focus and intimacy, eliminating the ballet and the crowds Verdi included to please Paris audiences.
The Met, on the other hand, made the small large.
Elijah Moshinsky's production dwarfed Shakespeare's handful of characters with oversize stage trappings.
There were battlements lowered by a stage elevator, a bedroom dominated by columns suitable for the central office of a bank, and classical paintings the height of the stage.
These examples of Verdi grand and small might be the results of opposing artistic missions: the Swedish company strips away spectacle, the Met adds it.
But the companies were also responding to opposing aspects of Verdi's work. ("Don Carlos" was first performed in 1867; "Otello," in 1887, soon after Verdi produced a revised version of "Don Carlos.") The Met's grandeur emphasized the social and public themes in Verdi; the chamber-size Swedish production focused on interior, private preoccupations.
The political and the personal strands coexist in both works; in fact, the tension between them is one of Verdi's recurrrent themes.
The composer constantly juxtaposes the passions of private life with the demands of public life.


Wall Street; Investment Newsletter Can Crow About Its Bearishness
PETER ELIADES was bearish on the stock market all through the rally of 1993.
For that, he gets to be a winner?
Apparently so, at least when it comes to advice for investing in mutual funds.
Mr.
Eliades, the editor of Stockmarket Cycles, showed a profit of more than 100 percent last year, according to The Hulbert Financial Digest, a newsletter that tracks the performance of investment newsletters.
Mark Hulbert, editor of H.F.D., said that over the last eight years Stockmarket Cycles has given the best advice (up 389.4 percent) of all the letters that tell how to divvy your money among funds.
Mr.
Eliades's good fortune: while he hated stocks, he was bullish on funds that invest in precious metals.


Inquiry Strains the Ties Of Administration Aides
The strong bond between the Treasury Department and the White House -- a link that has been central to the Clinton Administration's effort to turn the economy around -- has been strained in recent weeks by the fallout from the Whitewater investigation.
White House officials who spoke on condition of anonymity said they believe that damaging disclosures about two of the President's top advisers, George Stephanopoulos and Harold M. Ickes, were the work of Roger C. Altman, the Deputy Treasury Secretary.


Frenchman on Trial: Testing the Role of the Nazis
Halfway through the first trial of a Frenchman accused of committing crimes against humanity during World War II, those who had hoped that France -- or at least the collaborationist Vichy regime -- would also be in the dock have so far been disappointed.
During 12 days of hearings in a Versailles court, attention has focused almost entirely on Paul Touvier: his character, his role in a 30,000-member pro-Nazi militia, his participation in the execution of seven Jews on June 29, 1944, his long years in hiding until his arrest in 1989 at a monastery in Nice.


Gerald Williams 'Takes It Easy,' Seriously
A woman standing among dozens of clamoring fans threw two Yankee hats toward Gerald Williams from the overhang to the locker room here today.
The outfielder and his longtime pal, Juan Watkins, immediately feigned a departure.
The woman yelled in protest.
"I thought you were giving us one apiece," Williams said, his serious look fading into a smile.


Unfinished
To the Editor:
The club-history chart with "The Mighty Nell's" contains glaring omissions, and I fear that in some small way, this information may come to represent the history of late-night dancing in New York City.


MacMillan's Dances Distill 'Carousel's' Sexuality
DANCE EXPRESSES WHAT words cannot, as the saying goes, and Nicholas Hytner, the director of the new revival of "Carousel," made an inspired choice in his choreographer, Kenneth MacMillan.
It isn't that virtually everything, including a revolving turntable, moves with uninhibited vitality in this positively fluid production.
It is rather that no other dance maker would seem so naturally attuned to this reinterpretation of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical, to bringing out, in the 1990's, the dark underside of 1940's sentimentality.


Followers of Rev. Moon Sponsor a College Talk
IT was billed as a meeting of the Women's Federation for World Peace.
Posters on the campuses of Westchester Community College and Purchase College described a program "promoting peace and reconciliation" among different peoples.
The program on Tuesday at the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College, however, was a meeting extolling the virtues of the Unification Church and its leader, the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon.
Several hundred followers of Mr.
Moon were brought in by bus, and most of them sat rapt with attention through a video documenting his life and explaining the goals of his church.
Mr.
Moon's son, Hyun Jin Moon, then explained that God had spoken directly to his father, asking him to give the people of America a new revelation.
This was followed by a long Bible interpretation.


A Co-op Building's Mortgage
WHEN the first wave of co-op conversions began in the New York area some 15 years ago it was believed to be foolhardy to pay off the underlying mortgage (or, in some cases, multiple mortgages) still attached to the building.
Shareholders gained significant tax advantages by keeping this debt alive.
Moreover, paying only interest on the outstanding principal balance rather than liquidating the debt through amortization helped lower monthly maintenance payments for shareholders.


Black Schools Took Refugee Scholars In
To the Editor:
In the just-published "Refugee Scholars and the New School for Social Research," Claus-Dieter Krohn recounts how American colleges in the 1930's were reluctant to employ scholars and artists fleeing Hitler's Germany (Books of The Times, March 18).
In an important exception, many of us young refugee scholars found our first teaching opportunities at black colleges.
The story is vividly told in "From Swastika to Jim Crow: Refugee Scholars at Black Colleges" by Gabrielle Simon Edgcomb (Malabar, Fla., 1993).


POP BRIEF
Rodney Kendrick: 'The Secrets of Rodney Kendrick' Verve 314-517-558; CD.


Tar Heels Show Heels To Purdue and Face The Lady Techsters
In the 13 previous years of the National Collegiate Athletic Association women's basketball tournament, Louisiana Tech reached the championship game four times and won twice.
North Carolina had never gotten past the Sweet 16.
Today, before a crowd of 11,966 in the Richmond Coliseum, both teams fought their way into the title game at 3:45 P.M.
Sunday, Louisiana Tech with its 25th consecutive victory and North Carolina with its 13th.


So Nice to Be So Mean
"How dare you?"
"How dare you."
"How dare you!"


March 27-April 1:The Bloodshed Comes Home; An Emergency Is Declared In Homeland Days After 34 Die in South Africa Rioting
Imagine stepping out of your downtown Johannesburg office building on the way to lunch and finding a few thousand enraged Zulus in your way.
Imagine that the air suddenly fills with bullets and madness that kill 34 people.
It happened Monday, and it seemed to focus President F. W. de Klerk's mind.
On Thursday he declared a state of emergency in the brutalized Zulu homeland of KwaZulu, sending the army to put a lid on the factional violence.
Nelson Mandela endorsed the move.


On-Time Flights Increase in Europe
The punctuality of airline flights within Europe improved in 1993 and was at its best since 1987, according to a report issued by the Association of European Airlines, a Brussels-based organization with 24 members, including Air France, Lufthansa and other major carriers.
On international scheduled services within Europe, 12.6 percent of the flights were delayed more than 15 minutes last year, compared with 16.6 percent in 1992.
The worst performance in 15 years was in 1989, with 23.8 percent of flights delayed.


'Carousel,' A Soap Opera No Longer
FORGET EVERY OTHER "CAROUSEL" YOU may have seen, going back even to the 1945 Broadway original and the 1956 CinemaScope movie version.
They now seem to have been warm-ups for Nicholas Hytner's grand new production at the Vivian Beaumont Theater in Lincoln Center.
Though the show has been revived in New York before, this new "Carousel" is so fresh and moving that it's as if the Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d classic were coming to life for the first time.
As staged by the English director Nicholas Hytner, "Carousel" turns out to be a true "musical play," one of such unexpected feeling that, at the end, you may find yourself sandbagged by the emotions, no matter how much you scoff at them.
This is the first time that "Carousel" has got to me in such a way, and I've been consorting with it for decades, often with reluctance.
Like its arrogant, doomed, none-too-bright hero, the carnival barker Billy Bigelow, the musical is receiving a miraculous second chance.


Arizona Has No Answer for Williamson
Arkansas continues to come up with the right answers.
Last week, Michigan questioned whether the Razorbacks could win if Corliss Williamson, their bruising 6-foot-7-inch star forward, was tripled-team.
Arkansas responded with a lethal 3-point attack and eliminated the Fab Four from contention.
This evening, guard-oriented Arizona wondered how the fast-breaking Razorbacks would do if their perimeter game were taken away.
Nolan Richardson, the Arkansas coach, came up with the answer to this one at intermission: He unleashed a ferocious fullcourt press and a huge dose of Williamson that ultimately broke open a close game.


Saving the Waterfront From Development
To the Editor:
In his Soapbox essay, "Missing the Boat on the Waterfront" (March 20), Kevin Bone called for developing "a grand new resource" for the city that could include landfills, a recreational pier and a platform with restaurants.
But the beauty of the Hudson River is its broad expanse, giving access to water and sky.


Corrections
An article on page 30 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Arthur Honegger's "Jeanne d'Arc" misstates the opening date for a series of performances by the New York Philharmonic.
The first is on Wednesday evening, not Thursday.


Aiding a Street in Fear's Grip
Last summer, the first flush of a paralyzing fear spread along Church Avenue, when a local merchant, a hard-working Haitian immigrant named Wilner Boucicault, was gunned down after interrupting three men trying to steal his car.
While police statistics show dropping crime figures, the flush of fear has grown among merchants along the lively commercial strip, jammed with West Indian roti shops, Korean produce markets, pizza shops, clothing and electronic stores.
Some merchants, citing the fear of robbery, have left.
Others are taking special safety measures and lobbying for more police protection.


Rome, at 2,747, Plans A Big Birthday Party
Every year on April 21, Rome celebrates its birthday with a party: hundreds of fiaccole, candles made to withstand a stiff breeze, are placed all over City Hall Square on the Capitoline, the smallest and most famous of ancient Rome's seven hills.
City officials say Rome is celebrating its 2,747th birthday this year, based on the legend that described how Romulus and Remus, the twins who were suckled by a wolf, founded the city in 753 B.C.


'Tale of Two Cities': Another View
The production of "A Tale of Two Cities" at the Paper Mill Playhouse was the target of Alvin Klein's very strange collection of verbal abuse in his review on March 6.
I saw this magnificently mounted play.
The descriptions by the patrons during intermission and upon exiting included "splendid," "wonderful" and "deeply moving." The cast, scenic designs and costumes drew gasps of admiration from beginning to end.


[ PERSPECTIVES ] ; The Anatomy Lesson
DAVID BARTON IS A sculptor whose medium is human flesh.
A gym owner and trainer (and one pumped-up individual), Barton is looking at nudes at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, as mesmerized by perfection as a young ballplayer by Ted Williams's swing.
Artists of other centuries used marble, clay or paint to depict the idealized human form.
Barton builds strategic muscles.
It's a question of proportion -- accentuating one group to deaccentuate another.
One of Barton's favorite techniques is to build the outer thigh to a pearlike bulge.
"It de-emphasizes the hips and gives the illusion of that straight-up-and-down male line," he says, flexing his own bulbous quadriceps.


Stock Options Are an Effective Tool
To the Editor:
I would like to challenge the lopsided view of stock options presented by Alison Leigh Cowan in "Mom, Apple Pie and Stock Options" (Wall Street, March 6).
Virtually the entire financial community, accounting profession and business world would disagree with her and with the Financial Accounting Standards Board, which, with its propensity for esoteric regulation, is losing its audience.
Stock options effectively focus management on the goal of increasing shareholder value.
DENNIS BROWN  Lake Forest, Ill., March 6  The writer is chief financial officer of Sybron International, a dental and laboratory equipment manufacturer based in Milwaukee.


Always Full Sail When Dickson Is at the Helm
Never one to enter a yacht race half-heartedly, the New Zealand America's Cup skipper, Chris Dickson, has made the most of his entry in the 32,000-mile Whitbread Round the World Race.
With two legs to go in the six-stage race, Dickson's boat, the 60-foot Tokio, is in the lead by 14 hours.
And that's the way Dickson says he plans to keep it.


Health Plan Of a Union Is Investigated
At a cluttered office in Queens, a team of auditors and investigators are trying to unravel a puzzle: how 400 people were improperly enrolled in a teamsters union solely so they could obtain low-cost medical and hospitalization insurance.
Federal investigators say the two top officials of Local 819 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters devised the plan three years ago, originally to benefit their relatives and friends.
Later, according to the investigators, the officials -- Richard Scalza and his brother, Perry -- allowed an unlicensed broker to sell the union memberships to Queens residents desperate for health-insurance coverage.


New Drugstores From Woolworth's
The Woolworth Corporation opened eight new Rx Place Drug Marts in the city last week, continuing the company's venture into the lucrative drug-store market.
The new stores, opened in sites of variety stores Woolworth shut down last year, bring the number of Woolworth's discount drugstore chain to 15 in the metropolitan area.
The company said it planned to open 10 more of the stores here before the end of the year and to expand into other large cities as well.


Chaos Reigns Amid Elegant Aspirations
RISTORANTE CINELLI is a Franklin Square newcomer with a warm heart that is being overwhelmed by instant popularity.
On a recent Saturday night, we arrived promptly for a 7:30 reservation, much to the host's distress.
He smilingly shrugged, threw up his hands and suggested that we wait in the bar.
There we joined an army of others awaiting tables and were treated to glasses of wine, refills of drinks and even slices of pizza from Cinelli's adjacent pizza parlor.


AMERICA'S BEST BUILDINGS
America's Best Buildings" was effective in underlining the problems facing the nation's education system (text by David C. Anderson, photographs by Lizzie Himmel, Feb. 20).


Ideas &amp; Trends; She's Worth Her Weight in Barbra
WHEN some future cultural historian tries to identify the most puzzling instance of mass hysteria in the 20th century, he might skip right by Orson Welles's 1938 "War of the Worlds" broadcast and proceed directly to Barbra Streisand's 1994 concert tour.
Consider the evidence.
Last week, 65,000 tickets for her three New York shows at Madison Square Garden (two more have since been added on) sold out 24 minutes after being offered for sale, with a top price of $350 (this is not a misprint).
About 5 million calls were placed to Ticketmaster between noon and 3 P.M. last Sunday when tickets went on sale.
The pattern was repeated in every city on the singer's 22-concert tour.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


POSTINGS: The Playhouse on 91st Street; Lease Changes Hands
"The most important thing," said Ran Avni, artistic director of the Jewish Repertory Theater, "is a sense of continuity."
Mr.
Avni was describing his group's decision to buy the lease for Playhouse 91, at 316 East 91st Street, where it has been performing for two seasons as principal tenant of the Uptown Playhouse Corporation.
The lease, bought for $250,000 last month,runs through 1999.


'Left to Die'
To the Editor:
I wish to express my appreciation for the favorable review of my book "Left to Die: The Tragedy of the USS Juneau" (In Short, Feb. 20).
But I would like to correct a misimpression the reviewer had in stating that "at times, Mr. Kurzman . . . presumes to know exactly what someone was thinking or feeling."


Managing to Fail: How a Hospital Wasn't Built -- A special report; Project Adrift: Kings County's Lost Decade
Twice in the last five years, senior New York City hospital officials had serious doubts about their ability to manage the troubled $1 billion reconstruction of the Kings County Hospital Center.
Each time they considered whether to turn the effort over to a state construction agency with long experience in large public projects.
But each time they decided to press ahead -- a decision that one former head of the hospital system, Dr.
James R. Dumpson, now concedes was a mistake.


Myth, Not Ms. Magazine
Tired of editorial content?
Hate those nasty little text bits interrupting the advertisements in fashion magazines?
Completely illiterate?
Elle Top Model is for you.
For a mere $3.95, in the premiere issue, you get 52 pages of Claudia Schiffer.
Among the features: "Claudia!," "Planet Claudia" and "The Night She Became Claudia." Many of the pictures are photographs of other magazines in which Claudia has appeared.
For instance, her Revlon and Chanel ads in other magazines are shown, and of course Revlon and Chanel also advertise in Top Model.


Professionals Need Workplace Protection
To the Editor:
James Bovard should have consulted his lawyer before writing "Rigid U.S. Rules Hinder Job Flexibility" (Viewpoints, March 13) because he does not know the first thing about the Fair Labor Standards Act.
While he blames Federal law for creating rigid workplace rules, what he really wants is for employers to be free to impose such rules.


Sports of The Times; Questions, Questions, Questions Only the Season Will Answer
WHEN the Cardinals go against the Reds in Cincinnati tonight, it will be the first Sunday night opener in major league history, the start of the National League's 125th season.
But with three divisional champions and a wild card in both the American and National League playoffs, for the first time there also will be no pure pennant races as you've known them.
Baseball also has no commissioner.
And if the Players Association and the owners keep snarling at each other, there may be no season after the All-Star break, or after Labor Day.


Hillary Clinton Escaped Collapse in the Markets That Cost Many Fortunes
Fifteen years after brokers and customers at the Refco brokerage office here plucked money from the commodities markets and then watched their portfolios collapse, the office is attracting renewed attention for the role it played in earning nearly $100,000 for Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
In the late 1970's, the office was a "money machine for everyone" one client recalled this week, and a clutch of lawyers, farmers and bankers in this prosperous corner of Arkansas watched spellbound as the whirling electronic ticker kept score of their winnings.


Nimby Wars II: View From the Other Side
"I THINK I'm being punished by God," said Dr.
Joyce Wallace.
She was smiling, but she might have been serious.
"Years ago, when I lived on Hudson, I fought against a pissoir being built in the park across the street. I thought it would attract more junkies. Which proves we are all capable of practicing Nimby."
Dr.
Wallace's attempt to turn her town house into a home for former prostitutes seems to have been stalled by her Greenwich Village neighbors' ferocious campaign to discredit her and the project.
She, in turn, dismisses their anxiety as garden variety not-in-my-backyard selfishness.


Wanting Health Care Help, Voters Tell of Apprehensions
For Representative Jill Long, the most telling moment of this Congressional recess may have come as she took a break before a long siege of public forums on health care, only to have her own mother look across the dining room table and ask, "Jill, if the Clinton health plan gets through, will I be able to choose my own doctor?"
There is, it seems, no end to the public's questions and apprehensions during this Easter recess, probably the last break before lawmakers begin to step up to some very hard and very fundamental votes on health care.
A visit to "town meetings" on the issue here and in Winfield, Kan., and Rockford, Ill., this week showed a volatile, passionate debate at the grass roots.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
JAMAICA  Transforming Machetes Into Works of Art
When Linda Stein was growing up, she says, she was told, "Good girls shouldn't play with knives." So what did she do?
She created works of art from machetes.
The results are on display at the Jamaica Arts Center, where an entire room is filled floor to ceiling with machete blades.


Hendrik W. Nelis, Leda D. Natkin
Leda Dora Natkin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Natkin of Redding, Conn., was married yesterday to Hendrik Willem Nelis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hendrik W. Nelis of Haarlem, the Netherlands.
The Rev.
Gerard van Dijk, a Dutch Reform minister, performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Nelis teaches French at the Convent of the Sacred Heart High School in San Francisco.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father and her mother, known professionally as Judith Dolnick, are artists.


Garbage Day? Only Rodents Know for Sure
Peter Samton and his wife, Emily, first began to notice the rats near their apartment on West 88th Street about a month ago, and they attributed it to the sporadic trash pickup during the heavy snows this winter.
But when the snow and most of the old trash went away and the rats seemed to remain, they began to search for a cause.


Anne Gumkowski, Glenn R. Pierce
Anne Ellen Gumkowski, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Gumkowski of Branford, Conn., was married yesterday to Glenn R. Pierce, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Pierce of Plymouth Meeting, Pa.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert Jacoby performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Old Pine Street Church in Philadelphia.


Belatedly, Spring Arrives, Welcome All the More
It's about two weeks behind, but who's complaining?
Spring has finally come to the Northeast.
Even if it snowed tomorrow (don't say that!) that glorious clear light that stays around longer every day would still be here.
The first daffodil finally bloomed last week at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx -- but only because it sits over an underground boiler that heats the greenhouse.
The other tens of thousands on Daffodil Hill are still just little green shoots.


'Your Heart Goes Out to Them'
AMID the anxiety and anguish, the frustration and fear, Cheryl Simone and Alayna Jaenickazimer offered warm smiles and comfort to many who fled the Durham Woods apartment complex with little more than the nightclothes on their backs.
The women, both first-time local Red Cross volunteers, also offered hope and a return to normalcy for some whose sense of security was consumed in the early-morning fireball that blistered the feet and scorched the memories of those who escaped.


Drive-In Minus Cars
The Movie Manor Motel in Monte Vista, Colo., is open year round.
But the motel's main attraction is available only when the weather gets mild.
The 60-room motel, on the Rio Grande just east of the San Juan Mountains, and currently celebrating its 30th anniversary, wraps around the Star Drive-In Theater.
And when drive-in season is in full swing, beginning April 29 this year, guests can watch the show through the windows.


All Part Of a Trend
To the Editor:
An artist like Goya may well perceive and depict the essence of fools in his portraits.
Do all those ruthlessly portrayed by Richard Avedon (and others) deserve to be treated as he has chosen to treat them?


At Work; A Health Risk Escaping Regulators
YOU have an illness that makes you feel faint, pitch over and pass out or vomit.
It causes your blood pressure and heart rate to rabbit around.
You lose a day or two of work here and there, and sometimes you need treatment in a hospital emergency room.
You are worried, and chances are, if you are a white-collar employee and your symptoms appear at work, your employer, and perhaps even local public health officials, will be too.
If you happen to be a tobacco harvester, doing seasonal work, there's a good chance you recognize those symptoms.
They are typical of green tobacco sickness, an illness that, as one Kentucky tobacco farmer put it, "can make you feel like you're going to die." Despite evidence that the illness, essentially a form of nicotine poisoning that can affect field workers when wet tobacco touches their skin, is endemic among tobacco pickers, it is widely regarded as a nuisance and a cost of doing business.


Don't Blame The Post-Modernists
To the Editor:
Michael Howard's rant against "post-modernist fashions in American academic life," in his review of Gertrude Himmelfarb's "On Looking Into the Abyss" (March 6), strikes me, as do so many overheated conservative responses to contemporary academic thinking, as a clear case of protesting too much.
Mr.
Howard -- a former history professor at Oxford, no less -- reveals his true colors at the end of his review with the spectacularly ahistorical assertion that the "value-free" principles espoused by post-modernism today were responsible for the Holocaust.


Songs Sung for the Oppressed
IN a house deep in the woods here, a Ukrainian singer was practicing "Strawberry Fields" and preparing to tear people's hearts out.
Waif-like in a sky-blue minidress and high black boots, Masha Itkina closed her eyes and sang as though she was performing a tragic love song.
The Beatles were before her time, she said, and forbidden in the former Soviet Union as well, so she brings a fresh slant to the music.
"Nothing is real," she sang in a husky contralto, giving the line a startling intensity.
Robert T. Keston, a concert and film producer and writer, who with the actor Tony Randall, Ms.
Itkina's sponsor, recently brought the singer to this country for her American television debut, interrupted to correct her diction.
But Mr.
Keston, whose house this was, is no Professor 'iggins and Ms.
Itkina is not Eliza: she is a film actress and seasoned singer in Russia, who her American sponsors say could become a superstar here.


U.N. to Discuss Plan to Stabilize Population
A 20-year United Nations plan for stabilizing the world's population at about 7.8 billion people by 2050, compared with some 5.7 billion today, is to be discussed by 170 countries at a two-week conference opening Monday.
The plan, prepared by the United Nations Population Fund, involves quadrupling the amount of money given to poor nations for family planning, to some $4.4 billion, by 2000, and promoting social changes, especially in the treatment of women.


The World; OPEC's Lonely at the Tap, But China's Getting Thirsty
THERE was a time when the meetings of the OPEC oil cartel were covered by every major news organization in the world with all the intensity and fascination of a superpower summit.
Any minister emerging from the closed-door sessions who cocked even an eyebrow hinting at a price rise would send hundreds of journalists stampeding to the phones.
OPEC reporting was a contact sport.
These days, though, OPEC meetings attract about as much attention as a Save the Whales convention, and there are some beginning to ask again whether the oil giant isn't becoming just as endangered as the world's biggest mammal.
Don't bet on it.


It's Time to Play Catch Up With Spring
SHOOTS, blades, leaves and stems are pushing up fast these days.
Nature is trying to catch up with spring.
In many places, some of the earliest bulbs have bloomed.
Crocus, snowdrops, winter aconites and a few late Christmas roses have displayed their colorful petals.
There are also unwanted reminders of last year's garden that must be removed.
Although it is still a bit early to do a really good cleanup, since the ground remains soggy in many places, this would be a good time to get outdoors and remove some remnants.


Piedmont Journal; Tried by Deadly Tornado, An Anchor of Faith Holds
This is a place where grandmothers hold babies on their laps under the stars and whisper in their ears that the lights in the sky are holes in the floor of heaven.
This is a place where the song "Jesus Loves Me" has rocked generations to sleep, and heaven is not a concept, but a destination.
Yet in this place where many things, even storms, are viewed as God's will, people strong in their faith and their children have died in, of all places, a church.


Portraits From Hell
To the Editor:
In a graphic portrayal of a person one assumes that some identifiable facet is included, even if this smattering of likeness stretches one's imagination  [ "In the Portrait Game, Photographers Win," March 13 ] .
To accept Richard Avedon's photographs as likenesses is to assume that all these people inhabit the nether world.


The Executive Life; Moving On, Not Up, In the Video Business
IN one entertainment business that has been able to boast a good number of women on the corporate ladder, there may yet be a glass ceiling cutting short their ascent.
Since the home video industry was born in the early 1980's and as it expanded throughout that decade, several women were central to its development, especially in film acquisitions.
One of those women is now on her way out, and two may follow.


Missed Cues


The Nation: Just Say 'Ouch'; It Pains a Nation of Stoics to Say 'No' to Pain
EVEN in the final stages of the cancer that killed him, 59-year-old James Nickolaus refused to take medication to ease his pain.
"He didn't want to die an addict," said his daughter, Janet, a psychiatric nurse in Portland, Ore.
A majority of Americans are similarly stoic, according to recent studies, believing that only moral weaklings use narcotics.
Contrary to the popular notion that Americans are pill poppers, seeking relief at the first twinge of discomfort or depression, research strongly suggests that they are actually under-medicated for severe pain.


Perfect Time to Inspect House's Exterior
EARLY spring is the best time to inspect the outside of the house.
An inspection as soon as working outdoors is feasible allows making small repairs promptly and provides a head start on larger projects.
Start by checking gutters and downspouts.
They are crucial in preventing foundation leaks, and gutters especially may been damaged from snow and ice.


In 'C'mon And Hear,' Songs By Berlin
"MY ambition is to reach the heart of the average American," Irving Berlin said.
"Not the highbrow nor the lowbrow, but that vast intermediate crew which is the real soul of the country. My public is the real people."
So here is an evening of Irving Berlin songs, among the most accessible on America's all-time hit parade, that leaves one utterly baffled.
Go figure.


If the White Sox Don't Win, It'll Be a Scandal
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Mets appear on page 7.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX
Now that they have all that spring nonsense behind them and the real players are playing, the White Sox may be the clearest-cut favorite to win an A.L. division title.


Some Bad Role Models
EARLY WORK 1970-1979.
By Patti Smith.
Illustrated. 177 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $18.95.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; It's Age, Not Diplomas
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


Happy-to-Be-Here Division Could Go to Astros
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Mets appear on page 7.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
CHICAGO CUBS
Tom Trebelhorn is the new manager, but he could have the same old problems.
These are, after all, the Cubs.
Although Trebelhorn most likely will work more peacefully with the front office than his predecessor, Jim Lefebvre, did, he has the same potential problems in the starting staff.


The 'Great Man' Theory of Foreign Policy
DIPLOMACY By Henry Kissinger. Illustrated. 912 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $35.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Women Have Been There
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


In Collusion With Evil
To the Editor:
Gen.
Sir David Fraser compares Erwin Rommel to Robert E. Lee, but the Desert Fox can be much more closely compared to another Confederate general.
Rommel studied the techniques of Nathan Bedford Forrest and was able to apply them quite successfully against the British and even the Americans.
Forrest, a cavalry Moriarty, was fast, mobile, omnipresent, and became a hobgoblin to his opposition despite being vastly overmatched by the North.
Union soldiers may or may not have respected Lee, but they were terrified of Forrest, whose tricky tactics were translated verbatim from horses to tanks by Rommel.


Holy Week


Hint of Spring in the Air and on the Table
MANY foods evoke spring: artichokes, asparagus, lamb, young chickens, shad, soft-shell crabs, fresh herbs, early strawberries and new potatoes.
Starting with spring, the bins and baskets in the produce markets take on a new look.
Some vegetables that have been scarce, expensive or in poor condition for months begin showing up regularly.
And as the choices increase, so do the seasonal menu options.


Music; Trios, Quartets and a Quintet Are Offering Spring Serenades
ONE of these days, perhaps for its centennial next season, the Chaminade Club of Yonkers will present music by its namesake, the French composer and pianist Cecile Chaminade (1857-1944).
Meanwhile, chamber music lovers can look ahead to a recital highlighting works by Haydn, Vivaldi, Pierne and Schumann on Tuesday at 1:45 P.M.
The concert, which takes place at the Will Library in Yonkers, will be performed by the Music Project, an ensemble consisting of the flutist Sheryl Henze, the violinist Setsuko Nagata, the cellist Matthias Naegele and the pianist Dan Berlinghoff.
For more details, call 963-7753.
The Saturday Brass Quintet takes the acoustical measure of the Bedford Presbyterian Church on Friday at 8 P.M. for the finale of the Concerts on the Green series there.
This superb group, past winner of the Naumburg Award, will offer pieces both old and new.
Call 234-3672 for information.


Brooklyn Expatriates in Los Angeles Mourn Fading Reminders of the Past
Long before the Dodgers moved here, long before the term "sister city" was coined, Brooklyn and Los Angeles were soul mates, linked by the thousands of people from Flatbush Avenue to Coney Island who had made new lives here.
The past few days offered reminders both of how strong that bond remains, and how, in the most protean city in a changeable culture, it is inexorably weakening.
On Friday night, 200 Brooklynites, primarily from the world of entertainment, reunited in the Friars Club.
The setting was Beverly Hills but the flavor was Brooklyn: place cards depicting the Brooklyn Bridge, tables named "Ocean Parkway" and "Nostrand," "Ditmas" and "DeKalb," Dodgers caps by every place.
And in accents barely touched by 30 years of sunshine, rich and famous Angelenos spoke of the most important institutions in their mostly longish lives -- not colleges or studios -- but the Brooklyn high schools they attended three, four, five decades ago.


A Speculator Collapses, And Traders Worry
THE most dangerous speculators are the ones who don't think they are speculating at all.
For they assume that market disruptions will not affect them, and thus show a disregard for the warning signs that markets are turning against them.
That is why the collapse last week of Askin Capital Management may have been the most significant event of the week.
Askin was running more than $600 million in an allegedly "market neutral" account that was supposed to produce guaranteed profits without interest rate risk.
Something went wrong, and the entire amount may have been wiped out as interest rates rose in recent weeks.


Rangers' Panic?
To the Sports Editor:
If New York sports fans needed any additional evidence that the games they watch are not games at all, they got it again when the Rangers packed off Mike Gartner to Toronto as if he were just another player.


Double Exposure
In this age of rampant individuality, there's nothing like a twin to get you noticed.


Trusts and Estates Are Cited for Gifts to the Neediest Cases
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund has issued a list of trusts and estates that contributed to its 82d annual campaign, which ended Feb. 28.
Donations from those sources totaled $1,076,093.34, an increase from $1,035,382.58 a year ago.
Over all, the fund had the second-best campaign in its history, with $4,590,568.69 in donations from nearly 13,500 contributors during the three-month drive.
These are the trusts and estates that took part.
TRUSTS
Elisabeth S. Adriesse
Gwendolyn W. Allen
Angela S. Atkinson
Phil A. Bali
Jonas A. Barish/Mildred Barish
Mazure Bernard
Rita Bodenheimer
A. E. Bradford
Ada Brentano
R. D. Brown
Edwin Bruns
Russell and Judith Carson
Jean P. Chorley
Constance Coleman
Community Funds Account #10
Credit Shelter Trust
Katherine Packard Crispell
Reuben B. Crispell
Rose F. Dale
William L. Detmold
Elsworth Eliot Jr.
David Falk Memorial Fund
Amy Frank
Emanuel Frank
Desiree L. Franklin
Lilly J. Freeman
Esther Friedenheit
L. W. Frohlich Charitable Trust
Ilma Stafford Greene
Abraham (et al.) Haas
David Hass
Maude Harkness
Helen (et al.) Harris
Samuel Harris
Fred M. Hechinger
Joseph S. Heil
Eleanor Rice Hunt
Flora Isenberg
Percival E. Jackson
Carola Jacoby
Hattie Joseph
Jacques de Kadt
Stanley E. Kapp
Amy W. Klingmann
Richard and Peggy Korn Fund
Jeannette and H. Peter Kriendler Trust
Henry Krumb
Tilly Evelyn Lash
I. Montefiore Levy
Hanna Lewis
Elias Lieberman
Julius Loeb
Carolyn Fiske MacGregor
Gertrude Maiden
Bernard H. Mazure
Hoyt Miller
Madge Miller
Sophia Miller
Samuel J. Mortiz
Bert Nachman
William J. Nagle
Elsie and Walter Naumberg
Jacob Nusbaum
Adolph S. Ochs
Nannie Ochs
George W. Ochs-Oakes
Rosa Petschek
Helen B. Post
Frank H. Rank
Oscar and Ethel B. Reiss
Max Richter
John Roach
Clarence Lew Rosenthal
William Salloch
Kathryn Mulholland Samuels Memorial
Charles Schwartz
Lucille E. Selz
Harry Sices
Augustus I. Siesel
Maurice Silin
Thomas J. Skuse
Solon E. Summerfield Foundation
Charles F. Speare
Alexander and Tillie Speyer
Franklin A. Sprague
Hertha Stern
Jane L. Stitt
David Strauss
Madelon Sundheimer for Jane Sydney
James and Sophie Sylvester
Edwin Tassell
Unitrust
Robert O. Veit
Henry L. Walker Jr.
Roberta Waxman
Albert Louis Wechsler
Weingarten Memorial
Mary L. Wiener Fund
Wilbur Trust
Louis Wiley
Henrietta S. Wolf
Mabelle Allen Wood
Anonymous (36) ESTATES
Tillye B. Aaronson
Katherine Andrews
Eugene Bascho, Est. Sophie L. Bascho
Victoria Bitterman
Iris De La Torre Bueno
Gizella S. Cohen
Constance Culner
Gerard A. Eichenberg
David Falk Memorial
Aaron Feldman
Lynn G. Fennerty
Anita Guterman
Blanche G. Haltzel
Robert Herzog
Irene Hirschberg
Rita D. Hornstein
Charles Huber
Jessica Ruth Jacobs
Carola Jacoby
Faie J. Joyce
Fred J. Kulb
Jeanne Lautman
Ruth H. Markowitz
George Martin
Ethel R. Mayorg-Rivas
Florence McKinlay
Madge Miller
Sophia Miller
Maria Moretti
Joseph A. Palisi
Theodore Phillips
Florence Pollack
Celia Russel
Wells Richardson
Walter Schwab
Thomas A. Sheerin Jr.
Benjamin Sperling
Julien E. Strausz
Wanda Carlyle Smith
Beatrice R. Swaab
Helen Toplitz
Josiah B. Way
Jeannette Webber
Lilly Webster
Aida Weiner
Rose Wollstein


Philip Morris Lashes Back
The $10 billion suit filed by Philip Morris against the ABC television network is a clear attempt to intimidate further investigation into what may become the vulnerable underbelly of the tobacco industry -- its ability to control the dose of addictive nicotine delivered to smokers.
The company aimed its legal fire at several recent ABC programs, led by "Day One," which charged that cigarette manufacturers add nicotine to cigarettes to keep smokers addicted.
Philip Morris denied categorically that it does any such thing.
It said it simply "recombines" nicotine that has been removed earlier in the production process and does not add any additional nicotine.


In the Region/Connecticut; Tax Rollbacks for 'Paper' Subdivisions on Farmland
THREE months from now, in July, Samuel and Ruth Paletsky of Morris will be getting some money back -- $24,222.
It's a refund on their 1991 and 1992 property-tax payments.
Samuel's brother, Bernard, and his wife, Mildred, will get a refund of $3,391.
James and Beatrice Greaves are getting $5,747.
Andrew Anderson awaits $1,986.
Computations for the refund due Abdullah El-Hachem, an absentee landowner from Nigeria, have not yet been completed.


It's Not the Money, It's the Message
Regarding "Why Birth Certificates Now Cost $15" (March 7), I do not mind paying $15.
I do not mind waiting over 10 weeks to receive it.
I do not mind making four toll calls to Hartford to learn the status of my certificate.
But I DO mind getting taped instructions in Spanish: I DO mind having a taped message of an American governmental office telling me, "IF YOU WISH ENGLISH, PRESS ONE"!
MARY FELIX Westport


Correction
The Art column on March 20 about works by Jim Henson at the Hurlbutt Gallery in Greenwich misstated the years covered by the exhibition.
It is 1964 to 1971, not to 1981.
The column also misstated the surname of a Muppets performer.
He was Frank Oz, not Frank Rizzo.


Map of Tuckerman
Botanists, skiers and hikers are among the biggest fans of Tuckerman Ravine, a deep gully on New Hampshire's Mount Washington.
But a new map, published by Boston's Grand Circle Foundation, details every landmark of the four-mile ravine, from lakes and bridges to forests and rock formations.


The Search for a Better Way to Get There (Part 95)
AS they say, the more things change, the more they stay the same, and there are few better examples than the New York Automobile Show that opened yesterday at the Javits Convention Center on 11th Avenue in Manhattan.
To be sure, the automobile has come a long way in its 100-year history.
Its materials are high-tech.
Tires rarely go flat, and electrons have replaced rods and levers as the primary control of a car's functions.
Safety, too, is the hot ticket this year, with antilock brakes, air bags and side-protection door beams sprouting everywhere.


You Could Look It Up
The DSM-IV is on its way!
The Diagnostic and Statistic Manual of Mental Disorders, a comprehensive index of mental illnesses published by the American Psychiatric Association, will creep into the hearts and offices of mental health professionals next month when its fourth edition rolls off the presses.
What is found therein?
Among the new mental illnesses that the index suggests are rampaging the country is Inhalant-Induced Anxiety Disorder.


Lake Superior State Breezes to Championship
Lake Superior State took command of the Boston University team in the opening moments tonight and trounced the Terriers, 9-1, to win college hockey's national championship.
Seven different players scored goals for the Lakers, who led by 1-0 after one period and by 6-1 after two.
It was the most decisive score in this 44-year-old event since Denver beat St.
Lawrence by 12-2 in 1951.


On Sunday; Looking Back In Anger, Grief And Even Joy
AN atheist at the funeral could envy the power of religion in the life of Amy Federici, one of six people murdered by a gunman firing in random rage last winter on a Long Island commuter train.
The 27-year-old woman's church farewell was a dark starburst of grief and sanctity, glinting with testimonials to many words and deeds of charity by the victim, for all the scant span of her life.
The talk was of the woman's incandescent virtue and not of anything remotely approaching vengeance.
Her parents, Arlene and Jack Locicero, prayed by her coffin to set this tone, just as her 21-year-old sister, Carrie, managed to stand up and sing a parting hymn.


Official's Ouster Adds to Bitterness In Divided District
William E. Ubinas, the superintendent of District 1, is known on the Lower East Side as an energetic, charismatic leader with a flair for innovation.
But in a tumultuous meeting on March 24, five of the nine school-board members voted not to renew his contract in June.
They said his image is one thing, his performance another.
The decision has set off a firestorm.
Mr.
Ubinas's supporters charge that he is the victim of a political vendetta.
Mr.
Ubinas is defiant.
He says he will appeal to Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, and that if he fails, he will reapply for his job.


Q and A
Norway's Coastal Steamers
Q.
I have heard about the possibility of taking a trip aboard the Norwegian mailboats that sail along the fjords.
Do you know where I can obtain further information? -- Erik C. Mathys, Lincoln, Neb.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Coming Home To Roost
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


MacTavish Is Cool, Helping to Ice Victory
It is precisely for nights like this that Craig MacTavish came to the Rangers two weeks ago.
Poised and opportunistic, the 35-year-old MacTavish kept his cool, scored the pivotal goal and made several important defensive plays as the Rangers came from behind to take a 4-2 victory over the Devils tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Court Backs Bridgemarket
A development company has won the latest skirmish in its battle to build a huge marketplace under the Queensboro Bridge.
The state's highest court, the Court of Appeals, ruled on March 24 against a neighborhood group seeking to block the project.


Am I Blue?


Madrid's Round-the-Clock Pace
ATHENS and Rome are far older, Paris and Prague are more beautiful, but what European capital can match the voluble, gregarious and insomniac inhabitants of Madrid?
Not that the city lacks fine monuments and museums.
Yet, somehow, it is the Madrilenos who provide the real show.
They live their city like no other.
And, believe me, it is not easy to keep up with them.
They seem incapable of staying at home, they love to rub shoulders in crowds, they talk, eat and drink well into the night, they ramble through streets before dawn and, well, they never seem to sleep.
So it takes a special energy to get to know Madrid.
And, because its streets are noisy, polluted and clogged with traffic on weekdays, the weekend is the best time to do so.
The city has five million inhabitants and sprawls far and wide, but much of it can be ignored.
What entices is the old city with the grand Plaza Mayor at its heart, the Madrid de los Austrias, as it is known in honor of the Habsburg kings who built it in the late 16th and 17th centuries.
This is where the Madrilenos like to hang out.


Wednesday Night Obsession
At this point, I can no longer quite remember exactly when I became hooked on "Melrose Place." I think it was around the time when Amanda told Billy, who by this time had dumped her for Alison, that she was pregnant. (She subsequently had a miscarriage.) Or maybe it was a little later, when Sydney showed up and seduced her sister Jane's ex-husband, Michael. (More recently, Sydney blackmailed Michael into marrying her. But don't worry, he tried to poison her.)
I would like to say that I do not watch every group grope that Aaron Spelling puts on the air.
The 1980's came and went, and I barely tuned into "Dynasty." And it took me years before I could tell the difference between Jason Priestley and Luke Perry, of "Beverly Hills 90210" fame.
But I succumbed to "Melrose Place" pretty quickly.


Brooklyn Grocer Is Shot Dead In a Robbery by Teen-Agers
Teodoro Betances, a Brooklyn bodega owner, was like many others selling candy and milk on street corners in neighborhoods all over New York City.
A Dominican immigrant, he had painted his store sign, "Stop 1 Food Market," in red, white and blue.
There he toiled long into the evening, seven days a week, away from his wife and two young daughters.
But when he was shot to death during a robbery in his store at 423 Central Avenue, in Bushwick, even the local drug dealers shook their heads.


A Chance to Compare Trollope's World and Ours
To the Editor:
As the member of the Trollope Society who founded the first Trollope reading group, I was interested in your article about New York's literary societies, "From 'Riverrun' to Cyberspace" (March 27).
The central reason that we come together is to enjoy the world of Trollope both as a world very much in the past and apart, and simultaneouusly to talk about the commonalities of Trollope's world with our lives in 1994.


Melanie Schwartz, David J. Hecker
Dr.
Melanie Lisa Schwartz and Dr.
David Jay Hecker, physicians in New York, were married last evening.
Rabbi Joel Y. Zion performed the ceremony at the Inwood Country Club in New York.
The bride, 34, is an intern in medicine at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She graduated cum laude from New York University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She received her M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


New Manhole Covers Planned After a Fall
One day after a 5-year-old girl fell down an open manhole in Central Park, the city's Parks Commissioner, Henry J. Stern, said yesterday that his department intends to replace the manhole covers in Central Park with heavier models that are more difficult to pry open.
The police said the girl had been rolling down a hill when she fell through the manhole near the carousel on 64th Street and Center Drive.
The cover had been removed, though no one knows why.


ABOUT BOOKS
Forgotten Heroes
IT is no coincidence that Joseph G. Bilby writes about unsung heroes.
A veteran of the Vietnam War, he called his latest book "Forgotten Warriors: New Jersey's African American Soldiers in the Civil War" and dedicated it to the men of the First Infantry Division with whom he served from August 1966 to August 1967.


Bidding Your Miles
Frequent fliers redeeming miles through British Airways' Executive Club Mileage program won't necessarily have to settle for just free tickets and upgrades.
Through April 30, they can use their miles to bid for four prizes -- a safari in Kenya, a stay at Scotland's Gleneagles golf resort, a five-day cooking course in Positano, Italy, and the opportunity to pilot the British Airways Concorde simulator for two hours in Bristol, England.
Prizes go to the top bidders, with minimum bids ranging from 100,000 miles for the cooking course to 125,000 for the flight simulator.
But bids received to date have been "significantly higher" than the minimums in some cases, a British Airways spokeswoman said.


Russia Says It Needs to Keep More of Its Weapons on Borders
Faced with turmoil and instability along its southern flank, Russia has appealed to the West for a review of cold-war-era limits on the conventional weapons it is allowed to deploy in its border regions, military analysts say.
Moscow's main argument is that when it agreed to the 1990 treaty limiting such forces, it was a different country with an entirely different set of military concerns centered around the possibility of a war with NATO.
Now, the Russians say, their main concern is instability on their southern flank.


Back to Basics In the West Village
ANDALOUSIA ++ (212) 929-3693; 28 Cornelia Street, near West Fourth; $; Mastercard
A charming Moroccan restaurant filled with ceramic curios and adorned with colorful tapestries, Andalousia specializes in aromatic North African dishes and serves some of the best couscous in town.
Breewats -- small flaky pastries stuffed with fillings like sweet chicken stewed with dried lemons, a pea-and-carrot mixture or minced lamb -- are fine openers.
There are also clean and fragrant salads, like hummus, grated carrots with raisins in a sweet orange marinade, and mashed eggplant with parsley, cumin and minced olives.
The couscous is delicious, served with a variety of toppings, including steamed carrots, peas, zucchini and squash, spicy merguez, shredded chicken and tender chunks of stewed lamb.
Excellent tagines -- Moroccan stews -- are served in traditional brown earthenware crocks; and B'stilla resembles a sweet chicken pot pie that is encased in phyllo with almonds and topped with a flaky crust seasoned with sugar and cinnamon. ($25 and Under: 2/18/94)  FLORENT


Soul-Searching By Class of '94 At Annapolis
Falling neatly into line, dark uniforms creased, white hats pulled low, the class of 1994 looks every bit as spit-and-polished as any other assembly of midshipmen in the 149 years that the nation's future naval officers have been training here.
But suddenly, this year's class is likely to be smaller than it might have been, and its graduation next month will come with a certain poignancy and publicity that it clearly could have done without.
Their reputations sullied, members of the class of 1994, like the characters in a bitter tale of coming of age, will long live under the shadow of the widest cheating scandal ever to scar the United States Naval Academy.


Churches vs. Parents and Pupils
Opened last fall to train a generation of leaders, an alternative school in Mott Haven is now itself embroiled in a leadership crisis.
Ten days ago, a dispute with painful racial overtones culminated in the dismissal of the administrator at the South Bronx Academy for Community Leadership.
The move has left the school community divided, pitting students and parents who support the ousted administrator against South Bronx Churches, an association of 22 congregations that helped sponsor the school.


Seder With a Sense of Humor
Uptown -- Joan Rivers wasn't just conducting a seder for the 14 guests at her apartment on the first night of Passover.
She was presiding over it.
But once you've presided over the "Tonight" show for Johnny Carson, presiding over a seder isn't so daunting, especially when you've got a staff in the kitchen working the matzoh balls while waiters in black tie are serving cocktails and gefilte-fish canapes in the living room.
So how was Joan Rivers's seder like most other seders?


F.Y.I.
Honoring Horace . . .
Q.
I have been living in Queens for 30 years but have never been able to find out who Horace Harding (of Horace Harding Boulevard) was.


POSTINGS: Detracked at Last; Apartments Replace Rail Right-of-Way
A pair of railroad tracks once ran through the center of the building and kept going.
Indeed, much of the overhead track near West Street north of Gansevoort Street -- track that linked manufacturing and meat cutting to downtown -- remains, derelict and with weeds sprouting between its rusting rails.
Rockrose Development Corporation, the owner of the yellow-brick former warehouse at 802 Washington Street, part of the 10-building complex known as the West Coast Apartments, knew there was potentially valuable residential space going to waste.
After a decade of negotiations with Conrail, the Federal entity that controlled the tracks and myriad rights-of-way, Rockrose finally acquired the property for an undisclosed sum in 1990 and got permission to rip out the tracks from Gansevoort down to Jane Street, where the developer also owns two large lots.


THE FIRST AMENDMENT, UNDER FIRE FROM THE LEFT
Floyd Abrams is a brilliant champion of our Constitutional freedoms ("The First Amendment, Under Fire From the Left," March 13).
But when he is chosen to debate Catharine Mac Kinnon, readers get the impression that there are only two "sides" on censorship: opposed are civil libertarians, arguing somewhat abstractly for the integrity of the First Amendment; for are the feminists, represented by Mac Kinnon and Andrea Dworkin, who defend women's equality and physical safety, endangered by the absolute exercise of free speech.
As a matter of fact, many, many feminists believe that the First Amendment is good for women, and that women's freedom, equality and safety are abetted by the broadest availability of sexual speech, from "Debbie Does Dallas" to "Our Bodies, Ourselves" to Andrea Dworkin's expletive-laced anti-porn polemic, "Intercourse."


China's Balancing Act: Trying to Chastise an Old Ally
North Korea's nuclear program is such a nightmare for China that senior military figures here tell foreign visitors there is no reason, other than the guesswork by American intelligence, to believe that such a thing exists.
"They really don't like this issue," one Western specialist said recently.


Tooting Our Own Horn
As a rule The New York Times Magazine doesn't trumpet its successes in its own columns.
But there are exceptions to every rule, and the kudos received from Tan Dun, a Chinese composer, warrant a fanfare.
Tan uses paper to make music.
He blows on it and scratches it.
He performed the world premiere of "Soundshape II: for ceramics, water and paper" in San Francisco in March, and told The San Francisco Chronicle that The New York Times Magazine is musically unparalleled.
Back home in Manhattan (where he will be performing this fall), he confirmed his conclusion: "We tried so many papers, so many papers, but your magazine is best." Thank you.


Labor Department Falls Down on the Job
To the Editor:
In "96 an Hour: The Sweatshop Is Reborn" (Viewpoints, March 6), Karen Nussbaum, director of the Labor Department's Women's Bureau, and Maria Echaveste, administrator of the department's Wage and Hour Division, complain that Labor's enforcement task is difficult in the garment industry because subcontracting "opens legal loopholes for employers," allowing 38 percent of apparel employers to be misclassified as independent contractors.
If they think misclassification is a legal loophole, no wonder they're having trouble getting employers to comply with the law.


A New Era for Baseball: East Meets West Meets Central
Early in spring training, Lou Piniella delivered a message to his players.
"There's no reason to assume this team can't get into post-season play," the manager said he told his Seattle Mariners.
"It's our time. We can win."
The Mariners have never won a division championship in their 17-year history; in fact, they have finished only two seasons with a winning record.
But the development of their talented players combined with a change in the alignment of the divisions in each league makes the Mariners legitimate contenders for the first time.


Splendor of the Grass
The baselines are freshly marked and the grass nicely trimmed at 18 of the 28 major-league baseball stadiums, ready for opening day tomorrow.
At 10 other fields the Astroturf has been vacuumed.
Next year there will be only nine such abominations because George Toma, the head groundskeeper for the Kansas City Royals baseball team, will rip up the plastic in Kauffman Stadium and put down the real thing.
Toma, whom others in his trade call the "guru of groundskeepers" is a fan of grass, and not only because it has the feel of smaller, more accessible fields, like Scottsdale Stadium in Arizona, shown above.


When Electric Cabs Roamed Manhattan
To the Editor:
"In Quest for Electric Cars, He Adds the Power of Faith" (Profile, March 6) reminded me of a Harper's Weekly article in my collection about the fleet of electric taxis that roamed New York City's streets in 1898.
The article, with pictures, is dated Dec. 10, 1898, and tells how the cabs cruised during the daytime and recharged at a central garage at night.
Whatever happened to them?
The same thing that happened to the highly efficient network of electric interurban systems that served the nation from Los Angeles to New England.
Some say they were killed by the oil interests.
Whatever, it illustrates how we abandon a good thing and then reinvent it at great cost a century later.
GRAHAM R. HODGES  Liverpool, N.Y., March 8  The writer, a retired minister, collects old periodicals.


Getting Out the Kinks in a New Ball Park


North Korea May Be Expanding Atom Site
North Korea is expanding the potential of its nuclear installation to separate plutonium and may double the capacity of the plant in as little as six months, American officials said today.
The officials said international monitors discovered while visiting the site last month that North Korea had begun installing a second production line at the plutonium reprocessing plant.


Area's Only Abortion Clinic Loses Its Eviction Fight
The only abortion clinic on the Upper West Side has lost a bitter legal battle against its landlord and must leave its offices at 66th Street and Broadway by the end of the month.
It has nowhere to go.


Do the Blind Have a Right to Own Firearms? Judge Says Yes
STEVEN HOPLER says he fervently believes that the Constitution accords all citizens the right to have guns.
He says that includes citizens who, like him, are blind.
Not so, the Rockaway Township Police Department says.
It refused to issue him a gun permit in December.
So Mr.
Hopler, 31, who became totally blind in 1991 because of diabetes, went to court over the issue.


THE SOUND OF NON-MUSIC
John Tierney is living in a fantasy version of New York (The Big City: "The Sound of Non-Music," March 13).
His New York is filled with demonic theatrical unions and innocent, beleaguered producers who have (so sadly) failed to form a monopolistic cartel.
Obviously, Mr.
Tierney is unaware of the reality on Broadway, which is far less romantic than he might wish.
To wit:


Corrections
A credit line on Feb. 17 with a series of maps showing black migration patterns since the Civil War misstated the affiliation of Prof.
William Bowen, who provided the data.
He is in the department of geography, not geology, at California State University at Northridge.
And the Northridge campus is not part of the University of California system.
A reader's letter pointing out the errors, dated Feb. 27, was misdirected at The Times, delaying this correction.


From Stereotypes of Urban Decay to Signs of Life
ONE DAY, WE WILL HAVE A generation of public servants who recognize that the urban park system is the supreme democratic art form.
I wish that day were here, for we have in hand a plan that could help rejuvenate that art form in America's largest city.
"Public Space for Public Life: A Plan for the 21st Century" provokes hope and despair in equal measure.
Prepared under the auspices of two private groups, the Parks Council and the Central Park Conservancy, the $3 billion, 10-year plan offers inspiring proof that the civic spirit lives in New York City.
At the same time, as the plan documents with depressingly stark graphs and charts, the public has lost ground in the fight to keep the city green.


Rangers Stake Their Claim as Best of Best
In a showdown between the two best teams in the National Hockey League, it was the Rangers who came out on top tonight as they beat the Devils for the sixth straight time this season and put themselves in position to win the league's regular-season championship.
Down by two goals after one period, the Rangers rallied to score four straight times in the second period and skate away with a 4-2 victory at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in a game that had a playoff-type atmposphere.


Corrections
An article on page 26 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Verve Records includes an outdated list of performers for the label's 50th-anniversary celebration, on Wednesday at Carnegie Hall.
Lionel Hampton, Astrud Gilberto, Mel Torme and Shirley Horn are no longer on the program.


A Proposal to Reform The 'Eldercare' Maze
To the Editor:
In your Feb. 27 article, "Beyond Denial: An 'Eldercare' Primer," you draw attention to the difficulties many older persons and their families face in obtaining long-term care services.
As you say, the current system offers a complex and fragmented network of programs, services, rules and points of access.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
103.60
104.95
113.75
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6970
1.6670
1.5595
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3885
1.3758
1.2644
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4740
1.4969
1.5205
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$391.80
$390.80
$340.60
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close; gold price as of Thurs.


AIDS and the Practice of Architecture
AIDS is tracing a jagged line through the architectural profession, devastating some firms while leaving others seemingly untouched.
It has created hardships, including higher insurance rates, but also opportunities -- unwelcome though they may be -- as architects are asked to design buildings for a population that barely existed before the 80's began.
The epidemic has eradicated small offices and forced the heads of large firms into painful balancing acts.
On the one hand are employees who define their lives by their work and wish to stay on the job as long as they can; on the other are clients who may shy away from someone with AIDS, out of prejudice or fear that the designer will not see their project to completion.


On Moviegoing In New Jersey
In Glenn Collins's lamentation about the apparent ghetto-izing of New Jersey moviegoers ("A Sense of Place," Feb. 27), the problem more likely rests with exhibition.
A discouraging example: Cineplex Odeon's multiplex in Menlo Park.
This 12-screen arcade boasts the largest lobby this side of Paradise (as in Loews) with enough confectionery offerings to keep the Swiss chocolate economy alive for years.


'Broken Glass,' the New Haven Tryout That Isn't
IN 1947, a new play by an emerging playwright had its world premiere at the Shubert in New Haven.
It was the first stop on a passage to Broadway and to legend, and no one balked when "All My Sons" by Arthur Miller was called a pre-Broadway tryout.
Forty-seven years later, Miller's new play, "Broken Glass," is having its world premiere just two miles down the road from the Shubert at the Long Wharf Theater.
But everyone on the Long Wharf end is denying that it is a "tryout," an unspoken word in regional theater.
This in spite of the fact that the play, in its current production, is scheduled to begin previews at the Booth Theater, at the north side of Manhattan's Shubert Alley, nine days after today's closing in New Haven.
The Broadway opening night is April 24.


The Economy Should Work for Us
To the Editor:
The Group of Seven conference on employment in industrialized nations, held in Detroit this month, brought with it suggestions that the Europeans and Japanese could learn from the United States how to make their work forces more "flexible" by eliminating some job security, encouraging people to relocate and curtailing unemployment benefits.


A Fairy-Tale Ending Derailed
FOR O. WINSTON LINK, THE HARD-WON fruits of his artistic dream have turned unexpectedly bitter.
Rumors have been swirling through the art world for some time that the 79-year-old Brooklyn-born photographer, whose celebrated nighttime images of steam engines and railroad towns hang in museums worldwide, is suffering from Alzheimer's disease.
But a recent courtroom battle depicted him as a different kind of victim.
It painted him as the central figure in a remarkable tale involving charges of betrayal, physical abuse and the theft of some 2,000 photographic prints; these prints, worth an estimated $2.5 million, are still missing.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Sent Mike Oquist, pitcher, to Rochester of the International League.


Din Over Koreas Deafens Reason
To the Editor:
Headlines and televisions scream that North Korea is building atomic bombs, that Kim II Sung is dangerously senile and massing troops, that South Koreans are terrified of attack.


Evening Hours; New 'Otello' Has 5th Act: Supper
The Metropolitan Opera Guild celebrates the opening, March 21.


Cartier Hunts Its Own Eggs And Other Old Treasures
CARTIER WENT SHOPPING last month at the Barbra Streisand auction in New York and snared a choice piece of its past: a 1927 Cartier clock that is wound by moving the face.
The Art Deco timepiece was bought at Christie's for $316,000 -- 10 times what Ms.
Streisand had paid for it in 1983.
And it was acquired in time to be included in "Made by Cartier," an exhibition at the Paris-based jeweler's Fifth Avenue branch, opening on Tuesday and remaining through April 23.
The 80 objects in the show -- clocks, lighters, boxes, picture frames, cuff links and cigarette cases -- were created between 1860 and 1960.
All are part of Cartier's corporate collection of historic designs, which has been assembled over the last decade.


Anti-Smokers Are Set Back By a Success
Subjected to five years of the most expensive anti-smoking campaign in the country, California's smokers have quit the habit at nearly three times the national average, according to a recent study financed by the California Department of Health Services.
The campaign has been so successful, in fact, that it has brought about a multimillion-dollar reduction in its financing, which comes from a special tax on tobacco products.
At the same time the financially pressed state has been dipping into the anti-smoking money to pay for medical programs, particularly those for children.


More and Better Infielders Give Mets Reserve Strength
The Mets' new-found claim of infield depth and prosperity will not be put to the test on opening day.
Jeff Kent, the club's starting second baseman, is expected to have rebounded from a strained muscle in his left leg and be ready for play in Chicago on Monday.


How Hair Helps Skating
To the Editor:
I do not as a rule read fashion articles, being male, in my 60's, a grandfather and totally unfashionable.
But The Dressing Room column on March 6, ("Game Fashion") on the Olympic ice-skating fashion parade did catch my attention -- particularly the accompanying old photo of Sonja Henie, whom I remember well from her movies.


Notorious


Older People and the Need for Assistance
IF we live long enough, many of us will fit the profile of an older person: living alone, independent, with mental faculties intact but having a need for stimulation and possibly requiring some physical assistance to perform routine chores.
Now there is help for older people who want to remain independent but yearn to live richer lives.
Selfhelp Community Services, a 58-year-old nonprofit agency, has started a household-manager program to bridge the gap between companionship and traditional home care, said Elizabeth N. Radow, the program's director.


Journey of Discovery


Recalling Paradise Garage
To the Editor:
Although my "clubbing" days are over, as a former club event producer/promoter, I read with great interest "The Mighty Nell's" (Feb. 27).
But what really touched my sentimental button was your accompanying list of landmark clubs, from Studio 54 and Area to Webster Hall and Club USA.
I remember all of these clubs with fondness.


With Plenty of Time to Think, A Pianist Redirects His Career
WHEN THE PIANIST Murray Perahia cut his thumb three years ago (he says he no longer remembers how), he hardly expected the injury to threaten his career.
But the cut led to infection, pain, scarring and, as his concern mounted, a series of operations that put him out of commission for months.
"I didn't really want to come to terms with the idea that I would never play again," Mr.
Perahia said.
"Of course it crossed my mind -- how could it not? -- and I occasionally asked myself what I might be able to do if that happened."


A South Bronx Tale: Local Boy Makes Very Good


Hungarian Arrests Set Off Debate: Should '56 Oppressors Be Punished?
Almost 40 years after the searing days of the 1956 Hungarian uprising, Arpad Baliczay recalls with cinematic detail how as a 15-year-old he fought the Soviets on the streets of this city, armed with a machine gun and grenades and dressed in a stolen police uniform that engulfed his slender frame.
He is 53 now, one of the youngest veterans of the uprising, and with as much fervor as he tells the stories of the deadly days at the barricades, he believes that those who betrayed the revolution should be punished.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Purchasing managers' index, March
56.6
56.8
Tuesday
Leading indicators, Feb., pct. change
0.3
-0.2
Wholesale trade, Feb., pct. change
0.8
0.5
Wednesday
Auto sales, March, millions, ann. rate
7.4
7.8
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
330
320
Friday
Consumer credit, Feb., change, billions
$6.0
$8.0
This Week's Developments
Wednesday
U.S. Treasury releases Strips report
Thursday
Chain stores report March sales


Forest Park
To the Editor: As a wildlife enthusiast who hikes once or twice each week in Forest Park in Portland, Ore., I was stunned by the vigor with which James Sturz exalted the "bounty of life" in this 5,000-acre wooded expanse.
In "Portland's Untamed Heart" (Feb. 20), Mr.
Sturz gushes that bobcat, coyote, elk and black-tailed deer live within Forest Park's bounds, and that visitors can peer into trees for cougars, or spot black bears "nibbling at wild berries." The implication is that if you merely nip out of your car for a moment, you can see the majesty of nature prancing before your eyes.


Growing Up A Haldeman
The turbulent Washington waters have claimed many public figures over the years, but few as powerful as Harry Robbins (Bob) Haldeman.
Chief of staff to Richard Nixon, Haldeman served from the President's election until April 30, 1973, when he, along with his college friend John Ehrlichman and other top Nixon appointees, resigned amid mounting accusations of efforts to cover up the political scandal that began with the break-in of the Democratic national headquarters at the Watergate complex.
H.
R.
Haldeman, a successful Los Angeles advertising executive, worked for the Eisenhower-Nixon ticket in 1956.
Looking, he said, for an adventure beyond advertising, he was drawn to Nixon by opportunity as well as ideology -- both he and Nixon were active in California business circles.
But he also admired Nixon's "fighting" spirit.
Haldeman served as Nixon's chief advance man in his race against John F. Kennedy in 1960, as manager of Nixon's 1962 gubernatorial bid and as manager again of Nixon's triumphant 1968 Presidential campaign.


Death Wishes
Modern-day Americans have been as repressed about death as the Victorians were about sex, or so say the thanatologists, those academics who delve into all aspects of death -- medical, psychological and social.
But suddenly death seems to have gone from interloper to invited guest, judging by the outpouring of books and movies that have recently poked at it from every angle.
Death has even wormed its way into the world of marketing, inspiring a number of macabre products, from skeleton earrings to the Death brand of cigarettes.


Bronx Woman Killed as a Parapet Collapses
A 63-year-old home-care nursing attendant walking home from work was crushed to death in a roaring tumble of bricks yesterday morning when the parapet over a row of stores in the Bronx collapsed onto a sidewalk.
The police said the victim, Doreen Browne, of 1140 Elder Avenue, was buried under a large pile of red bricks as a six-foot section of the parapet of a one-story building fell about 9 A.M. on Elder Avenue, near Westchester Avenue, in the Soundview section.


Victor P. Raymond; Veterans Affairs Official, 46
Victor P. Raymond, an Assistant Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs, died on Friday at his home in Washington.
He was 46.
The cause was complications of AIDS, said his companion, Robert C. Rea.


The Executive Computer; Viewing Documents of Mixed Parentage
LOST amid the sound and fury surrounding the Wordperfect Corporation's recent agreement to be acquired by Novell Inc. was the announcement of Wordperfect Envoy.
This might otherwise have been seen as the company's most exciting product since its founders took up word processing.
Envoy belongs to a class of software tools known as document viewers.
Such tools allow computers using Macintosh, Windows and Unix software to exchange fully formatted documents over networks, regardless of what software and fonts are on the receiving machine.


How American Intellectuals Learned to Love Ozu
THERE ARE ESSENTIALLY TWO audiences for movies, and there always have been.
The larger one, to which most of us belong -- the one that today's Hollywood aims at and that most critics are conscripted to write for -- enters the theater with the reduced expectations of adults.
A movie is a one-night stand.
You get your popcorn, you get your hit from the screen, and you walk out more or less satiated, without a backward glance.
I mean this literally.
The second audience, considerably smaller, enters with the question "Am I going to want to go back?" Their moviegoing is prompted by a childish anticipation of finding films they can live in, and their judgments are founded in a small child's delight in repetition.
The backward glance is their basic accolade.
Anything that cannot withstand at least two viewings is, for them, often not worth one.
Consider Oscar night from their point of view.
How many times would you return to see "The Age of Innocence"?
"The Piano"?
"Schindler's List"?


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Coming Home To Roost
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


Duke Comes Back for Another Final Examination
The signs, spreading throughout the state of Florida as the greatest Gator season unfolded, said, "Find A Way." That is what the Gators did throughout the winter and deeper into spring than any Florida team had ever gone.
But at the end, when they seemed on the brink of achieving the first opportunity to play for a national championship in school history, Florida's Gators suffered the misfortune of having to deal with a program that has displayed a greater sense of resourcefulness than any team in the recent history of college basketball.
Duke's Blue Devils overcame a 13-point second-half deficit and their own inconsistencies to defeat Florida, 70-65, tonight and advance to the finals of the national collegiate tournament for the fourth time in five years.
Duke, 28-5, will meet Arkansas Monday night at Charlotte Coliseum with a chance to win a third national championship in four years.


The Bell Doesn't End A Teacher's Day
Your article on the difficult role of school administrator ("On the Whole, Teachers Would Rather Be in the Classroom," March 13) accurately depicts both the demands and the rewards.
Of the incentives for a teacher to make the career move, higher pay is one, broader sphere of influence is another.
You mention both but attribute the dearth of applicants to loss of financial incentive.
An equally plausible argument can be made: broader influence appeals to the young teacher who finds the classroom to be confining after several years in one place.
Widespread staff reductions and hiring freezes during the last decade have decimated this group.
Simply stated, fewer of the likely prospects were hired as teachers in the first plce.


Q. &amp; A.
Windows: Brown Or White?
Q.
At a shareholder's meeting in the fall, members of our co-op were told that new white windows (inside white, outside brown) would be installed come winter.
Subsequently, one white and one brown window were installed in the master bedroom of my two-bedroom co-op.
Upon my complaint that mismatched windows were ridiculous, I was told that the fire-escape window (one of the two) did not come in white and that therefore the windows could not match.


An Out-of-the-Way Isle In South Carolina
WHILE strolling along the surf line at Edisto Beach, S.C., looking for shark's teeth in the sand and thinking about a bowl of seafood gumbo at Bobo Lee's beach cafe, I was surprised by the sight of three little shrimp trawlers.
They were barely 100 yards off shore, moving only fast enough to keep their nets open, which is normal for trawlers while shrimping.
What seemed surprising was the hometown port lettered on their transoms below the winches and cranes on the afterdeck: Edisto Beach.


Corrections
Corrections in the main news section last Sunday and again on Tuesday repeated the confusion of Ms.
Kardon with Ms.
Carmel.
In addition, the correction last Sunday referred incorrectly to Dubaka Leigh.
He is a man.


Alienation Isn't What It Used to Be
Has there ever been a generation that does not believe it invented youthful alienation -- or, at the very least, made it easier to dance to?
It's been nearly 50 years between the supposedly shocking truth of "The Best Years of Our Lives" and the barely microwaved truths of "Reality Bites." Punk after movie punk is still, in the immortal words of "Saturday Night Fever," "nowhere on his way to no place." This seems to be the prestige address if you're in the film that aspires to define the decade.


The Winner, Axles Down
Overdrive magazine is about to conduct its annual readers' survey, which is an important event for anyone who cares about New York's image.
When this survey of truckers started in 1991, the Cross-Bronx Expressway was voted the worst road in America.
In 1992 it was chosen again.
But last year, in a stunning development, it came in second to Interstate 80.
I think I speak for all New Yorkers when I say: This will not stand.
Interstate 80 may be a perfectly terrible road by some standards, but its 3,000 miles are as nothing compared with the Cross-Bronx.
The truckers who voted for I-80 chiefly complained about the rough pavement in the Pennsylvania section.
Rough pavement!
The Cross-Bronx's surface can't even be called pavement -- it's more like a logging road sprinkled with chunks of asphalt -- but no one really cares anyway.
The only important question when you get on the Cross-Bronx is whether you will ever get off the Cross-Bronx.


Islanders Keep Pace With a Tie
The Islanders came here with so much confidence after the victory against the Canadiens on Friday night.
The Canadiens came to the Forum tonight with so much wrath for a team that had beat them in all four matchups this year.
With Florida (78 points) tying Ottawa tonight, the Islanders wanted to at least maintain ground in the battle for the last Eastern Conference playoff spot by earning a point tonight.


Business Diary: March 27 - April 1
THE ECONOMY Bear Sightings Reported on Wall Street  The stock market was on the front pages last week, and the news was bad.
Despite a rebound just before trading closed for the week on Thursday, the Dow Jones industrial average finished the week 8.6 percent below its all-time high of 3,978.36, which was reached on Jan. 31, after a rise of 68 percent that began in October 1990.
The recent decline, which has become more intractable day by day, is seen, at best, as being part of a "correction" -- a retreat of roughly 10 to 15 percent from a market high.
If this is just a correction, sunny days may not be far away.
But some investors are worrying about a full-blown bear market -- a prolonged decline.
Excluding the crash of 1929-32, when the market fell 89 percent, the average drop in a bear market has been 36 percent.
And that kind of a decline would take us almost back to where the bull market started.


Breakfast With Subtitles?
To the Editor:
Regarding "A Bowl of Ole" (Thing, March 13): In shortsightedly targeting their new breakfast cereal "Buneuelitos" at the Hispanic-American food market, I believe General Mills has ignored a significant group of potential customers: fans of the great Spanish film director Louis Bunuel.
If Bunuelitos cereal is as successful as I expect among film fans, I suggest that the General Mills line of Great Foreign Film Directors Breakfast Cereals be expanded to include Crispy Toasted Bergmans and Frosted Fellini Flakes.
FRED JACOBS Cambridge, Mass.


Lynda Hughes, Stephen Thomson
Lynda Hughes, a 42-year-old professional photographer, almost always has cameras hanging around her neck like necklaces.
Her photographic subjects have ranged from prehistoric cave art in France to baboons in Ethiopia to brides in New York.
She shoots several weddings a year and says of marriage: "I never expected it to happen to me. It's like, 'Never the bride, always the photographer.' "
Ms.
Hughes is not afraid to use her Nikons as flirting tools.
Cameras, of course, allow a photographer to observe people discreetly, ask total strangers to smile and, if all goes well, invite them into a darkroom.


If I Were a Bunny, Where Would I Hide Them?


Journal; Gay Shopping Spree
As breakthroughs go, it's not exactly Jackie Robinson joining the Brooklyn Dodgers.
Or Louis Brandeis on the Supreme Court.
But last week marked the premiere of the first mainstream television commercial starring uncloseted gay consumers shopping for merchandise other than condoms.
The 30-second spot was for Ikea furniture, and it began airing in four cities Wednesday night.
By Thursday morning, some gay men I know in New York had subjected it to more scrutiny than a room of semiotics professors might bestow upon "Finnegans Wake."


The Travails of Victorian Women Achieving Fame as Artists
THE show now at the Yale Center for British Art leads off with books, several of them classics like "Wuthering Heights" and "Jane Eyre." It also takes its title, "A Struggle for Fame," from a book by Charlotte Riddell, the Irish novelist who was living in London at the end of the 19th century.
Though Riddell went on to achieve fame, this, her first effort, written in 1883 when she was 51, has remained obscure.
It would seem, however, that the story, based on the writer's own experience of breaking into the literary world, sums up the difficulties faced by Victorian women trying to make it as writers and artists in a man's world.


The Rockies, Dodgers, Padres . . . and Bonds
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Mets appear on page 7.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
COLORADO ROCKIES
On first thought, it would seem the Rockies created unrealistic expectations by compiling the third best record (31-21) in the league in the last eight weeks of the season.
But then, using some of the revenue deposited by their nearly 4.5 million fans, they signed a series of free agents who could help them improve even more.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  UNDER THE BONE  By Anne-christine d'Adesky.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $23.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Women Have Been There
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


In Collusion With Evil
To the Editor:
Alistair Horne's review of "Knight's Cross" contains the statement "A typical Scorpio, Rommel was brilliant on the attack, but became morose and prey to pessimism on the defensive." This casual characterization of a historical figure by his astrological sign is ridiculous.
Astrology has no basis whatever in modern science; it is ancient and long-debunked mythology.
That astrology is still popular, and is used here in historical analysis, demonstrates the lamentable state of science literacy today.
ROGER KNACKE  Edinboro, Pa.


Little Big Men; They're All Speaking Perot's Lines
IN practically every democracy you can think of, established political parties are in deep trouble, their legitimacy suspect and their leaders susceptible to attack by populists who preach simple, emotional answers to the complicated questions of the post-cold-war age.
With so much cynicism about conventional politics and politicians around, and with the traditional left largely discredited after the collapse of Communism in 1989, it is hardly surprising that outsiders -- many of them self-made businessmen with enough money of their own to run campaigns that defy the long-dominant party machines -- have popped up in the United States, Poland, Peru, Japan and now Italy with the message that they have the magic cure for unemployment, inefficiency, waste and high taxes.


Hint of Spring in the Air and on the Table
MANY foods evoke spring: artichokes, asparagus, lamb, young chickens, shad, soft-shell crabs, fresh herbs, early strawberries and new potatoes.
Starting with spring, the bins and baskets in the produce markets take on a new look.
Some vegetables that have been scarce, expensive or in poor condition for months begin showing up regularly.
And as the choices increase, so do the seasonal menu options.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
JOYCE SERIES
Joyceans, rejoice!
A four-part discussion series about James Joyce, the Irish author whose works continue to provoke ire and admiration in almost equal measure, will begin Friday at 10:30 A.M. at Manhattanville College in Purchase.
Led by Eileen O'Gorman, professor emeritus of English at the college, the sessions will continue on successive Friday mornings, covering Joyce's influence on 20th-century novelists, his inner torments as an Irish Catholic, his self-imposed exile on the Continent and the well-known day in the life of Leopold Bloom (the central figure in "Ulysses"), which took place in Dublin on June 16, 1904.
Published in Paris in 1922, the book was banned in the United States as obscene until 1933.


Betty Furness, 78, TV Reporter And Consumer Advocate, Dies
Betty Furness, who went from doing television commercials for Westinghouse refigerators to pioneering the field of consumer affairs as a television journalist, died yesterday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 78 and lived in New York City and Hartsdale, N.Y..
She had been treated for cancer for three years, said her husband, Leslie Midgley.


Who Needs Hollywood?
To the Editor:
Reading Jill Gerston's article "Stockard Channing Goes West"  [ March 6 ] , one might think Ms.
Channing was a brilliant but marginal actress who, only now, after years of working in virtual obscurity, was finally getting her due, and who only now, with her Academy Award nomination, has more important things in store for her.


Conversations: Don Edwards; A Champion of Civil Liberties Lays Down His Lance
"THE next civil right really should be some kind of civil right for livelihood," said Representative Don Edwards, Democrat of California, the pre-eminent defender of constitutional rights on Capitol Hill.
Sitting in his office last week, he observed that civil rights debates have become more complex as the focus shifts from political to economic rights.
"It's all very well for a black kid in Washington to have free speech and not to be discriminated against in getting an auto license," he said.
"But unless he has a livelihood, unless he is qualified for a job and has grown up with strict adult supervision, he is going to have a hard time making it in this country."


Perfect Time to Inspect House's Exterior
EARLY spring is the best time to inspect the outside of the house.
An inspection as soon as working outdoors is feasible allows making small repairs promptly and provides a head start on larger projects.
Start by checking gutters and downspouts.
They are crucial in preventing foundation leaks, and gutters especially may been damaged from snow and ice.


Museums' Shows Span 1,000 Years Of Weavers' Art
YOU don't need to be a textiles aficionado to appreciate the intriguing images and striking patterns in the old fabrics at the Montclair Art Museum and the Newark Museum.
But don't wait too long.
Exhibitions of old textiles are rare and tend to be brief.
Conscientious curators are concerned about extended exposure to light and variations in heat and humidity that could damage fragile fibers.
Six of the seven large Navajo and Rio Grande weavings now on display at Montclair have never been exhibited before.
A small but choice selection of Coptic textiles in the Newark Museum is changed every six months.


It Could Be Rangers and Mariners, at 20 Paces
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Mets appear on page 7.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS
They used to spend gobs of money to try to put Gene Autry not back in the saddle again but in the World Series for the first time.
Now they wait for their minor league system to produce enough players to make them respectable.


Only the Accused Were Innocent
STORIES OF SCOTTSBORO By James Goodman.
Illustrated. 465 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $27.50.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; It's Age, Not Diplomas
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


March 27-April 1; The Face of the Long-Dead Past
The famous "Lucy" skeleton had everything paleontologists could hope for -- except a head.
Discovered in Ethiopia in 1974, Lucy and her kind, which came to be known as Australopithecus afarensis, had lived in eastern Africa from about 3.9 million to 3 million years ago.
Their ancestors had diverged from the ape lineage and their descendants would evolve into the Homo line, leading eventually to modern humans.
But fossil hunters had never looked an afarensis in the face until the discovery, reported last week, of the first fairly complete skull.


It's Time to Play Catch Up With Spring
SHOOTS, blades, leaves and stems are pushing up fast these days.
Nature is trying to catch up with spring.
In many places, some of the earliest bulbs have bloomed.
Crocus, snowdrops, winter aconites and a few late Christmas roses have displayed their colorful petals.
There are also unwanted reminders of last year's garden that must be removed.
Although it is still a bit early to do a really good cleanup, since the ground remains soggy in many places, this would be a good time to get outdoors and remove some remnants.


RED CROSS PLANS TO EMPTY A TOWN OF SERBS' ENEMIES
Thousands of Muslims and Croats will be evacuated from the northwestern Bosnian town of Prijedor to save them from nationalist Serbs bent on wiping them out, the International Committee of the Red Cross announced today.
The decision runs contrary to a long-standing policy of both the Red Cross and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to avoid mass evacuations of minority groups because, in effect, that would be helping the Serbs drive out other ethnic groups and populate the area with their own.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a picture caption on March 27 about the pop record producer Don Was misidentified the awards ceremony at which he played bass guitar.
It was the Grammys, not the Emmys.


In Defense Of Policy Illustrations
To the Editor
In her series taking the life insurance industry and its agents to task for confusing and misleading policy illustrations (Your Own Account, Feb. 27, March 6 and March 13), Mary Rowland never told her readers that the universal life insurance policies she disparages were not developed out of a desire for profit on the part of life insurers.


Oscar Levant's Good Side
To the Editor:
I remember Oscar Levant in Carnegie Hall, a brilliant and talented pianist.
Why didn't the highly overrated Richard Avedon take a picture of him then?
IRIS CHEKENIAN  New York


Wall Street; Grandpa Bear Says Look Out Below
NOTHING personal, but if you're among the masses who put certificate of deposit money into the stock market, Albert E. Sindlinger thinks you're "a damned fool." Mr.
Sindlinger, 87, is the pollster who runs Sindlinger &amp; Company, a 39-year-old consumer research outfit in Wallingford, Pa.
He talked about the recent stock-market rout, and the outlook from here for stocks, given low liquidity in the average household.
Question: What do you make of the 259-point loss in the Dow over the last two weeks?
Answer: We've seen a decline in people's equity expectations in our polling for four to five weeks.
I've been calling for this a long time.
Q: You're known as a real pessimist. Perhaps you've been calling for this too long?
A: I've been talking about this for three years, and this is it.
We've had a five-year decline in household income; a decline in the economy that forced  [ interest ]  rates lower; and depressed personal income of investors, who withdrew $608 billion from bank time deposits.
Those people chased hoped-for higher yields in stocks and bonds, mostly through mutual funds, and that drove equity prices to new highs.
It all fueled personal income with the wealth effect, which forced interest rates to rise.
Q: And the higher rates hurt the market?
A: Yes, but it was part of a structural change.
This is not a business cycle.
The economy had to come up to the level of the stock market, or the stock market had to come down to the level of the structural change in the economy.
The thing that caused current income to rise for six or seven months has been the wealth effect from equities.
But if the stock market does what I think it's going to do in the next two to four weeks, rates will start to fall again as you see the destruction of wealth.
Q: Whose wealth?
A: I figure 30 million people have gotten into the market -- bought stocks recently, taking money out of the bank that they shouldn't have taken.
And they're going to lose their principal.
These are people with $10,000 to $100,000 in assets who used to keep their money in time deposits.
But over the last two years, $608 billion has come out of insured time deposits.
These people were desperate because their life styles were affected by lower rates.
They are mostly in their 60's and 70's, and their life styles were built on the assumption they would always get 8 percent return on their investments.
When they found themselves getting 3 percent they were driven into equities almost out of desperation.
And they've committed suicide.
Q: How do you expect them to react now?
Will they sell and take losses?
Do nothing?
Buy more?
A: I don't think the public yet has caught on.
They think this is the 10 percent correction everyone expected.
The poor fools believe it because their brokers told them so.
Q: How low do you expect the Dow to go?
A: 2,000 in the next two to three years.
Q: How do you come by 2,000?
A: That's where the Dow should be to be in tune with the economy and the level of household liquidity.
I base it on what people say about current income.
Sixty percent say that over the last six months income was down.
In a normal recovery it would be 20 percent saying that income was down.
In a boom, only 15 percent would say income was down.
Have you noticed that we're supposed to be well into a recovery and everyone keeps talking about "when the recovery comes"?
Normally we'd be worrying about the next recession by now.
Q: Why hasn't the stock market been in tune with how people are doing financially?
A: The stock market was following income until 1985.
After September 1985, it ceased to be connected to the economy and became interest-rate driven -- it became a gambling pit.
The market particularly in the last year, has solely been interest-rate propelled.
Q: How long do you expect this structural change to take before things settle down?
A: We're five years into it and have at least five more.
The market is just catching up to it.
It's run out of liquidity.
It's run out of these idiots chasing yields.
This market has been fueled by idiots.
Q: There's some supposedly smart money placing big bets on the health of the market and the health of small investors.
General Electric wants to buy Kemper, for example.
A: G.E. ought to have its head examined.
Q: You're often accused of being perennially pessimistic.
When's the last time you were bullish?
A: In 1987. And in 1982 to 1984 I was bullish as hell.
Q: I spoke to the president of Quick &amp; Reilly, the discount brokerage, Thursday night, and he told me that they had two fabulous commission days on Wednesday and Thursday, and that 60 percent of the trades were buys.
What do you say to that?
A: That sounds about right.
Because the general public has been sold on the idea that there will be a 10 percent correction, and that's the time to buy.
I was listening to everyone on television Thursday night saying "stay cool because the professional money managers will manage your money well and this is the time to buy on a dip." It sounds good.
I wouldn't be surprised to see a rally in the first few days of next week.
But that doesn't change the over all, which is that the market is out of tune with the economy, and a lot of naive people will get terribly hurt.


Don't Blame The Post-Modernists
To the Editor:
Curious how you assign an ideologically conservative attack on academia by Gertrude Himmelfarb to an ideologically compatible reviewer, Michael Howard.
Were Miss Himmelfarb an author of diametrically opposite political colors, someone who grasped the complexities of modern cultural critiques rather than one who merely trashed them, I am certain that either (a) you would ignore the book entirely or (b) if you reviewed it, it would be trivialized as yet another piece of "dated" leftist rantings.
SANDI E. COOPER  Staten Island


Wendy Wasserstein, a Voice of Authority on Life in the 90's
A LARGE crowd turned out to meet Wendy Wasserstein at the Performing Arts Center of Rye High School here one recent rainy night, when the Rye Arts Center sponsored an evening of readings of her plays.
Judging from the laughter, it was a knowing audience, too: filled with mothers who send double messages to their daughters, single women juggling the demands of romance and a career and men as baffled as ever by just what it is women want.
"Mother, do you think it's possible to be married or live with a man, have a good relationship and children that you share equal responsibility for, build a career and still read novels, play the piano, have women friends and swim twice a week?" asks a character in "Isn't It Romantic," which was first staged in 1983.


To Our Readers
Starting next week, the suggested Sunday newsstand price of The Times will increase to $2.50 outside the greater New York metropolitan area.


Streetscapes/The Jefferson Market Courthouse; A Stopped Clock Sired the Preservation Movement
THE Jefferson Market Courthouse, at West 10th Street and Avenue of the Americas, is a delicious fantasy of turrets, gables, lookouts and stone carving, and work is now beginning on a restoration of the original slate roof.
But it was also the object of New York's earliest major struggle for historic preservation, one in which a band of Greenwich Villagers saved one of the city's greatest structures before there was a landmarks law.


D'Amato's Diction Backfires With Greek Americans
George Stephanopoulos has taken his lumps as President Clinton's adviser -- most recently for a heated conversation with a top Treasury Department official over an investigation into the failed savings and loan at the center of the Whitewater affair.
But his critics mess with this prominent Greek-American's patrimony at their peril, as Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato recently learned.
Discussing the White House's efforts to portray his inquiries into Whitewater as mere partisan politics, the Senator from New York last month repeatedly and pointedly mispronounced the names of several Clinton aides, including Mr.
Stephanopoulos's, which came out "Steppin' ah-full-us."


Landfill Anxieties Underlined in Debate on Draft Study
Years after the Fountain Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue landfills closed, city environmental officials and community leaders are still at odds over the whether contaminants buried there present a serious health threat.
The anxiety created by the issue is underscored by the angry reaction to a draft study conducted by a consultant for city environmental officials.
Community leaders say the year-long study is inadequate, and on Tuesday, they plan to demand a more in-depth investigation at an open meeting with city and state officials.


"The Blue Kite" Sails Beyond the Censors
THERE IS A SAYING IN CHINA: When two people talk, they tell the truth; when three people talk, it becomes a joke; when more than three people talk, it is all lies.
Tian Zhuangzhuang, the Chinese director whose "Blue Kite" will open on Friday in New York, quoted this saying at dinner recently.
In attendance were his translator; Lu Liping, the star of the movie and one of China's most popular actresses, and Peng Xia Lin, a director friend of Mr.
Tian's.
"Of course, this meeting is the exception," Mr.
Tian said, laughing.
The 42-year-old director, who lives in Beijing, was in New York for a brief visit on behalf of his film, whose themes are truth and deception, face and mask, censorship and ritual -- in other words, how the domestic and the political intertwine.


Manager's Profile
Ronald E. Elijah  Fund: Robertson Stephens Value Plus, $64 million in assets.
Manager since 1992 inception. (Sponsor: Robertson Stephens &amp; Company, San Francisco.)


Culture and Crafts in Bali, Java and Neighbors
Two cultural tours of Bali, Java and neighboring islands in Indonesia, the world's largest archipelago, are being offered this spring and early summer.
The Craft and Folk Art Museum in Los Angeles is offering a 14-night tour, departing for Bali from Los Angeles, New York or Chicago on May 18 and returning June 3.
The tour includes visits to the Balinese village of Mengwi, where travelers will visit the nearby monkey forest, the royal temple of Taman Ayun and the sea temple of Tanah Lot.
The group will fly to Sulawesi to the town of Tana Toraja, known for its cave cemeteries where the dead are guarded by wooden effigies.
After an overnight stopover in Ujung Padang, the tour continues to Yogyakarta in Java where participants will attend a performance of the Ramayama epic.
During the two-night stay, the group also visits a Javanese puppet factory and the Buddhist temple of Borobudur.
The tour proceeds to Bukittinggi in West Sumatra, home to the matrilineal tribe of Minangkabau, known for silverwork and embroidery.
Participants spend their last four nights in the mountain village of Ubud, Bali, known for its wood-carving, painting, music and dancing.


Out of Time
In the Marais, the swampy quartier of Paris whose crumbling, tumbledown elegance evokes Venice, there's a little shop where you can buy antique clock hands.
Not clocks, you understand, only the aiguilles, which in French can mean clock hands, church spires or needles. (Talons aiguilles are spike-heeled shoes, and these too have a timeless appeal: many women here wouldn't step out to buy even a newspaper without them.) The thought of a clock-hand shop where clocks are not sold is as poignant as a needle.
It's especially piercing in Paris, a city of logic and precision founded on marshlands of sentiment.
I asked my friend Nathalie, who lives across the street from the shop -- a dark, Dickensian jumble of a place, to judge from a squint through the window -- whether she'd walk in with me.
Oh no, she said, the monsieur is tres desagreable; he doesn't like to sell anything.
She had heard this, so to speak, secondhand, never having ventured in herself.
But she spoke with the proud face of ownership she wears when saying almost anything about Paris -- even disagreeable things.
Timelessness takes many forms, and Nathalie is one of them.
She takes credit, as Parisians have for centuries, for every old thing, good and bad, in her beloved city.
And she does so while wearing the most up-to-the-minute clothes.


Editorial Notebook; The Capitalist Road
It has been 15 years since Deng Xiaoping, once purged as China's "No. 2 capitalist roader," consolidated his power enough to decree the "modernization" of China's economy.
Since 1979, China has disguised its plunge into Western-style economics with a variety of labels.
Beijing bureaucrats speak of "socialistic markets" and the drive toward a "modern enterprise system."
As a first-time visitor to Beijing, I felt that the result has not been altogether modern or systematic.
But the deaf and reclusive 89-year-old they call the "senior leader" certainly unleashed a mighty tide of enterprise.


Knicks Run Streak To 15 In a Row
Patrick Ewing couldn't help but laugh.
Derrick Harper had made a steal and then lobbed an over-the- shoulder pass right to him near midcourt.
That left Ewing all alone with a clear lane to the basket.
Nice, gift-wrapped dunk for Ewing, right?
Ewing took off from about the foul line and brought the ball back near his hip, getting ready for the tomahawk slam.
But a funny thing happened on the way to becoming Michael Jordan.
The ball clanged off the back of the rim as Ewing fell to the floor.
Ewing smiled.
His teammates giggled.
The crowd at Madison Square Garden gasped.
And Coach Pat Riley calmly combed his fingers through his hair.


Steichen on Both Sides of the Camera
The faces that greet visitors to the gallery at Bristol-Myers Squibb here are framed by elegant hats, his a fedora with a rakishly curled brim, hers a sporty straw.
They could be young Germans just emerged from a Mercedes tourer.
In fact, they are Edward Steichen, born in Luxembourg in 1879 and a naturalized American in 1900, the year the photograph was taken, and his younger sister, Lilian.
The place is Milwaukee, where their father, a copper miner, had settled with his family soon after reaching the United States in 1881.


Perfect Time to Inspect House's Exterior
EARLY spring is the best time to inspect the outside of the house.
An inspection as soon as working outdoors is feasible allows making small repairs promptly and provides a head start on larger projects.
Start by checking gutters and downspouts.
They are crucial in preventing foundation leaks, and gutters especially may been damaged from snow and ice.


CRIME
Let's get this straight, right off the bat -- Jon Katz is not out to challenge John Cheever's bleak vision of the suburbs.
Mr.
Katz, the media critic for Rolling Stone magazine, deals pointedly, even poignantly, with various crises of commuter life in his detective series, which began with "Death by Station Wagon" and continues with THE FAMILY STALKER (Doubleday, $18.95).
But his keen anthropological observations on divorce, adultery, emotional abandonment, financial reversal, career burnout, peer pressure, child worship and other facets of privileged life in a New Jersey bedroom community are delivered with so much wit and affection that readers are not about to shred their commuter tickets and go loft hunting in TriBeCa.
"Divorce is so common, you sort of forget how devastating it is," a depressed wife confides to Christopher (Kit) Deleeuw, a discredited Wall Street trader who serves as the town's only private detective.
Kit believes that the family is "sacred," so he really puts his heart into his investigation of a malicious home wrecker who is not content with a bit of "normal suburban adultery," but feels compelled to infiltrate and destroy entire families.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 3, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
7
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
2
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a killer.
3
2
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
4
13
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
5
3
LORD OF RAVEN'S PEAK, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romance and adventure among vikings in 10th-century Britain.
6
2
HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.
7
1
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Researching his ancestry, an American journalist learns about the history of Mexico.
8*
5
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
9
10
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
10
4
THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal of past crimes.
11
14
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
12
1
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to a South Carolina town.
13*
7
JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star Wars" saga.
14
1
CAULDRON, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $6.50.) Economic disaster and nationalist hate groups besiege Europe; America enters World War III.
15
6
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
12
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
543
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
59
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
4
12
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
1
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
6
4
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
7
44
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
8
143
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
9
22
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
10*
129
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
11
1
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.) The memoirs of an Irish rebel, wrongly imprisoned in the 1970's and 80's.
12
9
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.
13
142
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
14*
47
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
15*
18
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
16*
29
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
17*
17
EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of murders.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
4
MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Ways to teach children about spending and saving money.
2
159
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
3
166
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
24
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending March 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


March 27-April 1: Death Swoops Down; Tornadoes Strike Suddenly, Killing Dozens in the South
It is the deadliest phenomenon of any spring: the devastation caused by tornadoes that swoop down from the skies across the South.
Last week, the price was particularly high when at least 44 people were killed and 350 were injured in Alabama, Georgia and the Carolinas.


Rebuilding a Sculpture Garden
Over the last 25 years, the sculpture garden at the southwest corner of Dag Hammarskjold Plaza has acquired a frayed image.
Sculpture is no longer displayed in the terraced brick exhibition area, across the plaza from the United Nations, and residents of the neighborhood have come to see it as a security threat.
Now, as a result of an agreement reached on March 25, the garden will be rebuilt, a move neighborhood groups hope will discourage loitering and add luster to the park, which has become a magnet for homeless people.
The owner of a building next door has agreed to improve the landscaping and lower the raised-level corner garden so that it improves safety by allowing an unobstructed view to the rest of the plaza.


Where Potholes Devour Cars
The three three-yard-wide potholes along 147th Avenue are the stuff of miserable urban legend.
"They're really deep and can break an axle for you, and they've been there since the beginning of time," said Albert Trotman, a resident of Springfield Gardens and a de facto road warrior.
"You have to swerve to avoid them, but you have to be careful not to cause an accident."


Fay Georgousis and Harry Josifidis
Fay Georgousis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vlasios Georgousis of New York and Kiaton, Greece, was married yesterday to Dr.
Harry Josifidis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Josifidis of Astoria, Queens, and Athens.
The ceremony was performed at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral in New York by the Rev.
Dr.
Robert Stephanopoulos.
Mrs.
Josifidis, 28, is a public relations officer at the Greek National Tourist Organization in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father, now retired, was a founder of Village Farms Inc., a wholesale food distributing and packaging company in New York.


No Headline
MAKING IT WORK 3  At the A.S.P.C.A., it's Gene Mederos's job to make sure the people are suited to the animals they want to adopt.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  These are high times for hats, but Ann Albrizio, hatmaker by hand, is one of the last of a vanishing breed.


Top China Dissident Is Reported Released
China's official news agency said tonight that Wei Jingsheng, the best-known figure in the campaign for democracy in China, was released after being briefly detained on Friday, but Mr.
Wei's office continued to report him missing.
In a separate development today, editors of the Ming Pao newspaper, based in Hong Kong, arrived in Beijing seeking confirmation of a report that one of its reporters, Xi Yang, has been sentenced to 12 years in a Chinese prison on charges relating to his news-gathering activities in Beijing last summer.


At 2 Services, 10,000 Firefighters Each Mourn a Brother
As the fire engine bearing the coffin inched to a stop, a mother, struggling to control two rambunctious daughters, kept saying, "This is Mommy's friend." Then, the mother herself broke down.
"Oh boy, this is too much," she said.
"Will Ye No Come Home?" the bagpipes wailed on a gathering breeze; the Mayor of New York City stood at attention, and the sun shone brilliantly.
A woman looking from a second-floor window across the street sobbed and shook.
Firefighters from all over the region, in a crowd the Fire Department estimated at 10,000, created a sea of dark blue with scattered white caps.


Gov. Howard Stern? Some Fail to See Humor
His platform is brutally simple: pass the death penalty, let road crews work only at night, stagger highway tolls to prevent traffic jams.
And from his empire of the air, Howard Stern, perhaps Long Island's pre-eminent gift to pop culture and its latest offering to New York politics, is talking turkey (and a few fouler things) to three million Americans.
He plays a tape of Senator Bob Packwood's confession to Larry King, the broadcast titan who is just so much suspendered scum in Mr.
Stern's sunglassed eyes, that the Senator from Oregon has no memory whatever of many women who now accuse him of sexual harassment.
"And they talk," Mr.
Stern says disgustedly, "about me running for governor."


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Coming Home To Roost
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


March 27-April 1; An Amicable Divorce, Dallas Style
You cannot believe everything you see and hear, especially that con job of a news conference last Tuesday when Jimmy Johnson and Jerry Jones talked of how much they liked and respected each other.
They wanted everyone to regard this as an amicable divorce.
In truth, they were so relieved to get rid of each other that they would say or do anything.
There was not enough room for both, even in Texas.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Don't Tread on UMass
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


Marin Shrine
To the Editor: Congratulations to Suzanne Berne ("Marin's Mellow Coastal Towns," Feb. 27) for managing to make her way to Bolinas despite the absence of road signs.
My wife and I had similar success last fall, and would like to report on two items that may interest readers:
Ms.
Berne mentions the availability of organic Fig Newtons in Stinson Beach.
These are available in New York too.
What isn't available in New York, as far as we know at any rate, is organic pizza; and when we were sipping a cup of espresso in the Bolinas Bakery, we heard the woman behind the counter advising a customer to return that evening for organic pizza.
This, she claimed, is served only in the Bolinas Bakery and perhaps one or two other places in the entire country.


The World; Odessa, Where Reality Is a Laugh a Minute
This worldly, decaying port town has seen some hard times in the 200 years since it grew up on the rim of the Black Sea.
Pogroms.
Plagues.
Nazi barbarism.
Decades of Soviet brutality.
But in some respects these days could rival the worst of them.
Odessites hate their reliance on Ukraine, and they are bitter about their lost links to Russia.
Spring here means principally that there will be heat again -- supplied by the sun.
And the national currency, the coupon, lost another 15 percent of its minuscule value last week.


In Mexico, Trade Agreement Comes First
To the Editor:
To read "A Murder in Tijuana" (Op-Ed, March 26) by Dick J. Reavis, one would think that the killing of Luis Donaldo Colosio, the Mexican presidential candidate, ranks with that of the Archduke Francis Ferdinand, which ignited World War I.


It's a Million Miles From the Inner City to a Suburban College
To the Editor:
Thirteen years ago, I was treading a similar path to Q'hana Gethers, the freshman student at Canton (N.Y.) Technical College you profile March 18.
Growing up in the inner city in New York and suddenly transplanted to the College of New Rochelle, a small Roman Catholic women's college in Westchester County, I felt like Ms.
Gethers, isolated, unsure and uncertain how to cope with a tranquil environment after experiencing chaos, upheaval and a battle-ready mode of living from the age of 6.


Workers Become Job Hunters as Company Reinvents Itself
After 23 years at the Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company, including the last five as a department head, David A. Fravel applied for his own job this week.
He filled out an application.
He had an interview.
Now, like job seekers everywhere, he waits.
Mr.
Fravel, 47, has no guarantee of getting this or any other position at the company where he has made his career, but neither is he expecting to be laid off.
What that leaves, for him and each of the company's 1,889 other employees -- all of whom will be required to reapply for jobs over the next few months -- is the uncertainty of starting from scratch.


For Orioles, Cost And Expectations Are High
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Yankees appear on page 7.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
BALTIMORE ORIOLES
After the last owners meeting, some participants reported that Peter Angelos, the Orioles' new owner, blustered in the best tradition of George Steinbrenner.


GENERATION RAP
IN 1968 A TRIO OF BLACK poets went on stage in Harlem at a commemoration of Malcolm X and framed their political verse with a chant: "Are you ready, niggas? You've got to be ready." That was the beginning for the Last Poets, influential forefathers of rap.
The original members -- Abiodun Oyewole, David Nelson and Gylan Kain -- and the Last Poets who succeeded them welded revolutionary politics, incendiary street language and jazzy musical accompaniment into a polyrhythmic wake-up call to America.
A quarter of a century later, Ice Cube lifts his voice and commands worldwide attention as one of hip-hop's angriest young men.
He first appeared with N.W.A. (Niggas With Attitude), the Compton, Calif., group that put the sub-genre called "gangsta rap" on the charts, and now sells millions of records solo with his hard-core imagery of an urban landscape bristling with blood and bullets, profanity, misogyny and potent beats.


Dreams That Liven Waking Hours; Hopes and Ideas Are What Keep New Yorkers Hopping
New Yorkers are seven million ants scurrying about on uncountable errands, chases, escapes, rescues, seductions -- dizzying, urgent business.
Another day another dollar, thank God it's Friday and let's do lunch, really.
F.
Scott Fitzgerald seemed to hit the nail on the head.
"There are only the pursued, the pursuing, the busy and the tired," he wrote in "The Great Gatsby."


Teachers Learning How to Teach Each Other
There was no school for the children of Bridgeport today, even though it was Tuesday.
It was their teachers and principals who crowded corridors, attended an assembly, stood in lunchroom lines and squirmed in uncomfortable classroom seats.
In a case of life imitating school, the city's 1,600 teachers and administrators came to Central High School for their annual Professional Development Conference, a day of classes on teaching.
If the schedule seemed eerily similar to what students experience, right to the final dismissal at 3 P.M., there were also important differences for the teachers.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CORRESPONDENCE  THE LAST WORD  Letters Between Marcia Nardi  and William Carlos Williams.
Edited by Elizabeth Murrie O'Neil.
University of Iowa, cloth, $34.95; paper, $16.95.


Philosophically Out of Focus
To the Editor:
I don't know about Leni Riefenstahl's lens, but my eye's lens sees no difference between the general "amnesia" so many average Germans have used to cloak their guilt feelings and Ms.
Riefenstahl's disclaimers.
If anything, an artist of such caliber should be more, not less accountable because his/her lens presumably sees more sharply than we of average perceptions do.
HANNA STRANSKA  Jackson Heights, N. Y.


SURFACING
SERVICE  Movie refreshments on wheels: At many Cineplex Odeon theaters in Manhattan, mobile concession stands are wheeled up and down the aisles before the movies start.
Similarly, the Loews Village Theater has a rolling coffee bar.
RETAIL  Fish market or art gallery?
Aquasource, in SoHo, is both.
It specializes in selling farmed seafood while exhibiting art with fish themes.
"Gratitude to the Sea," prints by Judy Hoffman, is now on view.
FASHION  High-heeled sneakers: With club kids and other glamour-seekers in mind, Converse plans to introduce a high-heeled version of the classic canvas Chuck Taylor All Star model in August.
Don't expect an endorsement from Charles Barkley.


Angry Zulus On All Sides Ready to Kill
The six Zulu men finished their patrol just after dawn today.
Blankets over their shoulders, spears and machetes in their hands, they walked through the muddy alleys of this squatter camp, oblivious to the two armored personnel carriers and the South African troops who stood guard on a nearby hill.
The military vehicles arrived Friday night as part of an effort to quell the rising tide of election-related violence here in the Zulu homeland.
But the deployment so far of about 1,200 South African troops, under a state of emergency declared Thursday by President F. W. de Klerk, seems to have had little impact on the residents of the rusted corrugated-iron shacks and mud huts.


Zvereva Gets the Drop on Pierce to Gain the Final Against Martinez
Done in by a dozen trickily staged drop shots, a stroke Natalya Zvereva forgot she owned in the first set but recalled in time to claim the next two, Mary Pierce watched helplessly as her imperious beginning was reduced to rubble in Zvereva's 0-6, 6-3, 6-2 semifinal comeback at the Family Circle Magazine Cup this summery afternoon.
In the final, the sixth-seeded Zvereva, a talent-laden doubles artist whose new attention to fitness has begun paying singles dividends, faces Spain's Conchita Martinez, a clay-court specialist who put up an unsuccessful title defense just last week in the Virginia Slims of Houston.
Zvereva and Martinez, currently ranked third in the world, are deadlocked at 3-3 in their career rivalry.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Joie de $500 Chausseurs
IT was a party where everyone was looking at everyone's feet.
Some passed inspection.
Others didn't.
"Not mine," Stephane Kelian said when asked about a pair of size 7's on the woman next to him.
Kelian, of Paris, designs shoes -- expensive shoes, as in $500-a-pair shoes.
In France his shoes are considered art, David DeMian said.
In Great Neck they are now displayed as art.
When the DeMian family, of Great Neck, recently opened a Stephane Kelian shoe boutique in their hometown, they decided to elevate a Kelian to a Rodin.


CO-EVOLUTION
We were very excited about the article that appeared in the March 6 issue about the Darwin fish produced by Evolution Design ("Co-Evolution").
Unfortunately, the article gives the impression that the fish can be obtained from Chris Gilman in North Hollywood, Calif.
This is not the case.
The fishes are sold by Evolution Design, P.O.
Box 26336, Austin, Tex. 78755.
MARIA LOVELAND Evolution Design Austin, Tex.


Izzy. Or Izzy Not?
Whatizit?
Which is what it (at right) was originally called, until the public got a look at it.
Laurie Olsen, communications director for the Atlanta Olympic committee (that's for '96) says, "They called it everything from the Maggot to Blue Sperm With Legs."
So the Atlanta committee did the honorable thing.
Rather than come up with something new, or forget the lucrative mascot business altogether (what the ancient Greeks did) they decided to rename the thing, and turn to kids to help.
A contest produced "Izzy."


Habitats/A Grand Victorian, With Water Damage; Taking On a Big Job
DRIVING up Ashburton Avenue in Yonkers, past bodegas, auto-parts stores and fast-food outlets, Jeffrey Gardere keeps up a steady stream of badinage, preparing visitors for his new neighborhood and new house.
"Some people look scarier than they are," he says as the car passes a group of baggy-trousered teen-agers strolling down the street in a wide pack.
"Their dress is stereotype rap-hip fashion."


In Grip Of Unique Fullcourt Press
It may arrive in the first few minutes or near the end of the half.
Or maybe late in the game or even in overtime.
But somewhere between the tip and the final buzzer, when you meet the Arkansas Razorbacks, their fullcourt defensive pressure elevates and you disentegrate.
Ask Arizona.


Britons Introduce Toll-Free Line
The British Tourist Authority is introducing a new nationwide toll-free telephone number, (800) 462-2748, for prospective travelers seeking information.
The service, scheduled to begin tomorrow, will be available from 9:30 A.M. to 7 P.M., Monday to Friday.
In Manhattan, callers should dial 986-2200.


A Wall St. Star's Agonizing Confession
Larry Kudlow seemed a master of the universe.
Being a top Wall Street economist was not the half of it.
Mr.
Kudlow had been a prominent member of President Reagan's economic team.
He helped conceive and fight for the tax-cut proposal that helped Christine Todd Whitman become Governor of New Jersey.
One of the nation's most articulate and charismatic commentators on financial issues, he has become the economic guru of Jack Kemp and of the conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh, as well as a regular on television interview programs and a speaker commanding hefty fees.
He even starred in Cadillac ads.
To hear some leading Republicans, the 46-year-old Mr.
Kudlow has nowhere to go but up.
They consider him a hot political property, a potential challenger for the Senate seat of Daniel Patrick Moynihan in New York or, should a right-leaning Republican like Mr.
Kemp win the White House in 1996, a shoo-in for a Cabinet position.
John Sweeney, executive director of the New York State Republican Committee, last week called him "one of the brightest stars."


Long Shot Starts Year Behind Plate
He wasn't supposed to make the roster.
He wasn't even supposed to stay with the club.
Kelly Stinnett was a wild card, a 1-in-100 shot, a Rule Five player the Mets chose to bring to their training camp.
But when the Mets' season opens tomorrow at Wrigley Field, Stinnett will be the man behind the plate, calling the game for Dwight Gooden.
It is a move that surprised everyone, particularly Greg Olson, the supposed backup catcher the Mets released last week.
Even Stinnett didn't expect the spring to end up this way.


Visions Of Casinos Return to the Beach
Casino advocates say they sense a real chance of legalizing gambling in the state, and as the discussion picks up in Albany, it's also picking up in the Rockaways.
"The Rockaways is ideal, with that largest strip of unused property right on the boardwalk, two airports and major highways," said Councilman Alfonso C. Stabile, who represents the western Rockaways.
Vincent Castellano, chairman of Community Board 14, says the board is likely to review the issue soon.


The Mets Have Nothing to Lose, Except More Games
They have been picked to finish last in the National League East -- again -- by most prognosticators.
They are the butt of a running joke on David Letterman's late-night show.
Sometimes, when other teams visited their camp this spring in Port St.
Lucie, Fla., the Mets could almost hear the opposition snickering behind their backs.
The 1994 Mets are not burdened with expectations, save for the negative ones.
How many games will they lose?
How bad will they look?
What embarrassing off-field incident will provide Letterman with a week's worth of monologue fodder?
For as long as Dwight Gooden can remember, opening day came with a public expectation that the Mets would be contenders.
This season, the public seems to expect some kind of joke.


Talented Name
To the Sports Editor:
Marc Bloom's profile of the Atlanta high school sprinter Milton Campbell ("A Young Sprinter Who Goes the Distance," The Times, March 13) included several paradoxes that most readers, especially those under 50, probably missed.


Now the Word, Without Sword And Sandals
IT SAYS MUCH ABOUT HOLLYWOOD'S hallowed tradition of pillaging the Bible that the producer of an ambitious new television mini-series based on the complete Old Testament felt it necessary to explain that his was not a "fly-by-night exploitation picture."
"It's done very tastefully," said Gerald Rafshoon, a bit sheepish at the need for such an admission.
Mr.
Rafshoon, media adviser in the Carter Administration, is the executive producer of "Abraham," which begins tonighton the cable channel TNT as the first installment of a planned 40-hour series that sweeps from Genesis through Job.
"We wanted to be literate and accurate," he said.
"This isn't one of those Cecil B. DeMille sword-and-sandal movies."


Eclectic Fare Fit for a Festive Evening
BY any standard, Gregory's Cafe and Bar in Fairfield is a delight to the eye.
The decor is artfully simple: white wood wainscoting with gold-framed flower prints along the upper walls, wood floor with scattered Oriental rugs, well-designed wood chairs with rush seats, a banquette along one wall.
Pinpoint ceiling lighting is soft but not dim, casting the room in a romantic glow.
The total effect is pleasing and comfortable without upstaging the food.
When we reviewed Gregory's 10 years ago, it was new, and we found it good but inconsistent.
Its few tables (seating a total of 45, including a few tables in the rear bar) and uneven performance made us suspect it would have a short life span.
A decade later, however, it remains, and the attractive look is much the same.
The original owner, Reina Zuckerman, assumed the chef's mantle several years ago, culinary wrinkles have been ironed out, and Gregory's has become very good indeed.


A Label. A Vision. A Golden Anniversary.
AT VERVE RECORDS' 50th Anniversary this Wednesday at Carnegie Hall, hoopla of all sorts will go on, celebrating the record label that has profoundly influenced music in this century.
Ella Fitzgerald, the Velvet Underground, Louis Armstrong, Frank Zappa, Lester Young, the Righteous Brothers, Charlie Parker, Janis Ian, Dizzy Gillespie and Stan Getz all recorded for Verve.
Subtract just Ms.
Fitzgerald's series of American standards, the early encounters between Afro-Cuban and jazz musicians, Getz's bossa nova albums, Parker's sessions and Billie Holiday's lavish recordings and the 20th century already sounds different.
In recent years, Verve has enhanced its reputation by restarting the careers of older musicians like Abbey Lincoln, Joe Henderson, Shirley Horn and Betty Carter.
And it's angling to become a force for the future, having signed young artists like the trumpeters Roy Hargrove and Nicholas Payton, the bassist Chris McBride and the pianist Stephen Scott.
There's isn't a label in jazz that is better at positioning its artists commercially.


The Dress And the Future
Lord &amp; Taylor celebrates dress and design students, March 17.


It's Time to Play Ball, And Stretch and Sing
WELL, IT'S THAT time of year again: beer, fish taco and baseball.
Let others ponder the subtleties of Doc Gooden's slider or divisional realignment; here on opening day, let us ruminate about the music of baseball.
Not every sport has a song.
The National Basketball Association has no fight song, the National Hockey League no hymn (no, it's not "O Canada").
Figure skating has music, but no one sings along, and soccer fans find other diversions.
Only baseball has an anthem: the ebullient "Take Me Out to the Ballgame."


Walt Dette, 86, Gifted Fly Tier In Catskills Who Shared the Art
Walt Dette, the Catskill Mountains fly tier who passed on his complicated art to future generations, died at his home in Roscoe, N.Y., on Thursday, one day before the trout season opened.
He was 86.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


The Nation; Some Cartoons Are Original; Alas, the Also-Rans Also Run
IN one cartoon, Rush Limbaugh takes a swig of orange juice and it squirts out both ears, a subtle hint that, well . . . you know.
Another panel compares President Clinton's Whitewater woes with the canoe ride in "Deliverance."
It might not be prize-winning satire, but (unless you feel strongly that there is something between Mr. Limbaugh's ears) at least it could make you smile.


Boiled Becomes Cool
There's a boiled-wool jacket being worn in New York and Paris that suggests the start of a new era of architectural clothing after years of loose, unconstructed layers' prevailing.
The jacket, by Azzedine Alaia uses the ancient process of boiling wool cloth to cause shrinkage that results in a felted stiffness.
The fabric can then be cut into jackets and coats without the usual inner structures or linings.
In the 1960's, a similar effect was achieved with double-faced wool, in which two pieces of cloth were stitched together to give the fabric a structure that defined the clothes then.
Mr.
Alaia's jackets hint at an even more interesting idea: molding cloth rather than cutting and sewing it to achieve shape.


Commercial Property/The Robert Martin Company; 'Re-Engineering' in the Face of a Changing Market
THE term "re-engineering" has become the latest buzzword in corporatespeak.
Some of the country's largest corporations use it to describe reorganization schemes to meet the competitive demands of the market.
What it has meant lately in the real-estate business is illustrated by the Robert Martin Company, a developer and property owner based in Elmsford, N.Y., in Westchester County.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Coming Home To Roost
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


No Headline
"My repertoire is limited to 'Red River Valley' and I play for my own self-amusement exclusively -- usually when I don't have my hearing aids in. " PRESIDENT REAGAN, asked about his harmonica playing.  [ 12:2. ]


A South Bronx Family's Bright Prospect, and Basketball's
In a littered alley just north of West 151st Street, amid empty bottles, shattered glass, dead rats and scattered debris, stands a diamond-shaped sign that proclaims, simply enough, END.
But to Felipe Lopez and his family, the apartment building that borders the alley represents just the opposite: a beginning of sorts.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Some Gentler Receptions
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


THE FIRST AMENDMENT, UNDER FIRE FROM THE LEFT
Hooray for Catharine MacKinnon!
If there were a bookstore devoted to magazines showing black men being lynched, no one would be crying "free speech." But let the equivalent happen to women and all the males of the world rise up to demand their rights.
If feminism means anything, it is the right of women to define themselves, after having been defined by men in most of historical time.
Now these women definers are waving the First Amendment as their way of saying, "We're only doing this for your own good, baby." CLAIRE COLLIER Santa Rosa, Calif.


The Postal Perils
To the Editor:
Five years ago, my company used the United States Postal Service's express mail exclusively to ship slides to the photo lab I use in Chicago.
In one six-week period, the Postal Service delivered six packages one day late to the same lab.
Calls to trace the packages never yielded anything more than "I don't know," or "It didn't get on the plane."


Ideas &amp; Trends; In Political Bloopers, Practice Is Everything
A REPUBLICAN Senator from Virginia named William Scott moved quickly to contain the damage in 1974 after he was branded "the dumbest Congressman of them all" on the cover of New Times magazine.
He called a news conference to deny it.
Ten years later, Jerry Springer, a Democrat who was running for Governor of Ohio, also tried to confront a weakness in a public forum.
Hoping to neutralize an embarrassing personal incident before it became a campaign issue, Mr.
Springer broadcast a television commercial in which he admitted he had paid for the services of a prostitute.
By check, no less.
He lost the primary but, appropriately, went on to fame as a talk show host.


What After-School Programs Offer
NO one would suggest that every child who has been switched out of the public school system into a private school is academically gifted.
Yet there is also no denying the fact that the trend in education away from placing students into academically homogeneous classes -- historically known as tracking youngsters -- and the reluctance on the part of many school districts to provide more challenging programs for high academic achievers have disillusioned many parents about public education.


All Made Up With No Place to Go
THE WAY TO THE CATS By Yehoshua Kenaz.
Translated by Dalya Bilu. 325 pp.
South Royalton, Vt.: Steerforth Press. $20.


BEST SELLERS: April 3, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
5
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
1
7
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
3
3
11
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
4
4
86
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
5
5
22
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
6
6
51
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
8
4
ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials from reaching North Korea.
8
7
6
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
9
10
10
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) Mysterious deaths haunt a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
10
9
8
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
11
1
RIVER GOD, by Wilbur Smith. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $24.95.) Ambition, greed and romance in Egypt at the time of the Pharaohs.
12
14
3
SECOND NATURE, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $22.95.) A woman adopts a "wolf man" and, by teaching him, learns a lot about good and evil.
13
13
6
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers a string of surprises.
14
11
6
RAMA REVEALED, by Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $22.95.) The concluding volume in a series about the voyage of a starship.
15*
9
BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of violent deaths.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
47
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
3
5
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
3
2
15
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
4
3
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
5
6
4
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
5
12
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
7
8
3
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
8
7
18
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9*
9
26
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
10
10
30
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
11
11
7
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
12
12
32
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
13
13
33
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
14
15
85
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
15
4
LEAVING HOME, by Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) From a childhood in foster homes to a column for The International Herald Tribune: the humorist's memoir.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
11
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
45
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
23
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice on women's health and fitness.
4
1
FIRST THINGS FIRST, by Stephen R. Covey, A. Roger Merrill and Rebecca R. Merrill. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Ways to organize your life to be successful.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
ANCESTRAL TRUTHS, by Sara Maitland. (John Macrae/Holt, $22.50.) A splendid novel, formally a book-length family reunion at which everyone is peculiar; its prime focus is on a woman trying to remember whether she killed her male traveling companion (she certainly wanted him dead).
A CHEF'S TALE: A Memoir of Food, France and America, by Pierre Franey with Richard Flaste and Bryan Miller. (Knopf, $25.) Assisted by two former colleagues at The New York Times, Mr.
Franey covers some 70 years of gustation in two countries in this mouthwatering memoir (nearly 40 percent recipes).
FORDING THE STREAM OF CONSCIOUSNESS, by Dubravka Ugresic. (Northwestern University, paper, $14.95.) A teeming politico-literary satire by a Croatian (written in 1988, before the breakup) in which delegates from various East bloc nations suffer the insults of history.
THE HEART THAT BLEEDS: Latin America Now, by Alma Guillermoprieto. (Knopf, $24.) An experienced reporter's essays on Latin American realities as they are lived and felt as the region copes with urbanization and market economics.
HERE WE ARE IN PARADISE: Stories, by Tony Earley. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A first collection, set mostly in North Carolina but universal in the sure touch that lets the author patrol his tough subject: love of person, place or thing.
LIVING A POLITICAL LIFE, by Madeleine Kunin. (Knopf, $25.) Ms.
Kunin tells how she came to be a three-term Governor of Vermont and develops the thesis that a "woman's political culture," with the power to transform politics benignly, has arisen and is growing in this country.
THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath &amp; Ted Hughes, by Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $23.) In the course of a contrarian approach to the Plath myth (genius-housewife crushed by odious male poet), Ms.
Malcolm raises pages of provocative questions about the values, and value, of biographers.
THE STONE DIARIES, by Carol Shields. (Viking, $21.95.) A panorama of 20th-century life is revealed in a diary-shaped novel that probes the most delicate layers of consciousness in tracing one woman's existence from birth to grave.
STONES FROM THE RIVER, by Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to 1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.
SUNDAY'S CHILDREN, by Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $16.95.) In his second autobiographical novel, the Swedish director revisits childhood in beautifully realized set pieces through which the psychological drama is developed.
WHAT IS TOLD, by Askold Melnyczuk. (Faber &amp; Faber, $21.95.) This genially pessimistic first novel follows the fortunes of three generations of cosmopolitan Ukrainian-Americans from places like Paris and Berchtesgaden to places like Free Fall, N.J., in a narrative presided over by presences from the spirit world.


March 27-April 1; Lads of Summer Romp in Many Fields
HERE'S the top of the baseball news from Britain: The Croydon Pirates defeated the Caterham A's, 16-2, in the first preseason contest of the year for the two clubs.
Last weekend's game was called after two and a half innings because the umpire, Alan Chell, saw no point in one side's running up the score.
"It's just a little preseason friendly," said Mr.
Chell, who is also the public relations director of the British Baseball Federation, which has been overseeing the erratic fortunes of the game in Britain since the turn of the century.
"Let's give three cheers for the A's," Pirate manager Dave Ward bellowed, as his team gathered in a tight circle near the first base line.
" 'Ip-'ip, 'ooray!"


Jockeying for Long-Held Political Terrain
THE first evidence of a stirring in the political terrain of the normally serene Hudson Valley region came only three weeks ago when a Republican State Senator, George E. Pataki, formally announced that he intended to challenge Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in this year's election.
This prompted two elected officials and a previous officeholder to begin thinking in terms of replacing Senator Pataki, assuming he would give up his 37th Senate District seat if he survived the Republican primary in September.


Perfect Time to Inspect House's Exterior
EARLY spring is the best time to inspect the outside of the house.
An inspection as soon as working outdoors is feasible allows making small repairs promptly and provides a head start on larger projects.
Start by checking gutters and downspouts.
They are crucial in preventing foundation leaks, and gutters especially may been damaged from snow and ice.


It's Time to Play Catch Up With Spring
SHOOTS, blades, leaves and stems are pushing up fast these days.
Nature is trying to catch up with spring.
In many places, some of the earliest bulbs have bloomed.
Crocus, snowdrops, winter aconites and a few late Christmas roses have displayed their colorful petals.
There are also unwanted reminders of last year's garden that must be removed.
Although it is still a bit early to do a really good cleanup, since the ground remains soggy in many places, this would be a good time to get outdoors and remove some remnants.


A Rich History
To the Sports Editor:
The sad story about the college basketball coach, Joe Castiglie, was excellent.
But the reference to Castiglie as "the top coach in the Stony Brook Patriots' 30-year history" must be tempered with the knowledge that Herb Brown, the Patriots and my coach in the late 1960's, went on to coach the Detroit Pistons in the National Basketball Association.
Then, in 1970, the Patriots had a coach who became well known in later jobs: Rollie Massimino.
PATRICK J. GARAHAN  South Burlington, Vt.
The writer was the captain of the 1969 S.U.N.Y.-Stony Brook basketball team.


More Whitewater Words
"But did you guys have to put the word shredding on the front page," a White House aide complained to a benign pundit, "and even worse, in a headline?"
Shred -- one of those Old English words meaning "scrap" or "fragment" that appeared a thousand years ago in Aelfric's Glossary -- has been getting a bad name lately.
It all has to do with a machine.


Still No Policy on Arms Sales
The Clinton Administration was expected to announce its policy on curbing arms sales last September.
But it remains silent as Americans grab an increasing share -- over half by the latest count -- of the global arms market.
It is time to seek limits on sales, starting with the most explosive regions, the Middle East and Asia.
To be effective, such limits have to be adopted by other states as well.
U.S. domination of this shrinking market puts the Administration in a good position to do something about that.
It could start by curbing American sales and by getting arms-exporting nations to notify one another in advance of major arms deals, so that concerted diplomacy can head off dangerous transactions.


Israeli Inquiry Illuminates More Than Hebron Killings
Like a flashlight beam in a dusty attic, the Israeli commission of inquiry into the Hebron massacre is exposing conditions and practices in the occupied territories that are covered by the cobwebs of long-accepted routine and rarely examined.
After a month of work, the investigation by the five-member panel has gone well beyond the massacre of at least 29 Muslim worshipers at the Cave of the Patriarchs shrine in Hebron on Feb. 25 .


Carnegie Hill: From Shanty To History
Two decades after two small enclaves of late-19th-century row houses were designated as the Carnegie Hill Historic District, the City Council voted last week to quadruple the area, including some 400 buildings.
As originally designated in 1974, the Carnegie Hill Historic District featured parts of an area on either side of Madison Avenue between 90th and 95th Streets.
It now covers all or part of 24 blocks, from 86th to 98th Streets, and from Fifth Avenue as far as Lexington Avenue in some places.


Staten Island Ferry Revives a Battle of Boroughs
The Staten Island Ferry will resume transporting vehicles by late May, officials say, and like other interborough issues, views on the matter are divided according to which side of the water one is standing on.
To Staten Island leaders, car ferries are a blessing in an area with limited mass transit; to some public officials in Manhattan, they cause congestion and pollution.
On March 21, Mayor Giuliani announced his decision to restore car ferry service to Staten Island.
The service was suspended after a fire damaged the Whitehall Ferry Terminal in lower Manhattan in 1991.
Mayor Dinkins made the suspension permanent the next year to discourage people from driving into Manhattan.


Testing a Definition of Family
A century ago, the heirs of Pieterse Lefferts, a wealthy Dutch immigrant who was granted his vast land holdings by Peter Stuyvesant in 1661, carved up a piece of their farmland and built stately Victorian homes for affluent Brooklyn residents.
In the face of increasing immigration and a shifting economy, a covenant to keep out boarders and renters was established between the remaining Lefferts heirs and new home buyers: only single-family houses could be constructed, and only families could live in them.
The community changed in the 1950's and 60's as black families began to move in and whites moved out, but the covenant, bolstered by zoning laws, held.
As of today, with three-quarters of its residents black, the community remains solidly composed of middle-class single-family homeowners.


Correction
A review on March 20 about "Black Holes and Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy" misattributed the illustrations.
They are by Matthew Zimet, not by the author, Kip S. Thorne.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 31 of the Arts and Leisure section today reverses the names of the assistant shown with the photographer O. Winston Link.
He was George Thom.


Farewell to a Hero


Grand or Gregarious in Brussels
FEW cities can boast of such vital artistic or gastronomic tradition as Brussels.
Borrowing the best of French cuisine and marrying it with such local ingredients as North Sea fish and shellfish, pale ivory Belgian endive, an encyclopedic range of beers and superb sweets and chocolates, there is no reason not to eat well there.
Still, modern Brussels is a city of contrasts.
This grande dame of European capitals appears a bit down at the heel; the august Grand' Place is surrounded by abandoned houses, with windows cinder-blocked and sidewalks crumbling.
On the other hand, it may be the same casual disregard that has allowed many vintage restaurants, brasseries and cafes with fine period decors to withstand the wrecking ball.


Corrections
A caption in the Evening Hours pages last Sunday, about an opening at the American Craft Museum, confused the identities of several people because of a picture substitution during the production process.
The picture showed, from the left, Shimoda; Dubaka Leigh; and Janet Kardon, the museum's director. (Kate Carmel and Marcella Welch were not pictured.)


Patricia Harper, 59, A TV News Anchor
Patricia Harper, who was among the first women to become a television news anchor, died yesterday in her home in Spain.
She was 59.
The cause was a heart attack, said Karen Scott, an executive producer at WPIX-TV in New York City and a longtime friend of Ms.
Harper.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with the Your Own Account column, about college admissions, misstated the telephone number for ordering U.S.
News &amp; World Report's "America's Best Colleges." It is (800) 437-8600.


William Lynch, 86, Union Official, Dies
William P. Lynch, a vice president and member of the executive council of the International Longshoremens Association during some of the union's most turbulent times, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 86.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Gerald.


March 27-April 1: Explanations Don't Make It; The Killing of Two Japanese Crystallizes Images of U.S.
By any statistical measure, visiting or living in the United States is not as dangerous as driving the Japanese highways.
But try to convince the Japanese of that after the murder of two Japanese students in California.
Takuma Ito and Go Matsuura were film buffs and good friends at Marymount College, and they loved life in America.
On March 25, they were shot in the head as they emerged from their car in a shopping mall.
The police have arrested two suspects, believed to be members of an Hispanic gang, who allegedly stole the car to get its radio.


In Mexico, Trade Agreement Comes First; Greater Modernizers
To the Editor:
Dick J. Reavis (Op-Ed, March 26) says Carlos Salinas de Gortari is Mexico's third radical modernizer, the first two, "giants of infamy" being Hernan Cortes and Porfirio Diaz.
Some of us would have rated Benito Juarez Garcia as a passable modernizer, being responsible for "La Reforma," which is celebrated in every Mexican history book as well as in the street names of a thousand cities and towns.
And don't forget Lazaro Cardenas, who seized the American oil companies, left office as poor as he entered it and did for land reform what has been done in few countries on earth.
PAUL ST.
PIERRE  Fort Langley, Canada, March 27, 1994


Comptroller's Report Questions Benefits From Casino Gambling
In a report that strongly questions the benefits of casino gambling, New York State's Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, says legalizing casinos will not substantially raise state tax revenues but will hurt the horse racing industry and create many new compulsive gamblers.
"Casino gambling is not the financial panacea that many proponents inside the industry and out would have us believe," Mr.
McCall says in the report, which is to be released Sunday.


New Disney Park Raises Environmental Concerns
NOW that the Virginia state legislature has agreed to financial incentives for the Walt Disney Company to build a new theme park in the countryside outside Washington, environmental groups are turning their attention to the changes in land use and transportation patterns that would come with the $650 million project.
The largely agricultural region around Haymarket, Va., where the 3,000-acre historical theme park is to be built, would sprout a big entertainment complex along with offices, shops, hotels and 2,500 homes under the Disney plan.


There's More
To the Editor:
As a post script to Edward Rothstein's essay "A Night at the Opera (Sans Song"  [ March 13 ] , let me point out still another connection between opera and silent films:


Hint of Spring in the Air and on the Table
MANY foods evoke spring: artichokes, asparagus, lamb, young chickens, shad, soft-shell crabs, fresh herbs, early strawberries and new potatoes.
Starting with spring, the bins and baskets in the produce markets take on a new look.
Some vegetables that have been scarce, expensive or in poor condition for months begin showing up regularly.
And as the choices increase, so do the seasonal menu options.


Anton Tedesko, 90, an Expert In Uses of Reinforced Concrete
Anton Tedesko, a consulting engineer who was an expert in sophisticated uses of reinforced concrete in the construction industry, died yesterday at Northwest Hospital in Seattle.
He was 90 and had moved to Seattle in 1993 from Bronxville, N.Y.
The cause of death was myelofibrosis, a bone marrow disorder, said his wife, Sally.


Did I Plagiarize His Life?
SIX MONTHS AGO A FAMOUS WRITER ACCUSED ME OF stealing his life.
As a result, I lost six months of mine.
This story began for me one sunny afternoon last September when I received a telephone call in Italy from David Streitfeld, a journalist at The Washington Post.
He told me that The Post was going to be running a review of my new novel "While England Sleeps" and that he wanted to accompany the review with an interview.
Flattered, I agreed, but as the interview wore on he kept returning to the book's sources.
I mentioned several -- histories of the Spanish Civil War, Christopher Isherwood's memoir.
I did not mention the book's most crucial source -- Sir Stephen Spender's 1951 autobiography "World Within World" -- for the simple reason that a year before, Spender had loudly protested the publication of Hugh David's unauthorized and unflattering biography of him.
Given Spender's apparent irascibility, I saw no sense in stirring up trouble unless it was absolutely necessary.


Marie T. Mandry; Ad Executive, 71
Marie T. Mandry, who over 36 years in the advertising business rose from a secretary to senior vice president of Young &amp; Rubicam in New York, died Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 71.
The cause was cancer, said her brother, Gerard Mandry.


Reagan Burnishes Image With Soulful Harmonics
Word has been going around among old friends of the Reagans that the former President and First Lady are doing fine out in California.
She still likes her social life.
He still likes his ranch.
They trade off and things work out pretty well, their friends say, before adding, And, oh yes, he's learning to play the harmonica.


Correction
The Your Home column last Sunday about bidding for a home referred incorrectly to the executive vice president of the William B. May Company.
The executive is Roberta L. Faulstick, not Robert.


Rock Through the Ages: The Glory of Disarray
WITH ITS GENIUS FOR THE moment and its passion for immediate gratification, rock music doesn't obsess over the past.
Rock is just now reaching its 40's, too young for a golden anniversary, so seeking a golden age may be premature.
But in its short existence, rock has evolved fast.
Shaped and disseminated by electronic media with a short attention span, rock has gone through phases and backlashes that mimic the history of older musical and artistic forms in foreshortened ways.
Its peak -- or, as I'm about to suggest, peaks -- would be measured in years rather than decades.
Any search for rock's golden age is complicated by pop's connection to youth.
Most listeners remember the height of rock perfection as coinciding with their own prime years from, say, ages 16 to 23.
That's when the music's promises of freedom and pleasure and power begin to ring true, as the constraints of adolescence give way to the privileges of adulthood while the responsibilities haven't yet sunk in.
Such nostalgia might someday envelop even Milli Vanilli and Vanilla Ice in a golden haze.


18 South Asian Galleries Opening at Metropolitan
Eighteen new galleries devoted to South and Southeast Asian art are scheduled to open April 13 at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Spanning two city blocks along Fifth Avenue from 82d to 84th Streets, the 12,500-foot space, with an additional 2,500-foot mezzanine, has been constructed inside the existing northern half of the museum.
The new galleries are named for Florence and Herbert Irving, who paid for the construction and donated works to the collection.


How Ossining Schools Were Back in 1961
In 1961, our elementary schools were at the cutting edge of innovation as recipients of a Ford Foundation Grant establishing the Dual Progress System, a highly acclaimed method of enriching elementary math and science courses in the wake of the Soviet Sputnik launching.
This then-lauded innovation appears to be the focus of one of Mr.
Worthy's criticisms -- the tracking that it encouraged by accelerating the progress of brighter students beyond their designated grade level.


Sports of The Times; Presidents Have Right To Be Fans
BILL CLINTON does not forget his roots.
In the midst of all this Whitewater business and all this commodities business, it is touching and even reassuring that a beleaguered President of the United States feels comfortable going out in public to root for his home-state university to beat another state university in the Final Four.
That's not the same thing as saying I'm delighted he came to Charlotte.
Presidents never seem to know the havoc they create by deciding to drop in for tea.
My wife recently spent an hour stuck on the Long Island Expressway in Queens because Clinton was in town, and the geniuses just flat-out stopped traffic.


In Celebration of the Dance
Dance Theater of Harlem holds a party for its silver anniversary, New York State Theater at Lincoln Center, March 17.


You Dirty Rats
There's no shortage of lawyer jokes, but who would have thought attorneys themselves had a sense of humor.
Enter The Rodent, an anonymously edited newsletter for associates stuck in the rat race.
It features items like "A Guide for Lawyers in Love," with tips on how to date and bill at the same time, and "Home Away From Home for the Holidays: Christmas Morning at the Firm." It suggests, "In lieu of going to church with loved ones, gather with other associates for services in the senior partner's office."


Virginia Rapids Wins Three-Horse Battle
After the most ruinous winter of racing in memory, some of the senior stars of the sport staged a roaring return to spring yesterday in the Westchester Handicap at Aqueduct.
And it ended in an old-fashioned rush to the wire by three horses, with Virginia Rapids closing furiously to win by half a length over Colonial Affair, who in turn had the length of his neck over the favorite, Cherokee Run.
The seniors' division needed a rousing run like this one.
Fly So Free and Strike the Gold have retired to new careers as stallions, Best Pal and Bertrando haven't cranked up their engines yet and the American Championship Racing Series has been terminated.
So, the Westchester supplied the season's first story line and a cast of distinction for the stars of handicap racing.


The Bowery Sphinx and Other Irishmen
BANISHED CHILDREN OF EVE By Peter Quinn. 612 pp. New York: Viking. $22.95.


But There Are Still the Old Reliables


After Winning Years, A Pioneer Bows Out
WINE is a small glamour industry on eastern Long Island, and news of shifts and shakeouts in the business travel quickly.
There are 17 wineries on the East End, with 3 on the South Fork.
So when Lyle Greenfield offered his Bridgehampton Winery for sale in February, he knew that the word would "fly through the grapevine faster than electric current," as he put it.
Even outside the industry interest has been high.
Mr.
Greenfield was a pioneer on the South Fork, planting his first vines in 1979 and building the first winery in the Hamptons, in 1982.
A past president of the Long Island Wine Council, he is known as a tireless promoter of Long Island wines and a hands-on vintner.


What Should Society Do With Handicapped?
As a teacher as well as the parent of a young adult with autism who attended the program where Jane Goldblatt  [ Letters, "Some of the Real Costs of Education," March 6 ]  was employed as a teacher I am outraged and appalled by her letter regarding special education.
Once before I responded to one of her letters on these pages.
That letter spoke of the waste of money in educating children with autism because they were so low functioning that they could not learn.
Whereas my son's education was not perfect, he was taught to read, do more than just simple math, use a computer, was given some practical job training working in an office of a charitable organization and brought into the community frequently to learn how to use its facilities and to act appropriately.
This is far from the picture of autistic students that Ms.
Goldblatt tried to paint at that time.


N.Y.U. vs. Who?
To the Sports Editor:
From a newspaper the stature of The New York Times one would have expected a better report of the final game in the Division III basketball championship in Buffalo than the provincial "We was robbed" piece when Lebanon Valley College downed New York University.


It's Time to Play Catch Up With Spring
SHOOTS, blades, leaves and stems are pushing up fast these days.
Nature is trying to catch up with spring.
In many places, some of the earliest bulbs have bloomed.
Crocus, snowdrops, winter aconites and a few late Christmas roses have displayed their colorful petals.
There are also unwanted reminders of last year's garden that must be removed.
Although it is still a bit early to do a really good cleanup, since the ground remains soggy in many places, this would be a good time to get outdoors and remove some remnants.


The Nation; Guinier Ideas, Once Seen as Odd, Now Get Serious Study
Call it Lani Guinier's Revenge.
A year ago President Clinton withdrew Ms.
Guinier's nomination as Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights because of a furor over some of her writings, which were widely depicted by critics as radical.
Now, her ideas are increasingly being discussed as solutions to seemingly intractable problems about voting rights that were raised by a Supreme Court ruling last year.


Divine Intervention
To the Editor:


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PSYCHOLOGY  DRIVEN TO DISTRACTION  By Edward M. Hallowell and John J. Ratey.
Pantheon, $23.


Splatttt! Sunny Side Down
EVER had the urge to toss an egg out the window and watch it splatter all over the sidewalk?
Dozens of architecture, art and engineering students at Cooper Union will do just that on Tuesday at the school's 11th annual Egg Drop.
The goal is actually to prevent the splatter.
In years past students have attached parachutes to their eggs, or tried helium balloons.
The eggs have been encased in everything from Jell-O to concrete.
There have been some successful drops since the event began in 1984, and Deborah Heyman, special events coordinator for Cooper Union, predicted that this year "the eggs won't all crack."


American Story


New York Observed: A Newcomer's Journey
THERE is a peculiar kind of impression that people form upon arriving in a place.
It's all sharp angles and high contrasts and odor and din.
It is the earliest dispatch from the unaccustomed senses, before the intellect rewrites.
If you settle in for a while, those primitive snapshots fade.
In their place emerges a more practical picture, the work of senses that have been taught what to cherish and what to ignore.
Maybe it's a matter of mental health.


Corrections
The Wall Street column on March 20, about trading in shares of North American Recycling Systems, misstated the date of certain disclosures by the company.
It was in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission in February 1993, not last month, that North American first disclosed a civil suit accusing it and other defendants of racketeering violations.


Data Bank/April 3, 1994
Data Bank/April 3, 1994
Factory Orders
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Monthly percent change
-1.0
2.4
1.4
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
1.3
-3.0
0.6
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
1.0
0.1
0.4
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
-1.2
-2.7
2.2
Employment
March
Feb.
Jan.
In thousands
130,580
130,776
130,667
Unemployment/Rate
Rate in percent
6.5
6.5
6.7
Weekly Jobless Claims
March 25
March 18
March 11
In thousands
330
340
345
Gross Domestic Product
IV Q'93
III Q'93
II Q'93
1987 dollars, percent change
7.0
2.9
1.9


Yanks Don't Need Miracle on 161st St., Just a Little Luck
Ladies and gentlemen, coming to you in black and white pinstripes, live from the Bronx, the 1994 New York Yankees.
Leading off is left fielder Luis Polonia, batting second is third baseman Wade Boggs, hitting third is first baseman Don Mattingly.
The names sound familiar, but their true identities are still blurry.
Yes, the Yankees are back.
Who they are and will be is another issue.
Are they the magical bunch who jostled for first place with Toronto, turned Yankee Stadium into a thrilling home until the middle of last September and have now returned for an encore performance?
Or are they a fragile group of thirtysomething players who are a few pitching flops away from turning what may be their last chance to dance in October into a wallflower's sitdown?


Two Groups Contest Role in Promoting Lubavitch Judaism's Cause in the County
EVEN as a child growing up in Brooklyn, Rabbi Velvl Butman knew he would chose the path that his father, Rabbi Shmuel Butman, had taken before him: spreading the teachings of Lubavitch Judaism.
Five months ago, the 26-year-old Hasidic rabbi settled in Scarsdale, and now -- dressed in traditional dark garb, with red curly hair straying from the confines of his black hat -- he travels to schools and organizations throughout Westchester, eagerly teaching others about ancient Jewish tradition and practice.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
BATTERY PARK CITY  $360,000
(Regatta)  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 810-sq.-ft. duplex condo; concierge, balcony, Jacuzzi, harbor view; common charge $599, taxes $3,220, listed at $379,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Regatta Real Estate)


A Portraitist To Potentates Of All Stripes
JIMMY CARTER once did a drawing for him.
He recently had lunch with George Bush.
Captains of industry and renowned surgeons and educators seek out his services.
And Herbert E. Abrams is still a bit awestruck by his association with the high and mighty.
"I feel that I'm a lucky, lucky man," he said.
"I came from a background of poverty. When I was young, I helped my father peddle fruit from a pushcart."


Investors Who Discovered Africa
MORE than 100 years ago, American adventurers in pith helmets roamed Africa, searching for fortune and fame.
In 1994, they're back -- but this time they're wearing pinstriped suits.
And they are taking investors with them.
Africa, particularly that part of the continent south of the Sahara, has become a hot new target for international investing.
In the last two months, brokerage firms in New York have floated three new funds -- and raised more than $350 million -- to invest in southern Africa.
And according to Fund Decoder, an industry newsletter, four more funds are in the works, including two that plan to invest across the continent.


A Gift of Color and Comfort For Chronically Ill Babies
MORE than 20 women gathered here on March 19 for a special kind of bee -- what the A.B.C.
Quilts Project of the Northern Star Quilters' Guild called a "super Saturday."
The members arrived at the Lincolndale Club House on a snow-swept winter morning, sewing machines in hand, to fashion colorful cotton squares into crib quilts for babies with AIDS or infected by H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, as well as for infants with other diseases.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Floyd Staying in Front  Raymond Floyd shot a four-under-par 68 yesterday and took a one-shot lead after three rounds of The Tradition in Phoenix.
His six-birdie, two-bogey round left him at 13-under 203.
If Floyd, who has 20 top-10 finishes in 23 events on the Senior PGA Tour, can hold today, he would become the first player to lead this tournament from start to finish.


A la Carte; A Bargain Meal for the Early Bird Diner
BOUNTIFUL three-course dinners that cost $10 or less are a rarity on Long Island.
One such meal is the early bird special served from 4 to 6 P.M. at the new La Verona at 286 Larkfield Road in East Northport (261-4880).
The meal is more than just filling.
The food is tasty, there are a goodly number of entree choices and some nice touches not always seen at bargain prices.
One such amenity is the basket of two types of warm Italian bread, accompanied by dollops of butter and herb butter.


Hat by Hat, by Hand
ANN ALBRIZIO won't be strutting down Fifth Avenue in the Easter parade today.
For one thing, she finds it a bit foolish.
"When you go watch all those people in their bonnets, you're looking at gimmicks," the milliner sniffed.
"Some of those things are an insult to the industry. Hats shaped like cakes, all that stupid stuff."
Spring hats are the last thing on her mind, anyway.
Though she has created hundreds of straw boaters and lace cloches during her 40-year career, Ms.
Albrizio is up to her elbows in velvet and felt, already conjuring up her autumn collection.


OUT OF SIGHT, OUT OF OUR MINDS
There has recently been an earthquake of 5.5 on the Richter scale at Yucca Flats that Kai Erikson did not mention in his article "Out of Sight, Out of Our Minds" (March 6).
By the Federal Government's own guidelines, this disqualifies the area as a nuclear waste repository, as it is by definition unstable.


Trenton G.O.P. Is a Contrast In Its Leaders' Personalities
Cutting state taxes can be fun.
Watch Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian.
It can also be painful.
Watch Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco.
Both Republican leaders have played important roles in helping Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman fulfill the start of her pledge to cut taxes.
With more to come, the level of enthusiasm that each exhibits ebbs and flows depending on his personal agenda and different leadership style.


Greek Revivalism
Twenty years ago, my best friend and I took off for Greece, running away from assorted boyfriends and a dour February in Vienna.
Months of existentialism may have left us wistful for clean, classical lines.
Life, as practiced then by our generation, probably had us longing for the heroic and enduring.
It is also possible that months of Viennese pastry had given us an appetite for something fresh and unconfected.
All we knew for certain was that Greece was south and cheap.
The land of Zeus and Athena put all this in a different perspective, however.
At first we thought it was simply the Aegean sun warming our skins and softening the edges of our prolonged adolescence.
But as we hitchhiked through Macedonia and the craggy mountains of northern Greece, we were lured south not by ancient attractions but by some inner siren.
Ruins and museums, souvlaki, spinach pie, baklava and goat's milk didn't impede our progress, or slow our pace.
Tourism pales in the face of an odyssey.


Another Round of Humbling for the Men of Harvard; Don't Tread on UMass
"The Humbling of the Harvard Man" (March 6), Louis Uchitelle's report on the men of the Harvard class of 1958 who have fallen on hard times, drew a large response from readers.
Some offered advice, some lamented the demise of corporate loyalty, some drew parallels to the hurdles faced by a generation of professional women.
Running through many of the letters, however, was a bitterness toward institutions like Harvard and a sense that arrogance and privilege had received just retribution.
To the Editor:


Ideas &amp; Trends; Sure, the Stock Market's Crazy -- Crazy Like a Fox
THE financial markets, as everyone knows by now, are peculiar.
Stocks and bonds can boom when the economy slumps.
They can slump when the economy booms.
And they recoil frantically from events with no obvious connection to the lives of American investors, like the assassination of a Mexican presidential candidate.
As an oracle, they flop.
Not for nothing did Paul A. Samuelson, the Nobel Prize-winning economist, once quip, "The stock market has predicted nine of the last four recessions."


Hint of Spring in the Air and on the Table
MANY foods evoke spring: artichokes, asparagus, lamb, young chickens, shad, soft-shell crabs, fresh herbs, early strawberries and new potatoes.
Starting with spring, the bins and baskets in the produce markets take on a new look.
Some vegetables that have been scarce, expensive or in poor condition for months begin showing up regularly.
And as the choices increase, so do the seasonal menu options.


Ms. Manners
Someday, perhaps, when you are a beautiful young lady, all dressed up in a flowing gown and long white gloves, you will be glad you read this book." In 1965, that prediction was offered to well-brought-up girls in "White Gloves and Party Manners," a behavior and grooming primer often defaced and ridiculed by its pre-teen readers.
Now that girls are grown up, and curtsying turns out not to be the way through the glass ceiling, the book's co-author, Marjabelle Young Stewart, has written "Executive Etiquette in the New Workplace" with Marian Faux.
Instead of "Good Grooming Can Be Fun" and "Doorway Manners," the new book has sections on "Office Affairs," "Accepting Public Criticism" and guidance for lactating executives.


Welcome to the Braves' New World: The East
This preview was prepared and written by Murray Chass.
Teams are presented in alphabetical order and the starting lineups are his projections.
Probable starters for the Mets appear on page 7.
Relief pitchers listed are the closers.
ATLANTA BRAVES
Embarrassment of riches I: The Braves, who already had the best starting rotation, sign Greg Maddux as a free agent, and he promptly wins his second straight Cy Young Award.


Don't Eat the Daisies
For those who think crime in New York might scare the Easter Bunny, think again.
There has never been an official count, but horticulturists at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx and the Brooklyn Botanic Garden estimate that hundreds of cottontail rabbits (like the one below, caught in another flower patch) make their homes, and meals, among the rare plants.
And the gardeners don't have the heart to get rid of them.
The bunnies, true to form, are fruitful and multiply.
Plus, after every Easter, the wild rabbits get a domestic supplement from folks who have grown tired of pet rabbits, and have the wonderful idea of "freeing" them.
Unfortunately, rabbits not born and raised in the briar patch tend to be dumb and slow, a treat for predators.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-11  EVACUATION SET IN BOSNIA  The Red Cross is to evacuate thousands of Muslims and Croats threatened by Serbs, reversing its policy of not giving in to Serbs' efforts to drive other groups out.  1  RUSSIAN FORCES CAUSE CONCERN  Russia has repositioned its forces along its borders, causing concerns in the West about whether Moscow really will be a partner with which NATO can work closely.  1


The Surprises of Spring Can Delight, or Hurt
When they went to spring training:
Fernando Vina didn't know he would win the Mets' shortstop job, then have it snatched from him a few days before the start of the season by a trade;


In America; Judicial Coin Toss
William Henry Hance was electrocuted in Jackson, Ga., a few minutes after 10 P.M. on Thursday, and the shabby mistakes, the carelessness and the demoralizing capriciousness that characterized his case continued right up until the end.
The Georgia State Board of Pardons and Paroles, in its official order denying Mr.
Hance's request for a stay of execution, somehow got the wrong man's name into a key paragraph.
So instead of William Henry Hance, the order contains a reference to someone named Larry Grant Lonchar -- an incredible mistake in a capital punishment case.


Evening Hours; In Your Benefit Bonnet
Thrift shop's Easter sale supports immunology studies at the Irvington Institute for Medical Research, March 22.


End o' the Rainbow


Some Good Can Come From Taro's Ordeal
Regarding the article on Taro on March 20  [ "Pardoned in Jersey, Taro Incognito" ] , your readers should know that two of the three dogfights were on Taro's property, and the third was with an extremely vicious terrier, which numerous individuals came forward in court to state, including Post Office employees and U.P.S. delivery people.
It is terrible that a fight occurred between two animals, which resulted in the owner of the terrier putting his dog to sleep, not being killed by Taro as you reported.
However, as anyone knowledgeable about dogs knows, dogs' fighting with other dogs has no relationship with dogs that attack people.


Drafting Rules For the East Side
To the Editor:
In drafting the revised zoning dealt with in your "Rules for East Side Avenues" on Jan. 23 the planners and Community Board 8 appear to have ignored the interests of the occupants of future buildings.
Instead, they have been preoccupied with reducing population density, tower heights and potential impacts on side street property owners.


INSIDE
No Bygones for Hungary
Now that Communism has collapsed, Hungary is beginning to bring charges against people who helped Soviet troops crush the popular uprising for democracy in 1956.
Page 10.
North Korea Nuclear Growth
Inspectors found that North Korea is expanding its ability to process plutonium, raising fears that it may plan to continue making nuclear arms, American officials said.
Page 6.
Git Along, Little Rumor
After careers in the movies and politics has President Ronald Reagan found his true calling with the harmonica?
Page 12.


In Collusion With Evil
To the Editor:
I appreciated your juxtaposing the review about a man who made war and the review about a girl who was subjected to war ("Knight's Cross: A Life of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel," by David Fraser, and "Zlata's Diary: A Child's Life in Sarajevo," by Zlata Filipovic, March 6).
Such positioning succinctly made the point that in war, regardless of their families' loyalties, children are victims.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
TRANSLATING FOR KING JAMES: Notes Made by a Translator of King James's Bible Translated and edited by Ward Allen.
Vanderbilt University, $19.95.
The Cambridge University scholars who translated the Bible for James I were neither well recompensed nor much remembered.
This book attempts redress for at least one of them, John Bois, a country preacher whose notes are rendered here.
In 1970 our reviewer, Helen Bevington, said that Bois "lives on as a tireless and brilliant scholar, worthy of the tremendous task."  CIVIL WARS By Rosellen Brown.
Dell, $5.99.
This 1984 novel by the author of "Before and After" deals with a couple whose idealism seems as worn as their marriage.
It is 1978 and the Carlls, former civil rights workers who are white, find themselves unwelcome in the black neighborhood in Jackson, Miss., where they've lived for many years.
As a family crisis unfolds, "this lucidly courageous book asks not only about heroes stuck in memory's groove but about us," Lynne Sharon Schwartz said here.
A troubled union is also at the heart of Ms.
Brown's TENDER MERCIES (Dell, $5.99), which explores the devastating aftermath of a boating accident in which Dan Courser permanently cripples his young wife, Laura.
The novel "contains prose as masterful, and as moving, as any being written today," Joyce Carol Oates said here in 1978.
Dell has also reissued the author's first novel, THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MY MOTHER ($5.99), in which the warring principals are a famous civil rights lawyer and her diffident daughter, a former hippie with her own hapless child.
In 1976 our reviewer, Laurie Stone, said that the deep and deadly connections between mothers and daughters "are nowhere in contemporary fiction better dramatized than here."


Don't Plant, Don't Yank, Don't Fertilize. Yet.
THE snow has melted, hallelujah.
The crocuses are blooming, yippee.
But before you stampede out the door to the pea patch, STOP.
Even if you're dying to plant those Wandos and Sugar Snaps, potatoes and broccoli, hold off until the soil in your garden gets crumbly.
Mine is still a gooey clay ball.


Mutual Funds; A Stumble for Small-Stock Funds
THE stock market chugged along nicely in 1994 until mid-March, when the market began a decline that took the Dow Jones industrial average down more than 250 points in two weeks.
That knocked the average diversified domestic stock fund from a 3 percent gain as of mid-March to a 3.2 percent loss for the quarter, according to Morningstar Inc., fund researchers in Chicago.
Hardest hit were the technology stocks, the driving force behind an exceptional showing up to that point in small-capitalization stock funds.
Technology stocks still ended the quarter with a gain of seven-tenths percent, while small caps took second place, finishing down 2.9 percent.
Overseas investors garnered the quarter's best overall performance, with Japan funds up 18.3 percent -- and the worst, as Pacific region funds dropped 12.3 percent because of a slump in Southeast Asia.


Eugene Keilin Emerges From Rohatyn's Shadow
At a farewell dinner last fall for Felix G. Rohatyn, one staff member rose to pay tribute to the man who led the State Municipal Assistance Corporation from its birth in 1975, when New York City's fiscal crisis first erupted.
"As far as I'm concerned," she said, "Bruce Springsteen will always be the Boss, and Felix Rohatyn will always be the chairman of M.A.C."


Russian Troop Movements Rouse NATO Concern on Treaty Limits
The Russian military has repositioned forces along its northern and southern flanks as they return from Central Europe, raising concern among NATO and United States officials who say the redeployment exceeds limits scheduled to take effect next year under a treaty reducing conventional weapons in Europe.
The deployments, and Moscow's effort to renegotiate the treaty to accommodate them, are emerging as a major irritant in the Pentagon's efforts to forge closer relations with the Russian military.


Thanks to Lord Elgin
To the Editor:
John and Gillian Gould (letter, March 25) are deceived if they think the frieze on the Parthenon known as the Elgin marbles would have been better preserved remaining atop the Acropolis in Athens.
It is also strange they praise Turks as protectors of the temple of Athena.
The Turkish rulers, having converted the Parthenon into a mosque, used the main hall to store gunpowder, whose explosion greatly damaged the temple.


Time to Block the Information Superhighway
To the Editor:
Todd Hixon's article about the unsuccessful Bell Atlantic-T.C.I. merger plan ("The Big Deal That Was Too Big to Fly," Viewpoints, March 13), missed a key issue that clouds the multimedia dream of the 21st century: people are already suffering from stimulus overload.
The nervous system evolved in low-stimulus environments, and many people still yearn for a return to that natural state of quiet and serenity.
They'd rather take a walk in the woods than view "Gone With the Wind" on their wristwatches.
GERALD W. GRUMET  Rochester, March 13  The writer is a psychiatrist.


BENEFITS
March of Dimes Beauty Ball  MONDAY -- The Greater New York March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation will benefit from the annual Beauty Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria, sponsored by the cosmetics industry.
Robert Cankes, president and chief executive of Christian Dior Perfumes, and Irwin Zazulia, president and chief executive of Hecht's, the department store chain, will be honored.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and an awards presentation.
Black tie.
Tickets, $700, from (212) 353-8353.
A New Pratt Scholarship  MONDAY -- Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel, chairwoman of the New York City Landmarks Preservation Foundation, will be honored at the Pratt Institute's annual Founder's Award dinner at the Plaza.
A scholarship fund will be established in her name at the institute.
Bobby Short and Peter Duchin will entertain.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 517-3547.
Realty Foundation Benefit  THURSDAY -- The Realty Foundation of New York, the charitable arm of the real estate industry, will hold its 40th anniversary and benefit while honoring the real estate developer Jack D. Weiler on his 90th birthday.
The black-tie affair at the Waldorf-Astoria starts with cocktails at 6:15 P.M.
Dinner, dancing and entertainment follow.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 697-3943.
Dance for Queens Museum  THURSDAY -- The Queens Museum of Art will hold its annual spring dinner-dance at Terrace on the Park, across from the museum at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Flushing.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing, entertainment and a presentation of awards.
Representative Thomas J. Manton, Democrat of Queens, is among those to be honored.
Black tie.
Tickets, $175, from (718) 592-9700.
Virtuosi's Musical Party  THURSDAY -- The Philharmonia Virtuosi will celebrate its 20th anniversary at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y., with a dinner and music by orchestra members.
David Rockefeller Jr. will be honored for his support.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.
Tickets, $185, from (212) 359-4220.
Indian Studies at Columbia  THURSDAY -- The American premiere of the film "In Custody," directed by Ismail Merchant, will be shown at 8 P.M. at the Paris Theater to raise funds for a chair in Indian studies in the Southern Asian Institute at Columbia University.
A group of prominent Indian-Americans in the New York area has been trying to raise $1.5 million for the Columbia chair.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception at the Paris, at 4 West 58th Street, will precede the premiere.
Mr.
Merchant Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, and George Rupp, the president of Columbia are to attend.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 854-3616.
Dance in the Park  FRIDAY -- We Care About New York, a group of volunteers promoting civility and cleanliness in the city, will hold a black-tie spring dance at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park from 9 P.M. to 1 A.M.
Round-trip bus service will be provided between the intersection of 72d Street and Fifth Avenue and the boathouse.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 686-1001, or $85 at the door.
For Sarcoma Research  FRIDAY -- After the death of Kristen Ann Carr, 21, in January 1993, her parents and friends active in the music industry established a fund in her memory to benefit research into sarcoma, the rare form of cancer that killed her.
A performance of "Fallen Angel" at the Circle in the Square, followed by a reception, will benefit the fund.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 628-5420.
Three on Staten Island  FRIDAY, SATURDAY AND NEXT SUNDAY -- The Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences will hold three days of fund-raising parties at the institute at 75 Stuyvesant Place in St.
George, within walking distance of the Staten Island Ferry.
On Friday, there will be a cocktail party from 8 to 10 P.M., with tables and place settings designed by interior decorators.
On Saturday, an afternoon tea will be held from 1 to 3 P.M., and be a tasting of beers from around the world from 8 to 10 P.M.
On Sunday, there will be a breakfast from 11 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Tickets, $45 for the cocktail party, $30 for the afternoon tea, $35 for the beer party and $15 for the Sunday breakfast, from (718) 727-1135.
Tour of SoHo Studios  SATURDAY -- Art in General, a 13-year-old group of artists that provides exhibition space for as-yet-unrecognized artists, will hold fund-raising tours of SoHo studios.
There will be three tours, each visiting five artists and all starting at 4 P.M. from the organization's office at 79 Walker Street, south of Canal Street.
A cocktail party from 6 to 8 P.M. will be held at the loft of the art collector Thea Westreich.
Tickets, $75 or $125 a couple, from (212) 219-0511.
Jazz for Adoptions  SATURDAY -- To help more African-American couples and single people become adoptive parents, the Spence-Chapin Services to Families and Children established a committee that has placed 250 children over the last five years.
An evening of jazz at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street, with the Roy Ayers Ubiquity group of musicians and vocalists, will benefit Spence-Chapin.
Reception at 7 P.M., concert at 8.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 369-0300.
New Jazz Talent  SATURDAY -- Just as she received early encouragement from jazz greats like Charlie Parker, Miles Davis and Max Roach, Betty Carter is trying to encourage a new generation of jazz performers through her annual Jazz Ahead Program.
A concert by Ms.
Carter and some of that new talent will be held at the Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street in downtown Brooklyn.
The 8 P.M. concert will be followed by a reception at the Lepercq Space in the Brooklyn Academy of Music, which is around the corner from the theater on Lafayette Street.
Tickets, $100, from (718) 636-4181.
Fashion Show and Tea  NEXT SUNDAY -- Talbots, the retail clothing chain, has teamed up with the Girl Scout Council of Greater New York for a spring fashion show to benefit the Girl Scout's educational and cultural programs for 23,000 girls in the city.
The fashion show of adult and children's clothes will be at 3 P.M. at the River Club, 52d Street and the East River.
Afterward, there will be tea, entertainment, an auction and activities for the children.
Tickets, $75 for adults, $35 for children under the age of 12, from (212) 645-4000.
Circus at the Waldorf  APRIL 11 -- Circus acts from the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus will enliven the annual dinner-dance of the National Conference of Christians and Jews at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The black-tie fund-raiser for the conference's campaign against bigotry starts with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 807-8440.


Peace and Quiet In the Capitol
Every so often, members of Congress leave Washington and head out on what they call their "district work period" and others call a recess.
At the Capitol, it's not unlike spring break in elementary school: the weekday occupants of a magnificent, musty old building flee the place for vacation or, sometimes, to finish up overdue homework.
The staff stays behind to clean up their mess and soak up the brief, blessed peace.
There is a first trickle of tourists, a taste of the flood to come.
Two-thirds of all visitors to Congress come in the five months from April through August.
Some of the wisest show up for the spring recess, between the leaky icebox of Washington winter and summer's Turkish bath.
Now, is when the tulip beds are unfolding, the birds are nesting and the Capitol's magnificent floors, all marble and stone and garish orange-and-blue-and-white tiles, are so deserted that you can hear the click of your heels echoing off the walls.


March 27-April 1: Life Goes On in Mexico; Governing Party Replaces Candidate Felled by Assassin
The traffic jams, one Mexican politician remarked on Wednesday, were like awakening pleasantly from a dream.
The mere fact that people drove off for Easter vacations brought a strange, welcome proof that the country had not fallen apart.
Two weeks before, tensions had been rising in the southern state of Chiapas.
Peasants who rebelled against the Government on Jan. 1 were looking askance at the settlement it had offered them.
The Government's negotiator, Manuel Camacho Solis, was threatening to run for the presidency as an independent.
The party's own candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, was starting to fight back.


Lease Offer: The Not-So-Fine Print
Excerpt from a proposed lease sent to lawyers for Lincoln Medical Center and Lincoln Women's Services, by the owners of 30 Lincoln Plaza, an apartment complex and office building controlled by Milstein Properties.
The character, dignity and appearance of the demised  [  leased ]  premises are of critical importance to the protection of landlord's interest in the building, and in recognition thereof, tenant agrees that:


For Seniors, Fun At a Discount
WHAT do older people want?
Like the "girls" in the Cyndi Lauper song of the 1980's, they too just want to have fun.
American Express, which says it discovered this propensity through customer feedback, has set up Senior Memberships and a "Just for You" program to accommodate the leisure habits of the Class of '47 and earlier: the saddle-shoe crowd, the Lindy bunch, the parents of the baby boomers.
Even with the program's frills, probably the most appealing part of the senior card is that people over 62 pay less for it: $35 a year instead of $55 a year for the regular green card and $55 a year instead of $75 for the gold card.
Here is a roundup of some other special programs for older travelers, some changes in continuing programs and further details on the American Express senior card and the organizations that have linked up with it.
On one front, the news is less than wonderful.
In October, the major airlines except Trans World Airlines raised the prices of the coupon books sold to people over 62.
Coupon books, valid for a year, with blackout dates, contain four or eight one-way tickets, usually useful only in the 48 contiguous states.
T.W.A. sells only four-coupon books, and its price is still $496.
The coupons may be used on trips to Puerto Rico and come with a certificate for 20 percent off any ticket to Europe.
A book for a younger companion bought at the same time costs $620.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
THE TEXTURES OF POVERTY
Joe Schwartz, born and raised in Brooklyn, N.Y., became a California photographer, but through the 30's and 40's he focused his camera's eye on the streets and people of his hometown.
Later he photographed similarly impoverished communities in California, capturing the small joys and comforts of people who had little to celebrate.
An exhibition of his black-and-white photographs titled "Poems I've Never Written," may be seen at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford through May 1.
Snapped in tenements, barber shops, bars, playgrounds, alleys and street corners, the pictures document a time when racial strife had not yet polarized the country.


Golf's First Slam
To the Sports Editor:
I have enjoyed the quality of The Times's golf writing in recent years, first of Jaime Diaz and now Larry Dorman.
But in Dorman's "Nick Price Is Making It Look Simple," (The Times, March 23), he wrote that Price wants to join Jack Nicklaus, Ben Hogan and Gary Player in the Grand Slam club.
Dorman then quoted Price as saying that only three golfers in history -- the three just mentioned -- have won all four major championships in their careers.
A fourth golfer, Gene Sarazen, also accomplished this feat, and was the first to do so.
Sarazen won the Masters in 1935, the United States Open in 1922 and '32, the British Open in 1932 and the P.G.A. in 1922, '23 and '33.
TOM LERUBINO  Gillette, N.J.


Profile; Relighting the Fires at Avon Products
THERE'S a flowering plant on Christina A. Gold's desk.
She's not sure if it is an azalea or a hibiscus or what.
But she loves that plant every bit as much as the more familiar blooms she tends at home.
"A sales rep sent it to me," Ms.
Gold said with visible pride.
"The note said, 'Thanks for bringing springtime back to Avon.' "


BASEBALL '94: Pitchers, Hold Onto Your Fastballs!; At 24, the Steady-Slugging Gonzalez Hasn't Begun to Hit His Prime
One had to wonder if the pitching fraternity ever had to consider anything as discomfiting as this: Juan Gonzalez, the most powerful of today's power hitters, says he's about halfway when it comes to developing fully as a major leaguer.
It's a logical statement, for sure, knowing that Gonzalez is only 24 and had only had three full seasons in the major leagues.
It's also a scary thought, if you're a pitcher and you know that Gonzalez has already learned how to pick on your kind at will, as indicated by his 116 home runs and 329 runs batted in the last three years.


Understudy Becomes Leading Man
He is a self-described Wisconsin farm boy whose career path has taken him to a pitcher's mound in New York and other cities throughout the American League.
In the winter, he hunts and cheers for the Packers.
In the spring and summer, he hunts for outs and pitches for the Yankees.
Bob Wickman is a friendly, no longer chubby, 25-year-old pitcher who is versatile enough to handle any role.
That role now might be that of the Yankee closer.


Love 101: Outlining the Course of the Heart
LOVE in the realistic 1990's could seem a contradiction in terms.
On the one hand, there is the deliciously delicate, intimate tenderness and mystery of love.
On the other, there is a course manual in a loose-leaf binder, homework and 102 hours of instruction.
In the 1609 sonnet "Let Me Not," Shakespeare spoke of love thusly:


World Markets; As Italy Turns Right, Stocks Turn Up
THE election celebrations in Italy began among investors on the Milan stock exchange even before the polls closed last Monday.
A mixture of rumor and exit-poll data led investors to conclude -- correctly, it turned out -- that the right-wing coalition led by the businessman Silvio Berlusconi would win a solid victory in the national elections.
The market, believing that a clear-cut victory for the right would provide sorely needed political stability and give direction to economic policy, rose sharply.
The Milan market bounced around for the rest of the week as analysts debated whether Mr.
Berlusconi would be able to hold together his disparate coalition partners and form a government.
The trend, however, was clearly upward.
By the end of the week, the Milan BCI index of leading stocks reached 722.99, up 53.26, or nearly 8 percent, since Monday, a performance that had to be considered especially strong in a week in which most other world markets fell precipitously.


L.I.'s Largest Winery Bets on the South Fork
DR.
Herodotus Damianos, the owner of Pindar Vineyards, Long Island's largest winery, has resigned himself to the inevitable.
Once his purchase of the Southampton Winery is completed, he will change its name to Duck Walk Vineyards, but he expects that the public will end up calling it Chateau Duck Walk.
If the image is Disney-like, Dr.
Damianos doesn't mind: populism is the strong suit of "Dr. Dan," as he is known to East End wine consumers.
On weekends, a traffic-slowing volume of customers floods into his mini-Gallo operation in Peconic, on the North Fork, to snap up $7 bottles with names like Winter White and Summer Blush.


Seeking 4-Legged Friend
THE first thing Gene Mederos found when he got to work was a smashed front door.
An irate dog owner had broken the glass when he learned the A.S.P.C.A. didn't accept animals at 3 A.M.
When the shelter did open to the public at 11, one of the first people through the now-plywood-covered door was a loud and disheveled woman who wanted to adopt a dog.
She was unable to fill out the one-page application and when interviewed could not provide a personal reference or home phone number -- both of which were required.


Honegger's 'Joan,' Timeless yet Timely
THERE ARE WORKS THAT try to achieve timeliness by trumpeting the hot issues of the day.
And then there are works that have timeliness thrust upon them, the case in point being Arthur Honegger and Paul Claudel's "Jeanne d'Arc au Bucher" ("Joan of Arc at the Stake").
The New York Philharmonic, which introduced "Jeanne d'Arc" to the United States on New Year's Day 1948, will reintroduce the oratorio to Avery Fisher Hall audiences on Thursday evening, with Kurt Masur conducting and Marthe Keller in the title role.
The idea for the piece came from the Russian-born dancer and actress Ida Rubinstein, who of course meant to portray the Maid of Orleans herself.
Could she have imagined, when she broached the idea to Honegger in 1933, how soon France would again stand in desperate need of a savior?
She certainly didn't anticipate that by the time the piece was finally heard in France -- logically enough in Orleans, in May 1939 -- the country would have descended into an ugly prewar mood, and that "the Jewess Rubinstein" would be vilified for presuming to present herself as France's sainted national heroine.


ON PRO BASKETBALL/Sports of The Times; Can the Knicks Tame the West, Too?
The offense that the Knicks have no answer to, the opponent they cannot hammer to the floor, is the West Coast skeptic who looks at their record and says, "So what?"
It's a reasonable question, which begs another.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on page 8 of the Travel section today about Edisto Island, S.C., appears with the last line of each column missing.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


A Legacy In a Pin
WHAT: The Middle Passage African Holocaust Pin.
A four-inch pin in brass, pewter or silver, it depicts in diagrammatic form the hull of a slave ship and the arrangement of its tightly packed human cargo during the middle passage, the slaves' horrific voyage from Africa to the colonies.
In one design, five cowrie shells (the number five is a symbol of justice in African lore) hang from the bottom of the pin.
In the other, the facial images of five slaves hang from metal nooses.
WHO MAKES IT: A Bronx company, Who Deserves It More Than You? at 558 Grand Concourse, Box 1361, Bronx 10451; (718) 367-5233.
The pin is the creation of Phyllis Bowdwin, a black jewelry designer who specializes in accessories for the African-American market.
The pins sell for $75 (brass, with cowrie shells) and $120 (with slave images).
INSPIRATION FOR DESIGN: The pin commemorates 400 years of slavery and the deaths of millions of Africans in the slave trade.
"I decided to make the pin because I was disturbed that nothing had been done in terms of erecting a monument or permanent commemoration of the time of the middle passage," Ms.
Bowdwin said.
HISTORY OF THE SHIP DIAGRAM: This image of the slave ship was first seen in "The Rise, Progress and Accomplishment of the Abolition of the African Slave Trade by the British Parliament," a book by Thomas Clarkson that was published in 1808.
The diagrams in the book depicted the ship from seven different angles, including a bird's-eye view of the top two decks and an intricate cutaway.
The image used for the pin, showing the teeming lower deck, is the most commonly reproduced.
Dr.
James Smalls, chairman of the African-American and Puerto Rican studies program at the City College of New York, said that almost all of the ships were designed basically the same way.
Ms.
Bowdwin said, "It is a classic image, a picture that was used over and over again, because it symbolized that whole period."
HOW THE PIN BECAME POPULAR: Ms.
Bowdwin said she first introduced the pin in December at the Kwanzaa Holiday Expo at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan, where it was virtually overlooked.
But she said that after one Expo shopper, a man, bought the cowrie-shell design, she began receiving orders, and she speculated that word-of-mouth helped create the demand.
Since then, she said, she has sold more than 200 pins to buyers in the Northeast.
WHO WEARS IT: Dubaka Leigh, a computer graphics engineer at ABC, does.
He said he bought it so he would not forget the legacy of slavery.
It is a testament "of the cruelty and barbarism of selling human beings as if they were beef and livestock," he said.
The pin, he added, often ends up serving as a history lesson for most people.
REACTIONS: Ms.
Bowdwin said some people want it and some are repulsed by it.
"Most people don't realize what it is at first," she said.
"The cowrie shells usually draw people to it. When they look closer, they start asking questions, and when I explain the legacy, they get really quiet."
Some black people won't consider wearing the pin because they don't want to confront the past or to be identified with it, she said.
But those who have what she termed "a higher level of consciousness" buy it without hesitation.
WHY NOW: "Many would rather forget what happened during that time because it is a shameful issue," she said.
"But just as the Jewish people remember their Holocaust, blacks should remember their legacy. It's something we have inherited. The legacy is pain, low self-esteem, self-hatred and racism on many levels deeply ingrained in our society."


The Consummate 'Good German'
To the Editor:
Was Leni Riefenstahl's career simply a coincidental confluence with the rise of Nazi Germany?  [ "Just What Did Leni Riefenstahl's Lens See?," March 13 ]  Would her talent have flourished in a democratic climate like America's, where propaganda would still be subjected to the criticism of a free press and the judgment of a free people?
She denied herself that destiny and, quite possibly, the world a history without Hitler by apotheosizing him in her films.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES WHERE LOVE LEAVES US By Renee Manfredi. University of Iowa, $22.95.


Numbers Game Doesn't Add Up for Teachers
William Schroeder's letter "Some of the Real Costs of Education"  [ March 6 ]  indicates the "average salary for all Rockville Centre teachers is $59,419." He suggests future contracts forgo raises until they "bear some semblance of reality to the marketplace under which the rest of us taxpayers labor." To which marketplace is he referring?
According to a chart with a study by Strategic Planning Systems Inc. published in The New York Times onOct. 4, 1992, the average income in Rockville Centre, ZIP code 11570, was $93,000.
The average teachers salaries are apparently 33 percent less than the average salaries of the community whose children they teach!


Murat W. Williams; Ambassador, 79
Murat W. Williams, a longtime Foreign Service officer who was Ambassador to El Salvador from 1961 to 1964, died on Thursday at the Westminster-Canterbury retirement community in Charlottesville, Va.
He was 79.
The cause was a stroke, said his son Michael.


For Diana Rigg, Neurosis Stops With the Character
FOR AN ACTRESS RETURNING to Broadway after 19 years and playing a woman in furious heat, Diana Rigg looked the essence of ladies-who-lunch cool one recent midday at a favorite chic hotel in west London.
Sweeping back her auburn hair and ordering a Campari with soda, she gave a bit of advice to any interpreter of an over-the-top character: performance ends with the text.
The drama prompting her return is Euripides' "Medea," with Ms.
Rigg, a leading classical actress and television's erstwhile Emma Peel in "The Avengers," as the wife who commits infanticide.
Jonathan Kent's acclaimed production began in September 1992 at the Almeida Theater in north London and ultimately won its star the Evening Standard drama award for best actress, the British equivalent of the American Drama Desk prize.
A year later, the play moved to the West End for a commercial run that has brought Ms.
Rigg an Olivier nomination. (The winners will be announced on April 17.) In New York it opens a limited engagement on Thursday at the Longacre Theater, allowing its producer, Bill Kenwright, another Broadway berth after "Blood Brothers," his long-running musical.


When Good Schools Aren't Good Enough
WHEN Nileema Noble and her family moved into the county four years ago, Chappaqua's reputation as an outstanding district was one of the attractions.
With two school-age daughters, the Nobles were concerned about good education.
But within three years, they switched their elder daughter, Mikhaila, to the private Hackley School in Tarrytown, with their younger daughter, Anisha, soon following.
"I wanted a far more structured environment," Mrs.
Noble said.


Recitals Celebrate Beethoven and Haydn
MOST orchestras, chamber groups and recitalists prefer to offer varied programs, choosing contrasting pieces that often span hundreds of years.
Sometimes, however, performers like to specialize for an evening.
On Tuesday at 8, for instance, the Tokyo String Quartet devotes itself entirely to Beethoven.
The lineup at Sprague Memorial Hall in New Haven lists a pair of B-flat Major quartets, the last of the Opus 18 set and the Opus 130, the latter with the composer's preferred finale, the "Grosse Fuge," Opus 133.
Tickets are available from the Yale concert office, 432-4158.


THE HISTORY OF A HOAX
As a graduate student of education and telecommunications, I read with fascination, but little surprise, Barry O'Neill's account of how a biased list of school ills acquired widespread cultural significance ("The History of a Hoax," March 6).


Pope Offers Conciliation to Jews and Christians
Pope John Paul II, who is unusually sensitive to the opportunities the church calendar offers for symbolic gestures, concluded three days of observance tonight to commemorate the central mystery of Christianity, the Resurrection, infusing this year's liturgical events with gestures of conciliation toward Christians outside the Roman Catholic fold, and toward the Jews.
On Good Friday evening, Pope John Paul made an impassioned plea for the unity of Christians, later praying the Way of the Cross, Christ's journey to crucifixion, with meditations composed by the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I, the spiritual leader of the world's 270 million Orthodox Christians.


The Hatted and the Reverent Celebrate Easter


WHITE HOUSE SAYS INTEREST RATE RISE MAY SLOW GROWTH
With long-term interest rates now above 7 percent, President Clinton's top economic advisers expressed concern over the weekend that further rate increases could damage the economy and slow growth to an unacceptable level.
The Administration argues that the economy is going through a transition from very strong growth in last year's fourth quarter to less growth now.
But no one can tell where the leveling-off point will be.
The concern is that if interest rates rise another notch, economic growth could decline too much -- slowing the creation of new jobs.


Mutual Funds
Stunning declines for investors across the board last quarter in Business Day, pages D9-16.


Investors' Protections When Mergers Occur
WITH consolidation picking up in the mutual fund industry, investors may be wondering what will happen if their fund company merges with another.
Will fund expenses rise?
Will fund managers leave?
Will some funds disappear?
In mergers past, like the combination of Templeton and Franklin, such fears were not borne out, industry experts said.
"The mergers in the mutual fund industry are nothing that anyone needs to be on pins and needles about," said Don Phillips, publisher of the Morningstar reports, which track the fund industry.


Nikon Has Narrowed Its Review to Four
Nikon Inc. of Melville, L.I., has narrowed the review on its estimated $10 million photo products account to four agencies from eight or nine.
Nikon began the review early last month after a bitter split with Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, its agency since 1990.
Jerry Grossman, the general manager of communications for Nikon, identified the finalists on Friday as Fallon McElligott of Minneapolis; Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein of San Francisco, and two New York shops -- Grace &amp; Rothschild and Merkley Newman Harty.
A decision is expected in early May, he added.


Small Hospitals Being Recruited To Join With Manhattan Giants
Until recently, doctors and administrators at Manhattan's prestigious medical centers looked down on the city's dozens of smaller hospitals, which they referred to condescendingly as community hospitals populated by L.M.D.'s, short for "local medical docs."
But today, with new economic pressures driving the organization of health care, the big-name institutions are aggressively courting those same hospitals, offering to affiliate in exchange for perquisites like low-interest loans to improve weak departments, consultations with internationally recognized academic experts and professorships at some of the best medical schools in the world.


Ample Perplexity Amid Plenty of Choices
IN the universe of decisions one makes in life, picking a mutual fund ought not to be among the most nettlesome.
But consider:
*
Last year, an average of four new funds were started each day, for a total of 1,441, or twice as many as in 1992.


Reviews/Pop; The Clanging Dissonances Of Pavement's Guitars
Pavement's set at Irving Plaza on Wednesday night started out well enough, but it flopped around at its midpoint, then died.
The band, which is touring in support of a new album, "Crooked Rain, Crooked Rain" (Matador), is known for its erratic shows; this one disintegrated in front of a full house.
The band plays noisy rock, glorifying all the different textures and sounds of the electric guitar.
The two guitarists use odd tunings, and for the first third of Wednesday's show, strange and dissonant notes rose from the murk; it was art rock with a sense of humor.
The sound was percussive, with metallic clanging, the rush of harsh distortion and abrupt blasts all layered over one another.
It added up to a modern, cool sound, almost purifying in its excess, the outpouring of guitars and amplifiers being pushed to their limits.


Review/Opera; Gwyneth Jones Takes Over Title Role in 'Elektra'
Singing the title role of Strauss's "Elektra" on Friday night for the first time in her Metropolitan Opera career, Gwyneth Jones snatched dramatic victory from the jaws of vocal defeat.
"Allein," her opening monologue, teemed with bad signs: an underpowered lower range; an upper register colorlessly overblown and at times excruciatingly off pitch.
Notes were repeatedly attacked from below and then missed altogether.
Points of crucial musical tension throughout the opera fell victim to explosions of raw, ugly sound.
Prospects looked bleaker than ever for the House of Atreus.
But this soprano's considerable reputation has never rested on purely vocal qualities.
Her art cannot be measured listening blind, which is why she has made very few recordings.
She viscerally inhabited the role, radiating Elektra's righteous madness; the flashes of anguish and fury on her face were frightening to behold.
She quickly took possession of the set and made sense of its awkward topography.
From the outset, she had the audience in thrall; after the curtain, shredded Stagebills rained down from the balconies like confetti.


Betty Furness, 78, TV Reporter And Consumer Advocate, Dies
Betty Furness, who went from minor acting roles to reknown as a television saleswoman and then became a formidable consumer advocate, died on Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 78 and lived in New York City and Hartsdale, N.Y.
The cause was stomach cancer, said her husband, Leslie Midgley.


St. John's Future Has the Talent but Needs Some Weight
Felipe Lopez had to prove he could fly, and did.
Zendon Hamilton wanted to show he could finish, and left some doubts.
Six thousand sets of eyes, looking for two-fifths of St.
John's next Final Four team, saw two quick, talented players whose first stop next fall should be at the basketball team's training table.
The weight of being St.
John's supposed saviors in approximately seven months is going to require a bunch of additional pounds.


Mystery in China: Where Is Dissident?
The whereabouts of China's most prominent democracy and human rights campaigner, Wei Jingsheng, remained a mystery today with his office unable to locate him and Government security services unwilling to discuss his case.
"If he was released, he should have contacted me immediately," his secretary, Tong Yi, said tonight by telephone.


Gooden Goal: More Changeups, Less Pain
Dwight Gooden's ambitions for 1994 are simple.
He would like to avoid the disabled list.
He would like to make all of his starts.
He would like the season to be respectable.
He is not asking for much more than that.
Gooden realizes that when he takes the mound today in Chicago -- when he makes his seventh consecutive appearance as the Mets' opening-day starter -- that the level of expectation, of excitement, won't be the same as it was in the past.
These Mets are not looking to capture a pennant, they are looking to be respectable.
And Gooden is not hoping to strike out more than 200 batters with a blistering fastball, he is hoping to throw a respectable changeup and keep his right shoulder pain-free.


In Guatemala, Too, Journalists Go in Peril
To the Editor:
"Firing the Messenger" (editorial, March 19), on Hungary's sacking of 200 journalists whose reporting criticized the regime, makes a compelling case: "When journalists are fired, starved and forced into exile, it is the first big backward step to tyranny."


Fighting the Mafia: Not Much Help at the Polls
Two years after their fiery protests ignited Sicily and galvanized the authorities into fighting the mob, Sicily's anti-Mafia campaigners suffered a startling defeat in elections last month.
They became victims of the region's economic misery, a desire for change and, paradoxically, the very zeal they brought to combating organized crime, losing the March 27-28 elections to the right-wing alliance led by the media magnate Silvio Berlusconi.
It was the same coalition they accused of being the mob's choice.


Dublin Journal; Peacemaker or Pet-Food Maker? History Will Say
When historians evaluate this period in Ireland, supporters of Prime Minister Albert Reynolds hope that he will be praised as the leader who brought peace to this island after 700 years of intermittent war.
But if he fails in his effort to end the current phase of that war -- the 25 years of killing in the British province of Northern Ireland -- he could be relegated to a footnote: a pet-food manufacturer and dance hall impresario who was known to dress in a cowboy suit and sing a Jim Reeves country-western howler that begins, "Put your sweet lips a little closer to the phone."


Islanders Could Sneak Into Playoffs
It has been a while since the Islanders set a specific goal and actually accomplished it.
But the past weekend was a good example of what this team is capable of when it focuses completely on the task ahead.
"We said we wanted three out of four points this weekend and it's pretty evident we hung in there," said Islander center Ray Ferraro.


German Riders Lead in Dressage
Monica Theodorescu of Germany,riding Ganimedes, won the Grand Prix event ahead of Nicole Uphoff-Becker as the World Cup dressage finals started today.
Competing indoors in theScandinavium Arena, Theodorescu collected 1,684 points in the compulsory test for the halfway lead.
Uphoff-Becker, also from Germany, who won individual and team gold medals in the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, had 1,645 points on Grand Gilbert.


Atlas Leaves Saatchi San Francisco Shop
Jeff Atlas, who joined Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in San Francisco as president only five months ago, has left the agency.
The departure of Mr.
Atlas, 37, was announced in a terse news release issued last week, which described him as "leaving the company to pursue other interests." Advertising executives had spoken recently of tensions between Mr.
Atlas and Michael J. Jeary, the chairman and chief executive of Saatchi San Francisco who had hired him.
Mr.
Jeary, who had relinquished the presidency to Mr.
Atlas, will reassume that position.
Mr.
Jeary did not return a telephone call seeking comment.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration is concerned that another increase in interest rates could slow the economic recovery.
The recent run-up in long-term rates, to 7.26 percent on Friday, has exceeded top economic advisers' expectations.
These officials see the economy moving from very strong growth to slower growth.
They fear if rates rise another notch, fewer new jobs will be created.  [ Page A1. ]


Two Portfolio Managers Sell American Heritage
Whether to get rid of a mutual fund after a poor quarter is a difficult question.
But if the fund drastically underperformed its peers, the time may have come.
Among the five mutual fund experts who created hypothetical retirement portfolios for The New York Times in July, the two who owned American Heritage have called it quits with that fund, which lost 17.65 percent in the first quarter.
Its peer group of small-company stock funds lost 3.01 percent, according to Lipper Analytical Services Inc.


Winners and Losers: Stock Funds
Funds primarily invested in stocks.
Limited to funds on Nasdaq with at least $30 million in assets.
Total return for the quarter ended March 31.
BEST PERFORMANCE FUNDS
PERCENT CHANGE
DFA Japanese Small Company
28.44%
T Rowe Price Japan
16.96
Japan
16.84
Fidelity Japan
15.07
Merrill Lynch Technology A
14.89
Merrill Lynch Technology B
14.67
DFA Continental Small Co
12.46
Morgan Stanley Inst Intl SmC
12.20
GT Global Japan Growth A
10.94
Fidelity Select Electronics
10.77
Total return for the 12 months ended March 31.
Lexington Strategic Investment
73.70
United Services World Gold
62.21
Morgan Stanley Institutional Emerging Markets
61.76
Lexington Strategic Silver
58.03
Scudder Latin America
57.18
Merrill Lynch Latin America A
55.72
Merrill Lynch Latin American B
54.58
Blanchard Precious Metals
54.19
Keystone Precious Metals
52.78
Thomson Precios Metal Natural Resources B
50.42
WORST-PERFORMING FUNDS
PERCENT CHANGE
Fidelity Southeast Asia
-23.58%
Eaton Vance Trad GtrChina Gr
-22.08
Eaton Vance Marathon GtrChin
-21.71
Morgan Stanley Inst Asian Eq
-21.29
T Rowe Price New Asia
-20.14
Merrill Lynch Dragon B
-19.63
Merrill Lynch Dragon A
-19.53
Scudder Pacific Opport
-18.93
Lexington Strategic Invest
-18.86
Morgan Stanley Asian Grow B
-18.67
Gintel Erisa
-11.88%
Equity Strategies
-11.55
Gintel
-10.88
Century
-10.72
Dreyfus Edison Electric
-9.94
Princor Utilities
-9.90
Stratton Monthly Dividend
-9.00
Franklin Managed Rising Dividends
-8.81
Fidelity Select Energy Service
-8.78
Capstone U.S. Trend
-8.53


Police Apology for Raid Calms Racial Tensions
In a city where the police have a reputation for misconduct and disregard for minorities, the swift admission by the new Police Commissioner that a mistaken drug raid several days ago had led to the death of an elderly black minister is being viewed by some blacks here as remarkable.
The Commissioner, Paul F. Evans, acknowledged on March 25 that the minister, Accelynne Williams, had suffered a fatal heart attack that afternoon after a SWAT team broke through his door, chased him into a bedroom and handcuffed him.
The police had the wrong apartment, Mr.
Evans said.
The next day he apologized privately to Mr.
Williams's widow, and publicly to blacks and the city.
He promised a full investigation.


Rangers' Additions Producing As Planned
When the Rangers acquired four players at the trading deadline two weeks ago, Coach Mike Keenan and General Manager Neil Smith said they added the size, grit and experience necessary to improve the team from merely a good regular-season squad to a Stanley Cup contender.
In the seven games since the arrival of Craig MacTavish, Brian Noonan, Stephane Matteau and Glenn Anderson, the Rangers are 5-1-1, and those four players have combined for 11 goals.
Six of the seven games have been on the road.
The latest goal was scored by MacTavish, on a flukey play that turned out to be a backbreaker in a 4-2 victory over the Devils on Saturday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


New Alliance In Computers
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation and Silicon Graphics Inc. will announce today an alliance of E.D.S.'s expertise in computer systems integration with Silicon Graphics's high-performance computers.
Their aim is to develop and sell customized hardware and software systems for interactive and multimedia networks and other consumer-oriented businesses that must work with huge amounts of information.


Mutual Funds Quarterly Review; Losses for Investors in All Categories
The first quarter proved to be the worst stretch ina long time for the millions of Americans investing in mutual funds.
Stocks and bonds, at homej and overseas, all dropped in value.
Investors in equities appear to be taking the plunge in stride, with redemptions modest so far.
Bond funds, however, are shrinking as investors pull money out.
After a long rallyin the 1980's, bond investors might not have realized how far their holdings could fall on an interest rate increase of one percentage point.
Jeffrey N. Vinik saw the Magellan fund he maanges fall from a 3 percent gain for 1994 jto a 1.59 percent loss last week.
Page D9.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY  Central Vt Pub Svc Mercury Fin Co TUESDAY  Hillenbrand Inds Inc Lennar Corp Xerox Corp WEDNESDAY  Mercantile Stores Inc Murphy Oil Corp NCH Corp Rite Aid Corp Southwestern Energy Co THURSDAY  American Wtr Wks 1838 Bd-Deb Trading Excelsior Income Shs General Pub Utils Corp W R Grace &amp; Co FRIDAY  Unum Corp


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Leading Economic Indicators . . .
Feb.
Wednesday  Auto Sales . . .
March  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Consumer Credit Feb.


Books of The Times; God, Self and Evil From a Fundamentalist View
Apocalypse On the Psychology of Fundamentalism in America  By Charles B. Strozier  316 pages.
Beacon Press. $25.
A couple of exciting times in his perplexing new book, "Apocalypse," Charles B. Strozier, who teaches history at John Jay College of the City University of New York, seems on the verge of delivering what he promises with his subtitle, "On the Psychology of Fundamentalism in America."


Part of a Bridge Over East River Is Marked Out For Car Pools
Trying to reduce the number of cars squeezing into Manhattan each morning, the city plans to reserve two lanes of the Queensboro Bridge for vehicles with at least two occupants to induce solo drivers to double up.
If the lanes are successful, the city may convert lanes of other bridges and tunnels for car pool use.
The lanes being created on the Queensboro Bridge, which may save 10 minutes of travel time for commuters who use them, are to be the first car pool lanes in the city.


Algeria Is Seen Edging Toward Breakup
The armed forces defending Algeria's military Government, and the Islamic fundamentalists fighting to overthrow it, are splitting into warring clans of diminishing loyalty, pushing the North African nation of 28 million people closer to a full-fledged civil war, say Algerians who make frequent trips to France or who have fled here.
Algerians active in politics assert that, as the death toll for foreigners and citizens rises, the daily armed confrontations between fundamentalists and Algerian authorities are turning into a free-for-all where various armed groups are adopting their own political agendas and using force to support their views.


Patents
THE Patent and Trademark Office does not keep official tabs on such statistics, but Gary L. Griswold, vice president of the Intellectual Property Owners Association, said he believed that Jerome H. Lemelson's recently granted patent for "apparatus and methods for automated analysis" set a record in the world of "submarine" patents.
A submarine patent is one that an applicant keeps submerged for years and sometimes decades at the Patent Office by drawing out the examination process and effectively pre-empting others from patenting the same invention.
The advantage to the applicant is that anyone who makes a product based on that invention will owe the inventor licensing fees once the patent is granted.


In the Menopause Market, a Gold Mine of Ads
When Faye Cone started researching her book "Making Sense of Menopause" she found a statistic that is making many marketers quiver with anticipation: 40 million baby boomers will hit menopause in the next 10 years.
From big pharmaceutical companies selling hormone replacement therapy to lone entrepreneurs developing an electric cooling blanket, advertisers are looking to profit from what Ms.
Cone, a former advertising and direct-marketing executive, calls the "mega-consumer" generation.


Yanks Set To Start The Quest For First
There is confidence throughout the clubhouse, considerable talent in the dugout, determination in the manager's office, anxiety in the owner's box and doubt about the bullpen.
Another baseball season opens in the Bronx today with the Yankees truly believing that this can be a memorable season for them, memorable for positive reasons.
The Yankees do not want to be remembered as the team that challenged the Blue Jays and tied for first place nine different times, as they managed last year.
They do not want to be remembered as the team that failed to break the Yankees' 12-year drought in the post-season, especially because a new and not necessarily improved three-division alignment allows a second-place club to qualify.
Memories of that sort will not suffice.


Republican Blind Spots
Congressional Republicans have raised legitimate questions about President Clinton's Whitewater dealings.
It is too bad that their zeal about ethics, and the impropriety of accepting financial favors from people with an obvious interest in government decisions, stops with the Democrat in the White House.
On the two fundamental ethics issues now facing Congress -- campaign financing and lobbyists' gifts to House and Senate members -- Republicans, with only a few exceptions, remain unwilling to support urgently needed changes.


Hydrant Painting Plan Made Tamper-Resistant
To the Editor:
"Red Tape and Green Hydrants" (editorial, March 28) refers to my letter published in The New York Post on March 21, recommending green paint for obsolete fire hydrants, in front of which drivers should be allowed to park.


Real-Estate Deal Puts Archdiocese in a Controversial Light
The Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America is trying to extricate itself from legal claims and troubling questions surrounding a multimillion-dollar real-estate transaction in Westchester County.
Leaders of the church, the largest body of Orthodox Christians in the United States, hope a proposed $7 million settlement could put to rest questions about the deal raised by some church members -- and the New York State Attorney General's Office, which has gone to court seeking access to financial records surrounding the transaction.


Israeli Police Finally Arrest Fugitive Anti-Arab Militant
Five weeks after he was declared an outlaw, the Israeli police finally caught up today with the fugitive leader of the anti-Arab Kach movement, arresting him and ordering that he be held without trial for three months.
In a cat-and-mouse chase, the Kach leader, Baruch Marzel, eluded the police for weeks even though journalists managed to find him for interviews in which he repeatedly taunted his pursuers.


Bonner's Strong Efforts Demand a Lot of Notice
After the Knicks wrapped up their 15th consecutive victory, a 110-87 drubbing of the Miami Heat at Madison Square Garden late Saturday night, all Pat Riley wanted to talk about was an unlikely hero.
"If there is one player who stood out tonight, it is Anthony Bonner," Riley said of the small forward.
"He was not expected to play. He took four or five charges, got three or four loose balls and second shots. It's incredible what he has given us."


Canaveral Runs Last And Out of the Derby
One month from the Kentucky Derby, the rocky road to Louisville took one of its most dramatic turns yesterday when John Kluge's rookie star Canaveral lost his lead after three-quarters of a mile in the Flamingo Stakes and not only lost the race but finished 10th and last.
The race was won by Meadow Flight, who now may join the traffic on the road to the Derby but who was so far below Canaveral in status that he paid a soaring $54.80 for anybody bold enough to bet $2 on him.


Handel's Life and Music
"Who Is Handel?," a program tracing the composer's career from his German roots to his years in Italy and England, is to be given by the early-music ensemble Vineyard musicke on Thursday at 8 P.M. at the Liederkranz Foundation, 6 East 87th Street, Manhattan.
The soprano Kristin Norderval is to join the four-member ensemble, which consists of Sarah Davol, oboist; Jorie Garrigue, violinist; Lucy Bardo, gambist, and Dongsok Shin, harpsichordist.
Regular tickets are $15; benefit tickets, which include a dinner and lecture at 6 P.M. and eligibility for door prizes, are $60.
Information: (212) 353-3366.


Florida Entrepreneur Plans Huge Amusement Complex
H.
Wayne Huizenga has a vision.
Where others see merely 2,500 acres of wetlands, quarries and canals here on the eastern fringe of the Everglades midway between Miami and Fort Lauderdale, he imagines the biggest new tourist attraction to arise in Florida since Disney World, a gleaming $1 billion sports and entertainment complex he calls Blockbuster Park.
Within five years, Mr.
Huizenga plans to build a 45,000-seat domed stadium and an indoor sports and concert arena to house the major league baseball and hockey teams he owns.
In recent months, he has spent more than $30 million acquiring land -- pocket change for a tycoon whose empire includes Blockbuster Video, the nation's largest movie rental chain, three of Miami's four professional sports franchises, and other media and entertainment properties.


Reviews/Pop; Seasoned and Saucy, Annie Ross, Singing
Among the seasoned jazz singers eligible for the title of Last of the Oldtime Bohemians, none cuts a saucier figure than Annie Ross.
With her fire-engine red hair and impish personality, the 63-year-old jazz legend still exudes the high-spirited adventurousness of someone who can be barely bothered to stop for a traffic light.
The singer, who is appearing at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza) through April 23, should not be confused with the morose nightclub performer she portrayed so compellingly in Robert Altman's "Short Cuts." Ms.
Ross's voice may be ravaged, but she remains one of the most vigorous and inventive swing stylists in all of jazz.
One of the high points of her show at Rainbow and Stars on Thursday was a rip-roaring rendition of "Jumpin' at the Woodside." Backed by a first-rate quartet that included Mike LeDonne on piano, John Webber on bass, Al Harewood on drums and Doug White on saxophone, she turned the Count Basie classic into a playful explosion of rhythmic pizazz.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a frank trade campaign, Playboy dares advertisers to open their minds, and their wallets.
PLAYBOY is, in a manner of speaking, coming out of the closet.
For years, the magazine has tiptoed around a pressing issue: how to handle marketers that refuse to buy advertising pages even though many Playboy readers are avid buyers of the automobiles, stereos, personal-care products and clothing they sell.
They avoid Playboy because of qualms over its risque content and an editorial philosophy that advocates sexual freedom with a social conscience.
And they also fear a backlash among those, from feminists to the religious right, who have demonized the Playboy bunny as much as antismoking activists have the Camel camel.


A Bosnian Easter: Peace and War


INSIDE
Latin America funds, which posted remarkable returns in 1993, showed their volatile side last quarter.
Page D11 Junk bond funds recorded a loss, although a smaller one than for bond funds in general.
The outlook for junk is relatively good.
Page D11 Two advisers who created hypothetical retirement portfolios are dumping American Heritage after it posted a 17.65 percent loss.
Page D15


Duke-Arkansas Is More Than Just a Game
When the college basketball season ends on the floor of the Charlotte Coliseum on Monday night, before a national championship plaque is awarded to the captains from Duke or Arkansas fresh, legends will have been manufactured and sent on to become an everlasting part of the game.
This championship night has become distinctive because it combines the possibility of a historic achievement in Duke's chance to win a third title in four tournaments with a theme that goes beyond the basketball court.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 ZULU WARS REDUX As South African troops moved into the Zulu homeland to quell violence leading up to the election, some recalled historic Zulu resistance and raised concern about whether the conflict would become chronic.
A1 More violence as Nelson Mandela counsels patience.
A6


How the $50,000 Investments Fared
Quarterly and cumulative performance of hypothetical retirement savings protfolios created and managed for The New York Times by five investment advisers.
Each began with $50,000 on July 7, 1993.
"Weight" refers to the percentage of the portfolio's assets invested in each fund.
Figures are prliminary and do not reflect sales charges if any.
SHELDON JACOBS Editor of The No-Load Fund Investor, Irvington, N.Y.
Last quarter
This
Ended March 31
quarter
Funds held last quarter
Weight
Return
Weight
Neuberger &amp; Berman Guardian
21.8%
-2.74%
22.3%
Mutual Beacon
18.3
0.84
19.5
Fidelity Convertible Securities
13.8
-3.56
14.0
Invesco European*
12.9
-0.47
13.6
American Heritage
9.2
-17.65
0.0
Vanguard Windsor II
9.0
-4.46
9.0
Fidelity Emerging Markets
5.0
-14.77
4.5
T. Rowe Price New Asia
5.0
-20.14
4.2
4.9
-4.18
5.0
Additions this quarter:
PBHG Growth Fund
8.0
*Previously known as Fiancial Strategic: European ERIC KOBREN President of Insight Management and editor of Fidelity Insight in Wellesley, Mass.
This portfolio invests solely in Fidelity funds.
Last quarter
This
Ended March 31
quarter
Funds held last quarter
Weight
Return
Weight
Value
40.6%
0.15
41.0%
Internat'l. Growth and Income
20.7
-2.16
20.4
Capital and Income
14.6
0.28
14.7
Short-Term Bond
14.2
-2.14
14.0
Capital Appreciation
9.9
-1.12
9.9
HAROLD EVENSKY An investment adviser in Coral Gables, Fla.
Last quarter
This
Ended March 31
quarter
Funds held last quarter
Weight
Return
Weight
Meridian
20.0%
-3.87
20.0%
SEI Capital Appreciation
15.0
-3.75
15.0
T. Rowe Price Internat'l. Stock
15.0
-2.38
15.0
Vanguard Windsor II
15.0
-4.46
15.0
Vanguard Index: 500 Protfolios
11.0
-3.84
11.0
Sogen International
7.0
2.19
7.0
T. Rowe Price Equity Income
7.0
2.78
7.0
Pimco Foreign Bond
5.0
-4.27
5.0
Pfamco Emerging Markets
2.5
-4.50
2.5
Newport Tiger
2.5
-18.65
2.5
JACK A. BRILL A San Diego investment adviser whose portfolio includes only "socially responsible" investments.
Last quarter
This
Ended March 31
quarter
Funds held last quarter
Weight
Return
Weight
Calvert World Values Global Eq.
21.1%
1.83
22.9%
Domini Social Index Trust
19.9
-3.86
19.5
Calvert Social Inv. Growth
18.9
-3.38
18.5
Working Assets Citizens Bal.
14.2
-4.21
13.8
Parnassus
10.6
3.65
11.2
Working Assets Citizens Income
9.7
-2.24
9.6
Progressive Environmental
4.6
-2.70
4.5
JOHN REKENTHALER Editor of Morningstar Mutual Funds, Chicago
Last quarter
This
Ended March 31
quarter
Funds held last quarter
Weight
Return
Weight
Scudder Global
26.8%
-3.06
25.0%
Janus
19.7
-2.63
20.0
Fidelity Balanced
19.4
-3.24
15.0
Third Avenue Value
14.9
-2.89
15.0
American Heritage
10.1
-17.65
0.0
Vanguard Specialized: Energy
9.0
-2.70
10.0
Additions this quarter:
Strong Opportunity
15.0
Source: Lipper Analytical Services Inc.


Helping Hand For Survivors Of Holocaust
With $300,000 from the German Government, social workers are going to Brooklyn groceries and butcher shops, synagogues and bus stations in search of aging survivors of Nazi persecution who need help.
Finding them will not be simple.
Many have deteriorating physical or emotional health and live alone.
But the workers of Selfhelp Community Services have long experience and know where to look.
For 57 years, the New York-based welfare organization has tracked Holocaust victims and given them aid -- medical or financial assistance, counseling, home-care or just a sympathetic ear.


Ski Slopes Are Graying, Except for Rebellious Snowboarders
Since the heyday of ski bums and hot doggers a generation ago, spring break has represented the final fling of the ski season for many college students, a chance to glide the slopes all day and cram together, six or eight to a room, at night.
But even as ski resorts across the nation continue to thrive, and with this season projected to finish near last year's record pace of 54 million customers, the percentage of students on the slopes has been declining sharply.


Rabbi's Followers In Fight at Hospital
Outside the hospital room where the spiritual leader of the Lubavitch Hasidic sect has hovered near death for three weeks, a brawl broke out last night among his followers over who would be permitted to pay a Passover visit to their Grand Rabbi, or rebbe, the police said.
Three men were arrested at Beth Israel Medical Center and charged with misdemeanor assault, and a fourth man required stitches to close a cut over his left eye, said Sgt.
John Clifford, a police spokesman.
"It was an argument over who should or shouldn't get to see the rebbe," he said.


The Many Joyful Noises of Easter
The faithful celebrated the Resurrection atop the Empire State Building and beside a hot-dog vendor on Fifth Avenue.
They prayed in Korean and Polish, knelt at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in Manhattan, and sang loud at New Hope Baptist Church in Queens.
Some took part in a Latin Mass at Ave Maria Chapel in Westbury, L.I., while others acted out the betrayal of Christ by Judas in street plays in midtown Manhattan.


Dodgers Find Strawberry
Darryl Strawberry, whose disappearance prompted an all-day search by the Los Angeles Dodgers, was located last night.
A Dodgers spokesman said Strawberry, who failed to appear for the team's final exhibition game yesterday, was safe and with his family, but did not offer further details.
The team, however, was not happy with his reason for leaving.


Newest Sign of Spring: Technology Stocks Fall
When the boom in high-technology stocks turned into a train wreck last month, investors could fault a lot of things, including the overall market decline.
Or they could put the blame where it belonged: spring fever.
That is not quite as silly as it sounds.
As the accompanying chart shows, there does seem to be an annual pattern to the way technology issues, and thus most technology-heavy mutual funds, behave.
High-tech stocks tend to soar in December and January, and to swoon in the spring.
After hitting bottom in June, they remain quiescent through the summer before their winter rally.


Accounts
*
DDB Needham Worldwide, New York, has withdrawn from the review for the North American account of NEC Technologies, Boxboro, Mass., with billings estimated at $35 million.
The withdrawal of DDB Needham, which has handled the account for the last eight years, leaves four finalists: Campbell Mithun Esty, Chicago and New York; Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston; Houston, Effler &amp; Partners, Boston, and J. Walter Thompson New York. *
UAZ of America, Reston, Va., to McCabe &amp; Co., New York, to handle the introductory American advertising and marketing communications for sport-utility vehicles to be manufactured by the company, a joint venture between a group of American investors and Ulianovsk Automobile Zavod, which makes Russian military vehicles.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Devils Concede Nothing, Except Maybe First Place
After two losses in two days over the weekend, the Devils have more or less become resigned to the idea that first place in the National Hockey League belongs to the Rangers.
Their loss to the Rangers here Saturday night put the Devils 4 points behind their cross-river rivals in the race for the President's Trophy, which goes to the team with the most points in the N.H.L.'s regular season.


Few Places to Run as Fund Prices Drop
Mutual fund investors found almost nowhere to hide last quarter, as they suffered through some of the worst stock and bond markets in several years.
Funds usually called "conservative" -- municipal bond, utility and equity income funds -- suffered some of the worst damage.
The losses are a sharp reversal from the strong gains all kinds of funds achieved last year.
Standing in sharpest contrast were the declines in international funds, the stars of the fourth quarter of 1993.


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday about Easter celebrations in New York City misidentified the site of an egg-decorating event.
It was at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, not at St.
Hilda's and St.
Hugh's School.


METRO DIGEST
HOSPITAL PARTNERS, BIG AND SMALL
Economic pressures in the health care industry are causing big-name medical centers in the New York area to pursue affiliations with small hospitals.
The result is the emergence of a few huge hospital networks and a constantly shifting landscape of hospital alliances that make Balkan politics seem simple.
Such consolidation is taking place all over the country, but is most striking in New York, where hospitals until recently have turned a blind eye to the inevitable arrival of managed care.
A1.


Optimism Persists on Junk Bonds, Despite a Slip
By some measures, investors in junk bond funds had a good quarter.
But doubtless many of them do not think so.
After a good start, junk bonds stumbled in February, along with the rest of the bond market, and finished the quarter with a loss of 1.1 percent.
But that compares with a drop of 3.4 percent in Treasury bond funds.
Of the seven bond fund groups tracked by Morningstar Inc. in Chicago, only the adjustable-rate mortgage funds fared better than junk, managing a slight gain of 0.4 percent.


Sir Robert Cockburn, Leader Of WWII Anti-Radar Effort, 85
Sir Robert Cockburn, a British radar specialist who helped hamper the ability of German radar to spot British and American bombers during World War II, died on March 21 in Aldershot, southwest of London.
He was 85 and lived near Aldershot.
Sir Robert was born in Belford, Northumberland, studied at London University and did research on communications and radar from 1937 to 1945.


Tragedy in Turkey
Hardly anybody is paying attention, but a bad war in Turkey has turned worse.
Frustrated by a persistent Kurdish uprising in the mountainous southeast, the Turkish Army is preparing a massive spring offensive involving 130,000 troops.
America is necessarily involved.
Turkey is a NATO ally and buys American weapons that were certainly not meant for use against Kurdish villages.
Yet Washington's protests are muted for an ironic reason: The U.S. relies on bases in Turkey to provide help to Iraqi Kurds, who have carved out an autonomous enclave in northern Iraq.


A Shot That Catches Nothing but History
What can you do in seven-tenths of a second?
If you're a world-class runner, you can run 7 or 8 yards.
If you're a world-class swimmer, you can cover 5 feet.
If you're the North Carolina women's basketball team, you can win the national championship.
Today, score one for North Carolina as it won the National Collegiate Athletic Association's 64-team tournament.
With seven-tenths of a second to go and Louisiana Tech leading, 59-57, North Carolina had the ball under the Louisiana Tech basket.
Stephanie Lawrence snapped a pass to Charlotte Smith, just behind the 3-point line on the far side.
Smith, a 6-foot junior known for rebounding, not shooting, swished a 20-footer.


Review/Jazz; Wynton Marsalis Takes a Long Look at Slavery
Wynton Marsalis's skills have grown as fast as his ambition, and he is the most ambitious younger composer in jazz.
On Friday night at Alice Tully Hall, he led the world premiere of his first work for big band, "Blood on the Fields," a large composition -- nearly three hours of music -- about a vast topic, slavery.
The piece was commissioned by Jazz at Lincoln Center, of which Mr.
Marsalis is the artistic director.
For the new work, Mr.
Marsalis not only shifted from his usual septet to a 15-member jazz orchestra; he also worked with text (his own libretto), singers and narrative.
But he responded to the change in scale and ensemble with an outpouring of ideas.
His music holds on to jazz fundamentals -- blues and ballads, swing and Afro-Caribbean rhythms, call-and-response -- while abstracting them into fast-mutating collages.
With "Blood on the Fields," he also proves he can write melodies that sound natural for singers.


21 Injured in Greenpoint Tenement Fire
A critically burned woman was forced to leap from a window, 20 other people were injured, some as they were rescued from fiery rooms, and 25 families were left homeless early yesterday when a four-alarm fire roared through a row of four tenement buildings in a Brooklyn waterfront community on the East River.
No one was killed in the spectacular blaze of undetermined origin, which burned out of control for two hours despite the efforts of 200 firefighters and gutted the three-story attached frame buildings at 198, 200, 202 and 204 Huron Street, between Manhattan Avenue and McGuinness Boulevard in Greenpoint.


Fall of a Man Pivotal in Breast Cancer Research
Dr.
Bernard Fisher was pivotal in changing the way breast cancer is treated by pioneering large-scale research and therapy studies of the disease and by overcoming the natural independence of surgeons.
But the same forceful personality that allowed him to accomplish so much has contributed to his downfall.
Last week, Dr.
Fisher, a 75-year-old surgeon who has served on the University of Pittsburgh faculty since 1947, was suddenly ousted from his job as head of a group of studies of breast and bowel cancer amid questions about why he delayed reporting falsifications and irregularities among studies he oversaw to his Federal sponsors.
A Canadian researcher has admitted falsifying data submitted to Dr.
Fisher, but Dr.
Fisher himself is not under suspicion.


Budget Group Urges Cut in Police Desk Jobs Held by Officers
New York City could save at least $50 million a year and put more police officers on the street by changing work schedules and replacing hundreds of officers in administrative positions with civilians, a private budget monitoring group said in a report released yesterday.
The report, by the Citizens Budget Commission, said carrying out the two recommendations would allow Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to avoid some of the most painful cuts he has proposed to close a $2.3 billion gap in the budget for the coming fiscal year, which begins in July.


Bridge
To answer the question "What is the rarest undoubled contract?" one must ask another: "Where is the game being played?" In Italy the first answer is one club, since that bid is almost always treated as forcing.
On this side of the Atlantic the answer is five no-trump.
When that contract is reached, the bidding is usually open to criticism.
The diagramed deal was played in a duplicate game at the Manhattan Club, 27 West 72d Street, and reported by Dr.
Paul Metz of Brooklyn.
South had one of the rare hands on which a direct leap to four no-trump makes sense in response to a one-level opening.
Even so, he was headed for jeopardy in five spades when his partner showed one ace.
North, hungry for match points, then increased the danger by converting to five no-trump.


A Fight for Peace on Chicago's Streets
When the last bell of the day rings and students pour out of the neighborhood high school, Hal Baskin prays for peace but prepares for trouble.
He peers into passing cars and worries about drive-by shootings.
He spots a group of boys shouting at one another across the street and runs over, knowing how quickly teasing words can be replaced by fists or, more likely these days, by bullets.


Political Memo; Imperiled AIDS Agency Is at Center of Budget Storm
With Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani committed to whittling 15,000 jobs from the government, perhaps nothing better illustrates the budgetary tradeoffs and choices, the wrenching political decisions and even the high-stakes gambles than the administration's debate over whether to eliminate the Division of AIDS Services.
How the division ended up fighting for its existence is a tale of the city budget's complexity, of the scores of restrictions on Federal and state grants and of the options left when a mayor seeks to close a $2.3 billion budget deficit without new taxes and still protect the police, firefighters and schoolteachers from cuts.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Winning Tradition for Floyd, in a Playoff  Raymond Floyd birdied the 18th hole twice in 20 minutes yesterday, once to stay abreast of Dale Douglass and again to win the Tradition in the first playoff in the tournament's six-year history.
In winning the first major of the year on the Senior P.G.A. tour, the 51-year-old Floyd joined Don Bies (1989), Jack Nicklaus (1990, 1991), Lee Trevino (1992) and Tom Shaw (1993) as champions of the event played in Phoenix.
Floyd, who won his sixth championship in 24 senior events since September 1992, won $127,500.
He had to birdie two of the last three holes to do it. (AP) Crenshaw Has the Touch: Ben Crenshaw, whose putting was especially sharp, shot his third straight round of 68 to win the Freeport-McMoRan Classic by three strokes in New Orleans.
Crenshaw finished with a 15-under-par total of 273.
The victory, the 18th in his 22-year career, earned Crenshaw $216,000.
The Texan's last three top 10 finishes have been victories. (AP) TENNIS  The Upsets Stop Here as Sampras Cruises  Top-ranked Pete Sampras defeated Lionel Roux, a French qualifier, 6-2, 6-2, yesterday to win the Salem Open, his fifth title this season.
Roux had upset fourth-seeded Ivan Lendl and No. 6 Aaron Krickstein on the way to the final on the hard courts in Osaka, Japan.
But Sampras quickly took control, breaking the 20-year-old Roux's serve in the third and seventh games of the first set. (AP) Costa Turns Back Medvedev: Carlos Costa fought back to overcome defending champion Andrei Medvedev, 4-6, 7-5, 6-4, and win the Estoril Open in Lisbon.
Costa lost the first set and was down, 5-2, in the second before seizing the initiative on the clay court. (AP) Hometown Hero Loses Twice: Magnus Larsson beat Richey Reneberg, 6-4, 6-2, to win the River Oaks International in Houston.
Reneberg, of Houston, fared no better in the doubles final, teaming with Scott Davis to lose, 6-1, 7-6 (7-1), to Mark Knowles and Christo Van Rensburg. (AP) N.B.A.
Lakers 4-1 Since Coach Johnson Took Over  Elden Campbell scored 17 points and the Los Angeles Lakers improved to 4-1 under Coach Magic Johnson, defeating the Atlanta Hawks, 102-89.
It was the Lakers' season-high sixth consecutive home victory.
The Hawks had won seven of their last nine games, but shot 38 percent last night. (AP) Bulls 96, Pistons 93: Scottie Pippen had 26 points, 9 rebounds and 9 assists as Chicago swept its five-game season series against Detroit in Auburn Hills, Mich. (AP) Rockets 106, Clippers 98: Hakeem Olajuwon had 39 points, 11 rebounds and 6 blocked shots as visiting Houston beat Los Angeles for the eighth straight time.
The Rockets pulled within a half game of San Antonio in their battle for the Midwest Division lead. (AP) Celtics 135, 76ers 112: In Philadelphia, Sherman Douglas scored a season-high 27 points and passed for a career-high 22 assists to spark Boston.
It was the 10th straight defeat for the 76ers. (AP) N.H.L.
Lemieux Sparkles for First-Place Penguins  Mario Lemieux scored his 13th and 14th goals and added two assists as the Pittsburgh Penguins beat the Boston Bruins, 6-2, yesterday to keep sole possession of first place in the National Hockey League's Northeast Division.
The Penguins went 6-0 against Boston this season.
The game was played before a neutral-site crowd of 17,224 in the Richfield (Ohio) Coliseum. (AP) Stars 6, Capitals 3: In Landover, Md., Mike Modano got two goals and Pelle Eklund and Mike Craig scored 37 seconds apart in a four-goal second period that lifted Dallas past Washington. (AP) Blues 3, Red Wings 3: In Detroit, Curtis Joseph, St.
Louis's goaltender, made 47 saves in the tie.
With the point, first-place Detroit moved 4 points ahead of Toronto in the Central Division.
Zambia will play Mali in Wednesday's semifinals.
Ivory Coast, the defending African champion, also advanced to the semifinals against World Cup qualifier Nigeria by beating Ghana, 2-1. (AP)


Bonfire of the Duke Fanatics
Duke students have their own Final Four tradition: a bonfire in the main quadrangle celebrating each victory.
Despite a week of administration warnings that a fire would not be tolerated this year and ignoring the lure of a rock band playing a free concert in an empty parking lot, Duke students built their blaze after 6,000 of them watched the victory over Florida on Saturday on a giant television screen in Cameron Stadium.
A chant ("burn the bench"), a streaker and more than a little alcohol added to the festivities.


Office Space
Spurred by a strengthening economy and low interest rates, New York City's commercial real estate market is beginning to come out of its long recession, real estate brokers say.
Vacant office space in Midtown is diminishing for the first time in a decade and the value of concession packages offered by landlords is starting to drop.
New York City and Washington D.C. are the only markets in the country where landlord effective rents -- the tenant's rent less operating expenses, real estate taxes and electricity costs -- are on the rise.


Essay; 2 Climbdowns, 1 Climb-Up
Two climbdowns and one climb-up illuminate the state of politics in Europe today.
In Britain, where the Conservatives are split between Euro-lovers and Euro-skeptics, Prime Minister John Major made a puny, pitiful effort to strengthen the voice of the minority in the expanding European Union.
He clambered atop the ramparts, derided his Labor opposition as "Monsieur Oui, the French poodle" -- but then had to climb down again, his tail between his own poodlish legs.


Market Place; A Look at H &amp; R Block and How the Tax Preparer Plans to Reap Gains From Its Computer Services.
WITHIN the next few days, H &amp; R Block will mail dividends to its shareholders along with a printed report on its previously released fiscal third-quarter earnings that traditionally includes one added piece of information closely watched by analysts: an update on how the tax preparation business has fared through March 15.
That is crucial information for a company that for decades has made the bulk of its profit in the fiscal quarter ending April 30.
These days, though, analysts will be looking just as closely for any new information on Block's Compuserve subsidiary.
The Compuserve network -- which has about 1.8 million subscribers, who use their personal computers to chat, shop, conduct research and file taxes -- has been growing at triple the rate of the tax services for which Block is known, and now accounts for close to 30 percent of its revenues and earnings.
Indeed, the main thing that separates the analysts who rate the company as a "buy" from those who say its stock is fully valued is their views about Compuserve.


Editorial Notebook; Get Ready for ARF
East Asia, from Seoul to Singapore, is now the world's axis for expanding trade and economic growth.
Any interruption of that region's growth would reverberate around the globe.
Fortunately, most economic indicators point toward further expansion -- provided there is continued political stability and peace.
With that in mind, East Asian nations are preparing to launch, this July, a promising new vehicle for avoiding military conflicts.
It is called the Asean Regional Forum, or ARF.
It has received scant attention in the West, even though the U.S. will be an important participant.
It is not a military alliance like NATO or a collective security organization like Europe's Conference on Security and Cooperation.
But, in time, it could come to play a central role in American strategy for the Asia-Pacific region.


Corrections
An article yesterday about funeral services for two New York City firefighters misattributed a quotation in some editions.
It was the Fire Department chaplain, the Rev.
Myckal Judge, who said that like Jesus, Christopher J. Siedenburg had been received directly into heaven; the remark was not made by the Rev.
Joseph Murphy.


Cancer Study Group Lists Its Advances in Treatment
Since 1958, Federal agencies have financed the work of the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project at the University of Pittsburgh to determine the effectiveness of various surgical procedures, drugs and radiation therapies for cancers of the breast, colon and rectum.
The project's studies helped clarify what the location and size of the cancer and spread of tumor cells to lymph nodes indicated about the patient's prognosis.
The project also generated data on the occurrence of cancer in the second breast.


Don't You Believe That Nicotine Isn't Addictive; A Ban for Health's Sake
To the Editor:
In "Pssst. Wanna Light?" (Op-Ed, March 24) Richard Klein attacks proposed bans on smoking in schools, fast-food restaurants and workplaces.
He compares them to Prohibition and derides their imposition as a "futile and costly experiment in prohibiting perennial vices."


Dominican Officers Arrest 2 Linked to Violent Drug Gang
The last of the Wild Cowboys, one of New York City's most violent drug gangs, went down last week.
That is how law-enforcement officials are portraying an unexpected pair of arrests of what they say are a leader and a senior executioner of a gang that ruthlessly enforced its control of the cocaine trade in parts of Washington Heights and the South Bronx.


Taking a Gift to New Heights


Dance in Review
Lynn Shapiro
Bessie Schonberg Theater
The world of Lynn Shapiro is filled with bodies contorted and cramped by unexpressed feelings.
The Francis Bacon of contemporary choreographers, Ms.
Shapiro uncannily established an atmosphere of dread and loss without a single familiar psychic sign post in "Ambition Bird," a program of five dances presented on Thursday night.


Welcome to Augusta National, Home of the Big Masters Debate
Even now, Gene Sarazen remembers it as though it were last week.
He can see the 15th green, with the pin cut on the right side.
He can feel the breeze, smell the grass.
In his mind's eye, he can recall the moment his caddie, Stovepipe, handed him his 4-wood for the most significant second shot in tournament golf history.
"I was debating with my caddie about whether to go for it or whether to play safe," said Sarazen, 92 years old.
"He said to me: 'Oh, we've got nothing to lose. Let's go for it.' "


CHRONICLE
GARRISON KEILLOR plans to make the original site of the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville, his prairie home away from home this summer.
And his companions will include two eras of performers, The Associated Press reported.
A special broadcast of "A Prairie Home Companion" will be made on June 4 from Ryman Auditorium, where the Grand Ole Opry ran from 1943 to 1974.
The broadcast will help celebrate the completion of an $8.5 million restoration of the 102-year-old auditorium.
Appearing on the radio show will be the EVERLY BROTHERS , VINCE GILL and MARY CHAPIN CARPENTER .
The Everly Brothers performed at the Ryman as youthful members of the Opry cast in the late 1950's.
Mr.
Gill and Ms.
Carpenter never had a chance to play there.


It's Orderly Chaos Vs. Order in Final
Arkansas vs.
Duke offers a flexible, and contrasting, national championship clash, an inside-outside, 94-foot sprint and waltz toward claiming college basketball's sweetest prize.
This is a matchup that covers every base.
It is a challenge of both teams' persistence on making true for themselves the motto of each of the previous 55 champions: "What you can do best, we can do better."


Let's All Complain About Postal Rates
To the Editor:
It has been suggested that, because the nominal price of first-class postage is about where it was in the late 18th century, Americans who complain about the proposal to increase postal rates are merely whining wimps who are lacking in historical perspective.


Dance in Review
Nago Manman Ye Performing Ensemble  La Mama Annex Theater
Out of adversity -- both immediate and long-term -- there came a charming and poignant theatrical experience on Friday night, when the Nago Manman Ye Performing Ensemble presented a program of theater and dance based on voodoo rhythms and rituals.


After Flying High, Emerging Markets Fall Back to Earth
Call them shooting stars.
They are mutual funds that soar in performance, and bring in zillions of dollars in assets.
All too often, a large part of the money comes into such funds near the top.
Then they collapse.
Consider two Fidelity funds, the Southeast Asia Fund, which invests in stocks, and the New Markets Income Fund, which buys high-yield bonds in third world countries.
Both are less than a year old, and for their lives have respectable records, with the Southeast Asia fund up 26 percent and the New Markets Income Fund up 9.5 percent.


INSIDE
Algeria in Chaos
Algeria is edging toward civil war, with factions splitting both the Government and the Islamic Fundamentalist opposition, and many Algerians are fleeing the violence.
Page A7.
Into Manhattan, Two by Two
Two weeks from today, the Queensboro Bridge will become the first roadway in New York City to get car pool lanes.
Page B1.
A Flaw of Personality?
The strong personality of a researcher who played a pivotal role in changing how breast cancer is treated may have contributed to his ouster as head of a group of studies.
Page B10.


Critic's Notebook; New Plays With Big Ideas, Really Big
Aleskii Antedilluvianovich Prelapsarianov, the ancient Bolshevik who continues to deliver the prologue to Tony Kushner's "Perestroika" on Broadway, died here recently, in another play of Mr.
Kushner's, from an uncontrolled fit of speechifying.
In "Slavs! (Thinking about the Longstanding Problems of Virtues and Happiness)," 1 of 10 works in the 18th Annual Humana Festival of New American Plays last week.
Prelapsarianov (played here by Ray Fry) once again fiercely lamented the decline of the "beautiful theory" that had shaped the Bolshevik Revolution and the "mad, swirling, planetary disorganization" in which his world found itself in 1985.
Shortly before his collapse, he concluded: "God is a reactionary. And the progressive people are the enemies of God."


Don't You Believe That Nicotine Isn't Addictive
To the Editor:
Cigarette manufacturers dispute that cigarette smoking involves addiction to nicotine.
They emphasize that more than 40 million Americans have quit smoking, that most did so with no professional help, and that this is not consistent with the behavior of individuals addicted to such drugs as heroin or cocaine.
There are problems with this argument.


Drop Seen For Stocks At Opening
The stock market returns from a long nervous weekend today amid a general belief that prices will open significantly lower.
But there is some hope that share prices will then stabilize.
"I think we'll open a lot lower, maybe down 50 points, and then try to rally," said David Shulman, the chief equity strategist of Salomon Brothers.
"That is a guess."


Cardinal McCann, 86; Ex-Prelate in Cape Town
Owen Cardinal McCann, a South African foe of apartheid who was the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Cape Town from 1951 to 1984, died on March 26.
He was 86 and had a home in Wynberg, a suburb of Cape Town.
He died of a heart attack, The Times of London said on Friday.


How Mutual Funds Performed Through Thursday, March 31, 1994
Winners and losers; taxable bond and municipal bond funds.
Limited to funds listed on Nasdaq with at least $30 million in assets.


A Channel For Lovers Of Athletic
Unless their VCR's are working triple overtime, sports television viewers cannot build a complete video archive of great events.
While many fans may record the World Series, the Super Bowl or the N.B.A.
All-Star Game for a single repeat viewing, they eventually erase it into video limbo.
But the Classic Sports Network, a 24-hour cable service aiming to start operations late this year, hopes sports couch spuds will revel in going back, back, back in time to watch generous helpings of events as old as the 1896 Summer Olympics when "moving" pictures were just being born and as new as hockey star Wayne Gretzky's recent record-setting 802d goal.


Rival Visions of Freedom Split South African Zulus
From the sphinx-shaped crag that gives this place its name, a vast amphitheater of yellow grass, drenched in blood and history, rolls east to a distant horizon.
On a sunny January day in 1879, a British force of 1,800 soldiers on their way to an anticipated easy conquest of Zululand looked up from this plain to see 20,000 Zulu warriors cascading down from the plateau.


Blazers Feel the Clinch As Nets Feel the Pinch
For the second straight game, Nets Coach Chuck Daly watched helplessly as his team, playing at home, had a playoff-bound club on the ropes only to go down to defeat.
Today, the Portland Trail Blazers escaped with a 109-105 victory.


Latin American Shares Show Their Volatility
Latin America funds, after posting remarkable returns last year, showed their volatile side in the first quarter.
Mainly because of political and economic uncertainties in Mexico, these funds ended the period with small losses and narrow gains.
The Latin America funds had a strong January despite the bloody Chiapas uprising in Mexico, and continued performing well in February when the Bolsa hit a peak.
But in March the peso weakened against the dollar, and Mexican stocks slipped, as speculative money that had flowed in from foreign investors flowed out after approval of the the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Then Luis Donaldo Colosio, the governing party's presidential candidate, was assassinated, shaking the markets.


Crusading for Harmony as a Skinhead Spy; Repentant Racist to Go Into Hiding After Giving Data on New Jersey's Neo-Nazis
Dominick Bruno Jr. says he first took a razor to his scalp when he was 15, submitting to the rites of a neo-Nazi skinhead gang that prowled the mall-encrusted landscape of suburban New Jersey.
Soon he was preaching bigotry in the schoolyard and flooding increasingly diverse neighborhoods with fliers that said, "Deport Niggers, Spiks, Jews!"
But recently, something snapped in Mr.
Bruno, a leader of the S.S.
Action Group, one of the more virulent skinhead gangs.
He said he began to feel repulsed by the subculture he had embraced: the bristling hostility to nonwhites, the throbbing racist music from Germany and Britain called oi, the violent teen-agers who seemed little more than small-town losers hungry for attention.


Ex-Senator Runs Again, Elsewhere
After three decades in public life, William E. Brock 3d is regarded as one of the most skilled politicians in the Republican Party.
But his decision to run for the Senate from Maryland 17 years after serving as a senator from Tennessee has puzzled even his biggest admirers.
Of the many reasons put forth by his friends as to why Bill Brock should not return to the fray of elective politics, this is the most persuasive: He would probably lose.
Though Mr.
Brock would become the first senator elected by popular vote from two states, Democrats are already attacking him as a carpetbagger.


Abroad at Home; Physician, Heal Thyself
During a long trip abroad last month I kept reading, in local papers, Washington reports about President Clinton's "Whitewater crisis." When people asked me to explain what exactly it was, I could not.
Now, after sifting through the news of recent weeks, I do see a crisis: an oncoming crisis of confidence in the press.
For magazines, television and newspapers have taken stories that deserve modest attention and blown them up to hyperbolic proportions.


World Economies


Baseball's Finest Hour
Opening Day!
May thine glories never fade
Or perish in an ambuscade!
Every spring about this time, I conclude that my place in baseball history is not yet secure.
Few believe there was ever a time without an Opening Day, but there was such a time, and it was I who greased the sleeves of the club owners with "Say, boys, wouldn't it be grand if every season began on the same day? Oh, what an adventure that would be!"
"Well, boys," the pooh-bahs exclaimed, "does the lad have a point or not?" The lad was 12, and did.
The year, 1878.
We called our game base-ball back then, which seemed such a waste of space.
That's another of my contributions.
I still preserve a copy of my letter to the Scribes Association of 1875.
"Oh, you Scribes," I postulated, "drop the hyphen and save the space!" I signed it "A NineYearOld With Ideas in His Bean." And that's what I was.
With my brother Neddy I spent many unsupervised hours tossing a Cognac bottle up against our barn.
The game was to make our mother come bounding and leaping out.
My, but she was widely held to be insane!
Her appearances each counted as a run.
Later, Neddy, who penned verse to toughen his fielding hand, dashed off these lines in her sainted honor: Mother, your apron is burning,
But I cannot put it out.
I'm miles away in a pasture,
Playing base-ball  [ sic ]  like a lout.
Mother, your leggings are burning,
They have a phosphoric smell.
But I'm running bases, Dear Heart,
They'll love your pies in Hell.
When it became too dark to continue our games, we would join our comrades of all ages in sitting around and yacking baseball, forever baseball, unless someone had plague blankets, and then we dared each other to sleep in them.
But soon it was back to baseball.
I heard much wild talk of the tragedy of the Monitor and the Merrimac, and the number of lefty twirlers who gave their lives on those ships.
At these times, in the closing dark, we felt a special sense of each other's destinies, but tastefully, we kept that kind of news to ourselves.
On one occasion, the superb Kid Gerty loomed at the center of our bunch.
The chesty second sacker had been recently expelled from the Hartfords for muffing a superstition.
"Boys, I let a missionary parade about in my uniform. What harm could it do this once?" he sobbed.
"I was dead wrong, and my mates were right to cast me out."
I asked Gerty did I have the stuff to be a true professional.
"Oh, I couldn't say," he replied.
"It would crush you. No, I haven't a clue." This judgment much inflated my standing in town.
Truly, baseball of my day had seized the national imagination, so that made for trouble right there.
I observed that there was entirely too much pretending going on.
"Play back, boys, I'm peerless Cappy Anson and he bats like this" was a common fantasy of the fields.
Or perhaps, "See me, boys, I'm the barrel-chested O'Rourke twins. Say, watch how we feature the stick!" Gosh, it was an epidemic.
To combat such carelessness, I became the Stance Authenticator, a service which, at 5 cents a player or a dollar a team, was a small price to pay for uniformity.
What an inspiring sight it must have been to our women: hundreds of men and boys lined across a meadow, getting Cappy Anson's infernal hitch exactly right.
Inevitably, as my fame spread, I was visited by the Rule Book Committee of the Sporting Clubs -- Benny Songstreet, Senor Lou Cash, P. K. Thotny.
Senor Cash was humming It ain't no rupture, Roger
I'm a-stayin' in the Game.  Thotny asked, "You the logical boy?"
I conveyed that I was.
"Gather round, boys," he whispered.
"Infatuated amateurs," I cried.
"Smug mice! You must decree one Opening Day and make the squads adhere or else. Then, expunge the records of this erstwhile silly season. The pleasures of monotony are ours for the taking! Oh, isn't this just the life?"
What is it about those days and ways, why do they haunt me still, inning by inning, pitch by pitch, rolling ever onward like a baseball, endlessly stitched?
I gave you the best I've gotten
I spent all the shells I've shotten
My tale is bereft
But it's all I got left
I'm afraid it adds up to notten.


With Little Room to Lose, Martinez Breezes to Title
It was a star-crossed tournament from the start, so it came as no surprise that the Family Circle Magazine Cup's marquee-unfriendly final bordered on the anticlimactic and, in the case of its swift second set, the anti-contested.
Graf-less, Navratilova-less and Sabatini-less, the tournament toiled on under pristine blue skies and produced for its grand finale a match between second-seeded Conchita Martinez, the only one of its top five seeded contestants to survive beyond the quarterfinals, and sixth-seeded Natalya Zvereva.


Reluctant Reds and Tradition Lose Opener
The St.
Louis Cardinals called it a season opener.
The Cincinnati Reds didn't want to.
After a long night of pratfalls, errors and otherwise sloppy play, both teams probably wished they could have called baseball's 1994 opener a dress rehearsal.
Those feelings aside, what unfolded here in frigid weather tonight does count.
And the Cardinals, by virtue of a 6-4 victory, will wake up Monday as the first team atop the newly created National League Central Division.
Conversely, the Reds, thought by many to be the team to beat in the Central, find themselves in last place.


CHRONICLE
They were the glory days that burn on in the memories of Brooklyn Dodgers fans, the days when "Dem Bums" triumphed in Ebbets Field 40, 50 years ago.
Now those Dodgers rarely assemble except for funerals like those of Roy Campanella and Don Drysdale last year.
So nostalgia is likely to prevail at two events in New York this week, a panel discussion called "An Evening With the Brooklyn Dodgers" at the 92d Street Y on Thursday and a private reunion at the Downtown Athletic Club on Saturday.


Serbs Press Attack on Muslims in Gorazde
Serbian forces continued an intense assault today against the eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde, using artillery and armor-supported infantry and pressing ahead with an offensive that United Nations officials here said was aimed at seizing the strategic eastern half of the town.
The Sarajevo radio reported tonight that 47 people had been killed and 207 wounded in the six-day-old attack on Gorazde, whose 65,000 people, mostly refugees, have been cut off by Serbian forces since last May.
Gorazde is one of six areas that the United Nations has promised to protect as "safe havens."


Weekly Sale By Treasury
The Treasury's financings this week are confined to today's auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of an abbreviated session of futures trading and New York cash market activity on Good Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.60 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.91 percent.


Pat Harper, 59, Emmy-Winning News Anchor
Pat Harper, who was among the first women to become a television news anchor, died on Saturday in her home in Capileira, Spain.
She was 59.
The cause was a heart attack, said Karen Scott, an executive producer at WPIX in New York City, and a longtime friend.


Aetna, Tightening Belt, Goes It Alone
Aetna Life and Casualty Company is not well, even its chairman says so.
Its bloated expenses, aggravated by years of lethargy and heavy losses in real estate, are not unusual among large insurance companies.
But the healing strategy Aetna has adopted sets it apart from other insurers like Travelers Insurance and Phoenix Mutual or Equitable Life Assurance.


Network Baseball's Unopening Day
It is opening day for most of the baseball world except for network television.
For the first time in decades, network baseball telecasts will take a bye on the first half of the season before reappearing July 12 for the All-Star Game, followed by 12 consecutive weeks of games and the post-season.
CBS is gone, after four years and $500 million in losses.
In its place is The Baseball Network, the joint venture formed last May by major league baseball, ABC and NBC out of the ashes of the humbling CBS experience.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B14-15.


Health Plan Poses Question: Who Is an Employee?
For more than 10 million Americans who work as independent contractors -- truckers, construction workers, computer programmers and many nurses, among others -- President Clinton's health plan and several of its major rivals could prove an awkward fit.
Proposals like Mr.
Clinton's, which would require employers to buy health insurance for all their workers, have reignited a long-running battle over how to define just who is an employee.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Hollywood Isn't Smiling At an ABC Comedy Tactic
"Thunder Alley," a new comedy on ABC, may not yet be the biggest hit of the television season, but it is certainly the biggest target.
The series, which stars Ed Asner and was harshly dismissed by most critics, has achieved high ratings in the four weeks it has been on the air.


U.S. Rules Out Using Force to Save Muslim Town
Defense Secretary William J. Perry today ruled out military action to save a Bosnian town that the United Nations Security Council has promised to protect, even as the town came under fierce attacks by Serbian forces.
He said the Administration would not use air strikes to prevent Serbian forces from overrunning Gorazde, a predominantly Muslim town of 65,000 in eastern Bosnia that is one of six areas that the United Nations Security Council has designated "safe havens."


Sports of The Times; A Coach and a Player Climb a Mountaintop
COLLEGE basketball ends tonight with a touch of irony that, in many ways, amplifies the swirling social and political currents that have subjected intercollegiate athletics to a more thorough analysis than ever before.
In January, the Black Coaches Association threatened to boycott games scheduled on Jan. 15, the anniversary of Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Analytical Technology Inc., Boston, an initial public offering of 1.6 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.


No Headline
"I've seen more kids die in this area than buddies of mine in Vietnam. This is not the country I fought for." -- RUDOLPH MONROE, a drama instructor at a Chicago park.  [ A8:2. ]


For Addicts, Alternatives to Prison
For Eduardo Rufino, jail was less a place to do penance than to learn from experts about the tawdry urban science of peddling drugs.
So when he emerged from Rikers Island eight years ago after serving time for a purse snatching, he started to sell, then use, crack and heroin, developing addictions so fierce that he lost track of time, people and money.


Betty Furness Dies


Jays Hope Titles Come in Threes
If the Chicago White Sox repeat as a division champion, they will credit their success to the presence of Michael Jordan in spring training.
With Jordan taking the focus and attention away from everyone else, the White Sox will explain, the real players were able to get in their work and not face the pressure of daily questions about their ability to repeat.
What will the Toronto Blue Jays' excuse be for repeating?


For First Time, Opening Day Is Opening Night


In the Bronx, a Police Presence Can Save Lives
To the Editor:
Your March 24 and 25 coverage of the slaying of two teen-agers and the injury of a third in a South Bronx playground makes no mention of the police role, or the lack of it, in providing a visible and deterring presence in hot spots that are glaringly obvious to the community.


She's Young and Smart, But Not Too Smart to Lead
At the age of 33, Lisa Henson is the youngest studio head in Hollywood, one of a handful of powerful women here and, most significant, a new breed of movie executive.
"Highbrow?" she said with a nervous laugh.
"Does anyone really think of me as highbrow?"


N.C.A.A. TOURNAMENT: Sports of The Times; Arkansas Coach Delivers a History Lesson
OUT in the west Texas town of El Paso as the song goes -- the junior high school was hard by the Mexican border.
Nolan Richardson describes his players as being rather short, and not very good at rebounding, but there was one tangible bonus for a coach of African-American heritage.
"If I wanted to go to the movies, I'd go across the border," Nolan Richardson told hundreds of witnesses yesterday.
"If I wanted to ride the bus, I'd go across the border."


Firepower and Ice: Lake Superior State Ambushes B.U.
For a college hockey championship game, a 9-1 score is astonishing, like 100-50 in basketball or 73-0 in football.
Such a game took place here Saturday night and the team with the one goal, Boston University, was the one that had been ranked No. 1 in the nation for the last month of the season and the one favored last fall to become the next National Collegiate Athletic Association champion.


Dance in Review
Free Range Exposures  Free Range Arts 250 West 26th Street Chelsea
"Free Range Exposures," the choreographic showcase program presented on Saturday night, was varied without being especially interesting.
Few of the participants had the imagination and intensity to make their works compelling from beginning to end.


Stanley J. Love, 68; Made Child's Wear
Stanley J. Love, president of Joseph Love Inc., a manufacturer of children's wear, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 68 years old.
The cause was multiple myeloma, a form of bone cancer, said his son, William.


Dance in Review
Tere O'Connor  Performance Space 122
Tere O'Connor's choreography suggests that there are times when love is far from lovely.
No worldly-wise person would argue with him about that.
Unfortunately, he also made love seem a bore in the two works that his company, Tere O'Connor Dance, presented on Thursday night.


High-Profile Hazard
To the Editor:
Further on "Pull Over, Urban Cowboys" by Jamie Lincoln Kitman (Op-Ed, March 30), about sport-utility vehicles, also known as four-by-fours:


Suicide Law Still in the Dock As Kevorkian's Trial Nears
As a trial date nears for Dr.
Jack Kevorkian on charges that he violated Michigan's law against assisted suicide, lawyers are wondering when the state's high court will rule on the constitutionality of the law.
Nearly three months ago, on Jan. 6, the Michigan Court of Appeals promised to expedite its deliberations.
Two county judges had ruled the law invalid, saying it violated technical provisions of the state Constitution, while a third issued a broader ruling, holding that suicide may sometimes be a constitutionally protected right.


Conservative Publisher Is Leaving Paramount for Penguin
Erwin A. Glikes, president and publisher of the Free Press, said yesterday that he would not join Paramount Publishing, but would instead start his own division at Penguin U.S.A.
The move disappointed executives of Paramount, which just acquired the Free Press as part of its purchase of Macmillan Inc.
"I'm sad about leaving the Free Press because I love it and it means a lot to me," said Mr.
Glikes, who has been publisher of the Free Press for 10 years.


'I'll Have to Sell the House to Pay for Treatment'; Patient Victories
To the Editor:
Your March 28 front-page article on insurance coverage for medical treatment may discourage patients from enforcing their legal rights, while encouraging insurance companies to continue denying coverage.
The efficacy of bone marrow transplants for breast cancer and other advanced treatments is a medical issue that certain insurance companies have made into a legal issue, by taking the treatment decision away from the patient's qualified medical specialists and giving it to an insurance company administrator.


Corrections
A brief sports article last Thursday about Anheuser-Busch's television sponsorship agreement with major league baseball misstated its value.
It is $20 million annually.


Tillman Shuns the Giants' Bench for a Chicago Huddle
The Giants put up a good fight.
But in the end, running back Lewis Tillman couldn't resist the prospect of being a starter.
He agreed to a three-year, $3 million deal with the Chicago Bears yesterday, according to several people close to the situation.
The Bears are expected to announce the deal today.
Tillman's signing ended a tumultuous 24 hours for the running back.
Late yesterday, the Giants matched the original Bears offer of $2.85 million over three years.
And the Giants added $65,000-$100,000 to sweeten the pot.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CENFED FINANCIAL CORP., Pasadena, Calif., has agreed to acquire closely held United California Savings Bank, Santa Ana, Calif., for $1 million in cash and $6 million in Cenfed stock.
COMPASS BANCSHARES INC., Birmingham, Ala., has signed an agreement to buy 22 bank offices and $885 million in deposits from the Houston bank unit of Pulte Corp., Bloomfield Hill, Mich., for $6.8 million in cash.


General Mills To Cut Prices On Cereals
General Mills Inc. said yesterday that it would buck a trend in the breakfast cereal industry by cutting promotional costs by $175 million a year and passing the saving through to consumers in the form of prices that are 30 cents to 70 cents lower.
Officials of the Minneapolis company said consumers should see the lower prices soon after they go into effect on May 2.
For example, the price of a 15-ounce box of Cheerios, the best-selling brand of cereal in the country, should drop to about $2.90, from about $3.30 today.


Novell Is Expected to Name Hewlett Official as President
The software company Novell Inc. is expected to announce on Tuesday that it is naming Robert Frankenberg, a Hewlett-Packard executive, president and chief operating officer.
People familiar with the plans said that Raymond J. Noorda would continue for an indefinite time as chief executive but that Mr.
Frankenberg had been hired with the understanding that he would eventually succeed him.
Mr.
Noorda has said he will retire before his 70th birthday in June.
He is expected to continue beyond then as chairman.


BBDO to Handle Doritos in Britain
Pepsico Foods International has shifted advertising responsibilities for its Doritos brand of snack chips in Britain to BBDO New York from Young &amp; Rubicam London after only five months, executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said yesterday.


Sports of The Times; Doc Gooden Ignores The Winds of Change
THIS was around 11:30 A.M., and Dwight Gooden had this voracious grin on his face as he rushed back to the clubhouse after taking batting practice.
Why was this man smiling?
"Wind's blowing straight out," he said.


A New Straight Man for the Scooter
Paul Olden, the Yankees' new voice on WPIX-TV, said he was not nervous about replacing Tom Seaver and working with Phil Rizzuto and Bobby Murcer.
He has never met Murcer and knows Rizzuto only casually.
They haven't practiced together, so it will be a cold start when their 50-game schedule starts Friday night.
"The most important thing is to lay back and feel one another out in terms of pacing," the 38-year-old Olden said while watching the Yankees-Rangers game yesterday.
"I have to get a feel for how they work."


Selloff of '94 Continues, With Dow Losing 42.61, to 3,593.35
In what passes for good news these days, the stock market fell yesterday for the sixth time in the last seven sessions, but it was not the 100-point drop that many analysts had feared.
The number of shares changing hands, although higher than normal, indicated that some traders sat on their hands yesterday, waiting for further developments.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 344.4 million shares, or only 15 percent more than a typical day's volume, as the Dow Jones industrial average fell 42.61 points, to 3,593.35.


SOCCER
Political Futbol
There will be a crucial summit meeting today in Zurich among Joao Havelange, 78, and the leaders of the world's five soccer confederations regarding the FIFA presidency.


Review/Television; The Words That Inspired Dr. Kevorkian's Actions
As the title indicates, "The Kevorkian File" is less about the man known as Dr.
Death than about the cases that brought him that distinction, presented through riveting videotapes of people asking for his help in killing themselves.
Whatever his motives -- some credit him with compassion, others detect self-aggrandizement -- Dr.
Jack Kevorkian began his career as a death facilitator, which has included 20 such encounters, almost four years ago.
The Michigan doctor is seen on June 2, 1990, talking to Janet Adkins, a 54-year-old woman with Alzheimer's disease, and her husband, Ron.
Although her doctor had told her she had several good years left and opposed thoughts of suicide, Mrs.
Adkins feared the disease would in time deprive her of the ability to make the decision to end a much-diminished life.
After several other doctors refused her request for pills that would do that job, she answered an advertisement by Dr.
Kevorkian, who was then beginning his campaign to help dying patients die.


METRO DIGEST
NORTHROP WINS BATTLE FOR GRUMMAN
The Northrop Corporation triumphed over the Martin Marietta Corporation in a battle for the Grumman Corporation, the venerable Long Island military contractor, which agreed to merge with Northrop for $2.1 billion.
A1.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contract of Mark Williamson, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.


Voice Names New Editor
Karen Durbin, a feminist editor and writer and a former staff member of The Village Voice, has been named editor in chief of The Voice, David Schneiderman, the newspaper's president and publisher, announced yesterday.
The appointment is effective immediately.
Ms.
Durbin, 49, who has been arts and entertainment editor of Mirabella magazine since February 1990, succeeds Jonathan Z. Larsen, who resigned in February after five years as editor.


Review/Music; Dark Confessions Emerge From Patterns of Sound
The highest originality, it can be argued, is often framed in the most familiar of circumstances.
Andrzej Panufnik's "Arbor Cosmica," at any rate, uses an ordinary collection of stringed instruments played in the ordinary way to speak in a very unusual voice.
This 10-year-old piece by the late Polish exile is in 12 sections; Gerard Schwarz and the New York Chamber Symphony played half of them at the 92d Street Y on Sunday night.
"Arbor Cosmica" renders music-criticism chatter about style and harmonic language pretty much beside the point.
Visceral emotion seemed to leap from the point of the bow to the listener's heart.
How it got there is a mystery best left unexplored.


Subway Alarm Halts Service at Rush Hour
Someone triggered an emergency alarm disrupting power deep in a subway tunnel in Brooklyn yesterday, trapping more than 1,000 rush-hour commuters in trains for two to three hours and disrupting service to thousands of others throughout the city.
The alarm device, along tracks used by the A and C lines, is one of many interspersed on tunnel walls throughout the subway system, and could have been tripped only by someone on foot in the tunnel, said Charles Seaton, a spokesman for the New York City Transit Authority.


Hebron Is Now Divided by a Concrete Wall, Too
The wall of concrete blocks, standing 7 feet high and stretching 100 yards, was put up by the Israeli Army more than a week ago as a security measure.
"Welcome to the Hebron Ghetto," spray-painted graffiti say in Hebrew, suggesting that some of the Jewish settlers are no happier with the wall than are the Arabs, who call it a hulking offense.


Details of Implant Settlement Announced by Federal Judge
A Federal judge in Birmingham, Ala., yesterday spelled out the details of a $3.7 billion settlement of breast implant claims, allowing them to be made public for the first time.
The judge also established a schedule and procedure for women to join the class-action suit to compensate women who have had implants and experienced any of a list of injuries, diseases or conditions.


Today's Toss Is Tomorrow's Catch


Interest Rates Ascend In 2d Consecutive Selloff
Interest rates moved sharply higher yesterday for the second consecutive trading session, with some market participants selling off long-term bonds.
Adding pressure to yesterday's selloff was a move by dealers in other fixed-income investments to hedge against losses by selling their Treasury securities.


'Vinyl Wars' Divide a Hamlet; Tappan Board's Ban on Siding Angers Some Homeowners
This aged hamlet, one of the cradles of the American Revolution, finds itself enduring another revolt, one that is also about life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, though it seems at first to be mostly about vinyl siding.
A group of homeowners here and their sympathizers are rebelling against the rule of the local Historic Areas Board of Review, Tappan's version of a landmarks commission, which was formed three decades ago to preserve the hamlet's 46 historic dwellings, some almost 300 years old, as well as the hoary look of a village founded by farmers and mill hands.


Corrections
An article yesterday about judicial vacancies on the Federal bench in the Second Circuit misstated the 1983 backlog of district-court cases in some editions and referred incompletely in those editions to the area covered.
The number of cases pending was 27,167, not 22,964; the figure included Connecticut and Vermont, not just New York.


Treasure Trove Of Fossils Turns Up In the Gobi
NO paleontologist had ever investigated this part of the Gobi Desert, some low hummocks of 80-million-year-old reddish rock in a remote basin in southwestern Mongolia.
Not Roy Chapman Andrews, the adventurous American explorer of the 1920's.
Not the Russian and Polish scientists who reconnoitered there more than two decades ago.
And last summer's American-Mongolian expedition might have passed through without striking real paydirt, if it had not been for what happened to one of the trucks.
As Dr.
Michael J. Novacek, the expedition leader, told the story, the caravan of dust-coated trucks had traveled some 250 miles southwest of the town of Dalan Dzadgad through mountains and over sand dunes, across some of the bleakest landscape in the Gobi.
About 30 miles north of the forlorn village of Dauz, the party approached the basin, which did not look like much from a distance.


Anxious Times for Investors
The stock and bond markets continued to be jolted yesterday by intense selling.
Stocks plunged at the market's opening, and the Dow Jones industrial average ended the day down 42.61 points.
Bonds continued Friday's steep decline, with the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond surging to 7.41 percent
Investors are becoming increasingly nervous about the unstable markets.
Although there appeared to be no panic redemptions at mutual funds, individual investors showed little interst in buying, in contrast to previous recent market downturns.
And they have good reason to be nervous: Some big institutional investors have suffered heavy losses.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  NATIONALIST IMPACT ON RUSSIA  Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the nationalist who made a strong showing in Russia's parliamentary elections, continues to press his cause, and it is changing policy in Russia.
A1


2 Environmental Camps Feud Over Noisy Ocean Experiment
A $35 MILLION test of a new way to measure the temperature of the world's oceans was delayed last week and may be canceled altogether amid accusations that it threatens to harm whales and other marine mammals.
The dispute is unusual in that it pits two arms of the environmental movement against one another: those trying to fight global warming and those trying to protect endangered animals.
The experiment, run by the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla, Calif., and involving seven nations, would send sounds from underwater speakers across the Pacific Ocean at least once a day every day for two years.
Sound travels faster in warm water than cold.
In theory, the test should be able to detect changes in the sound's speed as it crosses the Pacific that would reveal temperature shifts as subtle as one-hundredth of a degree Fahrenheit.


Rangers Wake Up and Smell the Goals
The Florida Panthers woke up in the city that never sleeps and tried to bore everyone into snoring through a hockey game last night.
For two periods at Madison Square Garden, they contained the Rangers with their dull-but-efficient defense, and the score was 1-1 after 40 minutes.
But the Rangers broke free with two goals in the third period and hung on for a 3-2 victory.


Mexicans Arrest 3 More Guards In Killing of Leading Candidate
Citing new evidence of a conspiracy in the assassination of the governing party's presidential candidate last month, Mexican authorities today charged three men, including two former state police officials, with involvement in the killing.
The new arrests brought to five the number of men jailed on suspicion of taking part or conspiring in the shooting of the heavily favored candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, as he left a campaign rally in the northern border city of Tijuana on March 23.


Justice Dept. Persists In Harassing the Arts
To the Editor:
"On Decency and the Courts," which accompanies your March 23 report on Clinton Administration arts policy, notes that the Justice Department is appealing "a court decision overturning the so-called decency provision, which requires the National Endowment for the Arts to take standards of decency into account when awarding its grants."
As co-counsel for the plaintiff artists in the case, Finley v.
National Endowment for the Arts, let me add that the law requires of the agency "respect for the diverse beliefs and values of the American public."


Patterns
Illustration's Rebirth
Fashion illustrations once looked like pages torn from a designer's sketch pad, so literal that they could be sent to a pattern maker.
But a new generation of artists is changing not only the look of fashion illustration, but its goal.


Zhirinovsky Cult Grows: All Power to the Leader
Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, the ultranationalist whose party stunned the world in December with its strength in Russia's parliamentary elections, put on a show last weekend that gave some inkling of what he might do if he ever came to power.
The Fifth Congress of his Liberal Democratic Party of Russia,held in a meeting hall on Moscow's outskirts, began with a line-up on stage of "Zhirinovsky's Falcons," 18 young men in blue uniforms and black boots, some wearing dark glasses, all with side arms strapped to their waists.
Then there was the introduction of guests, including a German neo-fascist, a delegation sent by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and a Russian general recently freed from prison for his role in the uprising against President Boris N. Yeltsin in October.


CHRONICLE
Byline readers noticed a new name, JON KATZ, atop the "Media" column in the issue of New York magazine that came out yesterday.
Does that mean that EDWIN DIAMOND, who has been the magazine's media columnist for nine years, is out in the new KURT ANDERSEN regime?
Sort of, but not quite, both Mr. Diamond and Mr. Anderson say.


Dispute in Brooklyn Subway Ends in Killing of Student, 16
Rashad King, a 16-year-old student with a solid record in school but no chance of outsprinting a bullet, was shot and killed late Sunday night on a subway platform in Brooklyn.
He was on his way home, 20 minutes before the midnight curfew set by his mother, when he was shot in the back.
The police said a "staredown" between two other youths on a subway car had escalated into a physical confrontation.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Bar Extra Fees for Dumping of Out-of-State Waste
The Supreme Court ruled today that states may not impose extra fees for dumping waste from another state.
The 7-to-2 decision overturned an Oregon surcharge on the disposal of solid waste generated beyond Oregon's borders.
Under the 1989 law, the fee for placing out-of-state waste in an Oregon landfill is $3.10 a ton, as against 85 cents for waste generated within Oregon.
The Oregon Supreme Court upheld the surcharge last year.


Market Place; Wall St. dusts off an old theme: The bear brings opportunity.
FOR people in the business of selling stocks, recent days have not been a bear market, oh no.
Sure, the hiccup in the long bull market has turned into a prolonged coughing fit, but many brokers prefer to see this as "an opportunity market," full of bargains for their clients.
As the Dow Jones industrial average slid 42.61 points yesterday, putting its decline from its late-January peak at almost 10 percent, a number of brokers and money managers said they were busy buying shares for their clients.


It's a Grand Day for the Yankees and a Windy One for the Mets
As soon as he saw the flags flying toward the intersection of Sheffield and Waveland Avenues -- as soon as he felt the wind on his face -- Dwight Gooden knew this would not be your average day at Wrigley Field.
Gooden has had his days here before, most of them good ones, and he knows to expect the unexpected when the banners can be seen flying out over the center-field scoreboard.
It would have been hard, though, for Gooden to predict this.
The Mets made this one interesting -- what with several reminders of their 1993 defensive ineptness -- but they still managed to open the 1994 season with a franchise-record, opening-day run total in a 12-8 victory over the Cubs.


'I'll Have to Sell the House to Pay for Treatment'
To the Editor:
The tone of "Patients' Lawyers Lead Insurers to Pay for Unproven Treatments" (front page, March 28) suggests that patients have been encouraged to sue their health insurance companies to secure coverage for catastrophic illness, and that insurance companies are victims in these lawsuits.
This is incorrect.
The patients and their families, who have paid high premiums for comprehensive health insurance, are the victims, and the health insurance companies, which encourage lawsuits through their unethical, immoral and sometimes illegal practices of arbitrarily and capriciously denying coverage, deserve to lose every lawsuit.


Sun Line Cruises Moves Its Account
Sun Line Cruises said yesterday that it would move its account, without a review, to Dweck &amp; Campbell of New York from AC&amp; R Advertising in New York.
Billings were estimated at $2.5 million.


At Last, a Clear View of a Subway Map


Arbiters of Bias in Securities Industry Have Slight Experience in Labor Law
A Congressional study has found that at a time when more employees are compelled to submit complaints of job discrimination and sexual harassment to arbitration the people who decide these cases for the securities industry are overwhelmingly white men in their 60's with little experience in labor law.
The study, conducted by the General Accounting Office and made public last week, looked at companies affiliated with the New York Stock Exchange and the National Association of Securities Dealers.


Review/Theater; Mort Sahl Continues To Deflate Pretension
"A liberal is someone who believes in busing but is repelled by school prayer," observes Mort Sahl.
"A conservative is someone who is repelled by busing and believes in school prayer. And a moderate would like to compromise between these two extremes and perhaps have prayer on the bus."
These witty political definitions, voiced near the beginning of Mr.
Sahl's new one-man show at Theater Four, set the tone of a performance in which the 67-year-old humorist deflates the self-righteousness and egotism of public figures whose views cover the spectrum of American political opinion.
If Mr.
Sahl affects a cynical, above-it-all attitude toward politics, politicians and their celebrity supporters, he takes an extra relish in puncturing the pretensions of those who call themselves liberals.
The show puts a number of movers and shakers of Hollywood's liberal establishment through the wringer.
Norman Lear, Shelley Winters, Ed Asner and Robert Redford come in for especially sharp tweaks.


Small Investors Step to Sidelines As Rates Jump and Stocks Fall
Individual investors, whose willingness to buy has rescued the stock and bond markets numerous times in the last several years, refused to do so yesterday as interest rates soared to their highest level in more than a year and stock prices fell sharply.
The yield on 30-year Treasury bonds jumped to 7.41 percent, the highest since January 1993.
A week ago, the rate was below 7 percent, making this period one of the sharpest for interest rate rises in recent years.


Israeli Experts Support Assertion Lone Gunman Acted at Hebron
The Israeli commission of inquiry into the Hebron massacre heard expert testimony today that supported assertions by the army that the killings were the work of a lone gunman.
The testimony by police ballistics experts produced no evidence to back up assertions by Arab survivors of the massacre on Feb. 25 that there had been more than one source of gunfire in the mosque, where at least 29 worshipers were killed.


It's a Title for Arkansas
March madness came to a frenzied April finish last night as Arkansas beat Duke, 76-72, in the 63d and final game of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's 1994 Division I basketball tournament.
The Blue Devils, who had won two of the previous three championships, led by 10 points in the second half and were tied 70-70 with a minute to go, but the Razorbacks had too much in reserve and too much Scotty Thurman.
His three-pointer at the shot-clock buzzer put Arkansas ahead for good as President Clinton cheered the Razorbacks' first national championship.


Fed Disinclined to Act On Short-Term Rates
The tumble of the stock and bond markets has surprised Federal Reserve officials but has not persuaded them so far to change short-term interest rates.
Fed officials say they are inclined for now to let investors determine the prices of shares or long-term interest rates, over which the central bank exerts limited influence.


Corrections
A report in the Calendar column of The Home Section on Thursday about a course in caring for trees on city streets misstated the name and address of the organization offering it.
The group is Trees New York, at 280 Broadway (at Chambers Street), Suite 432.


American Center In Paris Cuts Back
There it sits, a gleaming, marbled, fully functional architectural abstraction.
It is surrounded by a nearly finished city park and staffed by 22 busy people.
But for the moment, at least, it's a shell.
This is the current state of the new American Center in the Bercy district of eastern Paris.
Frank Gehry's building, which cost a big chunk of the $40 million the center obtained in 1987 when it sold its old quarters in central Paris, was pretty much completed months ago.
But the center's board decided in the fall of 1992 that it did not have enough money to proceed with long-range plans for this combined museum, performance space, educational facility and community center.
The programming staff was messily fired and uneasy silence settled on what was to have been a major showcase of American culture in the French capital.


Funds See Increase In Selling
Investor courage may be starting to crack in the face of the stock market's almost daily double-digit declines lately and the bond market's run-up in interest rates.
"There's a lot of selling going on -- stocks and mutual funds," said Hugo Quackenbush, senior vice presdient of Charles Schwab, the discount brokerage firm.
"It doesn't look pleasant."


A.T.&amp; T. Increases Gay and Lesbian Ads
A.T.&amp; T. has become the largest marketer to aim advertising at gay and lesbian consumers with advertisements for its corporate calling card created by Ayer Inc. of New York.
"We're committed to meeting the communication needs of our many diverse customer groups," Jon Mellor, a spokesman for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Basking Ridge, N.J., said yesterday.
The company is buying advertising space in the April 19 issue of The Advocate, the magazine's annual business issue, he said, as well as in two more issues during 1994, and is participating in a Gay and Lesbian Business Expo at the Meadowlands Convention Center in Secaucus, N.J., on April 16 and 17.


3 Singles Never Felt This Good
The Mets did not know much about Karl (Tuffy) Rhodes when he came to the plate this afternoon at Wrigley Field, the first Chicago batter of the season.
They knew he had hit a lot of home runs in the minor leagues last year, had bounced around a bit before that and had played a bunch of games with the Astros over four years in the Houston organization.
Obviously, though, they did not know how to get him out.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Lemieux Is Ejected Pittsburgh Penguins center Mario Lemieux was ejected from last night's game against the Tampa Bay Lightning but his teammates held on for a 2-1 home victory.
Lemieux was given a game misconduct penalty for the third time in his career after he left the penalty box to charge referee Kerry Fraser.
Lemieux was disputing a high-sticking call that sent him to the box at 18:59 of the opening period. (AP)


Dubious Debbie Inspires Battle Over a Trademark
For more than 30 years, the smiling girl in the sunbonnet who graces packages of cupcakes, fruit cookies and oatmeal cream pies has been known to snack-food lovers as Little Debbie, the symbol of what her creators say are the best-selling snack cakes in the nation.
But in a move that has enraged the McKee Foods Corporation, the company based in Collegedale, Tenn., that makes the cakes, the smiling girl has inspired a novelty company's parody that turns her goody-goody image on its head.
Emblazoned on the front of a T-shirt, she has a marijuana cigarette hanging out of her mouth.
Instead of cream pies, she hawks "Weed Pies" that promise to "blow your mind . . . not your waistline." Her new name?
Little Doobie.


Pacific Bell to Leave Foote, Cone Agency
Pacific Bell will place in review various assignments with billings estimated at $30 million after the telephone company and its agency, Foote, Cone &amp; Belding San Francisco, mutually decided to part ways.
The split centered on potential conflicts presented by the relationship between a sibling Foote, Cone agency, FCB/Leber Katz Partners of New York, and an important client, A.T.&amp; T.


Advanced Micro's Results Cheer Analysts
Buoyed by continued strong demand for personal computers, the chip maker Advanced Micro Devices Inc. reported earnings today that were well above Wall Street estimates, raising analysts' hopes that other computer technology companies will report good first-quarter results in the days and weeks to come.
Many analysts see Advanced Micro's results as a harbinger of strong financial figures from makers of computer parts like disk drives, modems and networking adaptors, although in some cases price wars may hinder profits.


Daniel M. Rosen, Patent Lawyer, 53
Daniel M. Rosen, a lawyer who was an expert on patents, copyrights, trademarks and trade secrets, died on Friday at his home in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
He was 53.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


No 'Green Light' for Serb Attacks, Clinton Says
The Clinton Administration today sought to dispel the impression that it was indifferent to the fate of Gorazde, a Bosnian town, now threatened by Serbian forces, that the United Nations has promised to protect.
But Administration officials said they had no immediate plans to extend the threat of air strikes, which NATO has used to stop the Serbian shelling of Sarajevo, to protect Gorazde or other Muslim enclaves from attack.


It's Sense to Keep Talking to North Korea
To the Editor:
Senator John McCain (letter, March 28) characterizes the Administration's response to the situation on the Korean Peninsula as concessional.
First, let me make it clear that I have the highest regard for the Senator from Arizona.
He is a true American hero, who fought valiantly for our country in Vietnam.
Nevertheless, his characterization of the Administration's handling of the crisis as "concession-laden" for attempting to resolve the crisis by diplomacy is unfair.
United States policy has been reasoned and reasonable.
We have responded to North Korean noncompliance in a tough manner, yet without unnecessarily raising the stakes.
What precisely would the Senator have us do?


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page yesterday about Robert L. Bartley, the editor of The Wall Street Journal, misidentified a senior news editor of that paper in some editions.
The editor, Alan Murray, is The Journal's deputy Washington bureau chief, not the bureau chief.


Extravagant Orioles, Extravagant Plans
After having stumbled the last two Septembers and having tried to cure their problems by spending $44 million on free agents, the Baltimore Orioles opened their season today with their fans, players and owners unwilling to be satisfied with anything less than a place in the playoffs.
There are 161 more games to go, but today's game against the Kansas City Royals did nothing to dash those hopes, with the Orioles winning, 6-3, at Camden Yards.


Fidelity Retains Macy Bankruptcy Adviser
Fidelity Investments, the giant mutual fund company that is one of R. H. Macy &amp; Company's most influential creditors, has retained Wasserstein Perella &amp; Company to advise it in the retailer's bankruptcy case.
Daniel Harmetz, who manages Fidelity's investment in Macy and other bankruptcies, is a bankruptcy lawyer and usually relies on his own skills as a strategist in negotiating the outcome of bankruptcy cases.


Critic's Notebook; Beyond Slapstick to Show Perils Faced by Blacks
In the 1970's, in a sitcom like "Good Times," a black family struggling to survive in a high-rise Chicago ghetto would somehow always be good for a laugh, especially if the goofy son popped his eyes and shouted "Dy-no-mite!" And in "Chico and the Man," an ingratiating young Hispanic man in East Los Angeles could joke his way into a garage partnership with an elderly white, a harmless fantasy that dribbled to an end when the drug-plagued star of the show, Freddie Prinze, committed suicide.
Prime time entertainment's ability to fudge the harsher aspects of reality is boundless.
Today?
Where minorities are concerned, specifically blacks and Hispanics, there's no dearth of dopey escapism or broad stereotypes bordering on minstrelsy.
But at least occasionally an unusual effort is made to go beyond the standard television props of one-liners and tidy uplift.
This week, two very different examples of a new grittiness are on tap: "South-Central," a new comedy drama series starting tonight on Fox Broadcasting, and "Lives in Hazard," a documentary on NBC on Friday night.
In each case, the setting is Los Angeles.


New York Could Boost Car Technology With Electric Taxis
To the Editor:
Developments in electric car technology, as you report in "Electric Cars Race Silently Into the Future" (front page, March 21), make it clear that market forces are now the last barrier to greater use of electric cars.
New York City should take advantage of a regulatory anomaly to make electric cars more competitive.
Since the number of taxi medallions in New York is artificially limited to some 11,000, their market value has inflated to about $150,000 each.
If electric cars were permitted to operate as taxis in New York City without buying a medallion, it would give the operator of a nonpolluting electric taxi an effective $150,000 head start.
It would also help to create a market that might allow sufficient production of electric cars to bring down the price.


New Section on Autos
The New York Times will begin publishing a freestanding Sunday section this week called Automobiles, with a front page of news features followed by automotive advertising.
The main news feature will be a column called Behind the Wheel, which will evaluate a range of cars, vans and trucks through road tests.
The section will also have a separate feature called Car Smart, which will offer car owners a range of information and advice on car buying and maintenance.
Previously, a column that described road tests of cars and trucks had appeared inside the SportsSunday section.


Montreal Journal; Quebec Bets on Subsidized Milk, Mother's Kind
"It's great news," Josee Paradis said, rocking her 6-week-old son, Brock, in her arms in her sparsely furnished basement apartment in an industrial suburb of Montreal.
Ms.
Paradis, a 19-year-old former secretarial student, was praising a decision by Quebec's provincial government to raise the subsidy for breast-feeding from $15 to about $37.50 a month under a new program to encourage low-income women to nurse their infants.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT BUCK, the director of the Brooklyn Museum, returned to his office yesterday after a 10-day business trip to Paris and London to learn that the museum was being deluged with calls from a very distressed public.
The callers wanted to know if it was true that the museum was being sold and would be transformed into a Las Vegas-style Egyptian theme park?
April fool.


In Cyberspace, a High-Tech League of Their Own
Ah, the opening of the baseball season.
The crack of the bat!
The roar of the crowd!
The whistle of modems!
Holy Cow, sports fans, baseball has come to cyberspace.
Baseball, whether the real game or the increasingly popular form of fantasy baseball called Rotisserie, has become a showcase for the slugging power of technology and information networks.
For a fee, fans of the game can now tap into vast information data bases where millions of bits of baseball news, esoterica and analysis are stored, dissected and disseminated, pitch by pitch, minute by minute.


Algeria: Descent Into the Abyss
Beware of "enlightened" military coups.
Two years ago, with a militant Islamic party poised to win parliamentary runoff elections, Algeria's army struck, canceling the vote, rounding up Islamic politicians and imposing an army-backed dictatorship.
The West, led by Algeria's former colonial ruler, France, put their fear of Islamic radicalism ahead of their commitment to democracy and wished the soldiers success.
Instead Algeria plunged into an abyss of terrorism and civil war with no end yet in sight.
More than 4,000 people have been killed and hundreds of thousands imprisoned.
Tens of thousands more have fled abroad, mainly to France.


By Design; Simple Adornment
Last year, designers reduced minimalism to its bare bones, banishing all accessories except shoes.
In the recent fall shows in Europe, the pendulum started to swing back.
Even the high priest of purity, Giorgio Armani, hung necklaces around the models' necks, making the world safe for jewelry.
The newest-looking necklaces are long and adorned with hefty beads or charms, often arranged asymmetrically.
They're all that's necessary to perk up simple slip dresses and tunics.


I.B.M. to Introduce New Software Pricing
I.B.M. plans to introduce a tailored, pay-for-use pricing system today on some of its mainframe software that could cut costs for customers by up to 30 percent.
The move is part of the effort by I.B.M. to try to hold onto its corporate customers, many of whom are shifting more of their computing chores off traditional mainframe machines.
Even though the prices on the big computers have dropped sharply in recent years, mimicking the price wars in personal computers, customers have long complained that mainframe software costs remain high.


Observer; Gone With America
Charles Kuralt is gone.
What is going to happen to America?
The barber pole is vanishing, and Charles Kuralt is gone.


NORTHROP BESTS MARTIN MARIETTA TO BUY GRUMMAN
The Northrop Corporation won the final round today of a heated battle for the Grumman Corporation, the venerable Long Island military contractor.
Grumman had decided to seek a merger in the face of its own diminished prospects and declining military spending in the post-cold-war world.
In the monthlong fight for Grumman, Northrop wound up triumphing over the Martin Marietta Corporation by agreeing to pay $62 a share, or a total of $2.1 billion.
Northrop's bid exceeded Martin Marietta's by $7 a share, or about $170 million.
The Martin Marietta deal would have been worth $55 a share, or $1.93 billion.


Feeding a Booming Population Without Destroying the Planet
AS modern contraceptives steadily reduce birth rates in the third world, the surging wave of humans now engulfing the earth is expected to level off in a century or so.
But by then the global population is likely to have doubled, and this grim realization is reshaping efforts to address the planet's overriding ecological question:
Will all those people -- nearly 12 billion of them -- be able to provide decent lives for themselves without doing irreversible damage to the croplands, water resources, forests, fisheries and other ecological resources on which life ultimately depends?


Sports of The Times; Yankee Clipper Off the Cuff
OUTSIDE, the opening-day festivities at Yankee Stadium had begun.
Members of the "Damn Yankees" cast were singing "You Gotta Have Heart." Two Winter Olympic medalists, the short-track speed skater Cathy Turner and the skier Picabo Street, were holding red roses and Robert Merrill would soon be singing the national anthem.
But in the catacombs behind the Yankee dugout, Joe DiMaggio suddenly emerged from the clubhouse and lighted the hallway.


D'Amato to Give $400,000 To Pataki in Governor Race
United States Sen.
Alfonse M. D'Amato said today that he would give $400,000, which he raised as he toyed with running for governor last year, to the candidate he is now endorsing in the race, State Senator George E. Pataki.
Mr.
D'Amato said he hoped that the money -- nearly half of what he collected at a major fund-raiser last year -- would help Mr.
Pataki, a former mayor of Peekskill, break out of the pack of virtually unknown Republican challengers to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in the election this fall.


Woodstock Gets News On Line
KEEPING tabs on the news surrounding the 25th anniversary Woodstock concerts is one tough job.
Crocuses are just pushing up, yet planning for the two big August festivals is reaching world economic summit proportions.
Hardly a day goes by when the local papers don't mention some snarl or other.
Who (town, county, concert promoters) will pay for what (sewer use, parking, water, medical staff) remains a looming question, to name just one.
There is infighting, out-fighting (one town wants another to pay for police overtime when crowds trample through) and plenty of permit snafus.


An Agency Seeks Forensic Wisdom From a Hole in the Ground
If the Addams Family ran a shipping company, its entrance would look like the lobby of the National Transportation Safety Board headquarters here, its walls covered with large color photographs of train wrecks, ship sinkings, jet-plane crashes, pipeline explosions, and one inspired shot of the tail of a small plane sticking out of the wall of a white clapboard house.
Each picture is discreetly accompanied by a little silver plaque that gives the date and the location.
There are no photographs yet of the inferno that engulfed an apartment complex in Edison, N.J., last month when a natural-gas pipeline exploded, but chunks of the pipeline are in a back room, along with other material undergoing analysis.


North Korea Rejects U.N.'s Call For Full Inspection of A-Plants
In an angry retort to the United Nations Security Council, North Korea today rejected as "unjustifiable" demands that it further open its nuclear sites, and said it now had no choice but to resume the "peaceful nuclear activities" it had frozen while negotiating with the Clinton Administration.
The statement today from the North Korean Foreign Ministry was the first since the president of the Security Council issued a statement on Thursday asking the North to allow a full inspection of its nuclear installations by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The president's statement, which had been softened after long negotiations with China, the North's last ally, vaguely hinted at the possibility of sanctions if North Korea failed to comply.


Employees' Next Concern: Possible Cuts in Work Force
With the Grumman Corporation's announcement this morning that it had agreed to a takeover by the Northrop Corporation, the big question for Grumman employees was how the merger would affect their jobs.
"On the one hand, I'm glad the guessing game is over," said Robert McHugh, a computer programmer.
"It makes the few shares of Grumman stock I own worth a lot more, but that won't do me any good if I lose my job when the dust settles."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.63
3.64
3.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.71
3.60
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.02
3.91
2.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.13
6.93
6.10
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.41
7.26
7.02
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.20
7.95
7.93
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.65
6.36
6.08
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Individual investors, whose willingness to buy has sustained and sometimes rescued the stock and bond markets in the last few years, refused to step in as interest rates soared to their highest level in more than a year and stock prices fell sharply.  [ Page A1. ]


Troyanos Memorial
A memorial concert for the mezzo-soprano Tatiana Troyanos is to be held at the Metropolitan Opera House on Thursday at 5 P.M.
James Levine will conduct members of the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra and Chorus and soloists.
Miss Troyanos, who died on Aug. 21 at the age of 54, sang 22 roles during her 17 years with the Met.
Free tickets are available at the box office.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


On My Mind God Help New York
Crime is going down in New York City.
Crime is going down in New York City.
Crime is going down in New York City.
The police tell us so.
Say it out loud a few times yourself and one of two things will happen.
You will get a chuckle from anybody who hears you.
Or, you will begin to believe it.


No Headline
"The leader and the party are one and the same. This regime is in its final agony. And when a sick man is lying on the operating table, you need a single doctor, not a team of consultants." -- VLADIMIR V. ZHIRINOVSKY.  [ A12:1. ]


The Shot That Ended A Looming Dynasty
Great teams produce great games.
Great players make great plays.


The Boys of Winter
Not so long ago, well within the memory of middle-aged fans, baseball's opening day game was played before a capacity crowd in Cincinnati, on a Monday afternoon, with speeches, music, red, white and blue bunting and kids playing hooky.
All other teams opened the next day.
Well, this year Cincinnati again staged the opening game -- a night game, on Sunday.
It was played in miserable, near-freezing weather in a half-empty stadium and it didn't feel or look right at all.
Marge Schott, the Reds' owner, treated the game like an exhibition and delayed the traditional opening day ceremonies until yesterday afternoon.
Of the Sunday night exercise, she noted sardonically: "This is their game" -- a reference to the agreement between baseball's high command and ESPN to hold the first game at night to guarantee a nationwide television audience.


Jays' Ring Ceremony: Got It and Flaunted It
Blue Jays 7, White Sox 3
Roberto Alomar and the rest of the Blue Jays got to celebrate again in front of Jack McDowell and the White Sox.


Despite Reservations, Police to Begin Rounding Up Truants
A police plan to round up teen-age truants in New York City will begin tomorrow, Board of Education officials said yesterday, even as some school officials and civil libertarians continued to express concern about possible racial discrimination and the violation of students' legal rights.
The board's announcement irritated the police, who had envisioned a joint statement.
John Miller, the department spokesman, refused to confirm that truancy patrols would begin tomorrow or to discuss most other aspects of the plan, including earlier reports that 100 officers would be involved.


Knicks' Smith Says He's Ready To Play
Charles Smith says he is back, just as the Knicks try for a 16th consecutive victory when they play in Miami on Tuesday night.
"I'm playing tomorrow night," Smith said after practice today. "It feels O.K."


Property-Tax Reform Plan Advances
A plan to overhaul Connecticut's property-tax system over the next few years, including phased-in tax breaks for inner-city renters and suburban retirees, advanced through a major committee of the Legislature today.
The plan, attacked by Republicans as election-year grandstanding, would also create a timetable for imposing a statewide system for assessing the value of real estate and other property.


S. J. Love, Clothier And Art Patron, 68
Stanley J. Love, president of a children's wear company and an art collector and benefactor of New York museums and other institutions, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 68 years old.
The cause was multiple myeloma, a form of bone cancer, said his son, William.


Signs Hint at Spectacular Supernova
A NEW exploding star in a nearby galaxy, discovered on Saturday, is growing steadily brighter and may be one of the most spectacular supernovas in recent years, astronomers said yesterday.
The stellar explosion, designated SN1994I, meaning the ninth one to be detected this year, was observed in the Whirlpool Galaxy, or M51, by a number of amateur and professional astronomers in the United States and Japan.
The explosion occurred 15 million years ago, but because of the galaxy's distance, light from it only reached Earth on Saturday.


No Details On Budget From Albany
Three days after they declared a budget deal, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the state's legislative leaders still had virtually no details to provide about it today, including which taxes they would cut, how they would divide aid to schools, which construction projects they would finance and how they would allocate money to local governments.
Although the leaders, particularly Mr.
Cuomo, were eager to extol their budget, it became increasingly clear through the day that there was no budget to extol.
Instead, there was just the skeleton of an agreement, with rough numbers penciled in as totals in a number of broad categories, like tax cuts, state aid to schools and spending on pet construction and maintenance projects.


Chess
The most dramatic failure at the Linares International Tournament in Spain was Gary Kasparov's slumping into a distant second place behind Anatoly Karpov.
The greatest player of our time is supposed to win, win and win.
But he was not the only one who disappointed the fans.
Three luminaries who were widely expected to leapfrog Karpov as Kasparov's most formidable rival took their own nosedives.
Viswanathan Anand, a 24-year-old Indian grandmaster, has been named by Kasparov as a threat to his pre-eminence, but Anand slipped down into an even score, which put him seventh among the 14 entrants.
Vasily Ivanchuk, a 25-year-old Ukrainian grandmaster, was widely hailed as a challenger for Kasparov when he won the Linares International in 1991, but he finished this time with a 6-7 score.
Boris Gelfand a 25-year-old Belarus grandmaster, tallied an unimpressive 5 1/2-7 1/2.


Workplace For Disabled Helps U.S. Help Bosnia
In a factory that once pounded sheet metal into office furniture, Linda Davis now sews the olive-green bags that relief flights are dropping into Bosnia, stuffed with food and medicine.
She is proud of the quality and purpose of the work, which has made her employer a major military contractor in a city that has seen its woodworking and sheet-metal industries decline in recent decades.
And she is proud of how the work has changed attitudes about her and her co-workers.


Gift to Beth Israel Is Just Part of a Family Tradition
It began with a pushcart more than a century ago in the busy warren of streets on the Lower East Side, all crowded with immigrants, many of them Polish and Russian Jews who had come to America fleeing the pogroms.
One was a peddler named Moses Phillips, who set out mornings pushing a cart piled high with shirts sewn by his wife, Endel, in their one-room loft.
At first he sold shirts solely to support his family, but soon he had a bigger cause: to scrape together enough money to open a medical dispensary, because new immigrants did not meet the residency requirements imposed by local hospitals.
Neighbors helped, going door-to-door collecting anything offered -- pennies, nickels, pillow cases, candles and even a few chickens.
These efforts made it possible to transform a Henry Street tenement into a clinic, which later grew into Beth Israel Medical Center, one of the country's leading hospitals.


Judge Says He May Reject Plea Deal in Garbage-Hauling Case
Five men, including the man prosecutors had said controlled New York City's private trash-hauling industry for the Mafia, pleaded guilty yesterday to murder conspiracy.
But the judge said he might reject the plea bargain because it involved prison terms of just seven years.
The most prominent defendant is James Failla, 75, who law-enforcement authorities had accused of using force and threats of violence to divide up collection routes for the private companies that pick up trash from commercial buildings in the city.
Officials have said that longtime mob control of the industry has helped make New York's garbage-hauling costs the highest in the country.


Review/Music; Other Realms in Works by Brahms
An unhelpful cliche repeated ad nauseam about Brahms is that he shied away from symphonic music for much of his career and channeled his ambitions into instrumental and chamber forms.
We read of the "orchestral" piano sonatas, the "symphonic" chamber pieces for piano and strings.
Schoenberg argued that the Piano Quartet in G minor was inadequate as written and went so far as to concoct a loony orchestration with clangorous percussion in the finale.
Better to say that Brahms's chamber music, the center of his achievement, contains other realms.
His Clarinet Trio, which anchored a Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center program on Sunday afternoon at Tully Hall, derives from abandoned sketches for a Fifth Symphony; it is just possible to sense an orchestral outline in the first movement.
It's much easier, however, to imagine what the Fourth Symphony might have sounded like in chamber form.


MARKETS IN TURMOIL: Investors Undone: How $600 Million Evaporated -- A special report.; Fund Manager Caught Short By Crude and Brutal Market
David J. Askin entered the small conference room of his Lexington Avenue office last Monday to face his investors: blue-chip corporations, pension funds and wealthy families.
They had entrusted him with $600 million in what was billed as a low-risk approach to investing in bonds backed by home mortgages.
But as interest rates shot up in recent months, his two investment funds lost more than $100 million.
Several dozen investors were there in person, and 20 more were on the speakerphone.
What they heard did not please them.
Mr.
Askin said he needed $40 million to $50 million immediately because several brokerage firms were seeking more money to cover his funds' losses; if the cash could not be raised, their entire investment was in jeopardy.


A CD-ROM Magazine Is a Sound Possibility
MANY personal computers come equipped with CD-ROM drives and sound cards, and almost all can be fitted with them afterward.
They open up many possibilities.
More and more frequently, high-end software is supplied on disks instead of on a dozen or more floppies; games on CD's offer video sequences, and the devices can even play audio CD's with the proper software.
The Macintosh here is running "Gershwin Plays Gershwin," a nice anachronism: piano-roll reproductions tinkling out of a double-speed AppleCD 300 reader and a pair of speakers.
The software is also Apple's: CD Remote, which puts the image of a remote-control unit on the screen.


Clinton's Doubleheader: Two Cities, Two Sports
On Tuesday, he'll be back at work.
But today President Clinton played hookey as only a President can, taking Air Force One and a cavalcade of aides with him to witness both baseball's opening day and college basketball's last one.


Indians Finally Find Comfort at Home
If the Cleveland Indians thought that their old haunt, Cleveland Stadium, was cursed because of a supposed hex put on the franchise by a fired manager in 1958, what would they have believed about Jacobs Field if the first game the Indians ever played in their new home resulted in a no-hitter?
Against them.
Well, for seven and a third innings today, the Indians had to be wondering how awful that incredible bit of bad luck would have been, not just for today but for all the days the karma would surely have lasted.
For seven and a third innings is exactly how long Randy Johnson, the Seattle left-hander and perhaps the American League's most dominant pitcher, held the Indians hitless today before a crowd of 41,459 that included President Clinton.


A New Look to Fighting Crime


Any Discipline Issues Will Wait
When Peter O'Malley, owner of the Los Angeles Dodgers, heard yesterday about Darryl Strawberry's newly disclosed drug abuse problem, he was angry and wanted to throw the troubled outfielder off the team, a baseball person familiar with O'Malley's reaction said last night.
But major league baseball's substance-abuse policy does not permit such rash action.
Actually, no one knows for sure, until an arbitrator decides the inevitable union grievance over drug discipline, what the policy really permits.


In Italy, All or Nothing; Communists Once Sure of a Bit of Power, Say the New Elections Leave Them None
If Italy's just-completed election turns out to herald the peaceful revolution some forecast before the vote, the reason will not just lie in new faces and new promises of change after years of corruption and stagnation.
Rather, the most fundamental change will be in the relationship between winner and loser, between a government and an opposition that will now have to digest the most shocking implication of the vote: In Italy's new political system the winner takes almost everything, and the loser gets virtually nothing.


Lest We Forget: Steinbrenner Lurks Behind the Euphoria
The team that played a glorious opening-day game at Yankee Stadium yesterday was George Steinbrenner's team.
Not as in the team principally owned by George Steinbrenner but the team hand-picked by George Steinbrenner.
This is nothing new, of course, Steinbrenner's dictating which players will receive the paychecks funded by money that is principally his.
An owner inherently has that right.
But Steinbrenner is one of the few who exercises it, and he epitomizes the also-rans that those owners are.


INSIDE
U.S. Judge Is Skeptical Of Military Gay Policy
In a decision that could signal trouble for the new military policy on homosexuals, a Federal judge blocked the Pentagon from discharging six gay service members.
The judge expressed skepticism that the new rules safeguard homosexuals in ways the old policy did not.
Page A14.
A New Barrier in Hebron
The Israeli Army has put up a 100-yard-long security wall near Jewish settlements in Hebron, but Jews see it as building a ghetto and Palestinians as partitioning an Arab city.
Page A3.
Fossil Trove in the Gobi
Fossil hunters have found a rich array of new bones near where their gasoline truck got stuck in the Gobi Desert.
Science Times, page C1.
Youth Killed in the Subway
A 16-year-old student was shot and killed on a Brooklyn subway platform after an argument with other youths, the police said.
Page B1.


It's a Grand Day for the Yankees and a Windy One for the Mets
Everyone was curious about these Yankees, from the field manager to the clubhouse manager to the morning-after managers.
Everyone wondered just how this intriguing team would perform and whether the thoughts of grandeur floating around New York were appropriate.
On opening day yesterday, it was apparent that they were.
If Manager Buck Showalter had reached into his pocket, pulled out his ever-present notebook and scribbled an outline of things he wanted to happen against the Rangers, the list probably would have included a dependable start from Jimmy Key, some pizazz from the new leadoff man Luis Polonia, homers by Mike Stanley and Danny Tartabull and, most important, no disasters if he summoned members of his bullpen.
Outline or not, those wishes were granted.


Medicare Paying Doctors 59% of Insurers' Rate, Panel Finds
Medicare, the Federal health insurance program for the elderly, pays doctors only 59 percent of what private insurance companies pay, and this gap may "compromise access to care for Medicare beneficiaries," a Federal advisory commission said today.
The gap has increased in the last five years, and President Clinton's health plan could widen it further, said the panel, the Physician Payment Review Commission.
In 1989, Medicare paid doctors 68 percent as much as private insurers paid.


A Child Shall Lead
To the Editor:
Re "Recycling Failure at the Board of Ed" (editorial, March 23): The other day my two younger boys helped me clean out the car.
I asked my 5-year-old to throw the trash in the corner basket, but found him walking back to the apartment with an empty glass bottle.
When I asked him why he didn't throw it away, he looked at me with that "It's the law" glance and said, invoking his kindergarten teacher at P.S. 9: "You have to recycle, daddy. Mrs. Goldweber says."


Colts' Bennett Arrested
Linebacker TONY BENNETT, who left the Green Bay Packers for the Indianapolis Colts on March 26, was arrested in Green Bay, Wis., after a female friend accused him of battery, the police said yesterday. (AP)


'Light Menu' for White House As a New Chef Takes Charge
After a six-week search and sample meals from a half-dozen prominent chefs, the White House plans to announce today the appointment of its new chef, a 39-year-old graduate of the Culinary Institute of America who is now the chef at the Greenbrier Resort and Health Spa in White Sulphur Springs, W. Va.
The new chef, Walter S. Scheib 3d, was chosen after an interview with Hillary Rodham Clinton last week and a sample meal.
But neither he nor the White House would describe the meal that helped him win the job.


First-Time Tourists Need a Pocket Guide To Downtown Internet
THE Internet is the virtual equivalent of New York and Paris.
It is a wondrous place full of great art and artists, stimulating coffee houses and salons, towers of commerce, screams and whispers, romantic hideaways, dangerous alleys, great libraries, chaotic traffic, rioting students and a population that is rarely characterized as warm and friendly.
In truth, the Internet and its metropolitan analogues are home to many friendly people. (The Internet population, by the way, is roughly equivalent to that of New York City and Paris combined.) It is just that new visitors do not often meet them.
First-time visitors may discover that finding the way around is an ordeal, especially if they do not speak the language.


Vandals Topple 50 Headstones in Queens Cemetery


A Shock for Disney, but No Turmoil
The death of Frank G. Wells, president of the Walt Disney Company, in a helicopter crash on Sunday afternoon, stunned the entertainment industry today and raised some questions about potential changes in a company that he helped propel to spectacular success over the last decade.
Michael D. Eisner, chairman and chief executive of Disney, who was shaken by the death of his closest colleague, quickly sought to blunt any speculation this morning about turmoil at the company.


3 Men Are Found Killed In Manhattan Apartment
A woman went home to her apartment in a quiet building in Washington Heights last night to find three men dead, their hands tied behind their backs, the police said.
The police were unwilling to give the names of the victims -- all Hispanic men in their 20's -- or say whether they lived in the apartment.
Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman, said investigators were not even sure how the three died, although they thought it possible that the victims were strangled.


State Dept. Report Labels Nigeria Major Trafficker of Drugs to U.S.
The State Department said today that some Nigerians, with the help of their Government, have created global drug trafficking networks in Europe and Asia that officials estimate provide 35 percent to 40 percent of the heroin that enters the United States.
The report, an annual world survey of drug cultivation and trafficking, also describes a dramatic expansion of Russian criminal groups involved in smuggling and distributing heroin from Central Asia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran, where heroin production continues to increase.


Q&amp;A
Snow White
Q.  Why is snow white?
A.
"The color of snow is whatever light is shining on it," said Dr.
Alan J. Friedman, director of the New York Hall of Science in Queens.
The individual ice crystals are transparent but reflective, so that light hitting them is scattered, broken up and recombined in different colors so many times that the end result usually appears white.


An 'Extinct' Butterfly Flutters Back to Life
FOURTEEN years after being declared an endangered species and 11 years after being presumed extinct, the Palos Verdes blue butterfly has risen against all odds in the tall grass of Navy land in San Pedro.
"It didn't register at first," said Dr.
Rudi Mattoni, the last person to sight the fragile creatures in 1983 and the first to see a small cluster of them three weeks ago.
"The sun broke through and there they were. It was a real resurrection for Easter."


WHITE HOUSE MEMO SEES HIGHER COSTS FOR WELFARE PLAN
President Clinton's plan to overhaul the welfare system could cost much more in the long run than previously disclosed, possibly adding $58 billion to the nation's welfare costs over 10 years, according to a confidential memorandum presented to Mr.
Clinton.
The document also says Mr.
Clinton should understand that "in rare circumstances" his plan to enforce a two-year limit on welfare benefits could leave families "homeless or unable to care for their children."


Relentless Arkansas Knocks Down Heaven's Door
At long, long last, Nolan Richardson and his Arkansas Razorbacks earned their 40 minutes of heaven.
It may not have felt that way as the Duke Blue Devils took the Razorbacks into the final, taut minutes of the national collegiate championship game.
But the hard-earned signature ability of the Razorbacks to operate in the most stressful moments -- a quality forged by the intense effort Richardson once named 40 minutes of something else -- helped Arkansas win its first national championship, 76-72, over Duke tonight at Charlotte Coliseum.


Mr. Giuliani's Blinkered Budget; A Better Way to Curb the City Payroll
New York City could hire fewer new policemen, increase street patrols with the existing force, soften cuts in other agencies and save at least $51 million a year in a plan laid out by the nonpartisan Citizens Budget Commission.
In view of this creative proposal, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's insistence on exempting police from spending cuts needs a second look.
The budget commission is a nonpolitical, business-sponsored fiscal watchdog.
Its well-documented analysis of police operations takes aim at just two soft spots -- officers in desk jobs, and the departmental work schedule.
The Mayor says he is considering other ways to save money at no loss to public safety.
But he has already rejected a modest proposal to invite private contractors to bid for custodial and police car maintenance jobs, and a senior adviser says he views the commission plan as "wrong-minded."


Hogs Got Off Deck To Deliver 1-2 Punch
For all talk about Arkansas's depth, talent, quest for respect, the Razorbacks' season came down to one fundamental question tonight: could the two players who had carried the team all season -- Scotty Thurman on the outside and Corliss Williamson on the inside -- dig Arkansas out of a monstrous 10-point hole with 17 minutes 9 seconds left in the season?
The two all-Southeastern Conference players had played like mortals for much of the championship game and now, after Jeff Capel's 3-pointer stretched Duke's lead to 48-38, everything the Razorbacks had worked for seemed headed for the drain.


Delay of Toxic-Waste Report Explained
A former official in the New York City Department of Sanitation said last week that the discovery of toxic contamination at the site of the proposed Brooklyn Navy Yard incinerator in 1988 "did not alarm me" and that it was his decision not to fully disclose the finding to the state, which was considering whether to grant a permit for the plant.
Information about the contamination, found in a 1988 report that detailed evidence of contamination by petroleum and polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCB's, in the soil and groundwater at the Brooklyn Navy Yard site, was finally turned over to the State Department of Environmental Conservation two weeks ago.


The Suit of the Moment Might Just Be a Dress
It is not likely that by next fall the one-piece dress will replace the jacket with skirt or pants as the most important part of a woman's wardrobe.
Still, the jacket or suit has been around so long it is not unreasonable to expect that something will come along to challenge it.
The question simply is when.
Avant-garde designers have, in fact, been trying to deconstruct the jacket, or tear it apart, for some time.
They've ripped out the stiffening, thrown away the shoulder pads and even poked holes in the material.
Giorgio Armani, the world's most respected suit designer, said last month in Milan that everywhere he looked women were wearing jackets and that he viewed dresses as a respectable alternative.
At any rate, he showed a lot of them, along with suits.


Mr. Giuliani's Blinkered Budget; On AIDS, an Intolerable Cut
Raymond D. Horton, president of the Citizens Budget Commission, has succinctly identified the core issue raised by Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's lopsided approach to closing the city's budget deficit.
The Mayor seeks to eliminate 15,000 jobs from the city's work force, but he plans to exempt police officers, firefighters and teachers from the cutbacks.
That means he will "really have to sock it to other agencies and programs," Mr.
Horton said.
"The real issue that the body politic has to figure out is what kind of cuts are tolerable in services for the poor, the homeless, the sick."
By that humane standard, the Mayor's emerging plan to erase or drastically cut the Division of AIDS Services is intolerable.
This 740-person unit in the Human Resources Administration has been performing a merciful service by helping impoverished and often helpless AIDS patients subsist and cope with their illness.
But now the division's $22-million-a-year staffing budget is in jeopardy.


A campaign aimed at teen-agers is at the forefront of California's $499 million battle against smoking.
CALIFORNIA's aggressive antismoking campaign, which uses a series of humorous television and billboard ads, is credited with contributing to a $1.6 billion decline in cigarette sales in the state in five years.
Consumption has declined by 1.1 billion packs, or 27 percent, three times faster than elsewhere in the country.
Advertising is an important part of the state's $499 million program to reduce smoking.
The program is so effective that it has become a national model for antismoking forces and has spawned a backlash by the tobacco industry in California.


Judge Blocks The Military In Gay Suits
A Federal district judge today blocked the Pentagon from discharging six gay service members who had challenged the military's new policy on homosexuals.
The ruling signaled that the policy itself could face serious trouble in the courts.
In the first legal challenge to the new policy, Judge Eugene H. Nickerson of New York barred the Defense Department from investigating or dismissing the six, two on active duty and four reservists, until their suit was resolved.


Redskins Sign Woods
The Washington Redskins, continuing efforts to shore up their defensive line, signed the former Los Angeles Rams defensive end TONY WOODS yesterday.
The terms of the agreement weren't given.
Woods, an unrestricted free agent, started eight games for the Rams last year and recorded 45 tackles and 1 sack. (AP)


Norman Segal, 50, a Developer Who Was a Patron of the Arts
Norman Segal, a Manhattan real-estate developer and patron of the arts, died on Saturday at New York Hospital.
He was 50 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The cause was complications of AIDS, said his wife, Gail Clott.


Foreigners Attacked in Guatemala
Fed by rumors that Americans were coming to kidnap children, cut out their vital organs and ship them to the United States for transplantation, an extraordinary wave of panic has swept Guatemala over the last month.
Tourists and other foreigners have been attacked by mobs in at least three recent incidents, the latest of which left a 52-year-old Alaska woman in a coma.


'I'll Have to Sell the House to Pay for Treatment'; Making Hard Decisions
To the Editor:
Decisions affecting coverage of experimental treatments for terminally ill patients are among the most difficult and controversial that managed-care companies make.
Unfortunately, the generalizations in your March 28 front-page article fail to capture any of the circumspection that is typical of the decision making by many managed-care companies.
Aetna Health Plans, for example, has established a prototype process that maintains the balance between the needs of dying patients and assuring the efficiency of the health care system.
The foundation of the process is an independent panel of 130 expert physicians who are asked to review questionable requests for coverage of high-dose chemotherapy with autologous bone marrow transplant.


Evacuation Of Bosnia Area Is Postponed
The International Committee of the Red Cross announced tonight that it has postponed a planned evacuation of thousands of Muslims and Croats from the northwestern Bosnian town of Prijedor after Serbian nationalist leaders refused to grant safe passage for large numbers of people to leave the area.
The top International Red Cross official in the former Yugoslavia, Andreas Kuhn, told a late-night news conference here that the Serbs had backed down on assurances given Sunday night to allow Muslims and Croats safe passage out of northwestern Bosnia.


New Season in the Bronx, Same Old Stadium Song
Even if New York City gives George Steinbrenner everything he wants in the potential renovation of Yankee Stadium, the principal owner of the Yankees is still envious of the new ball parks in Cleveland and Arlington, Tex.
"I hear they're magnificent places," he said at the Yankees' season opener yesterday against Texas.
"It's hard to compete. We're the largest draw in the league on the road, but not at home. They can't redo the stadium to look completely modern."


Cuomo Chooses Colonel to Serve As State Police Superintendent
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today nominated Col.
James W. McMahon, a 27-year veteran of the New York state police, as the superintendent of the 4,000-officer force.
Colonel McMahon was named to replace Thomas A. Constantine, who left the post last month to head the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration.
Until the State Senate votes on the colonel's nomination to the $95,645-a-year job, he will serve as acting superintendent.


Mullin Investigation
Golden State Warriors forward CHRIS MULLIN will continue to play while the police investigate a complaint that he assaulted a woman in a Seattle hotel room, the team said yesterday.
The Warriors are scheduled to take on the Spurs in San Antonio tonight.
Mullin, 30, a five-time N.B.A.
All-Star, was questioned by the police Saturday after the Warriors' 119-109 loss to the SuperSonics in Seattle.
The case is being investigated as a misdemeanor, said Sgt.
DAN WHELAN of the Seattle police.


Feller's Excruciating Vigil
For 54 years, Bob Feller has sweated through each opening day, waiting to see if some pitcher would repeat a feat only he has ever accomplished: throwing a no-hitter in the first game of the season.
Never was that vigil more excruciating than today, as Feller watched Seattle's Randy Johnson come within five outs of duplicating the feat against the Cleveland Indians, the team Feller once pitched for.
The 75-year-old Feller was among the 41,459 fans watching for seven and one-third as Johnson threatened to nudge his way into the record book alongside the Cleveland legend, whose opening-day no-hitter in 1940 against the Chicago White Sox in the old Comiskey Park was the first of three no-hitters Feller pitched in his Hall of Fame career.


Accounts
*
Luxor Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nev., to GSD&amp; M Advertising, Austin, Tex., to handle its account, previously at Stranger &amp; Associates, Los Angeles.
Billings were estimated at $6 million to $10 million. *
Ritchey Design, Redwood City, Calif., to Citron Haligman Bedecarre,San Francisco, to handle the mountain bike maker's account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Closer for the Summer? Hernandez Wants the Job
Xavier Hernandez was being diplomatic about his debut as the Yankee closer.
Very diplomatic.
So diplomatic that Manager Buck Showalter probably would have wanted to congratulate him for avoiding any potential controversy about the delicate issue.
Hernandez wants to be the closer, but it is not a demand.
Just like the other relievers, Hernandez will wait in the bullpen for the telephone to ring.
And when it does, regardless of the inning, he said, he will get prepared to pitch.
He did that before the ninth inning yesterday and was impressive in his debut with two strikeouts and his first save in a 5-3 victory over Texas.


When Dance and Music Develop in Duet
Making dances is supposed to be easy.
Choreographers put on some music and try out movements in front of their bedroom or studio mirrors, and then, butterflylike, new pieces emerge.
The reality is different, of course, especially when living composers and new music are involved.
When the curtain goes up tonight on "Ayego," presented by the Peter Pucci Plus Dancers as they open their weeklong season at the Joyce Theater, Mr.
Pucci and the composer Nana Simopoulos will have lived through a five-month relationship as tumultuous as most love affairs.


New Covers On Manholes After Mishap
Work crews started replacing or modifying covers on 150 small manholes in Central Park yesterday to insure that they were securely closed after a 5-year-old girl fell 15 feet into an open manhole on Friday near the park's carousel.
The girl, Sara Kinn, who was playing with her family and friends in a field, was not seriously injured.
She was rescued by her father, William, who climbed down the manhole and pulled his daughter out.


Books of The Times; Taking Sides In Polemics Over Plath
The Silent Woman  Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes  By Janet Malcolm  208 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $23.
Before we get to Janet Malcolm's vexing new book, "The Silent Woman: Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes," which originally appeared in different form as a single voluminous article in The New Yorker last year, a little history is in order.


Fire Destroys Sag Harbor Store


Felipe N. Torres, 96, Former Legislator And Retired Judge
Felipe Neri Torres, a retired Judge of the Family Court and a former Democratic assemblyman, died on Sunday in White Plains Hospital.
He was 96 and lived in the Parkchester section of the Bronx.
The cause was pneumonia, said Analisa Torres, a granddaughter.


Four Seasons Hotels For Sale, With a Catch
Isadore Sharp, the Toronto hotelier who founded the Four Seasons chain 34 years ago, has decided to check out of the hotel business.
The catch is, he has no intention of actually packing up and vacating for at least three more years.
And in the meantime, he expects the new owners to give him the run of the place.


Quest for Evolutionary Meaning In the Persistence of Suicide
CONSIDERED on its face, suicide seems to flout the laws of nature, slashing through the sturdy instinct that wills all beings to fight for their lives until they can fight no longer.
Yet to some evolutionary geneticists, suicide cannot be entirely explained as a violent aberration or a human pathology lying outside the ebbs and pulls of natural selection and adaptation.
These researchers note that suicide, for all its private, tangled sorrows, is surprisingly common in most countries, accounting on average for nearly 1 percent of all deaths.
And when the number of serious suicide attempts is taken into account, the prevalence of the behavior jumps considerably.


China Says It Holds Dissident to Check 'New Crimes'
China said today that its security forces are holding Wei Jingsheng, the country's best-known dissident, under arrest because he is "suspected of having committed new crimes" while on parole after 14 1/2 years in prison.
The statement by the official New China News Agency followed several days of uncertainty over Mr.
Wei's whereabouts and represents a serious attempt to silence him.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED WASTE INDUSTRIES, Bellaire, Tex., a waste disposal and recycling concern, has signed a definitive agreement to acquire Southern States Environmental Services Inc. for $21 million in Allied Waste stock and $5.9 million in cash.


Bickering on Italian Right Halts Talks on a New Government
After a week of bickering within his triumphant right-wing electoral alliance, the Italian media tycoon, Silvio Berlusconi, announced tonight that he was suspending the talks with his partners that were aimed at welding a government-in-waiting.
It is not immediately clear if this means that the alliance has fallen apart completely.
But the announcement from Mr.
Berlusconi's 70-room villa outside Milan threw Italian politics into disarray, unnerved financial markets and took much of the luster off an electoral landslide just a week ago that many cast as a herald of change.


Friend's Problem Surprises Gooden
Dwight Gooden did not know what to make of the news when he heard it Monday afternoon.
Darryl Strawberry, his good friend and former teammate, had been placed on the disabled list because of a drug problem.
So, too, had Gooden seven years ago.
Still, Gooden found it difficult to understand how Strawberry -- who looked so healthy and in control this spring training -- had fallen so far so fast.
"I just don't know what's going on," Gooden said this afternoon before the Mets played the Cubs at Wrigley Field.
"Really, his whole career there's been something. A lot of stuff he brought upon himself and a lot of stuff he didn't. Something could have taken a toll. Maybe it's hard for me to really accept that he has a problem."


A Recycling System for High-Rises
Environmentally minded homeowners can always stash away an extra bin or two -- or five or six -- to hold glass, plastic, metal, newspapers and other materials to be recycled.
But what about high-rise apartment dwellers, many of whom live in buildings with no storage space for recyclables -- only a chute that leads to a Dumpster below?
Getting sorted waste materials to the curb is a crucial part of the recycling process.
In Manhattan, many materials must be recycled by law.


Steps to Prevent Lead Poisoning
Parents, teachers and others who supervise children and are worried that lead may be in crayons can take steps to detect and prevent lead poisoning.
Very few crayons currently sold in the United States contain lead.
But crayons are typically kept around homes and schools for years, often without labels or wrappers.
People concerned about lead danger are therefore advised to discard all old crayons and replace them with new ones in boxes bearing the label "Conforms to ASTM D-4236."


Wine Talk
MEET merlot, the wine drinker's new best friend.
Merlot is the Rollerblade of wine -- or is it the snowboard?
It has been called the wine of the 90's, the star of the moment.
"Merle" is French for "blackbird." According to one story, the merlot grape is the same color as the bird.
According to another, it is the first grape in a vineyard that the blackbird eats because it ripens earlier than its cousins the cabernets -- sauvignon and franc -- and malbec.





Crayons Produced in China Are Recalled as Lead Risk
Hundreds of thousands of boxes of crayons imported from China were recalled today after the Government said they contained traces of lead that could poison children who ate the crayons.
The recalled crayons, most of which were manufactured a few years ago, amount to only a small fraction of the millions of boxes sold each year.


Stock Market Diplomacy; Clinton's Foreign Policy Includes a Regard For How a Move Plays in Global Trading
As the Clinton Administration weighs whether to revoke China's preferential trade status and whether to impose trade sanctions on Japan, a new factor is creeping into its calculations: What impact would such moves have on already volatile global stock and bond markets?
The diplomacy of the stock market is an increasingly important calculation for American officials.
Fifteen years ago, the impact of a foreign policy decision on the stock and bond markets might only have been a small consideration.
But now it is being taken much more seriously.


Southwestern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for 12mos to Feb 28


A Peking Duck That's Really a Chicken
This earthy spring menu begins with a heartwarming soup, followed by a roasted chicken prepared in the style of Peking duck.
Instead of going directly into the oven, the chicken is first blanched in boiling water.
This step serves two purposes: it eliminates some fat and tightens the skin, which helps the chicken achieve a deep roasted color and crisp skin when it is finished in the oven.


Quality Food Centers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 19


Frustrating 12th Hole at the Masters: It's So Near and Yet So Far
Some whimsical golfers have observed that the hardest drive in golf might be the one up Magnolia Lane, approaching the old manor clubhouse at Augusta National Golf Club for the Masters.
"I start choking as soon as I turn up the lane," is how Gary Player puts it.
Once inside golf's pearly gates, though, players are faced with an array of shots that can be as inscrutable as Augusta is beautiful.
Everywhere on the manicured grounds are shots that are frightening, puzzling, perplexing and unforgiving.
The first tee shot of the week at No. 1.
The second shot at the fifth hole.
The second at the 13th.
The tee shot at the 18th.
Any putt from above the hole.
All are worthy of note and all received votes as the toughest Masters shot in an informal player poll leading up to the tournament.
Nicklaus Isn't Immune
But of all the 72 or so shots facing the field of 88 golfers each day in the Masters, which begins Thursday, none are more demanding than the tee shot at the shortest hole on the course, the 12th, 155 yards of hell called, ironically, Golden Bell.
This shot has ruined more Masters than fire ants have picnics, and there isn't a golfer who has not been stung by it.


Governor Shouldn't Have Power to Bar Recruiters From SUNY
To the Editor:
The opportunity for college graduates to find jobs in their fields remains very difficult, especially here in New York State.


Kinder-Care Learning Centers Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Inner Ear May Take Beating From High-Impact Aerobics
PEOPLE who engage in demanding physical activities might expect to suffer occasional injuries to the body parts directly involved.
But few devotees of high-impact aerobics are likely to guess that their jumping and bouncing to music could damage their inner ears, causing symptoms like persistent vertigo, dizziness, imbalance, motion sickness, ringing or fullness in the ear and high-frequency hearing loss.
Yet just such a syndrome has been identified in a group of 30 otherwise healthy women in the Westchester County area of New York who regularly do high-impact aerobics, which involves a lot of bouncing up and down, often with both feet off the ground at once.


Kruk Is Going to Reading to Get Ready
Philadelphia Phillies first baseman JOHN KRUK will begin a minor league rehabilitation assignment with the Reading Phillies on Friday night, the team said yesterday.
Kruk has been undergoing radiation treatments for testicular cancer.
He will be treated at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital on Friday and play with the Class AA Phillies Friday night.
He will also play Saturday and Sunday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.63
3.62
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.65
3.71
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.98
4.02
2.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.91
7.13
6.07
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.24
7.41
6.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.09
8.20
7.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.63
6.65
6.05
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Israel Pulls Up Stakes At Gaza Headquarters
As the contents of his barracks were loaded onto a truck, Itai Kotsikaro, a soldier at Israeli military headquarters for the Gaza Strip, said he was happy to be finally moving out.
"We waited a long time for this moment," he said as soldiers lifted beds, desks, chairs and metal cabinets onto flatbed trailers.
"We won't miss this place, and I hope we won't come back. I feel relieved."


National Patent Development Corp. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; CBS News bends a rule and lets a television anchor continue to make commercials for radio.
CHARLES OSGOOD'S breezy exhortation "See you on the radio" has helped make him one of the most popular figures in broadcasting.
But his role in trying to sell you on the radio is now posing some problems.
Beginning Sunday, Mr.
Osgood will replace Charles Kuralt as the host of "Sunday Morning," the weekly CBS News program that has earned a reputation as a softer, quieter interlude amid the frenetic world of network television.
But to accept the position, Mr.
Osgood asked that he be able to continue his duties on "The Osgood Files," three-minute commentaries that are broadcast weekdays on CBS Radio.


Work-Release Is Suspended After Inmate Shoots Officer
Forty murderers were ordered back to prison from their work-release program on Monday night after a participant in the program failed to return to prison, stole a Jeep and, the authorities said, shot and wounded a police officer over the weekend.
The inmate died in a car crash while being chased by the New Hampshire police.


Who Cares Who Takes The Lead?
SOMETIMES social dancing actually has a social dimension.
Sometimes, among the things that take place on a dance floor, there is cultural diffusion.
Consider the Stepping Out Studio of Ballroom and Latin Dancing on Broadway and what has happened there in the year and a half since some students asked the management to organize special gay and lesbian classes.
"We wanted classes where we would feel comfortable," Tucker Farley said as she waited for the Monday night West Coast swing class to begin.
"What we wanted were classes where no one would be embarrassed if people danced with partners of the same sex."


Spectacular Shot by Delgado Once Again on Skydome Menu
Blue Jays 5, White Sox 3
Carlos Delgado, a rookie, homered off a restaurant window inside the Skydome for the second straight day, and the Toronto Blue Jays beat the Chicago White Sox, 5-3, last night.


Weak Canadian Dollar Raises Rates, Limits Jobs
Though Canada may deserve plaudits for its low inflation rate, a plummeting Canadian dollar has forced interest rates higher, threatening recovery from the double-digit unemployment lingering after the country's most severe recession since World War II.
The currency's dive to its lowest point in almost eight years mainly reflects growing nervousness over the Canadian Government's ability to control the ballooning public debt.


Party Out of Bounds: No Sweet 16 for the Knicks
The Miami Heat television analyst Jack Ramsay, the third-winningest coach in National Basketball Association history, thinks there is a misconception in exactly how the Knicks fashioned a 15-game winning streak.
"They're defending about as tenaciously as they did last season," Ramsay said of the team ranked first in defense and only 21st in scoring.
"The difference is they've gotten a better rhythm to their offense."


Theater in Review
The Mollusc  Pearl Theater Company 125 West 22d Street Chelsea Through May 8 By Hubert Henry Davies; directed by Anthony Cornish; set by Robert Joel Schwartz; lighting by A. C. Hickox; costumes by Deborah Rooney; properties, Lynn Bogarde; stage manager, Colleen Marie Davis.
Presented by Pearl Theater Company.
WITH: Tom Bloom, Robin Leslie Brown, Arnie Burton and Kathleen Christal.


In America; Out of Control
On Sunday night a teen-age boy who was doing well in school and had managed to stay out of trouble was shot to death when a fight broke out among other youths in a subway in Brooklyn.
Last Thursday gunmen invaded the O Street Market, a small cluster of retail stores in Washington, and began firing indiscriminately.
When the shooting stopped nine people had been hit, including a toddler, a couple of elderly women, two security guards and a 15-year-old boy.
The boy died.


Public &amp; Private; Happy and Gay
At the conclusion of the incomparable "Angels in America," a dying man named Prior Walter has the last word.
Prior has seen ghosts and angels, love and betrayal, lesions blooming on his body and the deaths of many friends.
But in the end, as he speaks of AIDS, America and the human condition, some of the things that this monumental play is about, he has a kind of peace so profound that you must genuflect before its grandeur, greater than any seraphim.
"This disease will be the end of many of us," he says, "but not nearly all, and the dead will be commemorated and will struggle on with the living, and we are not going away. We won't die secret deaths anymore. The world only spins forward. We will be citizens. The time has come."


People
*
Julie McGowan was named advertising director at The New Yorker magazine, New York, succeeding Lance Ford, who left to become national advertising director at Bon Appetit magazine, New York.
Ms.
McGowan was previously publisher at Family Life magazine, New York.
Mark McDonald, publisher at Men's Journal magazine, New York, will assume Ms.
McGowan's responsibilities in the new position of group publisher of both Family Life and Men's Journal. *
Steve Brown, executive management director of diversified accounts at J. Walter Thompson Detroit, was promoted to the vacant position of general manager, handling responsibilities for all accounts except the Ford Motor Co.
He assumes his new duties from Peter Schweitzer, president and chief operating officer of the J. Walter Thompson Co., who continues to supervise the Ford account worldwide.


Stocks Break Their Spring Slide With Strongest Surge in 2 Years
The stock and bond markets rallied strongly yesterday, halting for now the sharpest decline in years, as some traders were encouraged by new signs that the economy was not growing as rapidly as had been thought.
In a surge of buying and bargain hunting, traders bid up stock prices, lifting the Dow Jones industrial average 82.06 points, or 2.3 percent, to 3,675.41, the biggest one-day rally in more than two years.


Indicators Falter, but No Big Shift Is Seen
The Government's chief forecasting index edged down in February to break a six-month streak of advances, but analysts generally dismissed the reading as a reflection of bad weather and said they saw no change in economic direction.
The biggest factor by far was a shrinking workweek, caused by exceptionally severe weather during the early part of February.
The Labor Department's jobs report on Friday showed that the workweek expanded in March, more than making up the February decline.
If the workweek had been unchanged in February, the composite index of leading indicators would have gained two-tenths of 1 percent instead of slipping one-tenth of 1 percent.


Child Found, Mother Dead
A baby girl was found yesterday in a Morningside Heights apartment, along with the body of her 78-year-old foster mother, who may have died as much as a day earlier, the police said.
A neighbor in the building, at 351 W. 114th St., heard the 11-month-old girl crying and entered the apartment of Willie Flo Johnson, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.
She said the neighbor found Ms.
Johnson dead, possibly of a heart attack.
She said it had not been determined how long Ms.
Johnson had been dead, but "it might have been 24 hours." "The baby was taken to St. Luke's Hospital, got a clean bill of health and has been placed with another foster family," Sergeant Haimeck said.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about a Chicago theologian and educator misspelled his surname.
He was the Rev.
Victor Obenhaus.


A.T.&amp; T. BLOCKED FROM McCAW DEAL
A Federal judge today blocked A.T.&amp; T.'s $12.6 billion deal to buy the nation's biggest cellular-telephone company, saying that it would violate the antitrust ruling that broke up the old Bell System a decade ago.
The decision may not necessarily derail A.T.&amp; T.'s proposed purchase of McCaw Cellular Communications, but it throws a significant obstacle into the merger plans and is almost certain to delay the agreement from being consummated for at least several months.


Review/Jazz; A Pastorale Built of Chords That Turn Slowly in Midair
The composer Maria Schneider has been leading a big band at Visiones every Monday night for the last year, and the music she writes for it sounds surprisingly pastoral.
Music often tries for a metaphoric reproduction of its surroundings; Ms.
Schneider's sounds as if it belongs in Northern California, lush and trouble-free.
After a year's work -- and with some fine soloists, including the trumpeters Greg Gisbert and Tim Hagans and the saxophonists Tim Ries, Rich Perry, Rick Margitza and Mark Vinci -- Ms.
Schneider's band is precise in its execution.
She sits or stands in front of the band, and with a casual gesture cues a section; to draw out more volume from the trumpets, she waves her hands, like an animal trainer in a circus trying to get a reluctant horse into the ring.
She's after dynamics and control, and she gets both.


W.L. Parkerton, 49; Ran Credit Agency
William L. Parkerton, the senior vice president and a founding board member of Consumer Credit Counseling Services of Connecticut in Hartford, died on Friday at his home in West Hartford, Conn.
He was 49.
His family said the cause was cancer.


American Express Decides To Cut Ties With Lehman
American Express will make a $1.1 billion equity infusion into Lehman Brothers and then spin off its entire stake in the investment bank to shareholders at a one-for-five ratio, company documents show.
The equity infusion is aimed at bolstering the balance sheet of Lehman so it can maintain its credit rating as a stand-alone business.


Coors Stars in Ad Competition
The Coors Brewing Company took the top honors last night at the fourth annual Creativity In Public Relations Awards competition, sponsored by Inside PR magazine in New York, winning four awards.
Coors was recognized for a campaign, "Coors Literacy. Pass It On," that addressed the problem of adult illiteracy.
The campaign, created by Schenkein/Sherman of Denver, won the gold Cipra award and won in the corporate image and media event categories.
Coors's fourth award came in the cause-related category, for a campaign created by Patrice Tanaka &amp; Company of New York, centering on a romance novel that incorporated illiteracy among women as a theme.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


A Hospital Reaches Out to Jazz Musicians in Need
Irene Reid, a former vocalist for Count Basie's band, is ill with heart and thyroid problems.
Although she still performs regularly at Manhattan night spots like Showman's Cafe and the Five Spot, Ms.
Reid, like many musicians, is uninsured.
"I was never ill," Ms.
Reid said.
"I raised five children alone and I was able to maintain a certain life style, but I couldn't afford health insurance. Then I had a heart attack in '92 and found that if you don't have insurance, you can't get any kind of medical attention."


On Abortion, Gay Rights And Affirmative Action
Following are excerpts from opinions written by Justice Harry A. Blackmun.
They are the majority opinion in Roe v.
Wade in 1973, his separate opinion in Regents of the University of California v.
Bakke, a 1978 decision on affirmative action in which he voted to uphold a special minority admissions program at a state medical school, and his dissent in Bowers v.
Hardwick, in which the majority ruled in 1986 that the constitutional right to privacy does not extend to homosexual acts.
From Roe v.
Wade
The Court has recognized that a right of personal privacy, or a guarantee of certain areas of zones of privacy, does exist under the Constitution. . . .
This right of privacy, whether it be founded in the 14th Amendment's concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court determined, in the Ninth Amendment's reservation of rights to the people, is broad enough to encompass a woman's decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy. . . .


Mercury Finance reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Zimmerman Wins Furniture Account
Action Furniture by Lane in Tupelo, Miss., said yesterday that it had selected the Zimmerman Agency in Tallahassee, Fla., to handle the account of its Action Recliners by Lane line, which had been at Bozell New York for the last eight years.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Brooklyn Woman Injured In Letter-Bomb Explosion
A 75-year-old woman was critically injured yesterday when a letter bomb delivered to her Brooklyn home exploded and punctured her stomach, postal inspectors said.
The victim was identified as Alice Caswell, of 1946 East 27th Street in Sheepshead Bay.
Postal Inspector Michael Kmetz said the woman was apparently not the intended victim of the bomb.


German Output Up
Industrial production in western Germany rose in February, the Economics Ministry reported today, but economists said the figures showed continued stagnation in manufacturing.
The ministry said industrial output rose 1.2 percent from January and was up 1.1 percent from a year earlier.


Longtime Hewlett Executive Named Novell Chief
Novell Inc. today named Robert J. Frankenberg to succeed Raymond J. Noorda as chief executive.
Mr.
Frankenberg, who is 46, has spent his entire 25-year career at the Hewlett-Packard Company, most recently as the head of its personal computer business.
He takes command of Novell at the most challenging time since Mr.
Noorda turned the struggling start-up company around a decade ago.


The Value of Breast Milk
IN the decades since Dr.
Paul Gyorgy bucked the tide of bottle-feeding more than 70 years ago by saying "Human milk is for the human infant; cow's milk is for the calf," scientists have discovered dozens of facts to substantiate his instinctive conclusion.
The discoveries continue, indicating that no formula, no matter how intelligently devised, comes close to the known and potential benefits of nursing. .
In the last few years, several studies have linked a woman's breastfeeding with lower risks of ovarian cancer and premenopausal breast cancer.
In addition, it has long been known that the hormones of lactation help the uterus contract to pre-pregnancy size and help to space pregnancies by suppressing ovulation.


Opposition to FIFA President Evaporates
European soccer officials decided not to challenge the re-election bid of the FIFA president, JOAO HAVELANGE, clearing the way for his sixth term.
The decision yesterday in Zurich followed a three-and-a-half-hour meeting of soccer officials from North and South America, Asia, Africa, Europe and Oceania and ended months of intrigue.


Allwaste Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Fare Cards in Cabs?
To the Editor:
With the introduction of the New York City Transit Metrocard, and its apparent success, another useful place to use the card would be in taxi cabs.
It would further reduce cash the drivers would have to carry and perhaps make them less of a robbery target.


Horizon Healthcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Rose's Stores (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Shane Mack, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Alex Cole, center fielder, from Portland of the Pacific Coast League.


Hispanic Families Use Alternatives to Day Care, Study Finds
Hispanic families use preschools and day care centers much less than those of other ethnic groups, apparently because of cultural preferences for family-like care, a new Harvard University study says.
This finding, the study's authors say, suggests that government should be putting more child-care money into programs like vouchers that accommodate parental choices rather than concentrating on preschool programs like Head Start.
The researchers at Harvard's Graduate School of Education found that among families with a mother employed full time outside the home, 32 percent of the Hispanic families surveyed placed children in preschools or day care centers, compared with 55 percent of the black families and 43 percent of the white families surveyed.


Vietnam Opens International Trade Fair


Shaw Indus Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Riesenberg Stays Put But Collins May Split
Free agency has proved to be what most people thought it would be: a wild roller-coaster ride in which teams try to gut one another.
Take the Giants, for example.
Yesterday they made sure one of their best linemen didn't defect by signing offensive tackle Doug Riesenberg to a four-year, $8.3 million deal.


Texan Tries For Victory As New Sort Of Democrat
There is a joke among some Texas Democrats these days that the party is so desperate to recapture Lloyd Bentsen's Senate seat that it is on the verge of nominating a Republican to do it.
But the man to whom the joke refers, Richard W. Fisher, a wealthy Dallas investor, could stake a better claim as a sort of Zelig of recent American history, variously seen side by side with Democrats, Republicans and even Ross Perot.


Whitaker Is Dancing Around the Future
In just a few minutes yesterday, Pernell Whitaker declared himself the retired welterweight champion as of Sunday morning, then unretired, then looked forward to a rematch with Julio Cesar Chavez, then gave an opinion on orthopedic surgery.
In other words, Whitaker is back, as unpredictable verbally as he is with his in-and-out, bob-and-weave style in the ring. 'Not About World Titles'
Whitaker makes his first mandatory title defense Saturday in Norfolk, Va., since winning the World Boxing Council crown from Buddy McGirt 13 months ago.
Last September, Whitaker fought a majority draw with Chavez, who had been undefeated at the time.
Whitaker, and most ringsiders, considered it Whitaker's bout.


Fire in Bronx Apartments Kills 3, Including Woman and Son
A predawn fire roared up a five-story apartment building in the South Bronx yesterday, killing three people, including a mother and son who screamed as relatives watched helplessly from their own apartment just a few feet away.
After erupting in the basement of 513 East 138th Street in Mott Haven, the blaze quickly spread up to the second floor, where a 57-year-old man was buried under a collapsed ceiling and killed.
Then it advanced to the third floor where Magali Rivera, 29, and her 10-year-old son, Ivan, waited, petrified.


Golfer Alleges Drug Use on Tour
Although the sport has never had a documented case of a player's testing positive for drugs, golfer Mac O'Grady has charged that at least 7 of the top 30 players in the world use beta blockers to calm themselves and steady their putting.
In today's editions of The Augusta Chronicle, O'Grady, a former PGA Tour player, said he used beta blockers for six months in 1985-86 to help his putting.
He said many top players use beta blockers, but declined to name them.


2 Suspects in Officer's Killing Tied by Police to 10 Holdups
The police have linked the two men indicted in the killing of Officer Sean McDonald to 10 holdups in the Bronx and Manhattan in the last several months.
Yesterday in State Supreme Court in the Bronx, as the suspects in Officer McDonald's killing were arraigned on second-degree murder charges, Justice Burton B. Roberts approved prosecutors' requests to conduct lineups in the robberies.


Off the Menu
It's Not '21,' It's Barbecue
The "21" Club, 21 West 52d Street, is famous for its hamburger.
Now, Marshall Cogan, who owns the restaurant, and Ken Aretsky, its chairman, are going into the barbecue business.
They have bought a majority interest, for an undisclosed price, in Stick to Your Ribs, a barbecue place at 5-16 51st Street in Long Island City, Queens.
As much as they love the Texas-style ribs and brisket made at Stick to Your Ribs, they said they did not intend to serve them at "21." In becoming partners with Robert Pearson, the former English hairdresser who started Stick to Your Ribs in Stratford, Conn., in 1984, and then moved it to Queens two years ago, and Ellen Goldberg, who manages it, they hope to expand into Manhattan by the fall, and then perhaps to other states.


The Bloom Is On in the Capital


Agency Switch By Farberware
Farberware Inc., a cookware and kitchen appliance manufacturer in the Bronx, said yesterday that it had named Warner, Bicking, Morris &amp; Partners in New York to handle its account, which had been at Ryan Drossman &amp; Partners in New York since September.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Critic's Notebook; Clurman on the Theater, With Sweep and Passion
Harold Clurman always had stage presence, whether he was teaching, talking or simply going to the theater.
Wherever he went, he was accompanied by a sense of theatrical history, which was as endemic to his personality as his silver-tipped cane and black velour hat.
For most of his life, he undertook two potentially adversarial careers, as director and as drama critic, roles that in Clurman's case were complementary.
This means that he was an astute observer of major artistic events as well as a participant in them, beginning with the founding of the Group Theater in 1931.
His memoir, "All People Are Famous," was a step removed from autobiography.
It was, he said, "about myself through others." One might suggest that the posthumous new book, "The Collected Works of Harold Clurman" (Applause Books), is about Clurman through the plays he saw.
It is literally the story of his life in the theater.


Heiress's Kin Seek Custody Of Orphan
The sister of Anne Scripps Douglas, the heiress to a newspaper fortune who was slain three months ago by her husband, asked a court here today if she could become the guardian of Mrs.
Douglas's orphaned 3-year-old daughter, Victoria.
The request by Mary Gibbs Scripps, could set off a custody fight with the family of Scott S. Douglas, who apparently jumped off the Tappan Zee Bridge after beating Mrs.
Douglas to death with a hammer on New Year's Eve.
Mr.
Douglas's death was confirmed last week when his body washed up on a Hudson River bank.
At that time lawyers in the case said Mr.
Douglas's brother, Todd, and his wife, Diane, were interested in becoming the child's guardian.


Parking-Ticket Kvetches Save Companies Money; With Millions at Stake, Businesses Find Ways to Fight City Fines, and They Often Win
Martha Pabon, the fleet manager for a Manhattan company, went into the Parking Violations Bureau in Greenwich Village the other day, carrying 15 tickets, a dog-eared copy of the city's traffic and parking handbook and affidavits signed by her company's drivers and customers.
She walked out 20 minutes later with 12 tickets dismissed, 2 fines reduced and 1 ticket she had to pay in full.
Instead of $885 in fines, she ended up paying $110.


Four Authors to Receive Bancroft Writing Prizes
Four authors have been named the winners of the 1994 Bancroft Prizes, awarded annually by Columbia University for books about American history, biography and diplomacy.
Stanley Elkins and Eric McKitrick were chosen for "The Age of Federalism: The Early American Republic, 1788-1800" (Oxford University Press).
Dr.
Elkins is professor emeritus of history at Smith College; Dr.
McKitrick is professor emeritus of history at Columbia.


John F. Hanley; Executive Recruiter, 87
John F. Hanley, who founded an executive recruiting firm in New York, died on March 31 in the St.
Paul Health Care Center in San Diego, Calif.
Mr.
Hanley, who lived in San Diego, was 87.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Philip Hanley, a nephew.


Clinton Tries to Talk Health Care. Tries.
At a televised town meeting, President Clinton tonight came under repeated and sharp questioning from Americans who challenged him about his foreign policy, his candor and even his use of taxpayer money to attend a basketball game.
In an event designed to showcase once again his proposals for crime and health care, Mr.
Clinton found himself forced several times to defend his role in the Whitewater matter and his wife's lucrative investment in commodities futures.


Robert E. Scannell; Corporate Secretary, 54
Robert E. Scannell, the corporate secretary of A.T. &amp; T., died on Monday at Mountainside Hospital in Montclair, N.J.
Mr.
Scannell, who lived in Montclair, was 54.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


In St. Petersburg, a Struggle for Room at the Top
Peter the Great built this city in a monumental act of will nearly three centuries ago.
And in a similar vein, Sergei N. Nikeshin, one of St.
Petersburg's new, rich Russian businessmen, is planning to build himself a 40-story skyscraper high above the city's haunting neo-classical architecture.
The city's intelligentsia wants him stopped.


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page on Monday about Robert L. Bartley, editor of The Wall Street Journal, misidentified a senior news editor of that paper in some copies.
The editor, Alan Murray, is The Journal's Washington bureau chief, not the deputy bureau chief.
A correction of his title, in this space yesterday, was also erroneous.


Minority Students Languish In Special Education System
Radheya Mathews attends ninth grade in a public school for special education students in the Bronx, but it is as if he had dropped out in spirit many years ago.
He sits lethargically in class.
He often walks out.
He has a thick file of suspensions.
But at home, he is a gifted artist who quietly tucks away his fancy pencil drawings in a Timberland shoe box.
To the 15-year-old, the Lincoln Adolescent Youth Achievement Center, the public school that he attends for children labeled emotionally disturbed, is an "asylum," a place with no windows and no hope.


MCI Assigns Spanish Accounts
The MCI Business Markets unit of the MCI Communications Corporation said yesterday that it had named advertising and public relations agencies for international long-distance marketing programs in Spanish aimed at businesses.
Billings were estimated to exceed $2 million.
La Agencia de Orci &amp; Asociados in Los Angeles will create ad campaigns, while Ketchum Asociados in Miami will handle public relations.
Both will work with Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer/Euro RSCG, MCI's general market agency, which will be responsible for campaigns in languages like Mandarin, Cantonese, Vietnamese and Korean.


INSIDE
China Threatens Dissident
China threatened to bring new criminal charges against the country's most prominent dissident for his advocacy of democracy.
Page A12.
Trade and the Markets
The Clinton Administration is now weighing the impact of its trade decisions on the volatile stock and bond markets.
News Analysis.
Page D1.
Italian Alliance Loses Luster
A week after leading a right-wing alliance to victory, Silvio Berlusconi broke off talks with his partners on forming a government.
Page A9.
Cable-Phone Deal Canceled
Southwestern Bell and Cox Enterprises called off a $4.9 billion venture because of cable regulation.
Page D1.
Imported Crayons Recalled
Hundreds of thousands of boxes of crayons imported from China were recalled after the Government said they contained lead.
Page A14.


Wall Street Is Not Main Street
The Dow Jones Industrial stock average soared more than 80 points yesterday, bringing relief to anxious investors.
But the ups and downs of the stock market are more important to them than to other citizens.
Even severe gyrations in the stock market often have no effect on jobs or the rest of the economy.
President Clinton points out what truly matters: The economy is expanding at a brisk pace, employers created a huge number of jobs last month, and inflation is subdued so far.
The White House knows that keeping recovery alive is paramount.
That is why it got upset about the recent run up in long-term interest rates.


A CONVERSATION WITH: Claudia Shear; Blown Sideways Through Lunch
CLAUDIA SHEAR enters the restaurant in a dazzling gold raincoat and a dazzling smile, curls crowned by a baseball cap.
She's as kinetic as she must have been when she carried plates of pasta across this very room for a living, before she was famous.
She is at the elbow of the restaurant's manager, laughing warmly.
This is mildly surprising, considering the scene in her one-woman Off Broadway show, "Blown Sideways Through Life," when she recalls restaurant managers she has known: "Die on the street!" she hisses at one steakhouse lizard.
"Die under a bus!"


CHRONICLE
Two decades ago, when GLORIA STEINEM turned 40, a male reporter told her, "You don't look 40." To which Ms.
Steinem replied, "This is what 40 looks like. We've been lying for so long, who would know."
Her riposte, or at least part of it (she said no one ever quotes the second half) generated so much response the world over that she repeated it on her 50th birthday.


Myitkyina Journal; Peace in Their Time! How Wonderful It Is!
One of the world's oldest wars may be over.
And rice farmers in villages surrounding this northern city say that means that for the first time in their lives they are able to sleep at night without the fear that their sons will be gone by morning.
"Sometimes there was a knock on the door, and the men with guns would take our men and boys away to fight," said Daw Khung Htoi, 30, a farmer in Kawnan, a tiny palm-shaded village 10 miles north of Myitkyina, the region's main market town.


At White House, A Taste of Virtue
TONGUES are wagging throughout Epicuria.
After all, Walter S. Scheib 3d, whom the White House has chosen as the new chef, has spent his career cooking in large hotels and health spas and is the only First Chef to speak enthusiastically about working with a physician to create low-fat dishes for the White House menu.
Is this the first move toward establishing a diet-police state?
Historians say no: the decision is merely a response to the fact that dietary fat has become a demon in American culture.
Like past administrations, this one is aware of the public attitude toward food and has chosen to take a stand that will reflect favorably on its character.


Washington at Work; The Clintons' Health Care Nemesis: The Man Behind 'Harry and Louise'
In the history of the health care wars, "Harry and Louise" may well go down as the killer yuppies.
The couple, 40-something suburbanites fretting about big changes in health care in an advertising campaign for the Health Insurance Association of America, are now widely viewed as one of the most effective attacks to date on the Clinton health plan.
To the Administration and its allies, the ads symbolize an industry desperately fighting change -- and willing to terrify the public to do so.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Navratilova Giddily Gains on Clay  There are not many breakthroughs left in tennis for 37-year-old Martina Navratilova, who is retiring after this year, but she was as giddy as a teen-ager after making one yesterday afternoon in her opening-round match at the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships on Amelia Island, Fla.
Finally, on her third attempt at a 1994 clay-court event after discouraging losses in Houston and Hilton Head, S.C., she won a match.
And she did it handily, defeating Veronika Martinek of Germany in straight sets, 6-1, 6-1.
"It was a big hump for me to get over," said Navratilova, who hadn't suffered two consecutive opening-round losses in 20 years and didn't want to lose three in a row.
"They were going to have to cart me off, call 911," she said.
"I was ready to stay out there all day if I had to." Instead, she needed only 51 minutes.
Besides the third-seeded Navratilova, the top-seeded defending champion, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, dismissed Ruxandra Dragomir of Romania, 6-1, 6-2, and fourth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini, who would like to end her seemingly endless 32-tournament drought by capturing her fourth Bausch &amp; Lomb title, took a step in the right direction by coasting past Janette Husarova of Slovakia, 6-3, 6-4.


Arthur Berken, 62, Oncology Specialist
Dr.
Arthur Berken, a physician who specialized in oncology, died on Saturday at his home in Huntington, L.I.
He was 62.
At his death he was a senior partner in the Mid-Island Internal Medical Consultants group.
He had also been chief of staff and director of the department of medicine at Mid-Island Hospital in Bethpage, L.I.


Review/Television; How U.S. Barred Holocaust Refugees
Since the end of World War II, evidence has accumulated that before and during the war the State Department was in effect a pioneer in Holocaust revisionism.
Tonight's troubling documentary -- "America and the Holocaust: Deceit and Indifference" -- adds the power of pictures and first-hand testimony to accusations that Washington played down the known facts of Nazi persecution of Jews as a matter of policy and prejudice.
This 90-minute offering in "The American Experience" series brings home the effects of the official policy through the experience of Kurt Klein, who came to the United States in 1937 as a 17-year-old refugee from Germany, leaving his parents behind, temporarily, they hoped.
As the narrator recalls the growing threat to European Jewry, from Kristallnacht in November 1938 to the death camps of the 1940's, Mr.
Klein tells how his parents' efforts to flee to America were repeatedly blocked by State Department functionaries.
The pictures of Jews being rounded up and herded to camps, no less painful for their familiarity, make a grim counterpoint to the fate of one family.


Chinese Dissident Facing Possibility of New Charges
China threatened today to bring new criminal charges against the country's most prominent dissident, Wei Jingsheng, for his irrepressible advocacy of democracy and human rights.
Western diplomats here said the seizing of Mr.
Wei reflected acute concerns in the Communist Party leadership about political stability as corruption remained rampant despite a seven-month campaign against it.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stocks roared back in a surge of buying, with traders bidding up the Dow Jones industrial average 82.06 points, or 2.3 percent, to 3,675.41, the biggest one-day rally in more than two years.
The rally was fueled by a lift in the bond market and encouraged by two reports indicating that inflation was in check.  [ Page A1. ]


Vigorous Rally in Bonds Halts Run of Down Days
The bond market's stunning reversal yesterday, which pushed bond prices back up to last Friday's levels, may be a sign that the current down cycle is running out of steam.
The prices of Treasury securities moved sharply higher after a firm opening, on what market analysts described as retail buying and "short covering" by speculators who had bet that prices would keep dropping.
The gains came after two trading sessions that saw prices plunge and interest rates jump to 15-month highs.


Review/Theater: Jackie Mason; Politically Incorrect; It's Mason On Being Incorrect (No Joke)
Jackie Mason has never looked his best on a platform.
In 1989, when he was supporting Rudolph Giuliani in his unsuccessful bid for mayor, the comedian was forced to withdraw from the campaign after making statements perceived as derogatory to blacks.
More recently, he drew the censure of the American Jewish Congress and the Anti-Defamation League for saying on a syndicated radio show that blacks are more prone to violence than whites.
After the Giuliani contretemps, Mr.
Mason issued an apology in which he said: "What's funny on the stage can be insensitive when it's said off the stage and in the world of politics."


U.S. Officials Debate Policy To Halt Serbs
Serbian attacks on a Bosnian town designated by the United Nations as a safe area have set off a debate between the State Department and the Pentagonover the use of force to end the war.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry and Gen.
John M. Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, have said they would not use force at this time to protect the town, Gorazde, even though it has been designated a "safe haven" by the United Nations Security Council.


Corrections
An article on March 3 about the filming of "Murder in the First," a movie based on the life of a 1930's convict named Henri Young, included several erroneous descriptions of events in his life supplied by the film makers.
A March 16 letter from the Federal Bureau of Prisons points out that Mr.
Young went to Alcatraz after serving time in two state prisons for burglary and robbery.
His subsequent Federal crime was bank robbery, not theft from a post office.
He did not commit suicide at Alcatraz in the 1940's; he completed his sentence there in 1954, then served a term in Washington State Penitentiary for murder.
He was paroled there in 1972, and it is not known where he is or whether he is alive.
This corrrection was delayed by checking at The Times.


Teamster Strike Stops Activity Of Big Haulers
Picket lines went up at some trucking terminals early this morning as the teamsters union went on strike against 22 major trucking companies that move about 15 percent of the nation's dry freight.
The strike by about 80,000 truckers, dock workers, delivery drivers and mechanics began at 12:01 A.M. and is the union's first since a nine-day walkout in 1979.
Negotiations between the union and Trucking Management Inc., a negotiating group representing 23 major trucking companies, broke down last week after four months of talks.


How Domingo Does What He Does
"You hear. You are busy. You listen." Placido Domingo is leaning forward on a couch at the Metropolitan Opera house.
His famous tenor voice -- the voice that is just finishing a 25th-anniversary season at the Met -- is almost a whisper.
"And after a while" -- he pauses for emphasis -- "you start to understand what he is telling you."
Mr.
Domingo is explaining how Verdi's Otello begins to be snared by Iago, how his jealousy must grow slowly, almost imperceptibly.
"You explode for just a second in 'Misera mia!' and then you say no, no, I cannot be only suspecting. I have to find the proof. I have to delay. And then," Mr.
Domingo stops and suddenly claps his hands, "the really first, first moment of tremendous fury or desolation is 'Ora e per sempre addio' " -- Otello's farewell to all he has lived for.


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about David Van Vactor, a composer, misidentified two survivors.
Jessica and Eric Goodheart are the stepchildren of his son, David Landreth Van Vactor; they are not the composer's stepchildren.


No Headline
"There really isn't any advantage of staying. If I was to graduate, I probably wouldn't get no job anyway because I didn't learn nothing." RADHEYA MATHEWS, a special education student.  [ A1:5. ]


CHRONICLE
Forget the Prince and Princess of Wales.
Ignore the Duchess of York for a minute.
Scandal has hit another one of Europe's royal families.
Princess MARTHA LOUISE, the 22-year-old daughter of King Harald V of Norway, has been named the corespodent in a divorce action, The Associated Press reported, quoting an article in Tuesday's edition of Dagbladet, an Oslo newspaper.


Simple Justice for Poor Women
Is it too much to ask all states to treat poor women who are victims of rape or incest as decently as more affluent women with regard to abortion?
Half a dozen or more states -- the exact number is in flux -- are balking at a Federal directive to provide abortion services as part of their Medicaid programs.
That directive is designed to implement Congress's agreement to relax the Hyde amendment's longstanding ban on Federal abortion funding.


John A. Heintges; Army General, 81
Lieut.
Gen.
John A. Heintges, who was deputy commander of the Military Assistance Command in Vietnam in the 1960's, died on Thursday at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in Denver.
He was 81 and lived in Colorado Springs.
General Heintges died of complications from Parkinson's disease, the Army said.


Spring Repairs Make for Summer Leisure


Penguin Wins Bidding for Gates Book
A book to be written by William H. Gates on the future of the information revolution has been purchased by the Penguin Group for an advance in excess of $2.5 million.
The book is to be published in November as a Viking hard cover, it was announced yesterday by Peter Mayer, the chief executive officer of the Penguin Group.
Mr.
Gates, who is the chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, had been asking publishers for an advance of $2.5 million, a first printing of 500,000 copies and a guarantee that the publisher would set aside $125,000 for marketing.
Mr.
Mayer declined to give financial details, but he said Mr.
Gates's "minimal requirements" had been met.
Jonathan Lazarus, a Microsoft vice president, conducted the negotiations for Mr.
Gates.


Fight Over Schools Budget Intensifies
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani dug in their heels yesterday in the tug-of-war over the New York City schools budget, with Mr.
Cortines dismissing as unrealistic the Mayor's demand that 2,500 jobs be cut and the Mayor pushing a plan to dismantle the Board of Education.
Instead of the drastic administrative cuts the Mayor has demanded, Mr.
Cortines said yesterday that he could meet Mr.
Giuliani's budget targets largely through increased state school aid and financial credits that the Board of Education negotiated with City Hall last summer.


Nets Lean On Their Bench, Celtics Fall From Playoff Race
Instead of pushing the panic button when Boston made a run at handing the Nets their third straight defeat at home, Coach Chuck Daly calmly fended off the challenge with his bench tonight.
The move helped shape a 120-94 rout by New Jersey that illuminated the Nets' playoff picture and dropped the Celtics out of the post-season for the first time in 15 years.
Jayson Williams came off that Nets' bench to score a game and a career high of 19 points, making 9 of 15 shots from the field.
He also pulled down 7 rebounds, 5 on defense.


Don't Discourage Harassment Cases
To the Editor:
The effects of a genuine case of sexual harassment are devastating.
Yet, I believe, "Sexual Harassment: Stories From the Field" (The Week in Review, March 27) seeks to minimize or ridicule those effects.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 1
Mar. 25
Apr. 2
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
6.9
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
2.9
Gasoline stocks
214.4
217.5
228.6
Distillate stocks
101.7
101.8
97.9
Crude imports, daily
6.8
5.8
5.7
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.9
1.8
Crude stocks
337.0
335.8
342.7
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
87.7
86.2
88.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Prospects Seem Dim for Pact On Imperiled Species of Fish
Talks to stave off the destruction of the world's fisheries made modest progress at a recent three-week session, but prospects appear dim for a comprehensive accord to conserve endangered species.
"Recent collapses of fish stocks in different parts of the world underscore the urgency of our task," the conference chairman, Satya Nandan of Fiji, told weary delegates at the closing gathering on Thursday.
"However, the conference still has a long way to go before it can successfully complete its work." The 80-nation conference has set August as the deadline for an agreement.


Theater in Review
Brothers of the Brush  Irish Arts Center  553 West 51st Street Clinton By Jimmy Murphy; directed by Nye Heron; set by David Raphel; lighting by Mauricio Saavedra Pefaur; sound and musical arrangements by Nico Kean; costumes by Anne Reilly; original song by Don Rosler and Jay Ward; production stage manager, Elizabeth English.
Produced by Don Kelly and Bernadette Quigley.
Presented by the Irish Arts Center, Jim Sheridan, chairman; Mr.
Heron, artistic director; Marianne Delaney, executive director.
WITH: Ronan Carr, Mickey Kelly, Paul McGrane and Paul Ronan.


Micron Technology
Micron Technology saw its shares rise for the fifth consecutive session yesterday.
The Boise, Idaho, company makes computer products for work stations.
Technology stocks like Micron have been recent favorites of investors.


Change in Method to Report AIDS Cases
New York State health officials say they will expand their system of reporting AIDS cases to try to avoid losing an estimated $9 million a year in Federal money, but advocates for people with H.I.V. say they fear a threat to confidentiality.
The State Health Commissioner, Dr.
Mark R. Chassin, said yesterday that the department would require laboratories to report suspected AIDS cases based on the results of a blood test commonly given to people with H.I.V.


No One Tried to Get Clintons Off Hook
To the Editor:
Mark Twain once said, "A lie gets halfway around the world before the truth has time to put on its boots." I am writing to correct serious factual misstatements in a March 25 news article and March 26 editorial on the Whitewater matter.
Both stated that "Treasury officials" tried to pressure Federal investigators in Kansas City into agreeing to get the Clintons "off the hook" by telling Special Counsel Robert Fiske that there was no connection between Whitewater and Madison Guaranty.


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


British Inquiry Into Iraqi Sales Shakes Major
After nearly 11 months of testimony from 166 witnesses, the official inquiry into the Government's handling of arms-industry sales to Iraq has completed the bulk of its hearings, having jolted the already shaky political ground beneath Prime Minister John Major and his Government.
The final report on the inquiry will not be ready until late this year, and several more witnesses may be called in May.
But the public hearings have tarnished some political reputations, burnished others, and raised questions for the Conservative Government on the sale of arms-making equipment and weapons components to President Saddam Hussein's Government in the years before Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990.


Reds' Dibble to Have Shoulder Surgery
Reliever ROB DIBBLE will have surgery next week on the rotator cuff in his right shoulder and will be lost for about three months, the Cincinnati Reds said yesterday.


Ames Department Stores Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Jan 29


Looking Beyond Family to Aid the Elderly
Beverly Wagner has logged hundreds of hours on the telephone, flown regularly from Michigan to New York, and missed dozens of days of work, all trying to arrange care for her 94-year-old aunt, who lives in Manhattan and is losing the ability to care for herself.
After failing to persuade her aunt to move from her apartment of 50 years near Lincoln Center into her lakeside house in Michigan, Mrs.
Wagner finally hired Fine and Newcombe Associates, a geriatric guidance and family counseling service in Manhattan.
Fine and Newcombe is one of hundreds of companies that have sprung up over the last several years to help people coordinate and monitor the affairs of aging relatives who do not live nearby.


Pigs Can Fly and Arkansas Could Repeat
As much as the question always seems premature when the uniforms have not yet been removed on the final night of the college basketball season, it inevitably barges its way into the thoughts of the players, a verbal offensive foul.
The national champion Arkansas Razorbacks were in their dressing room at Charlotte Coliseum Monday night, acknowledging that not even the personal congratulations of President Clinton had caused their new status to sink in yet.
Their 76-72 victory over Duke was as fresh as their dried sweat when Corliss Williamson, having just posed with the championship plaque, was asked about next season.


National Realty L.P.  reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Sports of The Times; Last Straw Is Coming For Darryl
"WHY don't you come room with me?" Darryl Strawberry once asked Bill Robinson, when both were with the Mets a bunch of years ago.
Strawberry's first wife, Lisa, had gone through the revolving door that was their marriage at the time.
Strawberry didn't relish the thought of being alone.
Robinson, his family home in south Jersey, had a small place near Shea Stadium.
The team's hitting instructor was nearly old enough to be Strawberry's father, that salient point not crossing Robinson's mind.
He thought Strawberry was joking.


Yankees Write the Biggest Check When Paying Their Major Leaguers
The Yankees, who hope to overtake the Toronto Blue Jays in the won-lost standing this season, have already supplanted them at the top of the salary standing.
Based on a study by The New York Times of contract information obtained from management and player sources, the Yankees had an opening-day average salary of $1,721,744, highest among the 28 major league clubs.
The Blue jays, who opened the season No. 1 a year ago, are fifth this year with an average of $1,498,667.


Woman Paid Airline Fare, Detectives Say
A Long Island woman, who vanished from a shopping mall 12 days ago, apparently purchased a plane ticket to Canada a week before she disappeared, the Nassau County police said today.
Michelle Abbatiello, a 23-year-old resident of Westbury, is believed to have met with a travel agent in Glen Cove on March 18 and purchased a round-trip Air Canada ticket to Montreal, said Lieut.
Frank Guidice.
She paid $246 for the ticket, with departure from La Guardia Airport on March 25 and the return scheduled for April 4.


Tom Blackburn; Squadron Commander, 81
Tom Blackburn, a retired Navy captain who commanded the Jolly Rogers fighter squadron in the Pacific in World War II, died on March 21 at his home in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 81.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Mark, of San Francisco.


To Mets' Smith, It Feels (Sort Of) Like Spring
Pete Smith had to blow on his right hand between pitches so that he could feel the seams on the baseball.
It was 30-odd degrees and the windchill factor was in the single digits when Smith made his Mets pitching debut at Wrigley Field this afternoon.
He showed very few signs that the cold bothered him.
The Mets' most consistent pitcher in spring training, Smith threw seven smart and successful innings against the Cubs, his repertory well-suited to the 25 mile-an-hour winds blowing toward the plate.
He gave up nine hits and two walks, but used an excellent changeup to stifle the Cubs' top batters in key situations and help lead the Mets to a 6-2 victory.


Albany Talks Bogging Down Over Tax Cuts
A sharp policy disagreement over whose taxes to cut has emerged as a central obstacle to a new state budget, now five days late, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders made clear today.
Five days after saying they had the outlines of a new budget, several issues that from the start had been viewed as vital were clearly still in dispute.
In addition to the tax fight, budget negotiators were arguing over how to allocate aid to schools and how to divide construction money that New York City wants to repair schools and that other communities want for swimming pools and minor-league baseball stadiums.


Egg Fall


Finding the Absolutely Perfect Actor: The High-Stress Business of Casting
Marta Kauffman and David Crane are sitting together on a long white couch, trying to find Joey.
When they sent out the "breakdown" for the casting call, they described him as a "handsome, smug, macho guy in his 20's" who loves "women, sports, women, New York, women," and most of all, himself.
Now they are listening to a man who would be Joey philosophize in a smug, macho way about women and ice cream.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-13  SERBS PUSH INTO GORAZDE  Serbian attackers poured through breaches in army lines around Gorazde, a Muslim town in eastern Bosnia that is jammed with refugees.
People in surrounding areas fled as Serbs set fire to their villages.
A1  FOR U.S., AN OPTION NOT TAKEN  Reviving a debate over use of force, some State Department officials faulted the Defense Secretary William Perry for saying publicly that the United States would not use force to protect Gorazde.
A8


What Price Data? A New Fee Plan
How should information be priced in the information age?
That is the central riddle of the digital revolution.
Proposing an answer, Dialog Information Systems Inc., one of the largest publishers of electronic data bases for corporate librarians, will announce a new fee structure on Wednesday that departs from current industry pricing.


A Drama In 2 Parts Propels Islanders
With one dramatic goal to force overtime and a more dramatic one to finish it, the Islanders rallied behind Ray Ferraro and Benoit Hogue to beat the Washington Capitals, 4-3, at the USAir Arena tonight and land a strong counterpunch in their fight for the Eastern Conference's final playoff spot.
The 2 points the Islanders earned for the victory gave them 77 for the season and vaulted them over Philadelphia into ninth place in the race for the eighth spot in the conference.
The Florida Panthers, who picked up a point from a 3-3 tie with Quebec tonight, are 2 points ahead of the Islanders, with four games to play.
New York has five games left, including one with Florida.


Hands Reach Out Between Communities
To the Editor:
In "A Liberalism of Heart and Spine" (Op-Ed, March 27), Henry Louis Gates Jr. proposes moving beyond a "politics of identity" to a process of "identification" among communities, with an increase in "shared humanity." I concur fully.
But this process is already well under way at the grass roots.


3 Killed as Fire Sweeps South Bronx Building


Personal Health
"BREAST is Best." This slogan promoting breastfeeding has been widely publicized.
But the practice, which peaked among American mothers in 1982 after a decades-long decline, is far from commonplace.
According to periodic surveys, women who are young and unemployed, who live on low incomes and who lack college educations are the least likely to attempt to breastfeed, and if they do try, are the most likely to abandon it before their babies are 6 months old.
Babies of such mothers face the highest risk of health problems that could best be countered by starting life on breast milk.


Russia Chafes at Force Limits
Russia, having withdrawn its forces from Eastern Europe, wants to redeploy some of them near its southern borders, especially in the troubled Caucasus region.
But that would exceed the force limits that were negotiated before the breakup of the Soviet Union and are due to take effect in November 1995.
Moscow has asked the U.S. and other signatories to rewrite the treaty to permit the redeployment.
Washington is right to oppose it, since more Russian troops in the region would increase insecurity throughout Eastern Europe.





Italy's Victors Can Surely Govern
To the Editor:
"Italy's 3-Headed Monster" (Op-Ed, March 31), Prof.
W.
V.
Harris's analysis of the March 27-28 Italian elections, confuses two unconnected arguments: one based on largely groundless accusations of illegitimacy, both ideological and ethical, against the conservative forces that won the elections; the other based on the real problems faced by Italy.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on Friday about Video Store Magazine misstated the given name of its new publisher.
He is Don Rosenberg, not Dan.


A Time in China to Tend Graves


Miscellany
*
Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam Partnerships, Singapore, formed a joint venture with Rediffusion Advertising, Bombay, formalizing an eight-year affiliate relationship.
Dentsu, Y.&amp; R. will hold a 40 percent stake in the new agency, to be renamed Rediffusion, Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam, when Government approvals are obtained. *
Zeidner Research Group, a marketing research company, has been formed by Martin Zeidner in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was previously president of Topline Research, New York.


U.S. Policy Debate on Bosnia
Serb attacks on a Bosnian town have caused tension in Washington between those who want to foreclose the use of force and those who want to keep U.S. options open.
Page A8.


Jazz Festival To Include Five Free Concerts
The 1994 JVC Jazz Festival will saunter through town from June 24 through July 2, bringing jazz legends and lesser-knowns, international stars and festival favorites to New York's customary concert stops: Carnegie Hall, Avery Fisher Hall and Town Hall.
And for jazz fans short on cash, there will also be five free concerts, at Bryant Park in mid-Manhattan and Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
"It is difficult for anyone to afford the cost of jazz in nightclubs and concert halls these days," George Wein, the founder and director of the festival, said yesterday in a statement that announced the program.


Elliot H. Goodwin; Republican Leader, 77
Elliot H. Goodwin, a Republican Party leader in Manhattan in the 1950's, died on Saturday at his home in Glen Cove, L.I.
He was 77.
The cause was emphysema, said his wife, Hope.
Mr.
Goodwin served as president of the Ninth Assembly District Republican Club starting in 1955.
In 1958 he lost a primary fight with John V. Lindsay in the race for their party's nomination for the seat in the 17th Congressional District.
Mr.
Lindsay won the seat in the general election.


A Feast for 4 On a $20 Bill
IN cooking, like fashion, elegance does not always require a lot of money.
In both pursuits, a savvy shopper with imagination and refined taste can dazzle the crowd on a budget.
This idea came to mind when I was presented a challenge: to prepare a stylish dinner party for four -- an appetizer, a main course with two vegetable dishes and a dessert -- for $20 or less.
Of course, anybody can toss together a pile of pasta with vegetables, or a vat of chili con carne, for little.
But my mandate was to prepare something attractive and festive -- something that I would proudly serve to guests at my home.


Global Chorus: Market Was Due for Plunge
Walter G. Murphy Jr. scrutinized the performance of the world's stock markets this year and chuckled, "I've got a one-word description for everything: down."
And most of the world's markets did indeed go down, with a few exceptions.
Still, many analysts who surveyed the sinkage regarded it with a certain evangelical belief that the world was experiencing an overdue correction.


Leopold Oberst, 75, Management Expert For New York City
Leopold P. Oberst, a New York Telephone Company executive who was on loan to City Hall as a management specialist and efficiency expert in the administrations of Mayors Abraham D. Beame and Edward I. Koch, died on Saturday at Martin Memorial Medical Center in Palm City, Fla.
Mr.
Oberst, who lived in Palm City, was 75.
The cause of death was lung cancer, said his wife, Kathleen.


Books of The Times; Fears of the Puritans, the Appeal of the Indians
The Unredeemed Captive
A Family Story From Early America
By John Demos
Illustrated. 316 pages. Alfred A. Knopf.
It is 1704.
England and France are at war, and that means their North American colonies, New England and New France, are at war too.
Year after year they battle and negotiate, not only with each other but also with the many Indian groups -- Abenaki, Iroquois, Mohican, Algonquin -- who also inhabit the continent and who live in peace and at war with each other.


Guatemala Retains Rights
President Ramiro de Leon Carpio of Guatemala postponed a decision today to suspend constitutional guarantees but said he was still considering severe measures to end widespread violence that has included attacks on Americans.
Panic has spread across the country since unsubstantiated rumors arose that Americans were stealing Guatemalan infants to sell their vital organs for transplants in the United States.
Many of Guatemala's political leaders are pressuring Mr. de Leon to suspend some civil rights on the ground that violence and political instability have made the country nearly ungovernable.


U.S. Peace Effort in Bosnia Withers Under Serb Attack
After six weeks of rapid progress that raised hopes for an overall Bosnian settlement, American attempts to resolve the Balkan conflict are floundering, beset by a worsening military situation and a diplomatic impasse over what territorial concessions are needed for peace.
United States officials said that a Bosnian Serb offensive against the Muslim-held enclave of Gorazde, in eastern Bosnia, and attacks on Muslim civilians in Serbian-held territory in northwestern Bosnia have renew serious questions about whether the Serbs are interested in a settlement.


METRO DIGEST
SPECIAL EDUCATION'S MINORITY TRAP
Nearly two decades after Congress passed a law requiring public schools to educate all children with disabilities, providing extra money for smaller classes, special assistance for a variety of disabilities and individual attention, many education advocates say New York City's special education system, which involves 130,000 students, insures a second-class education, particularly for black boys, becoming a trap that incubates failure.
At the heart of the issue is compelling evidence that black and Hispanic students are harmed, not helped, by special education.
A1.
CARING FOR AGING PARENTS, AT A DISTANCE
Many people who must minister to elderly relatives from a distance are turning to referral services that provide information about care of the elderly, and to geriatric care managers who, for a fee, will shoulder many of the tasks families usually take on.
A1.


East Hampton Pulls the Plug On a Franchise For Cable TV
It wasn't the reception on their television sets that left officials in the Town of East Hampton frustrated and angry; it was the reception they were getting from their cable television company.
Over the last year, they said, the company had raised rates, reduced the number of channels in its lowest-priced package to 10, from 23, and as officials here see it, treated their complaints with arrogant dismissiveness.
And so, at a meeting last week, the officials took an action other communities have contemplated but few have tried: they pulled the plug on their cable company, revoking its franchise agreement and effectively ordering it to stop providing service to the town's 11,000 subscribers as of Oct. 1.


Review/Music; New Works to Entice New Audiences
New Music for Young Ensembles, an organization founded nearly 20 years ago by Claire Rosengarten, seeks to create a repertory of contemporary works for ensembles of intermediate abilities, thus widening the scope of new music for both performances and audiences.
On Monday night, the Bronx Arts Ensemble played works by the 1993 and 1994 winners of the organization's annual composing competition; the soprano Marni Nixon gave a mini-recital in and around them.
Rodney Lister's "Bird of Night," scored for piano trio, is an appealing nocturnal movement in gently flowing but tricky 6/8 rhythm.
Robert O. Johnson's "Mesas," for woodwind quintet, alternates plangent sound masses with nervously pulsing rhythmic figures.
Frank E. Warren's "Drei Lieder," for mezzo-soprano, violin and cello, is based on poems by Avenarius, George and Mombert, all set by Webern and Berg early in their careers; Mr.
Warren's idiom is atmospherically atonal without echoing the Viennese originals directly.
Joe Alexander's "Sonarequasta," for flute, clarinet, viola and piano, was a sturdy neoclassical construction (divided into a Sonatina and Fugue) with strong echoes of Hindemith.


SERBIAN ATTACKS BREACH DEFENSES OF MUSLIM TOWN
Serbian nationalist fighters poured through breaches in the Bosnian Army defense lines around the United Nations-declared "safe area" of Gorazde on Monday night and today, setting fire to a dozen villages and forcing more than a thousand Muslims to flee, United Nations officials here said.
"The Serbs are going for it," one United Nations official said.
"They are going to at least try to take over the eastern end of the pocket and push the Muslims over the river," a reference to the Drina, which bisects the area.


TV Film on Holocaust Is Criticized as Unfair to Roosevelt
Several officials, scholars and members of the Roosevelt family asserted today that a PBS program to be broadcast Wednesday night portrays President Franklin Delano Roosevelt as contributing to what the producer says was indifference by the United States to the Holocaust.
The program, part of the "American Experience" series, is called "America and the Holocaust: Deceit and Indifference" and examines the political, social and economic forces of the 1930's and 40's that affected the United States' reaction to the plight of European Jews.  [ Review, C18. ]


Henry Gemmill; Newspaper Editor, 76
Henry Gemmill, a former managing editor of The Wall Street Journal, died on Sunday in Washington.
He was 76 and had homes in Washington and Franklin, Me.
His family said the cause was heart failure.


Polonia Brings Spark But Some Pauses Loom
One inning.
It took Luis Polonia only that long in the first game of the season to provide a glimpse of the kind of electricity he can bring to Yankee Stadium and the kind of chaos he can inflict on Yankee opponents.
Get to first base, steal a base and then scamper home on a hit or an error or whatever.
That is Polonia's basic strategy.
While such a plan for a leadoff man is not exactly re-creating the finer points of baseball, it is new to the Yankees because they lumbered to a major league-low 39 stolen bases last year.
Polonia might steal that many by the All-Star break.


National Western Life Insurance reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Just Floating Away With Title Thoughts
It is 7:30 in the morning and Nolan Richardson is already up.
Not just up, but sharp and ready to go.
The Arkansas coach, smartly dressed in a gray suit, sat in a medium-sized ballroom facing television cameras, microphones, pens and pads, talking about what it meant to win the biggest, greatest game of his career.


Food Notes
Newman's Own Daughter
Nell Newman has a head start on most fledgling food entrepreneurs.
A daughter of Paul Newman, she has been able to piggyback her new company, Newman's Own Organics, onto the successful food operation (Newman's Own) built by her father and his partners since 1982.
The label of Newman's Own Organics has a picture of Ms.
Newman and her father wearing farmers' clothing and posing in the style of the Grant Wood painting "American Gothic."
And like her father, she will donate the after-tax profits of the company to charity.
Mr.
Newman's company has given away $56 million.


Unifirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
On our way to dinner the other evening I decided to get some cash.
We pulled up past the drive-up windows in front of the bank entrance.
Another car had arrived moments before us; I got to the door almost simultaneously with this A.T.M. customer, who had already brandished his card into the door-lock slot.
I held the door open for him and followed him inside.


Leiter's Son Dies From Spinal Disorder
The 9-month-old son of California Angels pitcher MARK LEITER died yesterday in Anaheim, Calif., from a rare form of spinal muscular atrophy.


Commonwealth Edison Co. reports earnings for 12mos to Feb 28


Corporate Priorities
To the Editor:
I was amazed at a quotation from a Lehman Brothers analyst in "Novell Acquisitions Hinge on Stock Price Fluctuation" (Business Day, March 24), concerning the networking giant's planned acquisition of the Wordperfect Corporation and the Quattro Pro spreadsheet business of Borland International Inc.: "The motto at Novell is customers first, employees second and shareholders third."


Hartmarx Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Lorenzo Plan For Airline Is Rejected
The prolonged effort by Frank Lorenzo to start a low-fare airline on the East Coast appeared increasingly quixotic yesterday after the Department of Transportation rejected his application because of safety and regulatory compliance problems during his stewardship of Eastern and Continental airlines.
Mr.
Lorenzo said yesterday that he would take the decision to the United States Court of Appeals today and repeated his charges that the agency was influenced by politicians trying to appease labor leaders who have long viewed Mr.
Lorenzo as Public Enemy No. 1.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac, is selling $50 million of medium-term notes due in 1996 at 100 to yield 5.59 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The issue is noncallable.


Arms Ban Is Defied at Rally by Zulu Party
More than 20,000 Zulus armed with traditional weapons such as clubs, spears and machetes marched today in support of their King's demand for a sovereign state and in defiance of the emergency decree that prohibits the carrying of weapons.
The march was meant as a show of force not only to protest the Government's proclamation of a state of emergency in Natal province but also the shooting deaths last week of Zulu marchers in Johannesburg.


Market Place; A hefty dividend lures investors to a stock that is sure to plunge.
THERE is a difference between return on capital and return of capital.
But too often investors, searching desperately for yield, lose sight of it.
An example of that shows up in IP Timberlands, a timber partnership run by International Paper that trades on the New York Stock Exchange.
If you look at the stock tables, you will see that it pays dividends of $2.88 a year.
At yesterday's closing price of $27.375, that works out to a yield of 10.5 percent.
In fact, last year IP Timberlands had an extra payment of $4 a share.
Factor that in, and you get an annual payout rate of 25 percent.


Prosecutor Identifies Her Brother as a Rape Suspect


Cauthen Nominated to Thoroughbred Hall
STEVE CAUTHEN, the only jockey to ride winners of the Kentucky Derby and English Derby, was nominated for the National Thoroughbred Racing Hall of Fame.


Roof-Garden Visions, Revisions and Revisions
THERE'S a mockingbird that wakes me up in the morning now, and sometimes, when I am still in that mist that lies between the conscious and the unconscious mind, I think I am in the country.
Compared with my old city pad, I'm deep in the country.
My old place was about as far west in Greenwich Village as you could get.
From the roof of my fifth-floor walk-up, I could watch freighters move down the Hudson River and the sun set over New Jersey.


Statements on Retirement Of Blackmun From Court
Following are remarks by President Clinton and Justice Harry A. Blackmun at a White House news conference today to announce the retirement of Mr.
Blackmun from the Supreme Court.
President Clinton:
Good morning.
It is my duty and my honor on behalf of the people of the United States of America to thank Justice Blackmun for his lifetime of service to our nation.
I have received his letter announcing his intention to step down from the Supreme Court.
In so doing, he will step up into our history.


Review/Rock; Allman Band Explores The Realm Of the Guitar
On a good night, the Allman Brothers can make the sound of guitars and jazz-influenced rock improvisation into something exciting, an expression of a type of American exploration.
On a bad night they can make a listener thank punk rock for plowing guitar-playing windbags six feet under.
The band's show at the Beacon Theater on Tuesday night veered between the two extremes, and for the most part the audience loved it all.
Punk rock may have completely altered the rock landscape, but the Allman Brothers, who finish an eight-night, sold-out stand at the Beacon this weekend, don't seem to care, and neither does the band's adoring audience.
The group sells the sound of the guitar, and all the freedom and wildness that, in rock, the instrument implies.
Over the years the band has been transformed from a sleek and swinging group to something more ponderous.
The jazz influences have given way to a rock heaviness, and at Tuesday's show the music had its bloated and slow moments, sounding thick around the middle.
At times Warren Haynes, who has completely absorbed the sound of Duane Allman, the group's original guitarist, pulled together solos of melodic beauty; he and the group's other guitarist, Dickey Betts, aren't afraid of using major scales to produce melodies.
At other times he just kept making the same point over and over.


Brazil Competes in World Textile and Clothing Industry


Dow Up 4.32 as Most Indexes Barely Move
After the largest one-day gain in more than two years on Tuesday, the stock market closed essentially unchanged yesterday, almost a mirror image of the bond market, which despite some large swings, also closed little changed from the previous session.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose by 4.32 points, to 3,679.73, but the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index declined by 0.24 point, to 448.05.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index dropped 0.23 point, to 750.72.


Transactions
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Named Steve Palermo assistant to the chairman of the executive council.
American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Signed Rene Gonzales, infielder, to a minor-league contract and assigned him to Charlotte of the International League.


Observations of a Rainy Day


Strawberry Now Waits
Darryl Strawberry has been evaluated by doctors and now awaits word on their recommendation for treatment of what he has said is a drug problem.
Gene Orza, associate general counsel of the players association, said yesterday that Strawberry met with Dr.
Joel Solomon and Dr.
Robert Millman in Manhattan, then returned to Los Angeles Tuesday night.
"I expect the evaluation process to be completed soon," Orza said.
"The doctors usually act pretty quickly."


Giuliani, Still Seeking School Cuts, Gets Personal With Recalcitrant Cortines
Escalating a war of words over New York City's school system, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani leveled an unusually personal attack yesterday on Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, accusing him of "protecting the bureaucracy" at the Board of Education and hurting schoolchildren.
Mr.
Giuliani once again insisted that the Chancellor's budget proposals -- which included cutting 678 full-time positions, eliminating more than 500 vacant jobs and receiving increased state aid -- fell far short of the Mayor's goal of cutting 2,500 administrators from the board's headquarters at 110 Livingston Street in Brooklyn.


Excerpts From Major Opinions
Following are excerpts from Justice Harry A. Blackmun's opinions: Abortion
From the majority opinion in Roe v. Wade, 1973:


CHUBB AND HEALTHSOURCE IN H.M.O. JOINT VENTURE
The Chubb Life Insurance Company of America and Healthsource Inc. said yesterday that they had formed a joint venture to operate a health maintenance organization in New York City and six nearby counties.
Stephen A. Rogers, president of the new H.M.O., Chubbhealth, said it would start by offering managed health care to employers with 250,000 employees who are already insured by Chubb.
Entering the New York market is "a major event for Healthsource, which had about $300 million in premiums last year, " Michael M. LeConey, an analyst at RAS Securities, said.
Chubb Life Insurance is a unit of the Chubb Corporation, based in Warren, N.J.
Healthsource is a managed health care company based in Concord, N.H.


Penguins Sit Pretty, but Devils Sink
Playing only his 20th game of the season, Mario Lemieux put on a dazzling demonstration tonight that Pittsburgh fans have been missing this season.
Despite being shadowed by Claude Lemieux, the Devils' pesky agitator, Lemieux scored two goals and had one assist, leading the Penguins to a 3-1 triumph over New Jersey at the Civic Arena that virtually assured the Penguins of the Northeast Division title.


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about a Russian plane crash on March 22 located the approximate site incorrectly.
It was near the Siberian town of Mezhdurechensk, near the Mongolian border, not near a town of the same name about 700 miles northeast of Moscow.


Corrections
An article in some editions yesterday about reports of Justice Harry A. Blackmun's plans to retire reversed two digits of his birthdate.
He was born on Nov. 12, 1908.


Reviews/Fashion; From DKNY, Eclecticism For Mothers, Daughters
THE fall fashion shows began Wednesday morning in the tent city that looks like a medieval encampment set up in Bryant Park, mystifying both tourists and New Yorkers.
The signs explaining that the park is the site of Seventh on Sixth were useful only to those who knew that Seventh Avenue is the heart of the garment center and that manufacturers have banded together, under the auspices of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, to stage their fall openings in a common location, right behind the New York Public Library.
Donna Karan's DKNY collection provided frenetic energy and good clothes, establishing it as the season's first hit.
Before the tents are quietly folded away next Wednesday (Ms. Karan's signature collection is to be the last shown), 59 fall collections will have been introduced.
Last October, the first time they were erected, to present the spring fashion collections, there were 42 shows.
The tents were deemed a success.


CPI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 5


Cyprien Ntaryamira, 39, Tried to End Burundi's Strife
Tribal warfare brought Cyprien Ntaryamira to power in Burundi and dominated his brief presidency, which reportedly ended yesterday when the plane in which he was traveling was shot down in the neighboring country of Rwanda.
Mr.
Ntaryamira, 39, was the second member of the majority Hutu tribe to become head of state since Burundi gained independence from Belgium in 1962.
The first was his predecessor, Melchior Ndadaye, who was assassinated on Oct. 21, along with several members of his cabinet, by factions of the minority Tutsi tribe, which has dominated the Government for most of the country's modern history, and which still dominates the military.


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Kondoleon Memorial
A memorial service for the playwright Harry Kondoleon is to be held on Monday at 5 P.M. at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Among those scheduled to participate are Robert Brustein, John Guare, David Henry Hwang and Wendy Wasserstein.
Mr.
Kondoleon died on March 16 at the age of 39.
Information: (212) 598-7163.


2 Africa Leaders Die, U.N. Says; Rocket May Have Downed Plane
The Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi, two small and troubled Central African countries, were killed today in a plane crash, United Nations officials said.
Rwandan diplomats said the plane had been hit by gunfire or a rocket as it approached the airport at Kigali, the capital of Rwanda.
The deaths of the two Presidents, Juvenal Habyarimana of Rwanda and Cyprien Ntaryamira of Burundi, were first announced by radio stations in the two countries, then by the French Embassy in Kigali, United Nations officials said.


Monk Leaves Redskins
ART MONK, pro football's career receiving leader, has declined the team's latest offer and will leave the team, the Washington Redskins said yesterday.
The team made a firm offer to Monk, 36, on March 11, urging him to return, but he turned it down.


New Role at New Yorker
The New Yorker has appointed Pamela Maffei McCarthy a senior vice president.
Ms.
McCarthy, the former managing editor of Vanity Fair magazine and former executive editor of Esquire, will also continue as The New Yorker's managing editor, a title she has held since 1992.
In her new role, Ms.
McCarthy will retain all her editorial responsibilities while playing a larger part in The New Yorker's corporate management.
As managing editor of Vanity Fair for eight years, Ms.
McCarthy worked closely with Tina Brown, the editor in chief, and followed Ms.
Brown to The New Yorker when Ms.
Brown was named editor two years ago.


Casillas Joins Chiefs
The Kansas City Chiefs signed TONY CASILLAS, an unrestricted free agent, to a four-year, $6 million contract and released running back HARVEY WILLIAMS, a former No. 1 draft pick.


Lois R. Murphy; Lawyer, 49
Lois R. Murphy, an expert on environmental law and a partner in the New York law firm of Cahill, Gordon &amp; Reindel, died on Tuesday in Manhattan.
She was 49 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was an acute respiratory incident, her family said.


'Secretary' Has Lost Much of Its Stigma
To the Editor:
As the publicity and public relations chairwoman for the New York City chapter of Professional Secretaries International, I am responding to "It's Time to Do Something About This Sexist Term 'Secretary' " by Seymour Durst (letter, March 27).


44 ARE WOUNDED
In the most serious terrorist attack inside Israel since 1989, 8 people were killed and 44 others wounded today when a Palestinian suicide bomber blew up his car beside a bus in this northern Israeli town.
The explosion turned the bus into a storm of flying metal and flames, slashing some victims to pieces and horribly burning others.


Essay; Crime in Singapore
The verb torture is defined in Merriam-Webster's Tenth Collegiate as "the infliction of intense pain (as from burning, crushing or wounding) to punish, coerce, or afford sadistic pleasure."
The dictatorship of Singapore has found an American teen-ager guilty of spray-painting cars and sentenced him to four months in prison, a $2,000 fine -- and torture.


Dow Found Silicone Danger in 1975 Study, Lawyers Say
After sifting through two million pages of Dow Corning documents, lawyers representing breast implant patients in a class-action suit say they have uncovered a 1975 study by the company showing that the silicone in the implants harms the immune system of mice.
The study found that a particular type of silicone gel in purified form, called D4, is highly toxic to the immune system.
Mice that received various doses of the silicone temporarily lost their ability to fight off disease.


Accounts
*
Chipcom Corp., Southborough, Mass., has asked seven agencies to compete for its account, including the incumbent, Spiessl Kitchen Vosik, Boston.
The others are: Devine &amp; Pearson, Quincy, Mass.; Duval Woglom Brueckner &amp; Partners, Boston; IQJ/Cipolla Group, Boston; Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly, Providence, R.I.; Mason &amp; Madison, Bethany, Conn., and Pagano Schenck &amp; Kay, also of Providence.
A final decision is expected by mid-May. *
Claire's Stores Inc., Chicago, to Graphtech Group Ltd., New York, to handle the account of the women's accessories retailer, previously at Hal Riney &amp; Partners, Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $4.5 million.


U.S. Officials Fear Ship Is New Smuggling Wave
A freighter unloaded more than 100 illegal immigrants from China off the coast of Virginia last month, and Federal officials said yesterday that they fear its arrival may be the first in a spring and summer wave of ships laden with immigrants headed for New York City.
After a splash of attention to immigrant smuggling when the Golden Venture ran aground off Queens last June, some immigration officials said yesterday that they worried that Federal efforts were falling short of what was needed to protect the coastlines during the coming warm season.


Review/Television; Settling In Amid Appalachia's Trials
After barreling into the top 10 with its special two-hour premiere on Sunday, "Christy" begins a weekly run tonight in its regular CBS time slot, on Thursdays at 8.
Family drama, overwhelmed by family sitcoms until recently, is alive and kicking.
"Christy," based on Catherine Marshall's best-selling 1967 novel, actually a barely disguised biography of her mother, is the story of a 19-year-old woman, Christy Huddleston (Kellie Martin), who leaves life in a Southern city to teach children in the Great Smoky Mountains.
Cutter Gap, the fictional name for Del Rio, Tenn., is home to about 50 families, most of them quite literally dirt poor.
Ignorance and superstition abound.
Change is suspect and often resented because, as folks see it, "that's just the way things is."


Russia Blocks U.N. Criticism of Serbs' Attack
Russia, the traditional ally of the Serbs, has blocked a weak Security Council statement criticizing the Serbs for their attack on the United Nations-declared "safe area" around Gorazde, in eastern Bosnia, and for their expulsion of Muslims and Croats from their homes in northern Bosnia in a new round of "ethnic cleansing."
After two days of debate, Security Council members were unable tonight to agree on a statement condemning the Serbs.


Calendar: Films, Crafts and Gardens
Architecture on Film  Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
A film series about New York architecture and urban design starts tomorrow and continues on April 22 and May 6 and 20.
Tomorrow's program includes a 1921 film inspired by "Manhatta," a Walt Whitman poem, and a portrait of the Verrazano Narrows Bridge.
All programs start at 6 P.M.
Reservations are suggested.
Admission, $5; May 6 only, free.


Treasury Prices Mixed Amid Fear of Inflation
The prices of Government securities finished mixed yesterday in a choppy session.
Investors, still wobbly after three days of surging and plunging interest rates, attributed some of the early weakness in bonds to concerns about inflation.
Those concerns stemmed from an article in The Washington Post yesterday that quoted unidentified officials of the Federal Reserve Board as having said that the Fed would delay a third increase in interest rates until the bond and stock markets had settled down.


Rangers Hope Circle Will Be Unbroken
After practice today, all 26 Rangers formed a circle at center ice, dropped to a sitting position and began twisting and turning through a series of calisthenics.
As his players exercised, Coach Mike Keenan, wearing a sly grin, skated slowly in and around the circle.
Keenan visited each player.
He patted helmets or backsides with the blade of his stick, and talked briefly with nearly every player.


Harvey T. Boyd; Illustrator, 52
Harvey T. Boyd, a fashion illustrator, art teacher and painter, died on March 19 at the Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 52.
The cause was complications from abdominal cancer, his family said.


ON THE ICE WITH: Oksana Baiul; A Skater's Credo: Only Angels Can Fly
She may be the world's most graceful athlete -- a majestic child capable of making grown men weep almost as easily as she does -- but Oksana Baiul still has a thing or two to learn about human nature.
"There is just no way a person as sweet, as innocent and as decent as Tonya Harding would try to hurt another skater," Miss Baiul said as she finished her third workout of the day here at the dilapidated, vacant old Odessa Sports Palace on the edge of this once noble city.
"I know her. I have skated with her. She hardly needs to pay an assassin to succeed in a tournament."


Economic Scene; Auctioning off the airwaves will be a formidable undertaking.
FOR decades, free marketeers labored to convince Congress that licenses to use the airwaves should be sold rather than given away.
But now that the opposition has cracked under pressure to reduce the Federal budget deficit, true believers are beginning to realize that the job is only half done: design of the spectrum auction may prove almost as difficult as establishing the principle.
Last month the Federal Communications Commission offered tentative thoughts on how space on the spectrum for "personal communications services" -- a souped-up version of cellular phones -- would be sold.
And in the view of Chuck Jackson, a communications consultant at Strategic Policy Research Inc. in Maryland, the F.C.C. has done its homework.
"The caliber of input from economists was remarkably high," he concluded.
But the route to a well-managed auction still has more than a few potholes.


Report Proposes Combining County Services and Localities
A report released today proposes merging local governments and services throughout Westchester County to eliminate overlapping jurisdictions and contain government spending.
"We have too much government and too little resources to pay for it," the Westchester County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke, said at a news conference where the report was released.


The Greening Of Bendel's
A 20-FOOT-TALL hexagonal gazebo, a late-19th-century wrought-iron beauty, stands majestically in the entrance of Henri Bendel, 714 Fifth Avenue (56th Street).
And it is filled with flowers and plants by Denise and Michael Oppizzi (above), the flower designers of the moment.
The gazebo houses the Oppizzis' new boutique, their first outside their studio and shop, at 818 Greenwich Street (Horatio Street), in Greenwich Village.


Circuit City Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Abbott Sees New Maturity Translating Into a Fine '94
The rain pelted Yankee Stadium yesterday, forcing a one-day postponement of the game with the Texas Rangers and giving Terry Mulholland another day to avoid discussing his Yankee pitching debut, which is his standard silence policy before all starts.
Inside the cozy clubhouse, before the Rangers and the Yankees learned that their game would be rescheduled for this afternoon, Jim Abbott was being pelted with questions about his first season with the Yankees, and there was no silence on his part.
No ugly memories leaped from Abbott's lips about 1993.
He recalled fondly a year in which he pitched a no-hitter and he defended his 11-14 record and 4.37 earned run average by saying the season was not as "disastrous as it's been portrayed."


Review/Dance; Stately Tableaux in a Whir of Hoops
There is little that is blurred or mistily impressionistic about Peter Pucci's choreography.
Mr.
Pucci likes to make moving bodies create clear shapes in space, shapes that can be ingenious, witty, surprising or poignant.
He was particularly inventive in the five new works that his company, Peter Pucci Plus Dancers, presented on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater.
Mr.
Pucci is a former member of Pilobolus, and that troupe's emphasis upon clever gymnastics surely influenced his own fondness for choreographic shape-shifting.
Yet his creations are not merely derivative, and each premiere had its own distinct theatrical personality.


Corning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Rabin Testifies at an Inquiry on Hebron
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin testified today for more than four hours at a closed session of the Israeli commission investigating the Hebron massacre.
Although details of Mr. Rabin's testimony were not made public.


Woolworth
Since the Woolworth Corporation announced last week that it would investigate accounting irregularities and said this week that its senior management would temporarily step aside, the retailer's stock has fallen.
Now, it has been disclosed that senior officers had sold stock before the public learned of the disclosures, and Woolworth's stock price fell again yesterday.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about the formation of teams at hospitals around the country to help protect abused children misstated the specialty of Dr.
Robert Haining.
He is a pediatric physiatrist, whose specialty deals with physical therapy and rehabilitation, not a psychiatrist.


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages rose 2.9 percent, to 15,288, in March from March 1993.
For the first three months of 1994, total pages increased 1.2 percent, to 39,495, from the corresponding period a year ago. *
J.
R.
Rider, the Minnesota Timberwolves' basketball player who won the National Basketball Association's 1994 slam-dunk championship, has signed his first multiyear advertising contract as a spokesman for Converse athletic shoes.
He will appear in three television commercials created by Houston, Effler &amp; Partners, Boston, to promote Psycho Training, a new line of athletic shoes.


AST RESEARCH SHARES TUMBLE ON EARNINGS RUMOR
Shares in AST Research Inc. dropped sharply yesterday after word circulated on Wall Street that the company would restate its financial results for its second quarter, which ended on Jan. 1.
The Irvine, Calif., company denied it had any such plans.
"There is no truth to the rumor about a restatement of our previous quarter's financial results," Emory Epperson, a company spokesman, said.
AST shares closed yesterday at $19.50, down $2.125 in Nasdaq trading, after reaching $18, a 52-week low.
For its second quarter, AST posted earnings of $17.9 million, up 23 percent from a year earlier.
Revenues rose 95 percent, to $677 million.
AST has yet to report its third-quarter results, but said last month that they would fall below analysts' estimates.


Dan Hartman Dies; Songwriter Was 43
Dan Hartman, a record producer, singer and songwriter, died on March 22 at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 43.
The cause was a brain tumor, said his manager, Julian Able.


Jets Still Want DeBerg, but the Dolphins Are a Barrier
The Jets may be squeezed out by Miami in their bid for Steve DeBerg, the 40-year-old quarterback who stepped in to start for the Dolphins last season when both Dan Marino and Scott Mitchell were out with injuries.
The Jets made a contract offer to DeBerg two weeks ago and the Dolphins countered with their own offer late last week.
The Jets' deal was one year for $500,000; the Dolphins offered slightly less, also for one year.
The Jets' general manager, Dick Steinberg, said that New York's offer to DeBerg was not an amount that would cause disruption under the $34.2 million salary cap, which was recently raised by $400,000.


Cambodia Says Thais Helped Pol Pot Escape
The Cambodian Government has accused Thailand of helping Pol Pot, the leader of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, flee into Thailand last month in the face of advancing Cambodian Army troops.
Foreign diplomats stationed in Cambodia said today that they had no reason to doubt the accusations against Thailand made by Prince Norodom Ranariddh, Cambodia's First Prime Minister, and said it would be one more dramatic example of the close ties between Thailand, particularly its armed forces, and the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrilla group responsible for the deaths of at least several hundred thousand and perhaps more than 1 million Cambodians in the 1970's.


A Later Championship Would Cause a Conflict
As momentum gains for new state high school championships in five sports to end the dispute between the state athletic association and New York City leagues, the groups involved face conflicts in scheduling that could ultimately undermine athletic opportunity.
Track and field, in which many New Yorkers rank nationally, has been in the forefront of the controversy.
With no open date on the track calendar, city and state officials are considering extending the season beginning in 1994-95 and holding the proposed state meets on the same dates as established national competitions.


Cleanup Continues at Site of New Jersey Blast as New Pipe Awaits Testing


A Year in the Making, Jazz From Betty Carter
Last year the singer Betty Carter assembled nearly 20 young jazz musicians, put together a show called "Betty Carter: Jazz Ahead '94" and presented two concerts at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music that ranked as some of the year's most exciting performances.
Now Ms.
Carter is doing the concerts again, not only at the Majestic, on Saturday night at 8 and Sunday afternoon at 3, but also at the Apollo Theater in Harlem, on April 16 at 8 P.M., and in Atlanta this summer.
Plans are in the air to tour Europe next year.
Are there enough young musicians to go around for this year's show?


Judge Rejects More Delay In Recycling
A state Supreme Court judge yesterday rejected the Giuliani administration's effort to delay an expansion of New York City's recycling program, leaving the city dwindling options to block the provisions of the 1989 law that set up the program.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, like former Mayor David N. Dinkins, has contended that complying fully with the law would be too expensive for the city and that the timetable for full compliance should be relaxed.


New Speaker Recasting an Image; Successor to Weprin Is Reasserting Assembly's Influence
In the two months since Sheldon Silver became Speaker of the New York State Assembly, the former yeshiva boy from the Lower East Side has cast aside his unassuming ways and waged a calculated campaign to reassert his house's influence on a broad range of issues.
After the two-year tenure of Saul Weprin, who was perceived by many Democratic colleagues as too cozy with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Mr.
Silver has set out to establish the Assembly as an independent force on criminal-justice policy, the state budget, welfare reform and Staten Island secession.


Critic's Notebook; Dance Mural Yields a New Notion of Matisse
Only a short time ago, it seemed as if the dossier on Matisse had been closed.
Tens of thousands of people had crowded into the great Matisse retrospective organized by John Elderfield at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
By the end of their visit they were seduced, sated, uplifted and knocked flat.
What more could there be to see, or to say?
Plenty, is the answer.
To prove it, you have only to go to the Philadelphia Museum of Art, where the Matisse mural of 1932-33 from the Barnes Collection is now on view.
That this majestic achievement should be there at all is a historic reversal of the famously bad relations that had prevailed between the Barnes Collection and the Philadelphia Museum during the lifetime of Dr.
Albert Barnes. (Barnes loathed the museum and amused himself by hiring people to heckle its exemplary director, Fiske Kimball, when he gave a public lecture.)


Clinton Finds a Lesson in Congressman's Life
In eulogizing a member of Congress who never became a creature of Washington and until last month never missed a vote, President Clinton suggested today that Representative William H. Natcher, the Kentucky Democrat who died last week, may have struck the perfect balance.
Mr.
Natcher "taught us a lot about how to live in Washington," Mr.
Clinton said after he left the funeral service.
"I come from a place not unlike this Congressional district," he said.
"And it's hard for people like me to adjust, I think, sometimes to the life in Washington.


College Agrees to a New Pact With County Medical Center
Ending more than two years of uncertainty over the staffing of Westchester County's largest hospital, officials from the county and New York Medical College announced today that they had agreed to a new affiliation contract between the college and the County Medical Center.
If ratified by the County Board of Legislators, as well as the boards of the hospital and college, the nine-and-a-half-year pact would be the longest between the school and county since their relationship began in 1976.


Dances So Beloved They Are Hated
The history of ballet and modern dance is studded with works that have attached themselves to the companies that performed them, like an extra arm or leg or sometimes a whole new persona.
Alvin Ailey could not escape "Revelations." For a time, "Tommy" was Les Grands Ballets Canadiens' middle name.
And now, ladies and gentlemen, the Joffrey Ballet has arrived with "Billboards," a ballet set to music by Prince, which opens tonight at the New York State Theater and will be performed nine times during a season that ends on April 17.


Executive Changes
DRAVO CORP., Pittsburgh, named Carl A. Torbert Jr., its chief executive, to the additional position of chairman.
INGERSOLL-DRESSER PUMP CO., Liberty Corner, N.J., appointed Frederick Hadfield president and chief executive.
The company, a joint venture of Ingersoll-Rand Co. and Dresser Industries, supplies pumps under the names Ingersoll-Rand, Pacific, Worthington, Pleuger, Scienco and Jeumont-Sneider.


Music Biographer To Give Free Talk
Joan Peyser, a musicologist and editor and a biographer of Pierre Boulez, Leonard Bernstein and George Gershwin, is to give a talk on her own life and biographical writing on April 19 at New York University.


In Italy, the Right Wing Squabbles Over Spoils
The rift in Italy's victorious, right-wing electoral alliance widened today as Silvio Berlusconi, the media magnate who led the voting in last month's national elections, threatened to force a new ballot, while his nominal ally appealed to other political parties for support in his campaign to change the country from a republic to a federation.
Mr.
Berlusconi broke off talks on forming a possible new government with Umberto Bossi, the leader of the Northern League and a prospective coalition partner, on Tuesday after Mr.
Bossi's party referred to the media millionaire as "Berluskaiser" and said democracy would be at risk if he took power.


S.E.C. Curbs Donations by Bond Dealers
The Securities and Exchange Commission approved broad restrictions today on political contributions that municipal bond dealers give to government officials and candidates who could later award them lucrative bond contracts.
The new rules are unusual in a market that has been subject to little Federal oversight until this year.
They are aimed at curbing a "pay to play" atmosphere in the $1.2 trillion municipal bond industry that has fostered rising campaign donations from securities firms and their employees and a succession of scandals.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Vase-Cleaning Trick
The information I find in my mailbox never ceases to amaze me.
A few weeks ago I listed some practical tips for cleaning glass vases.
In the next mail I received several packets of Polident along with a note from Jane G. Pepper, the executive director of the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society in Philadelphia.
"Did you ever try denture cleaner for your vases?" she wrote.
"It works like a charm, and here's some super-strength for you to try." So I did.
And it does.
Along with adding a fresh, minty fragrance to the vase.
Sticky House plants
Q.
Several houseplants, including a staghorn fern and a gardenia, have sticky, shiny spots on their leaves.
What do I do? -- Frank Marcus, Arlington, Va.


Andre Tchelistcheff, 92, Authority on Wine
Andre Tchelistcheff, a seminal figure in the modern California wine industry and an enologist of international renown, died on Tuesday at Queen of the Valley Hospital in Napa, Calif.
He was 92.
Mr.
Tchelistcheff had cancer of the esophagus and underwent surgery to remove a stomach tumor last week, said Rich Cartiere, editor of Wine Business Monthly, a trade publication.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MARY FRON never expected to be raising another child.
All that changed soon after her youngest daughter became pregnant at 16 and gave birth to a baby boy.
At first, the teen-age mother insisted she could raise the child herself.


Name-Dropping Ads In Worth Magazine
A magazine is dropping the names of the top executives at other magazines to help sell advertising in its own pages.
Worth magazine and its agency, Slater Hanft Martin in New York, are introducing a trade ad campaign that addresses well-known publishing executives not only as a gimmick, but also in an effort to cast them as the ideal audience for the monthly personal finance magazine.
The first three ads in the campaign invoke Tina Brown, editor of The New Yorker; Grace Mirabella, founding editor and publication director of Mirabella magazine, and Jann Wenner, chairman and editor of Wenner Media Inc.


THE SUPREME COURT: News Analysis; Presidents May Disagree, but Justices Are Generally Loyal to Them
When President Richard M. Nixon nominated Harry A. Blackmun to fill a vacancy on the Supreme Court in 1970, Mr.
Nixon could never have imagined that within a few years Mr.
Blackmun would become the bane of the right wing of the Republican Party.
But Presidents have been surprised by how their Supreme Court appointments turned out since the early days of the Republic.


Reviews/Fashion; Mohair Variations The Vittadini Way
IT'S a safe bet, season after season, that Adrienne Vittadini will have a handle on the trends of the moment, serving them up in a palatable way for her middle-of-the-road customers.
She doesn't break ground as a designer, and she doesn't lead her followers astray.
And so it was yesterday as she led off the fall shows in New York with a parade of mohairs, tartans, leathers, fake furs, kilts, skinny pants, pea coats and dresses.
And knits, lots of knits.
They're what Ms.
Vittadini is known for, and they've become increasingly important in the fashion scheme.
Especially in mohair, which looks like the yarn of the year.


Journal; The Holocaust Boom
If there's such a thing as a good year for the Holocaust -- as measured by a bull market in public awareness -- this is it.
Last month "Schindler's List" won the Oscars that assure it a mass audience.
This month the Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington marks its first anniversary with attendance doubling projections.
By late May there should even be a revision of the notorious 1992 poll that found 22 percent of Americans doubting the Holocaust: The American Jewish Committee has commissioned a new survey, both to measure the new Holocaust boom and to correct an ambiguous question that may have skewed the earlier poll's result.


Japan Premier Hints (Maybe) That He'll Quit
Japan's embattled Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, further unsettled his Government today after reportedly telling dinner partners on Tuesday night, perhaps in jest, that he was thinking about resigning.
Mr.
Hosokawa denied making the statement within hours after his guests, members of Parliament from a minor party, stepped outside the restaurant and told reporters that the 56-year-old Prime Minister had talked of quitting.


Eagles Sign Brister
Quarterback BUBBY BRISTER re-signed with Philadelphia yesterday and the Eagles also acquired defensive end BURT GROSSMAN from San Diego for a conditional draft choice. (AP)


Software Publishing Corp. to Cut Its Work Force in Half
Battered by larger competitors with broader product lines, the Software Publishing Corporation said today that it would cut its work force in half and take a restructuring charge for its second quarter, which ended on March 31.
In addition, Fred Gibbons, the company's founder, will resign as chief executive but will continue as chairman.


The Elderly, Especially, Need Safeguards Against Con Artists
To the Editor:
Your March 29 report on the arrest of a Brooklyn con artist who swindled the elderly by claiming he was a water marshal collecting unpaid bills underscores the urgent need for tougher measures for crimes committed against the elderly in New York State.


THE SUPREME COURT: The Overview; MITCHELL VIEWED AS TOP CANDIDATE FOR HIGH COURT
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine emerged today as a leading candidate to succeed Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who is retiring as the senior member of the Supreme Court, and the White House began almost immediately to weigh the potential consequences of nominating him.
In a White House ceremony this morning, President Clinton paid emotional tribute to Justice Blackmun, who said he would remain on the Court until late September unless a successor was confirmed before then.


Benefits of Assimilation
To The Home Section:
Suzanne Slesin wrote recently of Elaine Reichek's experience growing up in Brooklyn in an assimilated environment ("Perils of a Nice Jewish Girl in a Colonial Bedroom," Feb. 17).


Jim Everett Attacks ESPN2 Interviewer
New Orleans Saints quarterback JIM EVERETT, baited by a television host with taunts of "Chris Evert," attacked the interviewer during a live ESPN2 broadcast last night.
Everett stood up from his chair during the broadcast, overturned a table and pounced on the fallen interviewer, JIM ROME.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Fatigued Fernandez Foiled in 2d Round  Mary Joe Fernandez, whose fragile health continues to have a negative impact on her play, yesterday became the first highly seeded upset victim at the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships in Amelia Island, Fla.
Fernandez, seeded fifth, was eliminated in a second-round match, 3-6, 6-4, 6-2, by 144th-ranked Petra Langrova of the Czech Republic.
Fernandez has not won a tournament in more than a year.
She had not competed since February when her title defense at Indian Wells, Calif., ended prematurely with a loss to Amanda Coetzer in the quarterfinals.
Fernandez underwent surgery last year for endometriosis, a gynecological condition, and continues to experience side effects from the medication she takes to prevent the problem from recurring.
Yesterday she complained of fatigue, but she attributed the loss to Langrova's dogged and error-free play in the third set.
In other matches, third-seeded Martina Navratilova defeated Silke Frankl, 6-1, 6-1; sixth-seeded Lindsay Davenport trounced Radka Bobkova, 6-3, 6-0; Coetzer downed Larisa Neiland, 6-2, 6-2, and seventh-seeded Mary Pierce defeated Irina Spirlea, 6-4, 7-6 (7-4).
Top-Seeded Players Win: Pete Sampras, Michael Chang and Boris Becker won second-round matches in the Japan Open in Tokyo.
Sampras, the defending champion, scored a 6-3, 7-6 (7-5) victory over a Russian, Andrei Olhovskiy.
Chang rebounded from a 1-5 deficit in the second set for a 6-1, 7-6 (7-2) victory over his fellow American Doug Flach.
Becker beat a Frenchman, Stephane Simian, 6-3, 7-6 (7-5). (AP)


Continental To Cut 1,000 More Jobs
Continental Airlines said yesterday that it would eliminate another 1,000 jobs, further reduce its flights from its Denver hub and drop service to 10 more cities.
Industry analysts said the moves were another effort by the nation's fifth-largest carrier to reduce costs and keep aloft its fledgling no-frills, short-hop service.


Watch Where You Walk!
NEW YORK dealers have some interesting rugs lying around at the moment.
At the Mark Shilen Gallery, 109 Greene Street (Prince Street), in SoHo, the show opening today is called "Stripes" and the rugs are old and not-quite-so-old dhurries from India (right).
Six-by-9-foot rugs can range in price from $1,500 to $2,200, depending on age and condition; a spectacular 10-by-14-foot example, striped in two shades of blue, is $4,800.
"Although they look good on the wall, they are meant for the floor, and in India they are used for picnics and wedding festivals, and sometimes even under tents," said Mark Shilen.
He travels to the north of India to find the rugs, which are between 50 and 100 years old.
The show closes on May 8.


Nets Find New Sources Of Power Off Bench
Jayson Williams, on his way to an important interview today in preparation for the Nets' big game Sunday with the Knicks, passed his teammate Rex Walters, who was already talking to reporters.
Williams launched into well-rehearsed repartee with his fellow benchmate:


Big Losses In Gambling Stock Prices
Shares of many gambling companies tumbled yesterday after Missouri voters narrowly rejected a constitutional referendum to allow slot machines and other games of chance on riverboat casinos.
The vote, which came on Tuesday, represents a reversal of fortune for casino operators in the state.
Just 16 months earlier, Missouri votes had approved a law permitting floating casinos.
But in January, the state's Supreme Court ruled that although the legislation allowed games of skill like poker and blackjack, more profitable games of chances like slot machines would have to be approved separately.


Fall starts in tents
The princess dress is a key style in Donna Karan's DKNY collection. (Bill Cunningham/The New York Times) (pg. C10)


Serbs Propose Bosnia Cease-Fire as They Pound Enclave
Serbian nationalist leaders in Bosnia proposed a countrywide cease-fire today, but they continued to pound the Government-held town of Gorazde and reneged on a pledge to allow the top United Nations commander in Bosnia to visit the beleaguered enclave.
The Serbs broke through Bosnian Army defense lines around the pocket on Monday, in the eighth day of an offensive.


Schourek Falls From Favor Directly Onto Waiver Wire
Pete Schourek's spring of uncertainty is expected to reach a conclusion Thursday when he either clears waivers and is sent to the Mets' Class AAA Norfolk team or is claimed by another major league club.
The Mets -- particularly Manager Dallas Green -- have been less than pleased with Schourek's attitude and performance since the middle of last season but were unable to move him this spring.
Until this week, they were unwilling to risk losing him on the waiver wire without compensation.


Con Ed Again Indicted in Release of Asbestos
After a 1989 steam-pipe explosion released large amounts of asbestos in the Gramercy Park area, the Consolidated Edison Company and two of its officials concealed information about the asbestos from state and local authorities as well as from Federal officials, the Federal Government said in an indictment released yesterday.
In an earlier indictment, a Federal grand jury found that Con Edison did not tell Federal officials for four days that the blast had caused the release of 200 pounds of asbestos.
When they did tell the officials, the notification gave false or misleading information, to save the cost of a cleanup and relocation of tenants, the indictment asserted.


Actors Studio to Teach Program at New School
The Actors Studio announced yesterday that it would join with the New School for Social Research to create a theater-arts program offering a master's degree in acting, directing and playwriting.
The 300 students in the program will be the first nonprofessionals taught by the Actors Studio since it was founded in 1947.
The studio "has always been a private and protective place," said Paul Newman, its president.
"It will remain that while providing outreach to a new generation." He and Al Pacino will be among the program's teachers at the New School in the fall, Mr.
Newman said.


Riverboat Casinos Seek A Home in Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania politicians see jobs, waterfront development and tax revenue spinning in the little windows of slot machines on riverboat casinos waiting to take their place along the state's waterways.
Using research provided by the gambling industry, these public officials say that Pennsylvania's gamblers lose $1 billion a year in Atlantic City, about 60 miles southeast of here, and that it would be better if this money were lost closer to home.
Tourists who come to Philadelphia to see the Liberty Bell, they add, might also liberate some cash on riverboats plying the Delaware River.


Review/Theater; A Marivaux Comedy On the Effects of Love
Odds are you're not familiar with "The Triumph of Love" or Phocion, its leading character.
But five minutes at the Classic Stage Company, where Marivaux's comedy opened last night, will tell you that without a beguiling Phocion, everyone else is in trouble.
Like nearly all the dramatic works by this 18th-century Frenchman, "Triumph" is concerned with love, how it comes about, how it can be helped along and what effect it has on usually rational people.
In the course of the play, Phocion, an enterprising young lad, sees to it that three of the major characters fall head over heels for him.
The catch is, Phocion is really Leonide, a princess in disguise.


No Kind of Pacifist
To the Editor:
March 25 and 26 articles report that Mario Aburto Martinez, the accused assassin of Luis Donaldo Colosio, the Mexican presidential candidate, is a "self-proclaimed pacifist."


The Underside of the Final Four
President Clinton was on target when an interviewer asked for his thoughts on college athletics during Monday night's N.C.A.A. basketball final between Duke and Arkansas.
Winning is important, he said, but not as important as understanding that most college players are not going to play professional basketball and that "we ought to emphasize their getting their degrees."
University administrators across the country must surely have been pleased at what amounted to a Presidential endorsement of their effort to control the power of their coaches and bring a modicum of academic integrity to big-time college athletics.


Haiti Policy In Stalemate
After months of struggling over how to restore democracy to Haiti, the Clinton Administration faces a stalemate.
With its policies blocked by both sides and no new solutions in sight on how to reinstate Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a growing number of officials have concluded that Father Aristide will probably never be restored to power.
Despite President Clinton's vow to help reinstate Father Aristide, Secretary of State Warren Christopher has told other Administration officials that of all the foreign policy crises he faces, Haiti is the area where he has the hardest time seeing an eventual resolution.


Giuliani Sets New Policy to Spur Drug Arrests by Officers on Beats
For the first time in a generation, uniformed police officers in New York City will be given a major role in finding drug dealers and driving them away.
The change, part of new police strategies on drug trafficking and youth crime announced yesterday by the Giuliani administration, is a sharp departure from departmental practice intended to shield beat officers from temptations of bribery by drug dealers.
Ever since the Knapp Commission in the early 1970's revealed systemic corruption connected to gambling and other illegal activity, drug investigations and arrests have been left primarily to specialized citywide narcotics teams.


China Makes It Tough
Beijing's domestic political anxieties probably explain the latest charges against Wei Jingsheng, China's leading democracy campaigner, and the criminal investigation of his office assistant, Tong Yi.
Deng Xiaoping has always put political control ahead of China's international reputation, and Mr.
Wei, who has been fearlessly outspoken since his release from a long prison term last fall, has had a special knack for getting under the paramount leader's skin.


Law Firm's Roles Questioned in Macy Case
Junior creditors of R. H. Macy &amp; Company are complaining that Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, the prestigious law firm that is shepherding Macy through bankruptcy, has too many clients with conflicting roles in the case.
The main contention is that the firm, which has represented some of the country's largest corporations in bankruptcy court, has become so enmeshed in the case that it can no longer objectively represent its primary client, Macy, or its other clients, including three of Macy's largest and most powerful creditors.
One of those is Fidelity Investments, the mutual fund giant.


Teamsters and Haulers Expect Long Strike
A strike by 75,000 truckers, dock workers, delivery drivers and mechanics that began at 12:01 A.M. today has virtually shut down 22 major trucking companies, union and management officials said.
On the first day of the strike, which came after four months of negotiations broke off last week, there were few signs of violence around the country.
Six picketers were arrested near Boston, and a nonunion truck driver was injured outside Philadelphia when someone threw a stone at his windshield.


THE SUPREME COURT: The Legacy; Justice Blackmun's Journey: From Moderate to a Liberal
Justice Harry A. Blackmun's impending retirement, while unlikely to bring about a drastic change at the Supreme Court, will remove a distinctly personal voice from the Court's often featureless mix and will mark the end of an extraordinary personal journey.
Harry A. Blackmun came to the Court 24 years ago at the age of 61, a well-schooled Midwestern Republican lawyer and judge who appealed to President Richard M. Nixon as someone who could be confirmed without controversy after the failure of two earlier nominations for the vacancy, and who would help restore a law-and-order sensibility to a Court still in the shadow of the Warren Court revolution.


Small Businesses Certainly Do Create Jobs
To the Editor:
"Myth: Small Business as Job Engine" (Business Day, March 25) tries to make the case that large companies are at least as proficient as small ones at job creation.
This is certainly a point that can be illuminated empirically.
Curiously, however, you provide no data to do so, while ignoring ample evidence to the contrary.


Bridge
One should always be aware of an opponent's mood.
Is he angry, or gloomy, or happy?
An example of the happiness factor is the diagramed deal from a rubber bridge game.
Sitting South was Harry Hutzler of Scarsdale, N.Y., who arrived in six hearts after an opening three-spade bid on his left.
Since his four-heart bid in response to his partner's takeout double had shown no strength at all, he was happy to continue when his partner invited a slam.
South won with the ace in dummy, since the queen was likely to be with East.
He then cashed the heart ace, intending to follow with the king, and thought matters over when the jack appeared from West.
It did not seem likely that West had begun with two singletons, but there was a psychological clue available.


Palermo's New Role
STEVE PALERMO, whose career as an American League umpire was shortened when he was shot in the back while aiding a robbery victim three years ago, is returning to baseball.
The commissioner's office said yesterday that Palermo would be an assistant to the chairman of the Major League Executive Council.
Palermo, 44, will handle special projects for the Executive Council, the first of which will be a study of the length of games. (AP)


Denim and Jeans Pour Out of Northeastern Brazil
Cotton, computerized cutting machines and 65 cents-an-hour wages have transformed this bustling Atlantic seaport into a thriving Brazilian clothing and textile center.
Now, after winning over Brazil, Latin America's most populous nation, manufacturers here are starting to compete in world clothing and textile markets.
Fortaleza sits on Brazil's northeast shoulder, equidistant from Florida and France, so manufacturers think they are well situated to compete in American and European markets in the late 1990's.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  CAR BOMB KILLS 8 ISRAELIS  Eight people were killed and 44 others wounded when a Palestinian suicide bomber blew up his car beside a bus in a northern Israeli town.
It was the most serious terrorist attack inside Israel since 1989.
A1


It's On-the-Job Complaining As Coach Johnson Gets Ejected
Lakers 128, Kings 123
Magic Johnson was ejected for the first time as coach of the Los Angeles Lakers, after arguing an official's call in the third quarter of last night's game against the visiting Sacramento Kings.
And the Lakers came back to win the game, 128-123, in overtime.
Referee Ron Olesiak called a technical foul against Johnson with 2 minutes 12 seconds remaining and the Lakers trailing, 80-64.
Johnson was arguing about a technical foul called against James Worthy when he walked onto the middle of the court.


Micro Warehouse Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Amoco Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Subway Suspect May Surrender
A noted lawyer said last night that he would arrange the surrender today of a man who is wanted in the shooting of a 16-year-old boy in a Brooklyn subway station on Monday.
The lawyer, C. Vernon Mason, said he talked to the suspect, Alvin Green, 21, last night, and that Mr.
Green agreed to turn himself in to the police at Mr.
Mason's office in Manhattan this morning.


White Sox Sluggers Pound the Blue Jays
White Sox 9, Blue Jays 2
Robin Ventura and Darrin Jackson each homered twice -- with Ventura hitting his fifth career grand slam -- and the Chicago White Sox routed the Toronto Blue Jays, 9-2, last night at the Skydome.
Chicago hit five home runs as it beat Toronto after consecutive losses to the Blue Jays in the season's first two games.
Ventura twice touched off consecutive home-run bursts, first in the fourth against Pat Hentgen when Dan Pasqua followed.
Jackson pinch-hit for Pasqua after Ventura's grand slam off Paul Spoljaric in the seventh and homered, then hit another in the eighth off Scott Brow.


What Tenants Fear
To the Editor:
Re "Reforming Rent Rules" (editorial, March 21): You and the New York City Council should bear in mind that many of the "luxury" apartments it is trying to deregulate are not owned by landlords.
They are in co-op conversion buildings and have been bought by real estate speculators in the hope of an eventual windfall.
You declare these apartments will rent at market rates once they are decontrolled.
But tenants fear the loss of their homes.
If an owner wants an apartment, he has only to raise the rent to $1 million.


A Small Town in Natal Where Zulu Fights Zulu
Early on Easter morning, more than 20 Zulu youths surrounded Angeline Thokozile's house, beat her and threatened to burn down her home.
Then they told the 47-year-old woman that this was punishment for her son's allegiance to the African National Congress and that all Zulus should be part of the rival Inkatha Freedom Party.
Across town, Bruce Mlaba goes every day to visit his sweetheart and their 3-year-old daughter.
But Mr.
Mlaba, 18, is the son of the local Inkatha chairman while his sweetheart's family belongs to the African National Congress, and their neighborhoods are on opposite sides of the confrontation.
He is careful not to travel at night and always watches his back.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHEVRON INTERNATIONAL OIL CO., San Francisco, said it had sold its petroleum marketing joint ventures in Nigeria to Vitol for undisclosed terms.
FEDERAL EXPRESS CORP., Memphis, has started parcel delivery service under its own license to Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern countries.


Rhodes Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


INSIDE
Study Showed Silicone Has Immune Effects
Researchers for Dow Corning, a maker of breast implants containing silicone, found in 1975 that the substance activated and impaired the immune systems of mice, say lawyers for women with the implants.
Page A18.
Serbs Pound Bosnian Pocket
While proposing a truce, Serbs continued to attack an eastern enclave and blocked a United Nations commander from entering the town.
Page A3.
Eagles Bring Record Price
The Philadelphia Eagles of the National Football League were sold for a reported $185 million, the most ever paid for a sports franchise.
Page B9.
Bans on 'Schindler's List'
Many Islamic countries are preventing the release of Steven Spielberg's film about the Holocaust.
Page C15.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about the transplantation of fetal heart muscle from mice into adult animals misstated an affiliation of Dr.
Donald A. Fischman.
He is with Cornell University Medical College, not New York University.


Books of The Times; On Catching Trout While Letting Go
The Habit of Rivers  Reflections on Trout Streams and Fly Fishing  By Ted Leeson  178 pages.
Lyons &amp; Burford. $22.95.
At a time when the earth's fish population is growing dangerously depleted, you begin to wonder about hooking trout on feathered lures.
Even in centerfold photos of trophy catches about to be unsnared from barbless hooks and returned to their no-kill habitats, the fish have begun to assume a beleaguered look.
You toy with the thought of not buying a license this year.


Reno at New Jersey 'Town Meeting' on Crime


Sports of The Times; Wild Thing That's Called Wild Card
THE pennant race -- the supposed purity, sanctity, ennobling essence of two or three teams battling and perspiring for what used to be called the gonfalon -- was read its last rites, or so many believed.
It took place last year when the owners of major league clubs voted to split the leagues from two divisions into three.
Or, as Joe DiMaggio, in so many words, asked the other day, "Where is Cleveland anyway?" This is a question asked many times in the past, but not often in the context of baseball.


Warner-Lambert's consumer brands account finds a home, make that two, in New York.
THE Warner-Lambert Company said yesterday that it had consolidated its worldwide consumer brands account at Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. and J. Walter Thompson, both in in New York.
Billings were estimated at more than $150 million.
The consolidation follows the formation in January of a joint venture between Warner-Lambert and Burroughs Wellcome that merges their consumer brands into a company called Warner-Wellcome Consumer Health Products.


Golf; Langer Is Well-Suited for Second Green Coat
It's springtime at Augusta, and the Masters begins today, so as usual the questions are as plentiful as azaleas.
Can Greg Norman finally conquer the demons and win the tournament that is tailor-made for his game?
Can the foreign dominance, which has produced six of the last seven champions, continue?
Will John Daly eagle all the par-5's?
Fanciful speculation and this event are intertwined, like the roots of the great Southern magnolias.
But amid all the uncertainty, one thing is sure: Bernhard Langer is the best-suited defending champion since Nick Faldo in 1990 to win successive Masters.
Everything about his game and his makeup suggest that he will be somewhere around the lead when Sunday comes.


Greek Prime Minister Insists Macedonia Endangers His Country
Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou says he felt compelled to impose a trade embargo on the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia because the newly independent state's policies posed a "real and present danger to Greece."
The Clinton Administration criticized the embargo and named Matthew Nimetz as special mediator.
Mr.
Papandreou, who spoke with mellowness of the United States, to which he will pay his first official visit beginning April 22, explained in an interview what prompted his action.


CHRONICLE
He doesn't exactly fill the mold of Mr.
Chips, but SUMNER M. REDSTONE is delighted to be called "professor."
Mr.
Redstone, the communications industry titan and chairman of Viacom who emerged triumphant in February after a five-month fight for control of Paramount Communications, will become a visiting professor at Brandeis University in Waltham, Mass., in the fall.


A Village 'Merry Widow'
The Village Light Opera Group is to end its season with six performances of Franz Lehar's "Merry Widow," beginning on April 23 at the Fashion Institute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street, Chelsea.
Sara-Ann Noll sings the title role and Harry Crossfield plays her suitor, Danilo.
Ronald Noll conducts.
Tickets are $10 to $20.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


Market Place; America West shareholders may get something back after all.
DESPITE the airlines' poor record of profitability, the industry tends to attract optimists, and America West Airlines has been no exception, although it is operating under bankruptcy court protection.
Until recently, investors in the carrier appeared destined to have their high hopes dashed, just like others who invested in Continental and Trans World Airlines when they were under bankruptcy protection.
Nevertheless, there is some good news for America West's current shareholders: they are likely to fare better than many industry analysts had expected when the company emerges from bankruptcy this summer.


American League Is Where the Stars Shine Brightest Today
Everyone knows that success and failure in baseball come in cycles -- for players, for managers, for teams, even for leagues.
The cycle that has the American League riding high right now has so many facets and such powerful momentum that the National League has to wonder if its junior partner will defy gravity and never come back down.
"A few years ago, everyone talked about the National League this way, with their young talent and the American League didn't have it," said Frank Robinson, a former most valuable player in both leagues and a member of the Hall of Fame.
"Now, they talk about the American League. And you could see it coming for a little while, now."


Crackdown On Truants By Police Finds 216
Wending her way through the darkened chaos at the Playland arcade on Broadway yesterday, Officer Gomez, a three-year veteran of the New York City Police Department's truant patrols in Times Square, zeroed in on two youths huddled over a flashing video game.
She walked up to the pair and asked them what they were doing in an arcade during a school day.
"I tell you what," said Officer Gomez, who refused to give her full name, "we're going to call your school and your parents, O.K.?"


Small Businesses Certainly Do Create Jobs; Both Contribute
To the Editor:
The fundamental issue confronting advanced economies -- communities, countries or trading blocs -- was obscured by the discussion of job growth in "Myth: Small Business as Job Engine" (Business Day, March 25).
Most analyses find that when all economic sectors are considered, both large and small make net job contributions. (Although when the entire sector is declining, as in manufacturing, the issue is relative.)


Barnard Townsend; Publishing Executive, 85
Barnard Townsend, a retired publishing executive and banker, died on March 24 at his Manhattan home.
He was 85.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter, Diana Townsend-Butterworth.


Phone-Card Promotion May Be Promoting Fraud
To curb fraudulent calling, telephone companies constantly urge customers to guard the privacy of the personal identification numbers, or PIN's, used to make credit-card calls.
But a sweepstakes promotion sponsored by New York Telephone is backfiring precisely because the utility ignored its own admonitions.
In the last week, New York Telephone, which now calls itself by the name of its parent, Nynex, has sent mailings to three million holders of New York Telephone and Nynex calling cards statewide, with punch-out replicas of their calling cards imprinted with their secret PIN's.
Calling cards are the credit cards customers use to charge calls made from outside the home.


Taiwan's Wildlife Trade Draws Call for Sanctions
An interagency committee has recommended to President Clinton that he impose trade sanctions on Taiwan for illegal trafficking in rhinoceros horns and tiger bones, but forgo for now imposing similar sanctions on China, which has also been accused of involvement in the trade of exotic wildlife parts.
White House officials said that the interagency recommendation had not yet gone to the President's desk but he is expected to deal with it soon.
If he proceeds with the recommendation, it would be the first time that the United States has imposed sanctions on another country for trafficking in endangered species.
The sanctions would go into effect 30 days after a listing in the Federal Register.


Standard Microsystems Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


One Picture's Worth a Medical Treatise
To the Editor:
While the efforts of a hospital in Salt Lake City to control costs through computerization (news article, March 31) are clearly newsworthy, the caption on your accompanying photograph is as worrisome as it is revealing.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.60
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.55
3.65
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.94
3.98
3.04
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.90
6.91
6.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.24
7.24
6.95
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.09
8.09
7.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.54
6.63
6.04
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


People
*
Mechele Flaum, chief operating officer of Brain Reserve, New York, was named to the additional position of president, succeeding Faith Popcorn, who continues as chairwoman. *
Lee Rosenbaum, Western advertising manager for Discover magazine, Burbank, Calif., was named publisher in New York, succeeding Michael Rooney, who joined Times Mirror Magazines, New York, as publisher of Outdoor Life and Field &amp; Stream magazines.


METRO DIGEST
NEW ROLE FOR BEAT OFFICERS IN DRUG FIGHT
For the first time in a generation, New York City's uniformed police officers will be given a major role in finding drug dealers and driving them away.
A1.
The police picked up 216 students in the first citywide sweep of teen-age truants.
B4.


For the Air and the Economy, Try Ethanol
To the Editor:
"Coming Soon: The Alternative Fuel of the Future," Mobil Corporation's March 24 advertorial on alternative fuels and reformulated gasoline, is a thinly disguised attempt to sidetrack the Environmental Protection Agency's program to clean up gasoline and the air we breathe by blending it with clean-burning additives such as ethanol.


How to Fill a Justice's Shoes
"The shoes are large," President Clinton said yesterday of the retiring Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackmun.
"The role that he has filled on this Court is terribly important. I will attempt to appoint someone of genuine stature and largeness of ability and spirit to the Court."
Mr.
Clinton first must find a nominee of unquestioned excellence who will secure the Court's ideological balance, someone highly qualified who, like Justice Blackmun, will hold the line on civil rights, civil liberties, abortion, religious liberty and other precious rights that the Reagan and Bush Administrations sought to restrict.


Juvenal Habyarimana, 57, Ruled Rwanda for 21 Years
President Juvenal Habyarimana of Rwanda, who was reported killed yesterday when his airplane crashed while returning from a conference of African leaders, assumed power over the small Central African country 21 years ago.
A former army officer, the 57-year-old Mr.
Habyarimana rose through the ranks to become head of the national guard and the country's police.
In 1973 he led a bloodless military coup that established him in power for the rest of his life.


Vehicle Sales Rise By 19.7%
Sales of cars and light trucks in the United States outstripped expectations yet again in March, raising the possibility that the auto recovery may be more robust than analysts and industry executives had predicted.
With both consumer confidence and employment increasing, vehicle sales surged 19.7 percent over the March 1993 level.
The Big Three auto makers all set records for one month's truck sales.
Taken as a whole, car and light-truck sales for the 1994 first quarter have startled many industry analysts.


Luba Potamkin, 73, Pitchwoman for Cadillacs
Luba Potamkin, a broadcasting spokeswoman in the 1970's for her family's Cadillac auto dealerships on the East Coast, died yesterday at her home in Miami.
She was 73.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said her husband, Victor Potamkin.


What Price Success?
To The Home Section:
A quote by Dr.
Margaret M. Dawson in the Parent &amp; Child column (March 10), requires comment.
"I would never permit my child to repeat a grade in elementary school," she said.
"It's a sign of the school's failure. School should allow all children to achieve success at that age."


Trenton Court Backs Curbs On Anti-Abortion Protests
In a ruling aimed at balancing the right of free speech and the right to privacy, the New Jersey Supreme Court today upheld restrictions on the picketing activities of anti-abortion protesters, but modified a lower court opinion to allow protesters "a limited, controlled form of expression" near an abortion clinic's entrance.
Lawyers for the protesters said that the injunctions against peaceful demonstrations, which were upheld by the court in two unanimous opinions, violate First Amendment rights and that they would appeal to the United States Supreme Court.


Review/Music; Cellist Faces the Challenge Of Britten's Third Suite
By the time Benjamin Britten wrote his Third Cello Suite over a period of nine days in 1971, he had become absolute master of a form that had previously belonged exclusively to Bach.
One can talk of admirable works for solo cello by Reger, Kodaly, Hindemith and Ligeti, but it was Britten who approached the unapproachable, writing utterly private music that thought aloud in intermingling confessional voices.
Like all of Britten's late cello pieces, the Third Suite was written for Mstislav Rostropovich; with its filigree of Russian quotations and huge passacaglia climax, it also has strong links to the music of Shostakovich.
Mr.
Rostropovich ceased performing the work in public after Britten's death, finding the personal associations too difficult to bear, but other cellists have confronted its great technical as well as emotional challenges.
Colin Carr, who performed the Suite alongside Kodaly's solo Sonata at the Kaye Playhouse on Tuesday night, knows the idiom as well as any.


Truckers' Worry: A Weakened Union
It's not the money, say these robust men dressed in parkas and windbreakers to ward off the chill rain.
They earn at least $17.15 an hour, or $35,000 a year, not including overtime and benefits.
It's the relentless spread of part-time nonunion workers, they say, drivers who will take to the road despite low wages and no benefits.


Mets Whip Cubs; So, What's Their Magic Number?
This has not happened during Bobby Bonilla's Met lifetime.
He can't remember infielders catching difficult line drives.
He can't remember them stopping tough grounders.
And he can barely remember them turning any decent double plays.
Bonilla was thrilled over what he saw this afternoon at Wrigley Field.
With impressive pitching by Bobby Jones and excellent defense by the infield, the Mets defeated the Cubs, 4-1, to sweep their season-opening series.
It is the Mets' first 3-0 start since 1987 and their first 3-0 start on the road in franchise history.


Gooden Gets Start in Opener
Thanks to a bent spike on his right shoe, Dwight Gooden will be pitching the Mets' home opener on Monday after all.
Gooden was originally scheduled to pitch on Saturday in Houston, but his start has been pushed back to Monday -- when the Mets play host to the Cubs in their first game of the season at Shea Stadium -- because of an injury to the big toe on his right foot.
During his start last Monday in Chicago, a spike bent on Gooden's right shoe and stabbed into his toe, which appeared greenish and swollen this morning.
"It doesn't hurt that badly," said Gooden, who will be making his eighth career start and sixth consecutive start in a Mets home opener.


At One Special School, Students Learn Better Choices
The Robert F. Kennedy School on the Upper East Side looks much like a regular public school with its chatter of children, clean corridors and classrooms adorned with student artwork.
On a recent morning, students tinkered on computers, discussed the Civil War and hunkered over storybooks.
But the 130 students, ranging from age 8 to 14, are classified as emotionally disturbed, assigned here because the school system has determined that they cannot function in a regular classroom.
They exhibit emotional problems ranging from rage, depression and paranoia to childhood schizophrenia.


Islamic Nations Move to Keep Out 'Schindler's List'
"Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's Academy Award-winning film about the Holocaust, is being effectively barred from theaters in many Arab and Islamic countries.
Citing everything from the Hebron massacre, in which a Jewish extremist killed Muslim worshipers, to the assertion that the movie is "propaganda with the purpose of asking for sympathy" to the traditional Muslim abhorrence of nudity and sex in movies, various Islamic governments have given the film a cold, if not hostile, reception.
At the same time, the film, a major success in Europe, Asia and Latin America, is expected to gross $100 million overseas by tomorrow.
Most countries in the Middle East, with the exception of Israel, are expected to bar it, however.


Hearing Held on Bid to Repress Lawyers in Murder Case
Lawyers for Colin Ferguson, who is accused of killing six people on the Long Island Rail Road last year, clashed with prosecutors today over a bid to limit what the lawyers can say about the case outside of court.
In a hearing before Judge Donald E. Belfi of Nassau County Court, William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, Mr.
Ferguson's lawyers, argued that an order requested by the Nassau County District Attorney, Denis Dillon, violated their First Amendment right to free speech, and that they had made no statements that would prevent the court from finding unbiased jurors.


For Isles, The 2 That Got Away
Two points.
All the Islanders needed to do tonight was beat the Hartford Whalers, the second-worst team in the Eastern Conference, and they would have earned the 2 points to tie them with Florida for the eighth and last playoff spot in the conference.
It was that simple.


Ennobling The Everyday
A VISIT to a small but stirring exhibition at the Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts could make you want hold on to your next Williams-Sonoma catalogue.
Despite its rather forbidding title, "Form, Function and Beauty: Early 19th-Century French Watercolors of Domestic Objects" sparkles, with 50 hand-painted pages from early-19th-century French catalogues that served as salesmen's portfolios.


Insurers' Double-Edged Sword
As some of the nation's largest investors in bonds, insurance companies have seen the value of their $1.4 trillion in bond investments fall by tens of billions of dollars since yields began rising in October.
Insurers' stock prices have dropped in lock step: shares of life insurance companies are down more than 20 percent since October and shares of property insurers are down about 12 percent.
The declines are far steeper than the 5 percent decline posted by the Standard &amp; Poor's index of 500 stocks in the same period.


CHRONICLE
One of Hollywood's best-known yet best-kept secrets has been exposed: JUDY LEWIS, the daughter LORETTA YOUNG said she adopted at 19 months, has written a book disclosing that she was in fact Miss Young's biological child, conceived during a romance with Clark Gable.
From the time that Miss Young disappeared for several months in 1935, feigning illness, the love affair and its results were fodder for the Hollywood gossip mill, but Ms.
Lewis did not know until she reached adulthood.
Now, in "Uncommon Knowledge," to be published next week by Pocket Books, she describes her parents' relationship, her mother's concealment of her birth and her lifelong search for identity and affirmation.


Rooms Painted by the Hand of an Artist
ONE of the quickest, easiest and, relatively speaking, least expensive ways to liven up a room is with decorative paint, whether it is a simple color wash over linen-white walls or a dining room mural of a fanciful garden.
And a good way to get the job done is to hire an artist.
While actors typically work as waiters to help pay the rent, artists often moonlight as house painters.
The ranks of well-known artists who once wielded rollers and ladders are impressive, including Willem de Kooning.


New Focus On Motives In Killing On Bridge
One of the men arrested in connection with last month's Brooklyn Bridge shooting told the police that Rashid Baz, who prosecutors say fired on the van of Hasidic students, was "very angry" after the massacre of Muslims in a mosque on the West Bank and that he said, "We're supposed to kill all those Jews."
The statement by Bassam Reyati, the owner of the car service where Mr.
Baz worked, was among the documents filed by prosecutors yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Also included was Mr.
Baz's statement to the police, in which he denied that there were any "political reasons" for firing on the van.
Mr.
Baz, a Lebanese national, told the police he opened fire with two different guns because he believed someone in the van had fired on him first.


Eagles Purchased For Record Amount
After nine years as the owner of the Philadelphia Eagles, Norman Braman agreed yesterday to sell the National Football League team to a group led by Jeffrey Lurie, a film producer, for a reported $185 million.
That would be the most ever paid for a sports franchise, surpassing the $173 million paid last August for baseball's Baltimore Orioles.
Braman, a Miami-based luxury car dealer and art collector who lives several months each year in the south of France, paid $65 million for the team in 1985.


Making Jury Duty Less Painful and More Efficient
Imagine the impossible: that jury duty could be almost pleasant.
A juror who wasn't picked for trial on the first day would be excused altogether.
Compensation would be raised from $15 a day to $40, as it is in the Federal courts.
The summonses to serve would be fewer and further apart because the lists of people who could be called to jury duty would be nearly doubled.


An Antiques Shop, Too, Can Be Landscaped
JUDY NAFTULIN'S background is in journalism and horticulture, but these days she is an antiques dealer in New Hope, Pa.
She started her business four and a half years ago, when she realized that some of the things she liked best about landscaping were the old garden ornaments and furniture.
Ms.
Naftulin (above right) calls her shop a studio; some New York antiques dealers and decorators call it a well-kept secret 90 miles away.
"I think of myself as a good source for New Yorkers who want to get out of New York but don't want to go too far," she said.
Ms.
Naftulin specializes in unusual, often oversize pieces, which she has arranged in her shop into elaborate layered still lifes.
Walking through the space is a little like discovering an old attic filled with interesting, arcane objects.
In one corner sits a tin hatmaker's sign ($650); a fanciful Victorian wire bird cage ($725) hangs from the ceiling.
By the door, a plaster capital ($300) rests on a 19th-century mantelpiece (above, $900) from upstate New York.
Upstairs, there's an extravagant eight-foot-high iron tree with detachable branches.
It is $2,850.


Information Roadblocks
One after another, it seems, the biggest and flashiest merger deals in the telecommunications industry are collapsing under the cold feet of the corporate players and uncertainties about new regulatory obstacles.
The first victim was the Bell Atlantic Corporation, which six weeks ago abandoned its bid to buy Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's biggest cable-television company.
The two companies had planned to develop futuristic networks offering interactive television, games and electronic commerce.


Smith Looks to Enter As the Streak Exits
Now that their 15-game winning streak has ended, the Knicks have important matters to resolve before the playoffs.
Can Charles Smith return to the rotation without disturbing the team's chemistry?
Can the Knicks finish with the National Basketball Association's best record, or at least the best record in the Eastern Conference?
The answers will begin to unfold Thursday night, when the Knicks are host to the Cleveland Cavaliers.


Dresden Journal; From the Ruins Shall Rise a Church, and a Symbol
Nowhere in Germany are memories of World War II and its consequences more painfully alive than here, in what was the most beautiful city on the Elbe until it was shattered in the firestorm that followed the Allied bombing raids of Feb. 13-14, 1945.
For nearly 50 years, the most poignant symbol of that destruction was a pile of blackened stone on the site of the Protestant Church of Our Lady, whose elegant Baroque dome, shaped like a great stone bell, was immortalized by Canaletto in his 18th-century paintings of the riverfront.


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"Eighty-five is pretty old. I don't want to reach a point where my senility level reaches unacceptable proportions, and I don't want to be asked to retire like Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr." -- JUSTICE HARRY A. BLACKMUN  [ A1:6. ]


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Monday, about two officers of the Woolworth Corporation who temporarily stepped aside, misstated the length of John W. Adams's service on the company's board.
Mr.
Adams, who was named interim chairman and chief executive, has been a director since 1981, not 1991.


England Says No Soccer for Hitler's Birthday
The English Football Association announced today that it was pulling out of a soccer match with Germany on April 20, saying there was too much danger of violence because the date is Hitler's birth date.
The football association also said there was evidence that pro- and anti-Nazi demonstrators were planning to converge in Berlin on the day of the game.
"For a period of over three months, since this match was moved to Berlin, we have been fully aware of the risks of disorder," Sir Bert Millichip, president of the association, said in announcing the decision in London.
"We had hoped that these risks might have receded. Unfortunately, in our opinion, they have not."


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about students on an outing in Central Park misidentified their school.
It is St.
David's School, not the Day School.


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A mail promotion by Nynex is being criticized by customers who fear that the personal identification numbers for their calling cards may be used for fraudulent purposes.  [ Page A1. ]
U.S. sales of cars and light trucks outstripped expectations in March, pointing to a stronger-than-expected auto recovery.  [ D1. ]


Charles Winer, 79, TV Writer, Is Dead
Charles Elihu Winer, a television writer and arts administrator, died on Monday at New York University Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Winer had Alzheimer's disease for several years, said his son, Stephen, of Manhattan.


Special Education Absorbs School Resources
Two decades after Congress voted a 1975 law guaranteeing educational equality for the handicapped, New York City's special education system has ballooned into a vast educational industry that costs more than 22 cents of every school dollar and employs one quarter of all school employees.
The system has grown unchecked for 20 years, swelling from an enrollment of 30,000 students in 1974 to today's 130,037, about 13 percent of the city's one million schoolchildren.
With its $1.67 billion budget, special education has become a Cadillac in a school system of broken-down Fords.


Dick Cary, Arranger Of Jazz, Dies at 77
Dick Cary, a jazz arranger, instrumentalist and composer, died yesterday at Glendale Adventist Hospital in Glendale, Calif.
He was 77 and lived in Sunland, Calif.
The cause was cancer, said Floyd Levin, a jazz writer and friend.


Laidlaw Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Valiant Nature Passes Santa Anita Derby
Nine horses were entered yesterday in the $500,000 Santa Anita Derby tomorrow, the major West Coast milestone on the road to the Kentucky Derby.
But Valiant Nature was not among them, and he will run instead one week later against the best Eastern horses in the $500,000 Blue Grass Stakes in Lexington, Ky.
The decision not to run the colt, who outran the star, Brocco, in the Hollywood Futurity in December, was made for tactical reasons by his trainer, Ron McAnally.
But the trainer said it had nothing to do with the caliber of the opposition.
Valiant Nature was passing up another meeting with Brocco, the favorite for the Santa Anita Derby, but he was confronting Holy Bull, the favorite for the Blue Grass.


From Death's Grasp A Torah Is Reborn
Just before noon tomorrow in a synagogue in Queens, a young girl will say a blessing over a 300-year-old Torah that, in accordance with Jewish law and in defiance of evil, has been restored to life.
And in that moment, the bas mitzvah of 12-year-old Jennifer Roth will become a small but potent symbol of Yom Hashoah, the remembrance of the Holocaust.
For, rather than a time of mourning, Jennifer's passage into womanhood and the use of a sacred scroll that had been desecrated by the Nazis will speak of rebirth.


JAPANESE PREMIER SAYS HE WILL QUIT AS SCANDAL GROWS
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, who took office last year promising to clean up Japan's corrupt political system and bring about the broad deregulation of the country, said this afternoon that he would resign.
His announcement came amid a growing scandal surrounding his own finances during the 1980's.
Mr.
Hosokawa's sudden resignation is a major blow to the Clinton Administration, which had closely allied itself with the 56-year-old populist politician.
Washington had hoped that Mr.
Hosokawa would bring about a major shift of power in Japanese society, one that would favor consumers over producers and elected political leaders over bureaucrats.


No Economic Index
To the Editor:
"Law as the Free Market's Rogue" (Law page, March 25) addresses the effects of law on the economy, but does not note the burgeoning empirical evidence on the issue.
The one study you cite is four years old.
The two most recent major articles (by Charles Epp of the University of Wisconsin and by myself) identify errors in previous research and present studies showing there is no association between the number of lawyers and economic growth.


Israelis' Faith In Peace Is Put Under Strain by Bombing and New Attack
As this scarred and bitter town buried its dead from a suicide car bombing, Israel reeled today from a new attack by militant Islamic forces that killed a man, wounded four people and strained the faith of countless Israelis in the chances for peace with the Palestinians.
Perhaps nowhere was Israeli rage more palpable than in Afula, a working-class town in the north.
On Wednesday, a young Palestinian from the nearby West Bank drove to a bus stop here and blew up his car, turning a commuter bus into an inferno that killed 7 Israelis and himself and wounded 44 others.
Some were severely burned and still in serious condition today.


Collective Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31





Goldman Sachs Signs Major New Lease
In a reflection of financial vigor and an uptick in hiring on Wall Street, Goldman Sachs and Company, one of the nation's biggest brokerage concerns, has leased a large block of office space in lower Manhattan to expand its staff.
Although Goldman declined to disclose details, real-estate executives said it has rented 425,000 square feet, or roughly 25 percent of the space, in One New York Plaza, a 50-story office building just north of the Staten Island Ferry Terminal.


Medicinal Marijuana Has Many Drawbacks
To the Editor:
Like the majority of other addictions specialists, I take exception to Dr.
Lester Grinspoon's 20-year crusade to advocate the legal and medicinal use of marijuana (letter, March 25).
Smoking marijuana has no legitimate place in the treatment of nausea induced by chemotherapy.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve's top policy makers are involving themselves in the process of raising and lowering rates, rather than allowing their chairman, Alan Greenspan, to act on his own between meetings.
The move was described as indicative of a growing reluctance to delegate authority to any one person.  [ Page A1. ]


Food Lion Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Man Admits Subway Killing of Student, 16
The man whom the police have accused of killing a 16-year-old student on a Brooklyn subway platform Sunday night surrendered yesterday, saying he had opened fire on a gang of youths to protect his younger brother.
Alvin Green, a 25-year-old Long Island City man who law-enforcement officials say served a prison sentence for shooting a man in a drug dispute in 1988, said he had been slashed with a razor on the F train Sunday night and that he fired when other youths with razors advanced on his brother Kareem Green, 18.


Mayor Giuliani's Policing Strategy; Drug Busts by Beat Cops
Rudolph Giuliani campaigned for mayor on a promise to fight crime and disorder with a zeal that would reassure worried New Yorkers.
Mayor Giuliani's new plans for increasing drug arrests and cracking down on teen-age truants are clearly an attempt to make good on that promise.
The plans are reasonable and deserve a chance to be put to the test.
But the new drug approach could also encourage police corruption and violations of civil liberties unless it is very carefully administered and monitored.


Art in Review
Byron Kim
Max Protetch Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through April 16
Byron Kim's monochromatic paintings look a bit like generic Brice Mardens circa 1972, though they have a conceptual surprise.
Like several other artists in the 1980's and 90's (Peter Halley with his geometric works based on prison floor plans is an example), Mr.
Kim has coded abstraction with specific sociopolitical information.


Patent Dispute Brewing On Software Use of Ads
The apparent conflict between the software industry and the United States Patent and Trademark Office just keeps going, and going, and going.
The Patent Office, which recently reversed itself after granting what critics said was an overly broad patent covering multimedia software, is now taking a beating about a patent covering the use of advertising symbols, like the animated "Energizer Bunny," in software.


Art in Review
Annie Leibovitz
James Danziger Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through April 16
Last year was busy for Annie Leibovitz, as this selection of her work from 1993 demonstrates.
From President Clinton's inauguration to two trips to Sarajevo, Ms.
Leibovitz seems to have been everywhere.


Company Stops Pursuit Of City Work
A company that New York City investigators said last year had received special treatment from members of the Dinkins administration agreed yesterday not to seek any city contracts for the next four years.
The company, Lockheed Information Management Services, was tentatively awarded a $150 million contract in late 1992 to collect parking fines for the city.
The award represented the most significant effort by the Dinkins administration to contract out, or privatize, a city service.


Rome Off the Hook
ESPN said yesterday that it will not discipline an interviewer, JIM ROME, for taunting New Orleans Saints quarterback JIM EVERETT during a live broadcast, prompting Everett to physically attack him.
During the interview on ESPN2 broadcast Wednesday night, Everett lost his temper when Rome called him "Chris Evert" several times, even after the quarterback asked him stop. (AP)


Reviews/Fashion; Virginia Woolf, Meet Anne Klein
Richard Tyler, the Australian who made his reputation as a fashion designer in Los Angeles, brought a fresh twist to American sportswear in his collection for Anne Klein.
The clothes, introduced yesterday morning, were part of the Seventh Avenue fall showings presented in the Bryant Park tents.
The Bloomsbury group, which centered on Virginia Woolf and flourished in London in the first half of this century, was the source for some of the clothes, along with San Francisco and New York in the 1960's, the designer said.
Norfolk jackets, fancy vests, hand-beaded borders and muted tweeds suggest the murky colors of the art-infatuated Bloomsbury set.
The hemlines are pure 60's, extending not much past the top of the thighs.
Usually a wide gap of skin is revealed between the top of the over-the-knee stockings and the end of the skirt.


Power Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Wingfield Goes Pro
DONTONIO WINGFIELD thinks he is ready at 19 for the National Basketball Association, so he left the University of Cincinnati after one year and is making himself available for the draft.
Wingfield led his high school in Albany, Ga., to four state championships.
At 6 feet 8 inches and 250 pounds, he was the Bearcats' leading rebounder with 9 a game and second leading scorer with 16 points. (AP)


Starks Pushing For Playoffs
Less than a month after undergoing arthroscopic surgery on his left knee, John Starks was on the Madison Square Garden court, gingerly taking jump shots before last night's Knicks-Cavaliers game.
Asked whether Starks could return for the playoffs, which begin April 28, Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician, said: "There's reason for optimism. In the next week, we'll have a better idea."


Review/Film; A Life Colored by AIDS
Derek Jarman's "Blue" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Here are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 2, 1993.
Mr.
Jarman died on Feb. 19.
The film opens today at Film Forum 2, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
The sole visual content of Derek Jarman's film "Blue" is the color blue projected uninterruptedly and without variation for the movie's entire 76 minutes.
Against this field of color so evocative of sky, ocean, blindness, heaven and eternity unfolds a soundtrack of music, poetry and scalding excerpts from a diary by the English film maker, who has been living with AIDS for several years.


Inquiry Upgraded on Possible Ford Defect
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has upgraded its investigation of a suspected defect in the steering system of 3.4 million Ford Taurus, Mercury Sable and Lincoln Continental sedans built from 1987 to 1993.
The Taurus is the nation's best-selling car.
Safety investigators are looking at 134 complaints of broken tie rods, which are steel parts that connect the chassis to the wheels.
A Ford Motor Company spokesman said that the inquiry was routine, and that the auto maker was unaware of any defect.
Ford said it was cooperating with investigators and did not currently plan to recall the cars.


2d African Film Festival
One of last year's landmark film series is now an annual event.
The second New York African Film Festival, co-sponsored by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and African Film Festival Inc., begins tonight and will run for more than two weeks at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
An African film festival is especially welcome because of the infrequency with which African films are shown here commercially. (The Ethiopian-financed "Sankofa," opening today at the Harlem Victoria Five Theater, is a notable exception.) It's also welcome because Africa's diverse cultures offer such a wealth of thematic possibilities and because so many of these little-known works happen to be so good.
The series includes 11 first features along with a couple of old favorites, like the 1990 "Tilai" from Idrissa Ouedraogo, the film maker from Burkina Faso whose works have the eloquence and simplicity of folk tales.
The films, from 13 countries, deal with subjects as diverse as life in pre-colonial Africa (Gaston Kabore's "Wend Kuuni," Burkina Faso, 1982) to the romance between an African student and his Russian lover (Abderrahmane Sissako's "October," a 37-minute work from Mauritania, 1992).
The festival's opening feature, Isaac Mabhikwa's "More Time" (Zimbabwe, 1993), is also one of its most topical in that it addresses AIDS.


A Collision Course To Playoffs
Early in the second half of the Nets-Hawks game tonight, P. J. Brown, the New Jersey forward who weighs about 210 pounds, ran smack into Atlanta's 250-pound center Jon Koncak.
The collision sent Brown crashing to the floor, and when he got up, dazed, Brown looked as if he had just seen Elvis.
A foul was called and it was Nets ball.
Brown's teammate, Kenny Anderson, had a question for him.


Review/Film; Reliving a Past of Slavery
In "Sankofa," a contemporary African-American woman travels back in time and experiences slavery.
Haile Gerima's poetic and precisely detailed film takes its audience into its heroine's life and mind as her moral sense is challenged and changed.
No viewer can avoid the discomforting questions the film so eloquently raises.
The opening sequences, set and filmed in Ghana, are alternately seductive and off-putting.
Among drums and chants, a voice invokes ancestral ghosts.
"Spirit of the dead, rise up," the voice says, "and claim your story." The film's title is a West African term meaning to reclaim the past in order to go forward, and "Sankofa" stumbles only in its depiction of the present.


Troops Rampage in Rwanda; Dead Said to Include Premier
One day after the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi were killed in an apparent rocket attack on their plane, the Rwandan capital of Kigali dissolved into terror and chaos today as disparate army and police forces went on a rampage, reportedly killing the country's interim Prime Minister and at least 10 Belgian peacekeeping soldiers.
According to reports received here and at the United Nations, the interim Prime Minister, Agathe Uwilingiyimana, was shot to death after armed men abducted her from a United Nations compound where she had taken refuge.
In addition, according to the reports, three Cabinet ministers as well as other officials and members of their families were abducted and 17 Jesuit priests were killed.


Paving the Road for a Firefighter's Recovery
The funerals are over.
The blaze that killed two New York City firefighters last week is slipping into memory.
But in a Manhattan hospital room, a third casualty lies motionless, hovering between death and an unknown future.
He lies flat on his back, which is burned from head to calf.
Painkillers and sedatives have lulled him into a perpetual doze.
On a monitor above his bed, his heart scribbles its signature over and over in glimmering green.


On Stage, and Off
On, Off and Around the Ballot
The Tony administration committee yesterday held its penultimate meeting before the Tony nominations, with two interesting, if not unexpected, results.
The 24-member committee decided that for this year only, the category of best revival would be split into best musical and best play, the fallout, obviously, from a season when the number of revivals (17) nearly equaled the number of new shows (19).
The other decision was not to modify the rule specifying that the eligibility of performers is determined by the program on opening night, when the nominating committee members see the show.
This means that F. Murray Abraham, who replaced Ron Leibman as Roy Cohn in "Angels in America"; Cynthia Nixon, who replaced Marcia Gay Harden in the same show, and Michael Moriarty, who replaced Richard Chamberlain as Henry Higgins in "My Fair Lady," are ineligible for awards.


Left Exposed on Waiver Wire, Schourek Is Claimed by Reds
They have always tried to keep it from being an awkward situation.
Eric Hillman and Pete Schourek met in 1987 in an instructional league in St.
Petersburg.
Both left-handed pitchers with potential, they became close friends and roommates that fall -- their first in the Mets' system -- and, in many ways, they have been lumped together ever since.
That all changed today.
Hillman is still scheduled to make his first start of the season on Friday night in Houston, when he pitches for the Mets against the Astros.
But Schourek won't be there.
This afternoon, he was claimed from the waiver wire by the Cincinnati Reds.


U.S. Gains Trade Forum For Labor-Equity Issues
Sidestepping opposition from some developing nations, the United States won approval today for labor-related issues to be taken up by the new World Trade Organization that will be created when a global trade-liberalization package is formally signed on April 15.
The deal worked out today at the headquarters of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in Geneva averted the threat of embarrassing public disputes when ministers from 121 nations gather in Marrakesh, Morocco, next week to complete the so-called Uruguay Round of trade-liberalization talks.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Claimed Pete Schourek, pitcher, off waivers from the New York Mets.


Review/Film; Family as Revolution in Microcosm
"The Blue Kite" was shown as part of the 1993 New York Film Festival.
Here are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 2.
The film -- in Mandarin with English subtitles -- opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway and 63d Street.
In China it can't be easy being a film maker, someone who wants to explore on screen the contradictory events that have shaped not only the Communist revolution but also his own life.
It's a delicate, complicated task.
The film maker is dependent on Government departments created by the same system whose legacies he's examining.
The production and release of any film of this kind thus become something of a triumph.


Ralph James, Rear Admiral, Is Dead at 87
Rear Adm.
Ralph K. James, who headed the Navy's Bureau of Ships from 1959 to 1963 and oversaw repairs to battle-damaged American warships in World War II, died on March 31 at the Ginger Cove retirement community in Annapolis, Md.
He was 87.
Admiral James, who retired from the Navy in 1963, died of pneumonia, said Kathy Osterman of the John M. Taylor Funeral Home in Annapolis.


Harbaugh Joins Colts
The Indianapolis Colts came to terms with the free-agent quarterback JIM HARBAUGH and released JACK TRUDEAU.
The Colts were believed to have offered the former Chicago quarterback a two-year contract worth $1.75 million, The Indianapolis Star reported yesterday. (AP)


Lelyveld Will Succeed Frankel As The Times's Executive Editor
Max Frankel, the executive editor of The New York Times for the last eight years, will step down on July 1 and be succeeded by Joseph Lelyveld, the newspaper's managing editor.
The change was announced yesterday by Arthur Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times.
Mr.
Lelyveld, 57, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author who has been a foreign correspondent, columnist and editor in 32 years with The Times, will be succeeded as managing editor by Eugene L. Roberts Jr., a former national news editor of The Times who was executive editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer for 18 years, until 1990.


Ex-Partner Of Clintons To Sell Papers
The Clintons' former partner in the Whitewater land deal, James B. McDougal, has come up with a new way to raise money for his legal bills.
Mr.
McDougal's lawyer, who received 2,000 pages of Whitewater documents from the Clintons' lawyer on Monday, said today that he would sell the set to reporters for $4,000.
The lawyer, Sam Heuer, said just reporters who bought the documents would be allowed to submit questions about them to him and Mr.
McDougal.


Bill Clinton's Arteries -- and Ours
Ask around Little Rock and they tell it to you straight: Bill Clinton when he was Governor could really chow down.
Jalapeno cheeseburgers, mammoth steaks, chicken enchiladas swimming in cream and melted cheese -- artery-clogging fat by the mouthful, with roughage nowhere to be seen.
The habit has endured into the White House, such that Mr.
Clinton's eating habits have become the stuff of jokes.
When David Letterman asked Al Gore to list the top ten best things about being Vice President, Mr.
Gore included: "You get all the french fries the President can't get to."


Bronx Leaders Boycott Ceremony on Federal Aid
Borough President Fernando Ferrer and other elected officials from the Bronx boycotted a ceremony announcing an agreement on a Federal inner-city development program yesterday, saying they were upset that the program would benefit only a small portion of the borough around Yankee Stadium.
The agreement, between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Representative Charles B. Rangel, designated all of Harlem and a slice of the South Bronx as the area the city hopes will be selected as one of six urban "empowerment zones."


No. 3 Justice Official to Step Down Today
Webster L. Hubbell, who announced last month that he would resign as the No. 3 official at the Justice Department, will leave on Friday, a senior department official said today.
Jamie S. Gorelick, the Deputy Attorney General, told reporters today that Mr.
Hubbell was departing and that his successor would probably have a smaller role at the department than Mr.
Hubbell had as Associate Attorney General.


Mayor Giuliani's Policing Strategy; Rounding Up City Truants
On Tuesday, police officers swept 70 truants off the streets of downtown Brooklyn and sent them back to school.
On Wednesday the police spread a wider net across New York City, rounding up 216 truants.
Thus began the Police Department's new program to combat school truancy.
Whether it is the best use of police resources or the most effective way to get students back to school remains to be seen.
But the problem it addresses is real.
On any given day, about 15 percent of the city's 1.1 million students are absent from school.
Some absences are legitimate, many are not.
Students hanging out on the streets can become perpetrators -- and victims -- of crime.
According to Police Commissioner William Bratton, "A significant number are involved in criminal activities of all types, ranging up to robberies."


Music? Romance? Try a Museum
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT would not approve.
At the Museum of Modern Art, where his life's work is on display in a special exhibition, visitors who come to worship at the shrine of architecture have been sneaking off on Friday evenings to the Garden Cafe for free jazz.
There, over a drink and perhaps a cheeseburger or slice of lasagna, dozens of reprobates actually seem to be enjoying the vastly inferior art of music.
Sacrilege.
Uptown, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Friday and Saturday evenings have become date nights.
Up on the Great Hall Balcony, the wine begins to flow at 4 P.M.
The string quintet begins at 5.
As the shadows thicken, couples stake their claim to small tables with two tiny votive candles.
Meaningful glances are exchanged.
Club Met?


The Spoken Word
"HOLLYWOOD AND THE FRENCH NEW WAVE," Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
The final programs in a five-weekend series on the relationship between Hollywood films and the French New Wave.
Tomorrow at 12:30 P.M., "Femmes Fatales" is to feature the film critic Molly Haskell and screenings of Fritz Lang's "Woman in the Window" and Eric Rohmer's "My Night at Maud's." On Sunday at 12:30 P.M., Hollywood films that drew from the French New Wave are to be discussed by Ralph Rosenblum, a professor of film at Columbia University.
There will be screenings of "Hiroshima, Mon Amour," by Alain Resnais, and "The Pawnbroker," by Sidney Lumet.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
"ASIAN ENCOUNTERS: RECENT WORKS BY ASIAN-AMERICAN AND BRITISH-ASIAN FILM MAKERS," Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
A weeklong series of screenings and discussions featuring film makers and writers.
Tomorrow from 1 to 3:30 P.M., a panel discussion on Asian identity in the British and American press, with the film makers Gurinder Chadha, Shu Lea Cheang and Hanif Kureishi and the writer Daryl Chin, and screenings of three short films; admission, $10.
On Sunday at noon, Mr.
Kureishi, the director of "My Beautiful Laundrette," is to discuss the art of the screenplay with the writer Jessica Hagedorn; screenings at 3 and 5 P.M.
Admission to the discussion and screenings: $25, which includes brunch; discussion only, $20; screenings only, $9.
Information: (212) 517-2742.


P.L.O. Called Unready to Take Over
As Israel prepares to turn Gaza and Jericho over to the Palestinians, there are mounting fears among Palestinian and Israeli leaders, and foreign diplomats, that the dearth of planning and preparation by the P.L.O. leadership could be the prelude to chaos in the Israeli-occupied territories.
Persistent squabbling among the Palestinian leaders and poor organization, together with the eccentricities of Yasir Arafat, have left crucial appointments unfilled and agreements ummet, and thrown decisions at the negotiating table to the wind.


Islamic Banking: Faith and Creativity
Dr.
Ala-ud-Din, a dentist in San Jose, Calif., had two choices: save for years to buy a house with cash, or take out a mortgage and violate the law of the Koran.
That was until a third choice emerged.
A small Islamic financing company bought the house and leased it back to Dr.
Din in a 15-year deal that made him a homeowner without violating the religious law that bans Muslims from paying or earning interest.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "A LITTLE MORE MAGIC," Belasco Theater, 111 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
A presentation by the Famous People Players, with life-size puppets.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $40.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In big-city schoolyards, basketball backboards may become billboards.
A COMPANY that specializes in outdoor advertising is seeking to bring advertising to a new outdoor venue: basketball backboards in schoolyards.
Van Wagner Communications, best known for producing the extravagant electric billboards in Times Square, is proposing to create a National Backboard Network in the playgrounds of public schools in 11 big cities, including Boston, Dallas, New York, Philadelphia and Washington.


Clinton Goes To Heartland Seeking Help On Health Bill
President Clinton has found that the farther he gets from Washington these days, the better he likes it.
In speeches, discussions and a televised question-and-answer program in this suburb of Kansas City, Mo., and earlier today in Topeka, Kan., Mr.
Clinton defended his health care plan against its critics and suggested that the chief problem facing him was recalcitrance in Washington.


Western Digital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Gooden's Big Toe Holds Up Rotation
One day after the Mets announced that Dwight Gooden would start the home opener Monday at Shea Stadium, they learned that Gooden's big toe was still soar.
Gooden returned to New York today rather than remain with the team for its weekend series in Houston and is expected to be examined by the team physician, Dr.
David Altchek, on Friady.
His status for Monday's game is uncertain.


Met Is Filled With Memories of Tatiana Troyanos
Tatiana Troyanos, the excellent American mezzo-soprano, showed great loyalty to the Metropolitan Opera after her debut there in 1976, and her fans repaid it last evening, filling much of the house for a memorial concert in her honor.
Miss Troyanos died of cancer last August, at 54, only weeks after her last performances.
James Levine led the Met Orchestra and Chorus and several singers of the company in works variously associated with Miss Troyanos.
He began with the Overture and Serenade from Mozart's "Clemenza di Tito," which loomed especially large in his own relationship with her.


Art in Review
Robert Mangold
Pace Gallery  142 Greene Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through April 23
Robert Mangold's abstractions have always had an early Renaissance purity about them, but his latest paintings play drawn line against colored shape in ways that are positively Siennese.
The shapes are, as usual, Mr.
Mangold's monochrome panels, deployed here in two-panel trapezoidal works whose colors, sometimes matching, sometimes contrasting, run to deep oranges, olive greens, browns and grays.
While subdued, these hues emit a certain radiance; while perfectly flat, they harbor intimations of a soft atmospheric space.


Eric Holtzman Is Dead at 54; Biology Professor at Columbia
Prof.
Eric Holtzman, chairman of the department of biological sciences at Columbia University, was found dead in his office on Wednesday.
He was 54 and lived in Manhattan.
The police said he had apparently committed suicide by poison.


Cowboys Sign Johnston
The Dallas Cowboys signed fullback DARRYL JOHNSTON to a three-year, $4.2 million contract yesterday and announced that the Pro Bowl guard NATE NEWTON has agreed to a contract.
Johnston, who received a $1.8 million signing bonus, becomes the highest-paid fullback in N.F.L. history, the Cowboys said.
No details were announced on Newton's deal. (AP)


Morris Shows Signs of His Old Self In Pitching Indians Past Mariners
Indians 6, Mariners 2
Jack Morris for $350,000 guaranteed?
"I am the bargain in baseball -- they already got their money's worth," Morris said with a smile after he pitched the Cleveland Indians past the Seattle Mariners, 6-2, last night.


Art in Review
Thomas Trosch
Jose Freire Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through May 4
Thomas Trosch's second solo show suggests that the old art-about-art dog can still be taught some new tricks, ones that implicate that most essential art world participant, the collector.


Like Light Bulb Going On, Hospital Will Computerize; Driven by New Trends in Health Care, One Institution Decides to Change in a Day
Anthony R. Macaluso's delicately timed techno-ballet of batch files and interface gates will reach its moment of truth at exactly 1 P.M. on Saturday at St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center.
That's when technicians will throw the switch to take the hospital's new computerized patient-records network fully on line for the first time.
Nearly all of the hospital's 3,500 employees will have been trained.
Debugging SWAT teams will be roving the labs and nurses' stations for trouble.
Every foreseeable contingency has been planned for.
But for Mr.
Macaluso, a hospital vice president overseeing this hospital's unusual transformation, the nagging worry is what he hasn't thought of.
And this is not a business where you can shut down and tinker for a while if things don't fly.


In Maryland, Taking Free Papers in Protest May Soon Be a Crime
In cities and towns across the country, neighborhood and alternative city newspapers and campus dailies sit stacked in public places so that anyone can grab a free copy.
But increasingly, those doing the grabbing are taking entire stacks because they disagree with the editorial content.
Yet even with witnesses and confiscated papers as evidence, publishers have been unable to convince the police and prosecutors that it is a crime to take something that is already free.


Before You Believe in a Litigation Explosion
To the Editor:
It's being said so often that there is a litigation explosion in California, by Gov.
Pete Wilson, among others, that people everywhere are beginning to believe it.
But Governor Wilson and the others are wrong.


Police Seek Ex-Boyfriend After Slaying Of Executive
A Brooklyn Heights woman who had stopped at a local dry cleaner's before going to work at Salomon Brothers was killed yesterday morning when a man followed her into the store, whipped out a 9-millimeter semiautomatic weapon, and shot her six times in the head.
The police were searching yesterday for the woman's ex-boyfriend, Rick Varela, a Manhattan lawyer in his late 40's, who, she had told police, had raped and harassed her.


Why Newspapers Watch Their Language
To the Editor:
In "The Game of the Name" (Op-Ed, April 5), Prof.
Steven Pinker misstates the case about Los Angeles Times guidelines on language.
No words are banned by the guidelines, as even a cursory examination of the documents would show.
Nor is the taint of bigotry assigned to those who use words with potentially offensive connotations.
The professor did not check the facts involved with any of the people who led the committee that drafted the guidelines.


'If' Mitchell Is Nominated to Supreme Court Is Grist for Speculation at the White House
The White House said today that it saw no problem with George J. Mitchell's remaining as Senate majority leader for some time if President Clinton nominated the Senator to fill the impending vacancy on the Supreme Court.
As Presidential aides made it increasingly clear that the Senator from Maine was the leading candidate to replace Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who is retiring from the Court, Dee Dee Myers, the White House spokeswoman, sought to allay concerns about whether he could be an acceptable nominee while doing the President's partisan duty in the Senate.


Family Dollar Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


McCann-Erickson Executive Promoted
John Fitzgerald, the vice chairman and chief operating officer of McCann-Erickson North America in New York, was promoted yesterday to president and chief executive of McCann-Erickson Japan.
Mr.
Fitzgerald, 47, succeeds Donald Dillon, 49, who the agency said would be named later to another international executive position.
Mr.
Fitzgerald, who will be based at McCann Japan's office in Tokyo, will also oversee the office in Osaka.
The offices have 555 employees and combined billings estimated at $800 million from clients like Black &amp; Decker, Coca-Cola and General Motors.


Bosnia Fighting Rages as U.N. Tries to Broker Cease-Fire
Serbian nationalists shelled the United Nations-declared safe area of Gorazde for the 10th day running today as the United Nations commander here shuttled between Bosnian Government and Serbian commanders in a new bid to broker a lasting, nationwide cease-fire.
Face-to-face negotiations did not take place today as scheduled because the Bosnian Government Army's commander, Gen.
Rasim Delic, reportedly refused to meet his Bosnian Serb counterpart, Gen.
Ratko Mladic.
Instead, the United Nations commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose of Britain, spent most of the day ferrying a draft cease-fire plan between the Bosnian and Serbian headquarters.


Canwest Global reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Restaurants
"Do you think the cuisine of my country will finally become popular in yours?" asked my Colombian guest as she dipped a piece of oyster croquette into horseradish sauce and chewed thoughtfully.
There was a long silence.
Finally she said, "This is not anything I recognize but it is one of the most delicious things I've ever eaten." And she passed the plate.
The croquettes were unattractive little brown logs lying in a creamy swamp of horseradish sauce, but when I took a bite my mouth filled with the coppery flavor of fresh oysters.
The slight sharpness of the sauce tempered their richness; it was so delicious it was hard to stop eating.


Diner's Journal
A New Temple
Do people still drink martinis? Richard Krause says yes.
Mr.
Krause, the chef who made his mark in the early 1980's by opening Chinois on Main in Santa Monica, Calif., with Wolfgang Puck before coming to New York to pioneer California cuisine on the East Coast, has named his new restaurant after the drink.
He and his partners have gone all out, using martini glasses without stems that sit in a bowls of ice and offering martinis in five flavors, including one with fresh rosemary and another with pepper vodka and an olive stuffed with chipotle pepper.
After a couple of those, you may not be able to pay much attention to the food, which includes all manner of California classics, from an impeccable Caesar salad to several pizzas topped with exotic ingredients.


At the Bar; A pillar of the law laments that a 'noble profession' has become just another business.
For more than 50 years, the law has been spectacularly good to Sol M. Linowitz.
But more recently, the state of the legal profession has nearly broken his heart.
Mr.
Linowitz, now retired from a senior partnership at Coudert Brothers, former chairman and general counsel of Xerox, former Ambassador to the Organization of American States and negotiator of the Panama Canal Treaty, believes that what was once a great profession has been transformed into an unprincipled, emotionally unrewarding and dollar-driven enterprise.


After Teachers Attacked, Hall Patrols Set
After three teachers at Adlai E. Stevenson High School in the South Bronx were assaulted by students in two days, the school administration yesterday instituted hall patrols to stop students from loitering.
The patrols had been demanded by the school's teachers, who threatened to take unspecified action if the administration did not agree.
"For months, the school has allowed students to loiter in the halls," said Jeffrey Zeitlin, an English teacher who is the chairman of the chapter of the teachers' union in the school, at 1980 Lafayette Avenue.


In Chicago, It's Michael Jordan, .400 Hitter
Michael Jordan, the 31-year-old rookie right fielder for the White Sox, spoke with a few reporters before the exhibition game against the Cubs in Wrigley Field this afternoon.
"What if I got a hit today?" he said.
"You guys would fall over, wouldn't you?"
The reporters smiled, but courteously withheld comment.
Michael Jordan smiled that internationally famous smile, the one that has accompanied him as the star of basketball courts, commercials and home videos.
And then he left to play the game.


Secretary of Defense Wins Few Points for His Candor
When William J. Perry was picked in January to replace Les Aspin as Defense Secretary, the engineer and high-technology entrepreneur was billed as just the man to manage the Pentagon.
But a Defense Secretary always wears two hats, that of manager and foreign-policy strategist.
And while the crisp approach he brings to running the Pentagon has been applauded as an antidote to Mr.
Aspin's rambling style, Mr.
Perry's recent comments on Bosnia have raised questions about how well he is fitting into his second role.


AIDS Virus May Directly Cause a Cancer of the Immune System
Researchers in San Francisco say the AIDS virus may directly cause a cancer of the immune system by inserting itself into a cell's DNA and switching on a dormant cancer gene.
Doctors have thought that these cancers in people with AIDS were always caused by the suppression of the immune system by H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


End of a Missile Vigil


What of Smoking's Costs in Office Time?
To the Editor:
Further on forbidden smoking in office buildings, governmental or other: Having once been a civil servant, I've seen employees repeatedly leave their desks, wait minutes for an elevator, go outdoors, light a cigarette, have a puff or two, start a conversation with another smoker, during which the cigarette smolders a few minutes, take another puff or two and then resume the conversation until one or the other smoker has completed a complaint about clients or fellow workers.


Review/Music; Carmichael Songs in Revue
Hoagy Carmichael's music has more implicit jazz in it than the tunes of any other major American songwriter of the pre-rock era except Duke Ellington.
The sultry, swinging melodies of Carmichael, the self-taught pianist and composer from Bloomington, Ind., were spun from the same spiritual thread as the music of his idol, the great cornetist Bix Beiderbecke.
And "Hoagy on My Mind," a new revue of Carmichael's music that plays through April 16 at the Ballroom (253 West 28th Street, Chelsea) honors his work with an easygoing charm that accentuates the deep strain of Americana in his songs.
The show is an informal pop-jazz musicale in which six musicians led by the singer Barbara Lea, the trumpeter Dick Sudhalter and the pianist and singer Bob Dorough run through many of Carmichael's standards and offer comment on his music and his life.
Although the between-song patter has its stiff moments, the musical performances have the loose-jointed volubility of a jam session conducted by longtime colleagues who like to swing while avoiding any suggestion of high drama.


Europeans to Build Supersonic Plane
With Europe and the United States increasingly jockeying for leadership in efforts to build a new generation of supersonic passenger aircraft, the leading French and British aerospace companies said today that they would link up with their German counterpart to step up development of a successor to the Concorde.
British Aerospace and Aerospatiale of France, which built the Concorde together and which have been studying the possibility of a new supersonic plane for the last four years, said they would now be joined in that effort by Deutsche Aerospace, their partner in the Airbus consortium.


Again, Massacre in the Mideast
The enemies of Mideast peace have struck again, slaughtering yet more innocents and threatening new disruption of negotiations between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The murderous hatreds that inspire Israeli and Palestinian zealots did not begin with Baruch Goldstein's mosque massacre in Hebron.
They are not likely to end with the latest atrocities by Hamas -- the car-bombing of a bus in Afula on Wednesday, killing seven Israelis; a bus-stop shooting in Ashdod yesterday, and a threat of still more attacks to come.


The New South Americans: Friends and Partners
On Rio's bay, two huge Brazilian cannons have been waiting for Argentine warships for decades, monuments to the long enmity between South America's two regional powers.
But today the guns are frozen with rust, visited by tourists, many of them Argentines.
Ten years ago, Argentina and Brazil were run by military dictators, who inflated defense budgets and sharpened nationalist tensions.
Now, with both countries under civilian rule, they have discovered that former enemies can make good trading partners.


Bills Re-sign Tasker
STEVE TASKER, the Buffalo Bills' special teams ace, has agreed to a new three-year deal that will increase his pay to a reported $750,000 a year.
The Bills struck the deal Wednesday with Tasker, an unrestricted free agent who is considered among the league's top special teams players.


Nottingham Journal; Who's Merry Now? Sherwood Forest May Be Sold
There isn't much left of Sherwood Forest, and what there is, Robin Hood would hardly recognize.
Farmland, pasture, coal mines and urban sprawl have claimed most of the trees.
Where there is greenwood -- scattered pockets like islands adrift on the dull Midlands plain -- it consists mostly of dense stands of Mediterranean pine, imported and planted by the Government after World War I as a timber cash crop.
Bu


Word of Plans for Additional Tax Cuts Puts Albany Lobbyists in a Frenzy
With a proposal to cut $400 million in taxes on the budget negotiating table, but no decision on which taxes to cut, the State Capitol was filled today with furious lobbying by companies large and small seeking reductions for their industries.
Lobbyists for soda and beer companies stalked the corridors, brief cases brimming with memorandums on how to cut beverage taxes.
The New York State Home Builders Association rousted its 4,000 members to call lawmakers with a proposal to reduce real-estate-gains taxes.
Securities companies in Manhattan launched fax machine assaults with proposals for a tax credit worth $30 million to their industry.
Industrial giants like Eastman Kodak, I.B.M. and General Electric pressed for arcane tax code changes as valuable as they were oddly named: double-weighted sales, NOLs and the AMT.


After a Money Hunt, a Library's Real Treasures Are in Tatters
Classics by James Joyce, Alexandre Dumas and Zane Grey lay atop stacks of irreparably damaged books at the Fort Worth Central Library today.
Their spines cracked, covers ripped and pages torn, they seemed unlikely victims of a frenzied mob.
But these works of masters were among the thousands of books hurled from shelves and mauled on Tuesday evening as more than 500 people stampeded through the downtown library looking for money.
They were responding to an announcement by a Dallas radio station that it had placed $5 and $10 bills in books in the fiction section of the library.
The station, KYNG-FM, urged listeners to go on a treasure hunt.


Inside Art
Related by Money
A bit of nail biting is going on behind the scenes at art galleries and auction houses.
Will the recent volatility in the financial markets and uncertainty about interest rates hurt the big New York auctions of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art that are less than a month away?
The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed yesterday at close to what it was during the week of the Impressionist and modern art sales in November.
But financial experts say the mood now is different than it was then: a lot of the optimism has evaporated.


Books of The Times; Forster's Life, Neatly Divided at 45
E. M. Forster
A Biography
By Nicola Beauman
Illustrated. 404 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $30.
With this book, the first question that springs to mind is, Why another Forster biography just now?
Although P. N. Furbank's "E. M. Forster: A Life" was published 15 years ago, it remains a fine model of the biographical art, and little new information that would seriously alter Mr.
Furbank's assessment has turned up since.
Written in lovely, casual prose that Forster himself would have admired, the book depicted the author's life with both sympathy and candor.
Its one shortcoming was a failure to offer a full critical appraisal of Forster's novels; by dwelling on the life rather than the work, Mr.
Furbank left room for future Forster scholars.


In Israel, Tears for Car Bomb Victims


For Children
It's time to dash outdoors!
But can April, with its showers, be trusted?
Here are activities that can be enjoyed indoors, not only when it's raining but also after dinner, in the miraculous lull before bedtime.  'Growler' Tapes
Recommended ages: 3 to 10


TV Weekend; Another British Classic Is Imported
The BBC's six-and-a-half hour production of "Middlemarch" has been something of a sensation in England, reaping hefty ratings and pushing George Eliot's 1872 novel onto the best-seller lists.
Period costume drama, elegantly produced, has returned triumphantly to British television, which in turn, of course, means our own "Masterpiece Theater." "Middlemarch" begins a six-week run Sunday on the PBS series.
The British enthusiasm is quite understandable.
Apart from providing a whopping good story with romances and schemings to spare, George Eliot -- a pen name for Mary Ann Evans, who thought, correctly, she would have more literary acceptance with a man's name -- creates in astonishing detail an enclosed English village in which it was still possible to "make one's way," by hook or crook.
Everyone knew everyone else.
Accents might vary but all faces were white.
People knew their place.
Society might have its faults, but there was no doubt that England represented civilization at its most advanced.
Returning from a trip to France, where they ate odd things like frogs legs and snails, one character heartily digs into a real meal of beef and ale.
Simple, substantial, unshakable.


CHRONICLE
A frog can turn into a prince, but can a President turn into a frog?
When PRESIDENT CLINTON went backstage at the Kennedy Center on Wednesday after watching a new production of "The Sleeping Beauty" by the Royal Ballet, he pointed to a dancer dressed as a frog and said, "I want one of those masks."


Art in Review
Nicole Eisenman
Jack Tilton Gallery  47-49 Greene Street  SoHo  Through May 7
This show of recent work by the 28-year-old Nicole Eisenman is among the smartest, funniest, most inventive solo exhibitions of the season.
Tilton's walls are crammed with dozens of unframed drawings and paintings whose mini-narratives, visual puns and mythological burlesques, executed in a fluid draftsmanly style, bring Reginald Marsh and comic-book fantasy together in audacious combinations.


A Disabilities Program That 'Got Out of Hand'
Emily Fisher Landau, a member of a wealthy New York City real estate family, had long wanted to create a model educational program for bright youngsters with learning disabilities.
Mrs.
Landau herself experienced trouble reading as a girl, and it wasn't until she was 56 years old that she was diagnosed as dyslexic.
So a decade ago she chose the Dalton School in Manhattan, one of the pre-eminent private schools in America, to create a Fisher Landau learning disability program.


3 Students Are Charged After Officer Is Attacked at a High School
Three young women were charged yesterday with attacking a police officer outside a Brooklyn high school.
The police said a group of teen-agers, all thought to be students at the school, punched the officer, pulled her hair, beat her with her own nightstick and tried to goad each other into taking her gun.
The officer, Elizabeth McCrory, was not seriously injured in the incident at South Shore High School, at 6565 Flatlands Avenue in Canarsie, but she was admitted to the Brookdale Hospital Medical Center for observation.


Review/ Dance; Joffrey Revives Legendary Ballet By Massine
LIKE carrots and spinach, there are legendary ballets in the international repertory that are good for you even if they are not to your taste.
"Les Presages" ("Omens"), which Leonide Massine choreographed in 1933 as the first of his celebrated "symphonic ballets" is -- trust me -- one of those.
Set to Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony, this allegory about Man and his old friend Destiny is aggressively grandiose, possibly dated.
But it is also never less than brilliant or eye-riveting in the spectacular revival that the Joffrey Ballet has just brought to the New York State Theater.


Review/Jazz; Happy Anniversary, Verve Records
Verve Records' 50th anniversary show at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night was lucky to have been as successful, in its own functional way, as it was.
Musicians work better warmed up, and performances build not in the chronology of sound bites, but at length.
The show, which was meant to be packaged for PBS, kept the performances short and sandwiched between simple introductions read by the hosts Vanessa Williams and Herbie Hancock.
And musicians were hustled on and off stage for virtually every tune, destroying any sense of continuity.
Still, the concert, more than three hours long and heavy with jazz stars, had moments of real beauty.
Meant to cover a good portion of the label's history, from its founder Norman Granz's first concert in 1944 to the contemporary fusion it sells today, the show almost by definition had to wrestle with Verve's immense history as well as the paucity of the original performers.
Verve is lucky: it has spent a good portion of the last several years cultivating older musicians, and on occasion they came through.


Helped by an Early Easter, Sales Surge for Retailers
Sales at the country's retail-store chains leaped ahead in March, driven by the arrival of spring and an earlier Easter that inspired consumers to buy warm-weather clothes and products for their homes and yards.
Many of the nation's largest retailers reported double-digit sales gains last month.
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the country's largest retail company, said its same-store sales jumped 15 percent.
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company had an astounding 16.8 percent comparable-store sales increase, and same-store sales at J. C. Penney stores rose 14 percent.


Review/Theater; Amid Pain and Din, A Mighty Medea
MOUNTAIN climbers have Everest.
Swimmers have the English Channel.
Actresses have "Medea."
The title character of Euripides' tragedy is one of the huge, ravenous roles of dramatic literature.
It will take everything a performer can give, then ask for more.
Sheer talent is not enough.
Courage and a certain recklessness are required to conquer it.
A wild and exotic creature who knows potions that cure and poisons that kill, Medea is also a forsaken wife and tortured mother.
She is one of us and not like us at all.


Corrections
A chart on Monday with an article about links between large medical centers in Manhattan and other hospitals misstated the current academic affiliation of Lenox Hill Hospital.
It is affiliated with New York University Medical Center, no longer with New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Holocaust Lamentations Echo at Vatican
Pope John Paul II welcomed the Chief Rabbi of Rome to the Vatican today as guest of honor at a concert to honor the memory of the victims of the Holocaust.
"Many at that time mourned, and their lament resounds still," the Pope told 5,000 invited guests in the immense audience hall next to St.
Peter's Basilica.
"We hear them here, too. Their lament did not perish with them, but lifts up strong, struggling, heart-rending, and it says, 'Do not forget us.' "


COMPANY NEWS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., said its aerospace division had received a 10-year contract valued at $280 million to supply the General Electric Co. with jet engine components.
ASA INTERNATIONAL LTD., has agreed to acquire Profitkey International Inc. of Salem, N.H., for an undisclosed amount of stock.


U.S. Seeks to Ease Process of Getting Disability Benefits
Deluged with new applications, Social Security officials today proposed sweeping changes in how decisions are made on who gets disability benefits.
But advocates for the disabled said the changes would leave hundreds of thousands of disabled people ineligible for benefits.
The officials said the changes would speed up decisions, reducing the time for initial action on an application to an average of 40 days, from the current 155.
The officials said that people unable to work could still qualify for benefits.


Market Place; An offering in a British phone and cable TV venture shapes up.
FOR investors following the much-touted convergence of the telephone and cable television industries, the next few weeks may bring an opportunity.
U S West, the Denver-based telecommunications company, and Tele-Communications Inc., the cable television giant, are expected to decide whether to make a public offering of shares in TeleWest, their joint venture in Britain.
TeleWest is running neck and neck with Nynex, the New York-based phone company, as the largest cable operator in Britain.
What has attracted the American companies is not just the chance to build cable systems, but to offer both television and telephone service over the same fiber optic lines, with the promise of developing additional entertainment and information services.


Resignation News Jolts Japan Stocks
The shocking announcement today that Japan's embattled Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, intends to resign put stock prices into a temporary tailspin.
But analysts said the news created a sense of uncertainty rather than panic, and the world's second-largest market later rebounded to close slightly higher for the day.


Trenton Panel Offers Plan On School Aid
A special commission named by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman today recommended solving New Jersey's nettlesome school financing problems by making all but the very poorest districts pick up substantially more of the costs of running their schools.
The commission's plan would also limit special aid from the state to only that which is essential to bring the poorest districts into closer parity with the richest ones.
And richer school districts could not increase their own spending by more than the rate of inflation each year -- a proposal that would put a stringent brake on wage increases for teachers.


Sounds Around Town
Dixie Carter
Dixie Carter, Cafe Carlyle, Madison Avenue at 76th Street, (212) 744-1600.
Dixie Carter's highly personal range of material has lighted up the Cafe Carlyle on her four previous appearances.
This year, she is offering a "best of" collection, largely made up of repeats of her earlier successes.
Three of these are songs by the pianist, singer and composer John Wallowitch, who was her vocal coach when she first came to New York 31 years ago and has been a source of many of her best songs since then.
She is backed at the Carlyle by the pianist Mike Renzi, the bassist Bruce Samuels, the violinist Richard Henrickson and the drummer Orrin Odze.
There are two shows tonight and tomorrow night, at 8:45 and 10:45.
The cover charge is $40; there is no minimum.
JOHN S. WILSON Grady Tate Quartet
Grady Tate Quartet, Fat Tuesdays, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
Grady Tate, who was well established as a jazz drummer in 1968, had his career turned around that year when the arranger Gary McFarland featured him as a singer on a recording of "Windmills of My Mind." The recording was such a hit that it identified Mr.
Tate as a singer as well as a drummer; 25 years later, it remains a high point of his repertory.
His shows are today and tomorrow at 8 P.M., 10 P.M. and midnight and on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
For each night, there is a $20 music charge and a $10 minimum.
J.
S.
W.


Review/Art; Taking It Personally: Putting Emotions to Paper
As the tide of didactic, agenda-driven art begins to recede, and the complex, personal voice comes to the fore, an artist like Joan Snyder is starting to get the attention she deserves.
Now in her mid-50's, she has been exhibiting for 25 years, though only fairly recently have midcareer laurels begun to be thrown in her direction.
One of them took the form of a survey titled "Joan Snyder: Works With Paper," which opened at the Allentown Museum in Pennsylvania last fall and now appears, in a radically slimmed-down version, at Hirschl &amp; Adler Modern.
Actually, slimmed-down understates the case.
Of the 50-odd paintings and prints at Allentown, only 15 appear here, packed into a small, difficult space.
Under the circumstances, it is no surprise that the work, which spans two decades, doesn't get a chance to build and interact the way it can when seen in bulk and that her astonishingly versatile use of paper as a medium is incompletely explored.


No Headline
"If you dig hard enough in any kid, you'll find a problem. If you want to have something to write down, you'll find something to write down." JEANNIE WANG, a former teacher at the Dalton School  [ B6:1. ]


INSIDE
New Social Security Rules Urged on Disability Benefits
Social Security officials proposed sweeping changes that advocates for the disabled said would cost thousands their benefits.
Page A18.
Sharing Power at the Fed
The Federal Reserve's top policy makers are sharing in rate decisions with their chairman, Alan Greenspan.
Page D1.
Call for More Aid to Bronx
Bronx officials are angry that a Federal urban development program will benefit only a small part of the borough near Yankee Stadium.
Page B1.
Pope Welcomes Rome Rabbi
The Chief Rabbi of Rome was guest of honor at a concert in the Vatican to honor the memory of the victims of the Holocaust.
Page A8.


Christmas in April?


Manning Still Has a Level to Climb
Danny Manning slipped the white pad onto his right elbow.
Between the pad and his skin, there was green piece of foam.
Manning, a finesse player with a delicate shooting touch, didn't like the idea of the extra baggage on his shooting arm.
"The elbow? It could be better," Manning said, shrugging. "It's still sore."


Home Video
Calling on 'Mrs. Doubtfire'
For all the talk about multimedia, home video lives for the megahit, the rare super movie that packs theaters to the tune of $200 million or more at the box office and then rings cash registers for months with sales in the millions of cassettes.


When the I.R.S. Is a Soft Touch
Despite its reputation among most taxpayers as a fierce bill collector, the Internal Revenue Service is proving in many cases to be a most patient and forgiving creditor.
Or so it seems under an I.R.S. program that some might think is overly generous in settlements with delinquent taxpayers.


Lazare Kaplan Int'l reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


CHRONICLE
The Visa charge card may be, as the commercial says, "everywhere you want to be," but it wasn't where the PRINCESS OF WALES was when she went on a shopping expedition the other day in Salisbury, England.
The Princess tried to buy two men's shirts at Marks &amp; Spencer on Saturday and was rebuffed when she handed over her Visa card.
The store accepts only cash or its own charge card.


A Dash of Africa To Start the Day
Byron Lars started yesterday with a high-voltage show that was better than a pot of espresso for waking up his audience.
His theme was Africa, and he knew how to play it.
With a drummer on each side of the stage to set the tempo, the models cavorted down the runway in crocodile boots with bamboo heels and sported cornrow braids, masses of African bead necklaces, giant mask handbags, tie-dyed coats, sequined leopard prints and, occasionally, a set of animal horns.
One model even balanced a basket on her head.


Review/Film; The New Boy in a Town Ruled by Coincidence
A dusty, desolate Wyoming town is a logical setting for an updated film noir.
The first of many gleeful twists in "Red Rock West" is that Nicolas Cage arrives, as the man least likely to survive a tangle of murder, greed and infidelity.
Michael is not stupid; he just has the hapless luck of the terminally honest.
He drives 1,200 miles from Texas to a promised job at a Wyoming oil rig, only to admit on his application that he has a bad knee.
Back on the road, he spends his last $5 on gas, though an unguarded cash drawer is spilling bills in front of him.
This time his honesty saves him, for the gas-station owner enters at the moment Michael would have had his hand in the till.
The director and co-writer, John Dahl, keeps up this perfect swift timing throughout the film, playfully loading on every suspense-genre trick he can imagine.
"Red Rock West" is a terrifically enjoyable, smartly acted, over-the-top thriller.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.44
3.48
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.52
3.55
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.92
3.94
2.99
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.86
6.90
5.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.21
7.24
6.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.05
8.09
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.54
6.00
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Japanese Market Uncertain
When the Prime Minister announced his plans to resign, the Tokyo Stock Excahnge plunged, but it later leveled off.
Page D1.


Art in Review
Ruth Orkin
Witkin Gallery  415 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through April 17
Life on the streets of New York City provided Ruth Orkin with the subjects of some of her best-known photographs.
Orkin, a photojournalist who died in 1985, is perhaps best known for a gently funny 1947 sequence of children playing cards; as the game goes on, the children display all the emotions of slyness, eagerness and pride that adults hide behind poker faces.


It's Going to Get Uglier Before It Gets Prettier


U.S. Says Force Is Still a Choice In Bosnia Crisis
Seeking to restore credibility to American diplomacy in the Balkans, the White House today essentially repudiated remarks by two senior military officials that the United States was not prepared to use military power now to prevent the Bosnian town of Gorazde from being overrun by Serbian nationalists.
The national security adviser, Anthony Lake, said in a speech at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore that the Administration was still open to using air strikes to protect the town, where Serbian forces intensified a siege 10 days ago.


Sounds Around Town
John Hicks
John Hicks, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
John Hicks is a feverish pianist who uses torrents of notes as ideas.
He is to be joined by the immensely resourceful and satisfying saxophonist Joe Lovano, along with his longtime bassist, Walter Booker.
It's a fine trio that will overload the room with music.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 10, midnight and 2 A.M.; there is a $15 cover charge and an $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Art Farmer
Art Farmer, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
Art Farmer, a fluegelhornist, is leading a group filled with stars, including the much overlooked saxophonist Jerome Richardson and some younger players, including Geoff Keezer on piano, Ron Blake on saxophone and Marvin (Smitty) Smithond on drums.
Sets today and Saturday are at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and at 1 A.M.; on Sunday there is no third set.
The cover is $12 and the minimum is $8.
P.
W.
Jazz Album of the Week
Marty Ehrlich: "Can You Hear a Motion?" (Enja/80522/$14.99/CD only).
Over the last 10 years, the saxophonist, clarinetist, flutist, composer and band leader Marty Ehrlich has quietly been producing some of the more beautiful, and experimental, records coming out of the jazz world.
"Can You Hear a Motion?" may be his best yet, an album loaded with his smooth and intelligent clarinet solos (there are two tributes to the clarinetist John Carter) along with some nicely gnarled interplay with the saxophonist Stan Strickland.
Mr.
Ehrlich and Mr.
Strickland go back to the early 1970's, and together they're about as empathetic as any two musicians working; they're backed by the bassist Michael Formanek and the drummer Bobby Previte.
The album moves from agitated and swinging compositions to pieces that have the control and stasis of chamber music, and it's all perfectly calibrated and precise.
P.
W.


Treasury Prices Rise Moderately
The prices of Treasury securities moved moderately higher yesterday, partly on buying related to rallies in the mortgage-backed and municipal securities markets.
Many market analysts said a large part of the Treasury market's recent weakness had resulted from portfolio managers' selling Treasuries to hedge against declines in other fixed-income products that were adversely affected by rising interest rates.
Hedge funds, needing cash to cover redemptions, also sold Treasuries.


Bernard R. Bell, 82, World Bank Official
Bernard Raymond Bell, an economist and a former deputy director of the World Bank, died on March 29 at his home in Washington.
He was 82.
He died of cancer, his family said.


But in Singapore Peaceful Citizens Feel Safe
To the Editor:
The case of a convicted vandal sentenced to a flogging in Singapore (editorial, April 2) brings to light a fundamental difference in perspective and understanding of rights and responsibilities between the United States and Singapore, which we believe is well worth emphasizing.


Dickson's Yacht Loses Its Mast
Chris Dickson's hopes of winning the Whitbread Round the World Race toppled late Wednesday along with his sailboat's 85-foot mast.
The towering spar on Tokio broke apart in two places and fell overboard into the South Atlantic Ocean.
The 60-foot yacht had been facing 25-knot headwinds and pounding seas off the coast of Brazil since leaving Uruguay last Saturday.
The leader of the competition, which began on Sept. 25, is now Intrum Justitia of Sweden.


For Many in Arab Town, Israelis 'Should Feel What We Feel'
As a siren marking Holocaust remembrance day in Israel wailed over a radio and army gunfire echoed in the streets here, Khaled Abdullah viewed the car-bomb attack in Afula, Israel, on Wednesday through a prism of Palestinian pain.
Television images of the carnage in the northern Israeli town had left him cold, he said today.


Abroad at Home; The Blackmun Legacy
Years ago I met Justice Harry Blackmun and his wife, Dottie, at a judicial conference in Colorado.
Mrs.
Blackmun asked how I had traveled there and said they had come by car.
"Harry drives," she said, "and I read him the cert. petitions."


Review/Film; Menage a Trois With Hip Pretensions
Groaning and eye-rolling aren't possible for inanimate objects, but if they were, the portrait of Jack Kerouac seen in "Threesome" wouldn't keep a straight face.
Kerouac decorates a bedroom in the college dormitory apartment where Eddy (Josh Charles), Stuart (Stephen Baldwin) and Alex (Lara Flynn Boyle) flatter themselves into thinking they are a boldly bohemian trio.
The film is so proud of its alleged daring that it even begins with a dictionary definition of the word "deviant." "Sitcom" would have been more like it.
It cannot have been easy to throw three young, nubile characters into close quarters and sustain an utterly sexless, charmless atmosphere.
But Andrew Fleming ("the 'Generation X' film maker whose age belies his considerable experience behind the camera," according to production notes) has done exactly that.
Mr.
Fleming treats the non-events in this story as if they were of monumental importance, meanwhile managing to postpone the inevitable three-way sexual encounter until the final reel.
If you are sufficiently interested, you may wonder why three people sharing very close quarters don't decide to fool around until they are out skinny-dipping, in a highly visible spot, where they can be interrupted by a troupe of kiddie hikers.


Fed Shares In Chief's Rate Power
Without a vote or even a formal discussion, the Federal Reserve's top policy makers are taking over the process of raising and lowering rates, rather than allowing their chairman, Alan Greenspan, to act on his own between meetings, as he often has in the past.
Several Federal Reserve officials, speaking on the condition of anonymity, described the new approach not as implying criticism of Mr.
Greenspan, but as a sign of growing reluctance to delegate authority to any single person.
In fact, both of the Fed's recent moves to raise rates, in February and March -- the first increases in five years -- were made by the policy makers as a group.
They acted in the face of faster economic growth and growing concerns about inflation.


Acclaim Entertainment (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Nuclear Plant Shut Down After Quick Power Surge
A nuclear plant in southern New Jersey, trying to reduce power after grass clogged its cooling-water intake yesterday, went through a power swing before an automatic system shut the plant down, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said.
After the shutdown, the commission said, an emergency cooling system came on twice when it should not have, spilling radioactive water into the plant's basement.


Burlington Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Harding Won't Receive White House Invitation
A black-tie dinner and White House ceremony next week is expected to draw 150 athletes who competed in the Lillehammer Winter Olympics.
TONYA HARDING won't be one of them.
The United States Olympic Committee, which lost a court battle to hold hearings on whether Harding could skate in the Olympics, decided not to invite her to the event, a U.S.O.C. spokesman, MIKE MORAN, said yesterday.
"This is a social event we are sponsoring for the Olympic team and we thought we would be well advised not to create a distraction in Washington for this series of events," Moran said. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  JAPANESE PREMIER TO RESIGN
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan, who took office last year promising political reform and economic deregulation, said he would resign amid a scandal surrounding his own finances in the 1980's.
A1  U.S.
RESTATES POLICY ON BOSNIA  The White House essentially repudiated remarks by two senior military officials that the United States was not prepared to use military power now to prevent a Bosnian town from being overrun by Serbs.
A1


Dow Jones's Earnings Rise 29.8%
Dow Jones &amp; Company said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings rose 29.8 percent as a result of increased profitability in all of its businesses.
The company reported net income of $40.2 million, or 40 cents a share, up from $30.9 million, or 31 cents a share, for the quarter a year earlier.


Knicks Saved by Harper's Late 3-Pointer
On paper, it was expected to be an easy victory for the Knicks.
But on the court, it was an immense struggle.
Battling into overtime against an injury-riddled Cleveland Cavaliers team, the Knicks finally prevailed, 97-94, at Madison Square Garden.
It took a 3-point jumper by Derek Harper with 6.7 seconds left in overtime to win it.


Not Being 'Stupid' Looks Smart On a Tough Day at the Masters
It was a giddy first round of the Masters today, featuring the sort of taut theatrics and odd explosions usually reserved for the back nine on Sunday.
There were eagles and triple bogeys, chip shots into the lake, putts off the green and one tee shot that traveled about 50 yards.
And those were from the leaders.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Panthers Tie Flyers  Gord Murphy's slow, 40-foot backhand shot beat Philadelphia goalie Tommy Soderstrom at 6 minutes 11 seconds of the third period and pulled the visiting Florida Panthers into a 3-3 tie with the Philadelphia Flyers last night.
The lazy backhand capped a comeback from a two-goal deficit.
"I lost it on the way," said Soderstrom.
The Flyers were without Eric Lindros, their leader and top goal-scorer.
He suffered a sprain and ligament tears in his right shoulder Monday and probably will miss the final four regular-season games. (AP) Blues 6, Kings 2: Brendan Shanahan scored twice for the second consecutive game at St.
Louis.
The Blues star has seven goals in his last six games and is zeroing in on his second consecutive 50-goal season, with 47 goals and four games remaining. (AP) N.B.A.
Nuggets Boost Chances  Dikembe Mutombo had 11 blocked shots for the second straight game and also had 13 points and 13 rebounds as Denver broke Seattle's nine-game winning streak and improved its playoff chances with a 104-90 home victory last night.
The Nuggets now have a three-game lead over the Los Angeles Lakers for the eighth and final Western Conference playoff spot.
Reggie Williams led all scorers with 24 points as the Nuggets broke their four-game losing streak. (AP) Rockets 134, Warriors 102: The Houston Rockets set a franchise record for 3-point shooting, and Hakeem Olajuwon got his eighth career triple double in a victory over the visiting Golden State Warriors.
Houston made 75 percent (12 of 16) of its long-range shots.
Olajuwon had 26 points, 13 rebounds and 10 assists. (AP) Jazz 99, Mavericks 82: Karl Malone scored 25 points, and Felton Spencer 17 with 14 rebounds as Utah beat Dallas at Salt Lake City. (AP) TENNIS  Sunshine for Sabatini  After fumbling through a first set in which her serve failed four times, fourth-seeded Gabriela Sabatini won 10 straight games and 12 of the last 13, producing a 4-6, 6-0, 6-1 victory over Amanda Coetzer in the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships yesterday in Amelia Island, Fla.
"The good thing was, I maintained my mind in the match, kept my mind tough," said Sabatini.
In an upset of minor proportions, eighth-seeded Magadelena Maleeva, last year's most improved player but this year's most erratic, was eliminated, 7-6 (7-3), 6-4, by 19th-ranked Sabine Hack of Germany.
But top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario made swift work of Belgium's Laurence Courtois, 6-1, 6-2, and second-seeded Conchita Martinez downed Leila Meskhi, 6-2, 6-3.
Also advancing to the quarterfinals were Lindsay Davenport and Chanda Rubin.


A Mid-City Arcadia of Forests and Flowers
Spring-starved New Yorkers (where are those daffodils?) will find it busting out all over at Rockefeller Center tomorrow at 8 A.M., when the second annual Rockefeller Center Flower and Garden Show flings open its figurative doors.
There are no doors, of course, to this free outdoor show, for which a forest of 20-foot Italian cypresses has suddenly sprung up in front of the G.E. building on Rockefeller Plaza, between West 48th and West 51st Streets.
Not to mention a waterfall, a thatched cottage, an Elizabethan knot garden, a 16-foot cedar tower, glass houses full of orchids and tropical plants, and thousands of plants forced into bloom, from jasmine to clematis to lilies.
Around the skating rink (which still has ice and skaters, one of those nice incongruities about a spring flower show), there are a handful of smaller exhibits, featuring things like handmade birdhous es and a medieval garden of herbs.


Justice Aide Leaves Today
Webster L. Hubbell, who announced last month that he would resign as the No. 3 official at the Justice Department, will leave on Friday, Deputy Attorney General Jamie S. Gorelick said today.
Mr.
Hubbell, a golfing partner of President Clinton and a former law partner of Hillary Rodham Clinton at the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, Ark., has said he would step aside to avoid embarrassing the Clintons as he sought to respond to former partners in the firm who had accused him of billing improprieties.


METRO DIGEST
MAYOR AND CORTINES IN ACCORD, AIDES SAY
In a late-night meeting with Mayor Giuliani, Schools Commissioner Ramon C. Cortines agreed to the Mayor's demand that he cut 2,500 jobs from the schools administration, aides to the Mayor said.
A1.
DISABILITIES PROGRAM GOT OUT OF HAND
In the last two decades, the learning disabilities field has boomed at both public and private schools, spawning an industry of highly paid specialists who treat loosely defined reading and language problems that no one knows very much about -- and that in some cases may not need treatment.
A1.


Some Macy Creditors Raise Disclosure Issue
Junior creditors of R. H. Macy &amp; Company want to know why Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, the law firm representing the retailer in its bankruptcy case, did not disclose its relationship with Fidelity Investments, one of Macy's most powerful senior creditors.
After questioning Weil's acceptance of a recent assignment to represent Fidelity in the bankruptcy case of another retailer, Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc., junior creditors questioned why the law firm did not disclose previous relationships with Fidelity, as required by bankruptcy law.


Dow Gains 13.53 Points in Subdued Trading
Stocks ended higher yesterday, moving from early losses to their strongest point at the close of the session.
Trading was subdued after a huge gain on Tuesday and mixed results on Wednesday.
The absence of any anti-inflationary signs from Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, along with a moderate advance in the Treasury market, helped to buoy the stock market.
So did the release of better-than-expected retail sales for March, a day after auto makers announced strong sales for the month.
Both are significant signs of strength in the consumer sector of the economy.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the recall of Chinese-made crayons found to contain lead included an incomplete identification of one importer, supplied by the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
The importer is Fred Baum Imports Inc., the consumer agency said later.


Facing Suits, Askin Funds Seek Chapter 11 Protection
Three investment funds run by Askin Capital Management filed for protection from the funds' creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal bankruptcy code yesterday after lawsuits were filed by at least two brokerage firms from which the funds had borrowed money, David J. Askin, the company's president, said.
In the last two months, the $600 million that Askin had managed for wealthy individuals and institutions has essentially been wiped out.


Review/Art; Dark Side of the American Psyche
In the five years since Cady Noland's last New York show, she has become something of an international art star, known for seemingly chaotic installation pieces that probe the dark side of the nation's psyche.
Her hardware-laden, quasi-documentary style, an astute mix of strategies identified with Pop Art, Minimalism and Post-Minimalism, is characterized by scattered arrangements of objects and big sheets of aluminum or galvanized iron that often are simply leaned against a wall.
The sheets are printed with enlarged wire-service photos of politicians and celebrities; the objects, which are also mostly metal, include handcuffs, walkers, barbecue grills and stretches of chain-link fence; references to history, current events and patriotism abound.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the career of Justice Harry A. Blackmun misspelled the names of two previous nominees for the Supreme Court seat he ultimately filled.
They are Clement F. Haynsworth Jr. and G. Harrold Carswell.
A related news analysis article, about Supreme Court nominations by past presidents, misspelled the given name of a Constitutional scholar at Harvard Law School.
He is Laurence H. Tribe.


Yeltsin's On-and-Off Decrees on Bases Cloud the Policy Outlook
Conflicts between President Boris N. Yeltsin and his Government have confused diplomats and complicated the West's efforts to gauge the intentions behind Russia's more assertive foreign policy, especially in former republics of the Soviet Union.
A week after contradictory declarations from Mr.
Yeltsin and his Foreign and Defense Ministries over when Russia may join a military cooperation program with NATO, confusion arose today over Russia's desire to negotiate permanent arrangements on military bases in the neighboring republics.


Review/Music; Masur's 'Jeanne d'Arc' Gives Life to a Long-Ago Feminist
Kurt Masur's stirring success with Arthur Honegger's dramatic oratorio "Jeanne d'Arc au Bucher" ("Joan of Arc at the Stake") on Wednesday evening at Avery Fisher Hall came as no surprise.
In his three seasons with the New York Philharmonic, Mr.
Masur has shown a special talent in a fiendishly difficult genre -- works that mix music with the spoken word -- as well as an admirable ability to rise to big occasions.
But neither should Mr.
Masur's achievement be taken for granted.
In earlier presentations of incidental music by Beethoven, Mendelssohn and Grieg, he was traversing familiar terrain.
The Honegger was fresh ground for him, though he has had designs on the work for decades.


Chicago Project in Furor About Guns and the Law
When the shooting gets bad at the Robert Taylor Homes public housing development, tenants ask the security guard who lives next door where he bought his bullet proof vest.
They want one for trips to the corner store where they buy their babies milk.
When the shooting gets bad, as it did a couple of weeks ago, Joan Davis's two children sleep under the bed and wake up screaming in the middle of the night.
Daisy Bradford tells her children that if they are caught in the crossfire outside to fall on the ground and pray.


Mexican Suspect Denies Link to 4 Held in Killing of Candidate
As the Government presses its investigation into a possible conspiracy in the assassination of the heavily favored presidential candidate of the governing party, the man who investigators say has confessed to the murder has insisted that four other men charged with complicity are innocent.
In testimony on Wednesday, the suspected assassin, Mario Aburto Martinez, said he did not know the men whom prosecutors say spoke with him at a campaign rally on March 23 in the border city of Tijuana and then helped him push through a clutch of bodyguards to reach the candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio.


Which Total Is Greater: Yanks' Runs Or Fans?
Memories from the first game of any baseball season are very special, with legends such as Joe DiMaggio throwing out the first pitch, with the wintry chill dissipating as the game is reborn and with empty seats as rare as manageable lines at the concession stands.
But what about the second game of the season?
Does anybody brag about attending the game after the opener?
Sure, fans at game No. 2 talk about the traffic being lighter and about having elbow room for both elbows.
But yesterday, the smattering of fans at Yankee Stadium could have also gloated for hours about witnessing a truly memorable performance.
Be it the second, the 72d or the 162d game of the year, the action and, more appropriately, the Yankee offense was amazing.
It was almost historic.


Astronauts Prepare for Shuttle Launching Today
A space shuttle mission to test a radar mapping system is scheduled for lift-off on Friday morning, but the weather could interfere .
Officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration said today that the shuttle Endeavour and its six-member crew were ready to begin the planned nine-day flight at 8:06 A.M.
But with a forecast of showers and low clouds, meteorologists said there was a 40 percent chance that the weather would be acceptable.


BanPonce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rangers' Thoughts Turn To Possible Clincher
With four games to go in the 84-game National Hockey League season, the Rangers are a victory away from clinching the Atlantic Division title, the Devils are a loss away from settling for second place and the Islanders are still riding a four-team playoff bubble so complicated that the idle Islanders had trouble deciding which team to root for in last night's game between the Florida Panthers and the Philadelphia Flyers.
The Islanders, who play the Dallas Stars at the Nassau Coliseum tonight, knew that a Florida victory would strengthen the Panthers' grip on the eighth and final Eastern Conference playoff berth.


Sports of The Times; 'You Can Still Hear My Stomach'
IN his first Masters, Jim McGovern had opened with a steady-as-she-blows par 72, but now, standing under the sprawling oak tree outside the Augusta National clubhouse, he was talking about how nervous he had been.
"If you listen close," he said with a smile, "you can still hear my stomach."


USAir Agrees To Lift Rules On the Weight Of Attendants
USAir yesterday became the latest airline to drop its weight standards for flight attendants, settling a 1992 lawsuit filed by the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
The airline said it would abandon its weight charts for three years and substitute a "performance test" requiring flight attendants to show that could move comfortably down the aisle and fit quickly through the cabin emergency window on USAir's smallest jets.


Atmel Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Not a Pretty Ending At the Finishing Hole
Pat Summerall, calling his final golf tournament for CBS this weekend at the Masters, is still stung by the management decision that forced him to choose between calling football for Fox Sports and continuing with CBS golf.
"I didn't want to give up golf," Summerall said yesterday.
"But a decision was made that I didn't want to make."


Luther S. Cressman, Anthropologist, 96, Expert on Northwest
Dr.
Luther S. Cressman, an anthropologist whose discoveries helped revolutionize thinking about prehistoric cultures in the Pacific Northwest, died on Monday at his home in Eugene, Ore.
He was 96.
On an archeological dig at Fort Rock in south-central Oregon in 1938, Dr.
Cressman's crew unearthed a trove of woven tule grass-and-sagebrush bark sandals.
The 75 shoes had been preserved under layers of pumice and ash from an old eruption at Mount Mazama.
The find proved that humans had lived in the Northwest 9,000 years ago.
Anthropologists had previously believed that humans began inhabiting the region 4,500 years ago.


On My Mind; Land on Credit
In Cairo, Yasir Arafat is asked for comment on the slaughter of the bus passengers in Israel by a Palestinian terrorist.
He turns and walks away.
From Hollywood the same day came another story about Islamic attitudes toward Jewish lives, and Jewish deaths.
In Islamic countries around the world "Schindler's List" is being banned, labeled either as obscene, pro-Jewish, anti-German or all three.


Broad Study Says Home-Based Day Care, Even if by Relatives, Often Fails Children
Family child care, the most widely used form of child care by employed mothers in the United States, is often of poor quality, according to a broad study released yesterday.
The study by the Families and Work Institute, a private research organization, was the first wide-scale look in more than 10 years at family child care, in which one person cares for a number of children at a home.
Only half of the 225 children in the three metropolitan areas where the study was conducted showed signs of trust or attachment to the people who cared for them, even if those providing the care were relatives.


But in Singapore Peaceful Citizens Feel Safe; Privy Council Recourse
To the Editor:
The denial of Michael Fay's appeal by the Criminal Appeals Division of Singapore's Supreme Court is subject to appeal, through a mechanism of colonial vintage, to the Judicial Committee of Britain's House of Lords Privy Council, sitting in London.
Under Singapore's appellate procedure, an appeal to the Privy Council may be made in any criminal or civil matter where application for leave to appeal has been made and such leave granted by the Privy Council.


Foote, Cone Official Will Join a Client
Brian J. Gail, president and chief executive of the Philadelphia office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, said yesterday that he would leave to join a client, effective May 2.
Mr.
Gail, 47, was named to the new position of senior vice president of corporate communications for ARA Services, a diversified services company in Philadelphia with interests in food, leisure and uniforms.
In September, ARA named Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Philadelphia to handle its account, with billings estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Board Seeks Action On Nynex Mailing
The New York State Consumer Protection Board urged the State Public Service Commission yesterday to take "appropriate steps" to insure that the costs of a soured sweepstakes mailing promotion, sponsored by New York Telephone, would be absorbed entirely by the shareholders of its parent, Nynex, and not charged to customers.
The board's statement came in response to an article yesterday in The New York Times that disclosed problems with the mailing, which sought to encourage holders of New York Telephone and Nynex calling cards to charge local calls to their cards.
The sweepstakes mailer included card holders' confidential personal identification numbers, or PIN's, opening the promotion to potential credit-card fraud.


Just When They Thought Spring Had Arrived. . .


'Memory Therapy' on Trial: Healing or Hokum?
Gary Ramona had everything, or so it seemed: a wife and three children, a $300,000-a-year vice presidency at the Robert Mondavi Winery, a million-dollar dream house here in wine country.
Then four years ago his grown daughter, Holly, accused him of incest, citing decade-old memories retrieved in psychotherapy.
Mr.
Ramona has since lost it all -- his family, his home, his career, to say nothing of his reputation.
So now he is suing his daughter's therapists for malpractice, maintaining that they conned a depressed young woman suffering from bulimia into remembering childhood sexual abuse that never occurred.


TRANSIT: Track Work on the Subway


Hanover Direct
Shares of Hanover Direct, the catalogue retailer formerly named Horn &amp; Hardart, rose sharply this week after it concluded a $46.8 million secondary offering on March 31.
On Wednesday, Merrill Lynch projected annual sales growth of 50 percent for the company and rated the stock a long-term buy.


Giuliani and Cortines in Accord On Jobs Cuts, Mayor's Aides Say
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, meeting late last night with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, agreed to the Mayor's demand that he cut 2,500 jobs from the Board of Education administration, aides to the Mayor said.
It was more than double the reduction that Mr.
Cortines had previously agreed to, and apparently ended a budgetary confrontation between the two men.
Mr.
Cortines agreed to cut 1,200 jobs by the end of the fiscal year, June 30, and an additional 1,300 jobs in the next fiscal year, said Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers, who attended the meeting at Gracie Mansion.
He said the meeting went past midnight and lasted just under an hour.


Executive Changes
HYDE ATHLETIC INDUSTRIES, Peabody, Mass., named Wolfgang Schweim president of the Saucony athletic footwear division, effective June 1.
NOVO NORDISK OF NORTH AMERICA INC., New York, a unit of Novo Nordisk A.S. of Denmark, named Henrik Aagaard president.


Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


CHRONICLE
It was one of those transcendent moments for Cantor HOWARD NEVISON of Temple Emanu-El in New York when he stepped up yesterday to sing Franz Schubert's setting of the 92d Psalm.
The place was the Vatican, and Cantor Nevison said from Rome yesterday that he was the first cantor to sing at the Vatican and the first person to sing in Hebrew there.


Roy Smeck, Banjoist And Guitarist, 94
Roy Smeck, a leading guitarist, banjoist and ukulele player since the days of vaudeville, died on Tuesday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 94 and lived in Manhattan.
He died in his sleep, said Neal Hade, a friend.


Reitman's (Canada) reports earnings for Year to Jan 29


Race at This Masters Goes to the Slickest, And So Far, It's Mize
On Augusta National greens that were as hard and slick as Formica, the table was set today for a classic Masters weekend.
Larry Mize, one of the game's best putters, continued to display his prowess in that department.
He shot 71 that put him at 139, five under par, and gave him a one-stroke lead over Greg Norman, Dan Forsman and Tom Lehman.
Mize, an Augusta native who won this tournament in 1987, started the day with a one-stroke lead and kept his pursuers at bay with a silky stroke and some fine ball-striking.
He bogeyed just two holes, the 12th and 18th, and seemed comfortable on the rock-hard putting surfaces.


Sonia Raiziss, A Poet, Critic And Editor, 85
Sonia Raiziss, a New York literary figure for many years, died on March 19 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 85 and also had a home in Bucks County, Pa.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said Alfredo de Palchi, her collaborator and former husband.


Computer Data Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6 GLOOMY JOCKEYING IN TOKYO
After the abrupt resignation of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa, Japan's governing coalition scrambled to form a new government and salvage some of the reforms he promised.
Throughout Japan, there was a palpable sense of disappointment that he had fallen prey to precisely the kind of financial scandals he had denounced.  1 Hope faded in Washington that trade goals with Japan would be met.  5 VIOLENCE SPIRALS IN RWANDA
The Rwandan capital was convulsed by a second straight day of bloodletting and horror as rival ethnic factions waged street battles for control of the city.
French military aircraft landed to help secure the airport for evacuation of foreigners.  1 In many ways, tiny Rwanda and Burundi are like twins.  6 SOUTH AFRICAN SUMMIT FAILS
A summit meeting of South African leaders ended in failure when the Zulu King refused to call off a boycott of April 26-28 elections.
President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela had offered concessions to King Goodwill Zwelethini in the hope of halting civil war in a Zulu region.  6 ISRAEL SHUTS OUT PALESTINIANS
Citing security concerns after two terrorist attacks, Israel imposed an indefinite ban on Palestinian entry from the occupied territories.  3 Baruch Goldstein's wife says he did not warn her of massacre plans.  3 U.S.
STRUGGLES FOR BOSNIAN TRUCE
Mediators tried to broker a country-wide cease-fire between Bosnian Army and Serbian nationalist forces.
Fighting reportedly dropped off in the eastern Muslim enclave of Gorazde, but Serbs vowed to take the town sooner or later.  4 HARD EDGE TO AN IDLE ARCTIC PORT
Murmansk Journal: Anything goes for those who are crass, smart, deadly or lucky enough in the world's biggest Arctic city, which is now barely scraping by after losing its old Soviet subsidies.  4 No breakthrough on reining in India's arms race with Pakistan.  4 National 7-10 SOFTWARE PIRACY ON INTERNET
A Federal grand jury has accused an M.I.T. student of using school computers to distribute more than $1 million worth of pirated software on the global computer network.  1 UNPUBLISHED SPY TALES
The F.B.I. is investigating allegations in an unpublished book by a former Soviet spy that a K.G.B. double agent seduced the daughter of a C.I.A. employee in the 1970's to get to Government secrets.  1 AN END TO SPORTSMANSHIP
The handshake, universal symbol of good will and good sportsmanship, has been banned at sporting events in Simi Valley, Calif. for fear it might lead to fistfights.  7 DEPORTING JAILED ALIENS
Federal immigration officials agreed to let Florida deport between 500 and 1,000 nonviolent illegal aliens being held in crowded prisons.  7 REAPING UNNATURAL FRUITS
A Federal committee cleared the way for the first Government approval of a genetically engineered food, the Flavr Savr tomato.  7 HEALTH PLANS' MISSING MEDICINE
Nothing in the Clinton health plan or any alternatives before Congress directly addresses the problem of incompetent and negligent doctors.  8 Religion notes: How, where and why Americans pray.  10 Metro Digest 23 CORTINES UNEXPECTEDLY RESIGNS
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines abruptly resigned, citing Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's appointment of a fiscal monitor over the schools.
Mr.
Cortines said the appointment uncut his own authority.  1 A FATAL CONFRONTATION
After Sarah Auerbach broke off her relationship with Rick Varela, the nightmare dreaded by every woman alone began: the harassing phone calls, ugly encounters and finally a fatal confrontation.  1 Fashion Page 28 Some realism, some romance.
Kurt Cobain, the ragged-voiced lead singer of Nirvana who helped to create the enormously popular grunge rock sound, was found dead at age 27, an apparent suicide.  1 Golo Mann, historian.
Sonia Raiziss, poet and critic.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21 Editorials A senseless school brawl.
A reformer falls in Japan.
John P. MacKenzie: Blackmun.
Letters Anna Quindlen: Wanted -- a definition.
Russell Baker: The historian glut.
Clifton R. Wharton Jr.: The nightmare in central Africa.
Eamonn Fingleton: Don't let up on Japan.
Bridge 16  Chronicle 22  Crossword 16


Unit Trusts May Appeal To Fretful Bond Buyers
FOR municipal bond owners who have turned timid, there's a belt-and-suspenders investment worth considering: fixed portfolios known as unit investment trusts.
When tax-free bond funds dropped 5.3 percent in the first quarter -- a bigger drubbing than any other major fund category -- investors accustomed to a buoyant bond market may have recalled a long-ago lesson.
In the words of Marysue Wechsler, a Greenbelt, Md., planner: "Bonds are not meant to be traded as growth vehicles. They're used for income as stocks go up and down."


Shopko Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


CHRONICLE
If perchance you were thinking of wishing Sir JOHN GIELGUD a happy birthday on Thursday when he turns 90, do it sotto voce, please.
The actor has made it abundantly clear that he does not want much made of it.
A spokeswoman for the Garrick Club, to which Sir John has belonged for 24 years and where he celebrated his 80th birthday, said the other day, "He pre-empted any plans for this birthday by writing to the club secretary saying he didn't want a party."


U.S. Investigates Whether K.G.B. Recruited Ex-White House Aide
Guided by the unpublished book of a former Soviet spy, the Federal Bureau of Investigation is urgently looking into whether the K.G.B. recruited a Carter Administration official to steal secrets for Moscow, law-enforcement officials said today.
The central accusation is that the American official, after leaving Government service, worked secretly for the K.G.B., the Soviet counterpart to the Central Intelligence Agency.
He is said to have seduced the daughter of a C.I.A. employee and to have pressured the employee into supplying him with tidbits of classified information, which he then passed on to Moscow.


Nikkei Jolted, Then Recovers
The shocking announcement today that Japan's embattled Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, intended to resign sent stock prices into a temporary tailspin.
But analysts said the news created a sense of uncertainty rather than panic, and the world's second-largest market later rebounded to close slightly higher for the day.


Matich Joins Redskins
The Washington Redskins yesterday signed the free agent center TREVOR MATICH, formerly of the Indianapolis Colts, to a two-year, $700,000 contract to be their new long snapper on punts, field goals and extra-point attempts.
Matich, a nine-year veteran who has played for New England, Detroit and the Jets, replaces GUY BINGHAM, who retired at the end of the 1993 season. (AP)


Japanese Coalition Scrambles to Replace Premier
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's announcement today that he would resign sent his governing coalition scrambling to form a new government and to salvage at least some of the economic and political reforms Mr.
Hosokawa promised when he took office last year.
Mr.
Hosokawa's sudden resignation nonetheless appeared to usher in a new period of political instability that Japanese and American officials feared could slow, and possibly derail, his program to empower consumers and urban voters and deregulate a country choking on bureaucracy.


Brodeur Starts Again as Devils Triumph
Judging by the actions of Coach Jacques Lemaire, it appears certain that rookie Martin Brodeur will be the Devils' main goaltender in the playoffs.
Lemaire gave the 21-year-old Brodeur his third consecutive start tonight and he and the Devils turned it into a 7-2 victory over the Penguins before a sellout crowd of 19,040 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Yankees Ask Guarantees Against Relocation Loss
In the latest round of bargaining over New York City's efforts to keep the Yankees in the Bronx, the team has demanded financial guarantees from the city to guard against losses if a proposed $275 million renovation to Yankee Stadium requires a temporary relocation to Shea Stadium.
Team officials have also suggested that the city search for alternate locations for a new stadium.


New Claims in Tyson Case
The Indiana Court of Appeals ruled yesterday that a judge must review claims that a woman MIKE TYSON was convicted of raping had earlier falsely accused a high school classmate of rape.
The appeals court said Marion (Ind.) Superior Court Judge PATRICIA GIFFORD, who presided over Tyson's rape trial, must consider Tyson's second motion for post-conviction relief, originally filed Feb. 26, 1993.


Nice Guys Finish Last In Ban on Handshakes
After winning their first game of the season last month, the Simi Valley High School baseball players raced onto the field to shake the hands of their opponents, as they always had, but their coaches said, "Stop."
The handshake -- universal symbol of good will and good sportsmanship -- had been banned at the close of sporting events this season here in the placid, well-tended communities of Ventura County for fear that handshakes might turn into fistfights.


Bridge
Many young experts have the talent to make a mark on the national scene, but demands of work and family limit their tournament appearances.
One of them is Martin Fleisher, who learned his bridge in New Jersey and now lives in Northampton, Mass.
On the diagramed deal, played in the New York Winter Regional Championships during the New Year's weekend, he brought home an "impossible" three no-trump contract by skillful play.
As South, he might well have quit when the bidding reached three hearts, a contract that would have made exactly.
However, he gambled with three no-trump, and West led the diamond deuce, a card that he eventually regretted playing.


Review/Music; How to Play Famously on the Fringes of Fame
Russell Sherman keeps reappearing at the edges of the concert world.
On Wednesday, it was at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, where he played Brahms, Beethoven, Bartok and Schumann for a small, devoted audience.
Mr.
Sherman is quite simply one of the best pianists in this or any other country.
The depth of his technical resources, the breadth of his culture and the intensity of his fascinating, if sometimes eccentric, imagination make one wonder why this 64-year-old American is playing before small clusters of listeners in secondary venues and not touring the world in grand style and recording for major labels.


Corrections
A subheading on Tuesday with an article about a White House proposal for the welfare system referred incorrectly to the history of the effort.
The Clinton Administration has always predicted that the proposed changes would add to the nation's welfare budget; it was never promoted as a plan that would save money.


A Masterpiece Unveiled Anew


Religion Notes
Messengers of Peace
There are many acts of religious devotion besides prayer -- poetry, fasting, music, even athletics.
Sri Chinmoy, a spiritual teacher from India and self-styled world ambassador for peace, has done them all.
In the last two years he has channeled his spiritual devotion into drawing birds.


Jogger Raped by 5 Teens on Coney Island
A 43-year-old Russian immigrant was raped by a gang of five teen-agers after being attacked while jogging Thursday evening near the beach in Coney Island, Brooklyn, the police said yesterday.
The youths attacked the woman about 8:15 P.M. as she ran on a desolate section of the boardwalk between Fifth and Eighth Streets, the police said.
She was dragged under the boardwalk and beaten and raped.
The youths, whose ages range from 16 to 18, fled with the woman's watch, the police said.
There were no arrests.
The woman, who was not identified, walked home, where she took a shower and then contacted the police.


Editorial Notebook; Justice Blackmun's Voice
If Roe v.
Wade defined Justice Harry Blackmun's jurisprudence in the popular mind, there was another landmark that should have told the world about his independent spirit.
It was a speech he delivered, a lay sermon actually, in August 1973, six months after the famous abortion ruling at the close of his third full term on the Supreme Court.
Though already the author of one of history's major decisions, he was just beginning to speak out boldly in his personal voice.
The setting was a Washington hotel on a Sunday morning, a prayer breakfast at the American Bar Association convention.
The audience expected a song from a choir, a Scripture reading and then, from Justice Blackmun, a few words of professional comradeship, after which the attending lawyers and their families would be off to more speeches and symposiums.


The Nightmare in Central Africa
The neighboring African countries of Rwanda and Burundi have been plunged into unimaginable anarchy and bloodshed.
This week's violence -- the plane crash that killed the two nations' Presidents, the police and army rampage that has killed over a thousand people in Kigali, the Rwandan capital -- was only the latest convulsion in decades of ethnic warfare.
Relief agencies estimate that 100,000 people have died in Burundi since October.
The death of Burundi's President, Cyprien Ntaryamira -- who was returning from a peace conference in Tanzania when his plane was reportedly shot down -- brought back a vivid memory of my meeting with his predecessor, Melchior Ndadaye, in Washington on Oct. 7.
It also recalled troubling questions about how the West often views the prospects for "democracy" in countries like Burundi.


Corrections
An obituary on March 10 about Lawrence E. Spivak, originator of the NBC News program "Meet the Press," misidentified the occasion on which Whitaker Chambers first accused Alger Hiss of being a Communist.
It was on Aug. 3, 1948, before the House Un-American Activities Committee; the charge was repeated two weeks later on "Meet the Press."


Liftoff Delayed Till Today
High winds caused a one-day postponement of the launching of the space shuttle Endeavour today.
Another launching attempt has been scheduled for 7:05 A.M. on Saturday.


Camco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Commission Urges Curbing Pay in New Jersey Schools
The hand-picked advisory panel that reported to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman on Thursday was ostensibly concerned with achieving educational parity for New Jersey's poorest school districts.
But underlying the panel's recommendations, its members say, was the desire to apply the brakes to ever-rising salaries and benefits in the country's most expensive public-education system.
Even if their recommendations are watered down, the panel members made it clear in their comments that controlling school costs would require fewer teachers, fewer administrators and more bare-knuckled bargaining over wages and benefits from school boards that until now have been more willing to pay than to fight.


Judge Rejects A Plea Bargain For Defendants In Ship Deaths
The Federal judge in the case against seven men the prosecution calls enforcers on the Golden Venture, the freighter that ran aground off the Rockaway peninsula last June with 300 illegal Chinese aliens aboard, surprised the defense and prosecution yesterday by rejecting the plea bargain they had arranged.
Ten passengers drowned after the illegal immigrants jumped from the ship and tried to make it to shore.


A Playground Star Is Born


Turmoil in the Schools: Profiles; 2 Figures Familiar With Political Battles
Leonard Hellenbrand, whose job as the New York City school system's budget director has put him at the center of a political battle between City Hall and the Board of Education, is the sort of career official alternately praised as an insider with vital institutional knowledge or condemned as a bureaucrat bent on perpetuating the status quo.
In fact, Mr.
Hellenbrand, who has held his position since 1983, has been in the middle of several wrenching battles between mayors and schools chancellors over how much money the city should spend on its schools -- and where.


Melba J. Kgositsile, Civil Rights Advocate, 54
Melba Johnson Kgositsile, a civil rights and anti-apartheid advocate, died on Saturday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
She was 54.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter, Ipeleng Kgositsile.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Edwin C. McDonald, Consultant, 74
Edwin C. McDonald, an executive recruiting consultant, died on Tuesday at his home in Bronxville, N.Y..
He was 74.
The cause was prostate cancer, his wife said.


Cleaned 'Last Judgment' Unveiled
For centuries, the mysterious power of Michelangelo's "Last Judgment" has gripped visitors to the Sistine Chapel, Christ's lowered eyes gazing down serenely, his lifted arm seeming to embrace saints and sinners alike.
With a solemn papal Mass and a reception for invited guests, Pope John Paul II, the successor to the Renaissance Pope who commissioned the work in the early 16th century, today unveiled anew the masterpiece on the altar wall of the chapel where popes are elected and threw open Michelangelo's frescoes to full view again after more than 14 years of painstaking cleaning.


Israeli Bars Entry to Palestinians of West Bank and Gaza
Israel took measures today to rid itself of Arab labor from the occupied territories by imposing an indefinite ban on Palestinian entry and by deciding to bring in thousands of foreign construction workers and farm hands.
Confining Palestinians to the West Bank and Gaza Strip is a tactic that Israel often uses to reassure its jittery population, only to relax the restrictions after a while.
But after two terrorist attacks this week that killed 8 Israelis and wounded nearly 50 others, and with Islamic radicals warning of more bloodshed to come, the Government says that this time it means business about keeping the populations apart.


Making a Business of What You Know Best
In 1991, Michael Holman closed Holman Industries, a 12-year-old mechanical assembly plant in Inglewood, Claif., which had nearly $2 million in annual sales to the commercial and aerospace industries.
He said it was getting harder to deal with his clients, and he wnated to quit while he was ahead and could afford to spend some time developing new ventures.
A serious weekend bike rider, Mr.
Holman decided he could improve on the post that holds the seal for off-road mountain bikes.
On the typical mountain bike, the seat post is slanted about 18 degrees up, putting the rider off his center of gravity on inclines and descents.
Mr.
Holman envisioned an adjustable seat post made of aerospace-quality aluminum with four positions - neutral, forward, back and one that lowers the seat out of the way.
WIth a click of a control on the handlebars, riders would be able to adjust the slant.
Mr.
Holman, 37, is now president of Centerline Sports Inc., of Torrance, Calif., maker of the Power Post.


Turmoil in the Schools: The Relationship; Meeting Turns Into Last Straw
The frustration that led Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines to tender his resignation yesterday began to build two months ago, when the Mayor started to issue budget demands and Mr.
Cortines shot back, "I was not hired to be in anybody's hip pocket."
Their break was not rooted in ideological or policy differences -- paradoxically, they are both fiscal conservatives who have agreed on the need to downsize the school system -- but in the recurring conflicts over money that have led other New York City mayors to brawl with other chancellors, said school and city officials who know both men.


Bulls Gain One, Lose One
The Chicago Bulls yesterday activated guard JOHN PAXSON from the injured list and replaced him with center BILL CARTWRIGHT.
Paxson had been placed on the injured list because of tendinitis in the left knee.
He has missed 15 games because of the injury.
Paxson began the season on the injured list because of the tendinitis and missed the first 31 games of the season. (AP)


Robinson Honored Again
Purdue forward GLENN ROBINSON completed a sweep of college basketball's player of the year honors yesterday when he received the Classic Games John Wooden Award.
Purdue Coach GENE KEADY accepted on behalf of Robinson, who was delayed en route to Los Angeles.
JOHN WOODEN, the 83-year-old former U.C.L.A. coach who directed the Bruins to 10 National Collegiate Athletic Association championships in a 12-year span, presented the award at the Los Angeles Athletic Club. (AP)


White House Asks: Can Member of Congress Join the Court?
With Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine in mind, the White House asked the Justice Department today for advice about whether the Constitution would prevent a member of Congress from moving to the Supreme Court.
Lloyd N. Cutler, the White House counsel, made the request in a telephone call to Walter Dellinger, an Assistant Attorney General, the Justice Department said.
Officials there said an opinion could come as early as next week.


Andy Zoob, Orchestra Leader, 46
Andrew Paul Zoob, a drummer and the founder of a booking service for musicians, died on March 30 while on vacation in Paris.
He was 46.
The cause was septic shock, said his wife, Carol Maryan, an architect.


Unitrin Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
Since there seems to be a "Hall of Fame" for every manner of athletic and intellectual endeavor, why not one for soap operas?
The Soap Opera Hall of Fame, sponsored by Soap Opera Weekly, holds its inaugural ceremonies on Tuesday in the Hudson Theater at the Hotel Macklowe.
The first people to be inducted include the late Irna Phillips, creator of "As the World Turns" and a writer on numerous other serials; Macdonald Carey, the patriarchal figure of "Days of Our Lives," who died last month; Douglas Marland, the late head writer of "As the World Turns"; WILLIAM J. BELL, creator of "The Young and the Restless" and "The Bold and the Beautiful," and AGNES NIXON, creator of "All My Children" and "One Life to Live."


Student Accused of Running Network for Pirated Software
A Federal grand jury has accused a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology of using university computers to distribute more than $1 million worth of pirated software over the Internet, the global computer network.
In announcing an indictment on Thursday, the United States Attorney in Boston, Donald K. Stern, called it the nation's largest single case of software piracy to date.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.46
3.11
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.54
3.52
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.94
3.92
3.00
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.91
6.86
5.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.25
7.21
6.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.10
8.05
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.45
5.99
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


SPLIT WITH MAYOR PROMTS CORTINES TO SAY HE'LL QUIT
Ramon C. Cortines, who became Chancellor of the New York City schools seven months ago, said yesterday that he was resigning because Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was interfering in the management of the school system.
He announced his resignation, effective July 1, an hour after the Mayor appointed a political ally as an outside monitor of Board of Education finances.
The Chancellor said Mr.
Giuliani, in a midnight confrontation Thursday at Gracie Mansion over the school budget, had given him a choice: dismiss two of his top employees or accept the supervision of the fiscal monitor.
Mr.
Cortines said the terms amounted to "nothing short of blackmail, and obviously I could not succumb."


Suspect in 2 Priests' Deaths Released on Bail
As her weeping family and friends cried out in relief, Lisa Bongiorno, the 28-year-old Queens woman charged with killing two Greek Orthodox priests in a car crash last month, was released on $250,000 bail yesterday after agreeing to enter a full-time residential drug treatment program.
Ms.
Bongiorno, who the police said admitted smoking the drug PCP just before her car slammed into the priests' car on Northern Boulevard, was released by Acting Justice Seymour Rotker of State Supreme Court into the custody of officials from Daytop Village, a drug treatment center with 19 locations around the state.
The officials would not disclose where she would be staying.


Rangers Lock Up Best Record. Next?
When a team wins the Presidents' Trophy in the National Hockey League, it doesn't get a trip to the White House or even a phone call from the President.
The Rangers clinched this award, for being the best team in the regular season, last night when they beat Toronto by 5-3 at Madison Square Garden.
They accepted the cheers of their fans and the congratulations of their employers and held a modest celebration among themselves.
But the only thing that trophy -- along with $1.25 -- will get them is a ride on a subway train beneath the Garden.
After all, the Rangers won this award two seasons ago and fell to last place in their division last season.


Community Psychiatric Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Seaway Food Town (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Islanders Take Big Step Toward Playoffs
For the first time this season, the Islanders tonight thrust themselves into position to qualify for the Stanley Cup playoffs.
The Islanders beat Dallas by 5-1 at Nassau Coliseum and gained a tie for the eighth and last playoff spot in the National Hockey League's Eastern Conference.


Special Inspection Team Rushes to Nuclear Plant
The Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission rushed a special inspection team to the Salem nuclear plant in southern New Jersey yesterday to investigate why the reactor experienced a power surge and two inappropriate start-ups of an emergency cooling system during a shutdown on Thursday.
In addition, the plant operator, the Public Service Electric and Gas Corporation, disclosed yet another failure: when the emergency system was activated some valves failed to operate properly.


Reviews/Fashion; The Rise of the Fashion Stylist
At some point over the last few years, fashion stylists, with soothing smiles on their faces but whitened knuckles, began wresting creative control from fashion designers.
Fashion stylists are the great fixers, the ones who come in at the last minute before a show and direct a designer with 120 pieces and nowhere to go.
It is not uncommon, after a bad show by a good designer, for editors to inquire suspiciously who the stylist was, or after an abnormally brilliant show from a mediocre designer, to congratulate the stylist.


Cost of Malpractice: A Special Report; Medical Incompetence: A Whispered Factor in Rising Costs
When John L. Rounsaville Jr., a 44-year-old father of three, checked into a hospital here for routine lower-back surgery, he expected to be released within a day or so and be back at work soon after that.
But when he did get out, almost six months later, he was strapped in a wheelchair.
Mr.
Rounsaville, who was a rising executive with a Texas military contractor, had suffered catastrophic damage to the brain and the nervous system.
He had lost virtually all control of his body, rendering him unemployable and in need of round-the-clock nursing care for the rest of his life.
Every day, he had to take as many as 74 pills just to control the seizures.


Clinton Says Health Plan Isn't Politics
President Clinton today angrily assailed critics who suggested that he was more interested in politics than policy in his plans to overhaul the nation's health care system.
He asserted that the nation's current approach to health care had resulted in a system of "irresponsibility."


Aluminum Co. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
There is something to be said for loyalty.
DEBRA WINGER, who was romantically involved with Nebraska Senator BOB KERREY about a decade ago, is going to Omaha to be hostess of a $1,000-a-head reception for his re-election campaign tomorrow.
The investor WARREN E. BUFFETT will be her co-host at the party in the home of HARLAN NODDLE, a real-estate developer.


U.S. to Let 500 Aliens Be Deported
Federal immigration officials agreed today to let Florida deport 500 to 1,000 illegal aliens who are held in the state's crowded prisons.
The agreement between the state and the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the first of its kind, calls for inmates to be released early from prison.
The inmates, who are in prison for nonviolent offenses like drug possession and burglary, could begin being returned to their native countries by June 1.


Public &amp; Private; Wanted: A Definition
State Senator George Pataki says he is pro-choice.
Abortion rights activists say he's not.
The dispute is important.
Mr.
Pataki is running for governor of New York, a state that has one of the pre-eminent histories of abortion rights in America.
And he is doing so as the reproductive rights battlefield shifts from the U.S.
Supreme Court to the Statehouse.
Even the Right to Life Committee in his home county notes that though he "claims to be pro-choice," the Senator actually has "a pro-life voting record." Senator Pataki opposed Medicaid funding and a clinic-access bill and supports parental notification.
He has earned a perfect 100 percent on the legislative scorecard of the conservative Christian Coalition and the enmity of groups like New York State NARAL, NOW, Planned Parenthood and the Westchester Coalition for Legal Abortion.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the new pricing policy of an on-line computer service misstated the company's name.
It is Dialog Information Services Inc., not Dialog Information Systems.


Dow Declines 19 Points, Ending a 3-Day Run-Up
Breaking a three-day winning streak, stock traders bid down the Dow Jones industrial average yesterday by 19 points, to 3,674.26, in restrained trading.
Still, the Dow finished ahead for the week by some 38 points.
As they have for the last two months, stock traders followed their counterparts in the bond market, who worried that more hedge funds were overextended and thus selling bonds at any price.
More fundamentally, traders are worried that the Federal Reserve Board will raise interest rates soon.


U.S. Goals on Trade Ebbing With Japan Reformer Gone
The res ignation of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan has deprived the Clinton Administration of the agent of change it was counting on to open Japan's closed markets, and it has left the White House uncertain it will achieve its trade objectives with Tokyo anytime soon.
Mr.
Hosokawa was widely viewed by American officials as the Japanese leader most willing to accommodate American demands for more open markets.
His downfall is expected to lead to a period of political weakness and uncertainty in Tokyo.


A Reformer Falls in Japan
The downfall of Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokowa deals a sharp blow to Japanese hopes for a more responsive politics and American hopes for a less bureaucratic and regulation-bound Japan.
Under political fire for questionable loans and stock purchases and facing new problems over the management of his personal investments, Mr.
Hosokawa abruptly announced yesterday that he would resign as soon as a successor was ready to take over.
Given the fractured nature of the present ruling coalition, that might mean days or even weeks of uncertainty and backroom maneuver.


Transactions
Baseball  National League NEW YORK METS -- Purchased the contract of Doug Linton, pitcher, from Norfolk of the International League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association CHICAGO BULLS -- Activated John Paxson, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Bill Cartwright, center, on the injured list.
Football  National Football League MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Mark Higgs, running back, to a one-year contract.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Signed Trevor Matich, offensive tackle-long snapper, to a two-year contract.


Teamsters Set Talks With Small Haulers
The International Brotherhood of Teamsters agreed today to meet with representatives of 18 small trucking companies on Saturday.
The agreement held out the possibility that union employees of those companies might return to work under temporary accords while the union's strike against four large truckers continues.
The small companies are among 22 freight companies that were struck early Wednesday morning by 75,000 drivers, dock workers and mechanics.
The 18 companies employ about 6,000 teamsters.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a California proposition that raised cigarette taxes to pay for anti-tobacco campaigns misstated the first name of a Colorado anti-smoking advocate in some editions.
He is Arnold Levinson.


Reviews/Fashion; 2 Designers Recall A Glamorous Past
If you're young, have a great body and like to be noticed at parties, you could do worse than scour the stores for evening clothes by Todd Oldham or Bradley Bayou.
These two designers have little in common except a belief that the time is right for a return to the glamour epitomized by Hollywood's sex goddesses of the 1950's.
With so many of the evening dresses around seemingly designed for baby dolls or matrons, Oldham and Bayou may have found an unfilled niche.


Adjustable Mortgage Group Holds Ground
The group of adjustable-rate mortgage funds is very young -- of 53 funds, only eight have track records of three years or more.
These issues were created as alternatives to the more volatile Ginnie Mae funds, which buy mortgages backed by the Government National Mortgage Association.
In fact, adjustable mortgage funds held their ground in the dismal first quarter, eking out a 0.4 percent gain while other mortgage funds lost 2.5 percent.


Ford Auction Of S.&amp; L. Is Near an End
The auction of the Ford Motor Company's First Nationwide Bank unit heads into its final days with three bidders in the running.
Ford has set Monday night as the deadline for bids for its savings and loan business and will decide next week whether to sell First Nationwide to the Golden West Financial Corporation of Oakland, Calif.; Madison Financial Inc. of Dallas or to a joint effort by the Great Western Financial Corporation, based in Los Angeles, and Lehman Brothers, the investment banking company in New York.


METRO DIGEST
TURMOIL IN THE SCHOOLS: CORTINES SAYS HE WILL LEAVE  An hour after Mayor Giuliani appointed one of his political allies to monitor the finances of the school system, Schools Chancellor Cortines announced he would resign by July.
Mr.
Giuliani, in a midnight confrontation at Gracie Mansion over the school budget, had given him a choice: fire two of his top employees or accept the supervision of the fiscal monitor.
Mr.
Cortines called this "nothing short of blackmail, and obviously I could not succumb." Page 1.
The frustration that led Mr.
Cortines to tender his resignation began to build two months ago, when the Mayor started to issue budget demands and Mr.
Cortines shot back, "I was not hired to be in anybody's hip pocket." Page 24.
The text of the Chancellor's statement on the appointment of a fiscal monitor.
Page 24.
Excerpts from the Mayor's remarks about Mr.
Cortines's resignation.
Page 24.
Parents, teachers and politicians urged the Mayor to persuade Mr.
Cortines to stay.
Page 25.
Profiles of officials identified as those that Mr.
Cortines was asked to dismiss.
Page 25.
PIECING TOGETHER TWO SHATTERED LIVES Stunned relatives and friends mourned the deaths of Sarah Auerbach and Rick Varela, the stories of two lives shattered in a tragic mismatch -- and of apparent failures to avert a murder and suicide, despite her complaints to the police and other warning signs.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY SUSPECT IN DEATHS AGREES TO TREATMENT As her weeping family and friends cried out in relief, Lisa Bongiorno, the 28-year-old Queens woman charged with killing two Greek Orthodox priests in a car crash last month, was released on $250,000 bail after agreeing to enter a full-time residential drug treatment program.
Page 26.
MAYOR MAY REJECT MONEY FOR POLICE Mayor Giuliani said he might refuse Federal money to hire up to 5,000 new police officers if the Government insists on telling him how to spend it.
Page 26.
YANKEES ASK GUARANTEES AGAINST LOSSES In the latest round of bargaining over efforts to keep the Yankees in the Bronx, the team has demanded financial guarantees from the city to guard against losses if a proposed $275 million renovation to Yankee Stadium requires a temporary relocation to Shea Stadium.
Page 26.
REGION INSPECTORS RUSH TO ATOMIC PLANT The Nuclear Regulatory Commission rushed a special inspection team to the Salem nuclear plant in southern New Jersey to investigate why the reactor experienced a power surge and inappropriate start-ups of an emergency cooling system during a shutdown.
Page 27.
PROSECUTOR IN EVIDENCE INQUIRY QUITS The special prosecutor who has led the investigation into charges of evidence-tampering by New York State Police troopers said that he had resigned his post.
Page 27.
WHITMAN APPROVES PAY RAISES Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey authorized pay increases of up to 5 percent for as many as 6,000 of the state government's middle managers.
Page 27.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 26


Samuel E. Thorne, Legal Historian, 87
Samuel E. Thorne, a retired legal historian and professor at the Harvard Law School, died on Thursday at the Brookhaven Nursing Center in Lexington, Mass.
Mr.
Thorne, who lived in Cambridge, Mass., was 87.
The cause was a stroke, said a son, Samuel L. Thorne.


Zulu King Refuses to Halt Boycott of Vote
A summit meeting of South African leaders, widely viewed as the last chance to halt the low-level civil war lacerating the Zulu homeland before elections in three weeks, ended in failure tonight when the Zulu king refused to call off an election boycott.
Nelson Mandela, with President F. W. de Klerk at his side, spent much of the day wooing the King, whose name is Goodwill Zwelethini, to accept a ceremonial kingdom, a budget to maintain his tribal patronage networks and a royal constabulary in exchange for a promise to restrain his furious royalist subjects during the elections.


Hornets Move Closer To the Nets
Sometimes it just doesn't pay to get out of bed.
Tonight it didn't even pay for New Jersey to get off the airplane.
They seemed to have so little offense and defense left that Charlotte was able to win a wire-to-wire, 99-78 walkover and keep its slim hopes for the playoffs alive.


Hebron Killer's Wife Says Massacre Is a 'Riddle'
The wife of Dr.
Baruch Goldstein, the Jewish settler who killed at least 29 Muslim worshipers in Hebron, told an Israeli inquiry into the massacre this week that she was baffled by her husband's act and that he had given her no sign of what he was going to do.
The woman, Miriam Goldstein, testified in secret before the commission on Wednesday, and a transcript of her testimony was released today.


Turmoil in the Schools: Reaction; Broad Message Goes to City Hall: Reach a Truce and Keep Cortines
Everyone from the Board of Education president to parents, teachers and politicians, repeated the same message to City Hall yesterday: Please find a way out of the stalemate and keep Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines on the job.
In part it was out of respect for a popular Chancellor, who his admirers said strove to keep the focus on the classroom.
And in part it sprung from a fear that a continuing power struggle with City Hall and a potentially divisive search for a new chancellor could leave the nation's largest public school system adrift and in trouble.


Murmansk Journal; Port Is Dying, but You Need a Tuxedo
If not for all the platinum blondes in little black dresses, it would be tempting to say that the world's largest Arctic city is dying.
Once among Russia's mightiest and most active ports, Murmansk now sits practically idle, the rusting hulls of a dozen ships rotting in the harbor.
Thousands of workers at the enormous Murmansk Fish Cannery, one of the largest in the world, have lost their jobs because of changes in the country's economy.
Most of the rest simply get paid for doing nothing.


A Senseless School Brawl
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines have let their weeks-long dispute over budget cuts escalate to ugly and destructive proportions.
Their battle exploded in New Yorkers' faces yesterday when Mr.
Cortines refused to dismiss two senior staff people as the Mayor demanded, Mr.
Giuliani imposed a fiscal monitor for the school system, and Mr.
Cortines resigned in a huff.
Both deserve blame for the debacle.
Mr.
Cortines has been far too defensive and thin-skinned in protecting a bloated bureaucracy that almost certainly needs cutting.
But it is Mr.
Giuliani who heated up this war into personalized bullying that has now thrown the nation's largest school system into turmoil with the loss of its sixth chancellor in 11 years.
After this head-on collision, both men need to step back and re-focus on the main issue: how best to protect the interests of the city's schoolchildren.


Observer; The Historian Glut
History is constantly being revised these days.
It's because there is a glut of historians.
Revising history is the only way to keep them busy.
The historian glut results from the Government's Vietnam War policy of granting draft deferments for staying in college.
Young men who would happily have left the campus and gone into honest work were naturally tempted to stay on, and on, and on.


2 Nations Joined by Common History of Genocide
Rwanda and Burundi are like twins -- landlocked neighbors in the heart of Africa with common histories, languages and ethnicity.
The two tiny countries also share one of the world's worst ethnic disputes.
Unrest between the majority Hutu and the minority Tutsi in the last quarter century has spawned unspeakably horrible conflicts that have claimed hundreds of thousands of lives.


What if My Daughter Had Died?
To the Editor:
You report the case of Waneta E. Hoyt, an Owego, N.Y., woman, whose five children died in infancy of what was diagnosed as sudden infant death syndrome, and which the Onondaga County District Attorney now calls murder (news article, March 29).
He bases his conclusion, you state, on medical records that show no anatomical cause of death.


Review/Television; A Weighty New Entree On the Public-Affairs Menu
People who look forward to Saturday afternoons in spring so they can stay home and watch the public-affairs lineup on Channel 13 have a new treat this year.
Ben Wattenberg now occupies the 1:30 P.M. slot with "Think Tank," an intelligently conceived pro-and-con half-hour on matters of moment.
Last week's opener, "Does Punishment Pay?," pitted Robert Bork, who did not make it onto the Supreme Court, against Lani Guinier, who did not make it into the Clinton Justice Department.
On today's program, "Does Welfare Cause Illegitimacy?," you can watch Charles Murray, the social scientist who preaches an end to welfare, tangle with professors of contrary views.


Another Setback for Gooden
After his last start of spring training, Dwight Gooden said his goal for the season was to stay healthy and not miss a start.
He can throw that dream out the window.
Gooden will probably be out for the next week with what has been diagnosed as a capsular tear of his right big toe.
He will miss his start Monday afternoon at Shea Stadium, the Mets' home opener against the Chicago Cubs.
Bobby Jones is scheduled to start in his place.


Review/Piano; A Debut After Successes
Frederic Chiu, the young American pianist who made his New York debut on Thursday night at Alice Tully Hall as the recipient of Juilliard's Petschek Award, won notoriety at the Van Cliburn Competition last year for his unconventional programming and also for his hotly disputed lack of success with the jury.
But he had a more impressive calling card than any reputation as a competition maverick.
Based in France rather than the United States, he has made an acclaimed series of recordings for the Harmonia Mundi label, covering repertory from Rossini to Prokofiev.
His new recording of Mendelssohn piano sonatas is among the handsomest piano releases of the year.
Like many well-drilled Juilliard graduates, Mr.
Chiu has a powerful, note-perfect technique.
He showed it to good advantage in Prokofiev's Sixth Sonata and in "Une Barque sur l'Ocean" and "Alborada del Gracioso" by Ravel.
Far more rare, there is real grace in his playing, an inborn elegance in his shaping of musical phrases.
This he showed not only in the beguilingly atmospheric Ravel but also in the sharp-textured Prokofiev; he finds the lyric strand in Prokofiev's idiom that most pianists trample underfoot.
Alongside the mighty sonata, he played his own arrangement of four pieces from "Lieutenant Kije," languid to a fault but fully sympathetic.


How Norfolk, Va., Put Workfare to Work
To the Editor:
"Can Workfare Work?" (editorial, March 19) points out that there is nothing easy about transforming welfare into workfare: "A program that appears nearly without cost quickly turns expensive, which is why local governments that start workfare often slip back into simply mailing welfare checks."


Review/Pop; Reaching Out to the World
When Angelique Kidjo danced across the stage of S.O.B.'s on Wednesday night, her outfit proclaimed her ambitions.
On her wrists were spiky golden bracelets, akin to ancient West African ornaments; she wore black tights and, at her waist, ankle-length tassels that looked like a grass skirt but were apparently made of a synthetic fiber.
As in her music, modern materials transform traditional designs.
Ms.
Kidjo is part of a growing number of African musicians with global aspirations.
For decades, American and European musicians have been borrowing from all over the world, but they are not the only ones to take advantage of worldwide connections.
Ms.
Kidjo, a singer from Benin who now lives in Paris, is one of the most ambitious African internationalists, and she makes smart choices.


Arming Pakistan Doesn't Promote Peace
To the Editor:
In "Disarming the Subcontinent" (editorial, March 29), you seem to contend that resumption of arms sales to Pakistan under certain conditions would actually be a step toward disarming the subcontinent.


Steps Toward Peace in Croatia


Turmoil in the Schools; Excerpts Of Remarks By the Mayor
Following are excerpts from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's remarks in answer to questions from reporters throughout the day about Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines's announcement of his resignation:
I'm sorry he did this, but we really have to move on and reform this system.
There are some people who are capable of doing it and some people who maybe won't make personnel changes for one reason or another.
You can't reform the system by magic or all by yourself. . . .


Strawberry Enters Center For Drug-Abuse Treatment
DARRYL STRAWBERRY, the troubled Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder, entered a drug treatment center Thursday night, his attorney said yesterday.
BOB SHAPIRO told The Associated Press that he didn't know how long Strawberry would stay in the center, which he would not identify, and was uncertain of Strawberry's frame of mind because he did not speak with him Thursday.
Strawberry, 32, admitted to the Dodgers on Monday -- a day before the start of the season -- that he had a substance abuse problem and alcohol problem and asked for help.
He was evaluated by doctors in New York on Wednesday.


TERROR CONVULSES RWANDAN CAPITAL AS TRIBES BATTLE
After a second day of tribal bloodletting in Rwanda's capital, Kigali, French military aircraft landed early this morning to help secure the airport for evacuation of foreigners trapped in the city, where the death toll was estimated to be in the thousands.
French officials at the United Nations said Friday that three aircraft had successfully landed at Kigali's airport in what is believed to the vanguard of an international effort this weekend to evacuate the hundreds of Belgian and French nationals living there as well as diplomats and foreign aid workers.


Feeling Poorer and Spending Less
The American economy will grow somewhat less rapidly this year and next if stock and bond prices do not recover from their recent plunge, Administration officials and some private economists said today.
They cite higher interest rates, which discourage companies and individuals from borrowing and spending money.
Moreover, they cite the so-called wealth effect: many American consumers will likely spend less money if they feel poorer because of the shrinkage of their portfolios.


Horse May Miss Santa Anita Derby
One day after Valiant Nature was pulled from the Santa Anita Derby, California's major Kentucky Derby prep race was in danger of losing another highly regarded runner today when it was announced that Soul of the Matter had a blister just above the hoof on his left foreleg.
Soul of the Matter, who upset Valiant Nature and Brocco in the San Felipe Stakes here last month, has been battling assorted foot problems all winter.
He has a cracked hoof on his left foreleg that is held together by an acrylic patch, and last weekend he had minor swelling in a rear leg.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FORD MOTOR CO., Dearborn, Mich., said that its vehicle parts plants in Indianapolis and the Cleveland area would convert to natural gas from coal-fired boilers this year.


No Headline
"They told me that if I fired them by noon, no fiscal monitor would be appointed; if I did not fire them, the fiscal monitor would be announced. It is very simple for me -- my integrity is not for sale." -- SCHOOLS CHANCELLOR RAMON C. CORTINES.  [ 24:3. ] "We didn't give him an ultimatum; we gave him encouragement to make changes within the board." -- MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI.  [ 24:5. ]


Downdraft Pushes Bank Stocks to the Fore
Interest rates have been going up.
Stock prices have been going down.
Cash returns remain pretty low.
Where can an investor make some money?
Financial stocks, say a growing group of professional investors who have been buying the shares of banks, brokerage firms and insurance companies.


Pacific Forest Products reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
Summit Fails in South Africa
Meeting with the President and Nelson Mandela, the Zulu King rejected compromises and refused to call off an election boycott.
Page 6.
Health's Forgotten Element
Nothing in the Clinton health plan or in alternative plans in Congress directly addresses the issue of incompetent or negligent doctors.
Page 8.
An End to Sportsmanship
The handshake, universal symbol of good will, was banned after sporting events in a California high school, for fear it may lead to fistfights.
Page 7.
2 Arts


Business Owners Get Break on Health Plans
OWNERS of small businesses who are struggling with rising health care costs just got a good reason to put their spouses on the payroll.
The Internal Revenue Service will now permit such couples to pay all their family medical expenses with pretax dollars.
By putting a spouse on the payroll and setting up a medical plan, business owners have been able to reimburse their employed spouses for medical costs with pretax money.
But these medical plans applied only to employees, leaving the business owners out in the cold.


Nicklaus and Palmer Miss Cut at Augusta
As they neared each other behind the 18th green at Augusta National today, Arnold Palmer smiled at Jack Nicklaus.
"Do you want to play somewhere tomorrow?" Palmer asked. "Not here."


Salzburg Factions Seeking Peace
Until Herbert von Karajan's death in 1989, the upper-crust musical life of this gorgeous Alpine city hummed with pearly precision.
There were occasional off-season events that redounded to his and the city's glory.
But basically there were the venerable summer Salzburg Festival, which he ran, and the newer Salzburg Easter Festival, which he founded in 1967.
The Vienna Philharmonic dominated the summer festival while the Berlin Philharmonic was the showpiece orchestra in the spring.
The Easter Festival was privately supported, although the same flossy crowd paid exorbitantly high prices at both festivals and opera productions in the spring were routinely repeated in the summer, amortizing their costs.


Hook-SupeRx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Youth Is Served, but So Is Youth Plus 20
Stocked with talent, sprinkled with nostalgia and sparked by an unexpected upset of one of the most polished performers on clay by one of that surface's teen-aged neophytes, the quarterfinals of the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships were a disappointment only to today's losers.
But the 17-year-old Lindsay Davenport, who almost skipped this event out of homesickness for high school society and its accompanying senior year hi-jinks, was ecstatic after her 4-6, 6-4, 7-6 (8-6) ejection of second-seeded Conchita Martinez.
The sixth-seeded Davenport, almost a stranger to clay, used power, her usual trademark, and patience, an unusual one, in her comeback against Martinez, who last week in Hilton Head captured her ninth career title on clay.


New York Gives Everyone Access to Hospitals
To the Editor:
The proposal of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's administration to privatize selected municipal hospitals in New York City, as well as the views in your "Dr. Giuliani's Hospital Cure" dialogue (Op-Ed, March 30), demonstrate that the public and many policy makers, including those in Washington, are unaware that in New York State we have achieved universal access to hospitals.


Sports of The Times; Fruit Picked Before Its Time
UNTIL this season, college basketball, men's basketball in particular, was becoming wearisome: the tired cliches, the coaches' manipulative, controlling tactics, even the single-minded focus of the players.
But the last three weeks offered a mixture of social consciousness, politics and superb competition, three elements that are essential if the faulty foundation of intercollegiate athletics is going to change.


Forced Circumcision Is Alien to Nigeria
To the Editor:
A March 24 news article reports that Lydia Oluloro, a Nigerian woman living illegally in the United States, would not be deported.
She alleges, you report, that forced circumcision of females takes place in Nigeria.


India Unmoved in Arms Talks With U.S.
A visit to India by the United States Deputy Secretary of State ended today with no sign of a breakthrough in the Clinton Administration's effort to prevent an intensified nuclear arms race between India and Pakistan.
The American official, Strobe Talbott, said after a meeting with the Indian Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, that American proposals had encountered "some degree of skepticism" in New Delhi as well as in Islamabad, the capital of Pakistan, where he will meet with senior Pakistani officials over the weekend.


The State of the State, Proudly Restated; Cuomo Writes the Book on New York's Strengths, and (Surprise!) Finds Much to Like
It is only in the next-to-last paragraph of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's new book, "The New York Idea: An Experiment in Democracy," that he explains why he decided to write a 250-page treatise about the programs, policies and philosophical underpinnings of New York State government.
"For too long -- I think -- we have dismissed our strengths, shrugged off our achievements, and allowed the headline writers to concoct the whole image of New York," Mr.
Cuomo writes.
"Sometimes we have even been made to doubt ourselves."


Corrections
A jazz listing in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday for the Brooklyn Conservatory of Music has become outdated.
Enos Payne and the Circumference Jazz Ensemble will appear with the alto saxophonist James Spaulding tonight at 8 o'clock.
The Barry Harris Ensemble is no longer scheduled.


Mets Swallow Dose of Reality In Astrodome
The Mets tried not to get too excited about their 3-0 start to the 1994 season.
Manager Dallas Green shrugged off questions about what it might mean to the team's seasonlong potential.
Jeff Kent laughed at the joking suggestion that his three-game, six-r.b.i. total projected to 324 runs batted in for the year.
Most players simply took it in stride.
The Mets knew reality would hit sometime, and it did tonight.
Without a victory in the Astrodome in their previous seven outings, the Mets made it eight straight when Houston capitalized on one big inning for a 6-3 victory.


Turmoil in the Schools; 'My Integrity Is Not for Sale,' Cortines Says in His Statement
Following is the statement made yesterday by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines on the appointment of a fiscal monitor for the New York City public schools.
I think the Mayor's announcement to appoint a monitor for the school system is a regrettable one.


Long Bond Price Dips; Yield 7.25%
Interest rates rose yesterday as the bond market began to brace for two important reports on its growing obsession: inflation.
The market had started the week in turmoil as it focused on almost every hint of potential inflationary pressures -- and possible moves by the Federal Reserve to eliminate them by pushing up interest rates.


An MCI Vice President Is Named to No. 2 Post
The MCI Communications Corporation elevated Gerald H. Taylor today to be president of its worldwide communications business, a move that solidifies him as the most important person in the company after its chairman, Bert C. Roberts Jr.
Mr.
Taylor, who joined MCI almost at its inception in 1968, was executive vice president in charge of its United States long-distance business.
Since the resignation last August of MCI's last president, Daniel F. Akerson, who became chairman of the General Instrument Corporation, Mr.
Taylor has shared operational control of the company with two other executive vice presidents.


Envoys Urge a Truce as Bosnia Fighting Eases
United States diplomats and United Nations officials worked here today to arrange a comprehensive cease-fire between Bosnian Army and Serbian nationalist forces as the intensity of fighting reportedly dropped off in the eastern Bosnian enclave of Gorazde.
The United States' special envoy, Charles Redman, held talks here today with Bosnian Government officials, while the commander of the United Nations military force, Sir Michael Rose, shuttled between the Bosnian and Serbian commanders.


Q &amp; A
Husband-Wife Pensions  Q. My wife and I are both employees of my professional medical corporation.
Is it true that we cannot both contribute to the pension and profit-sharing plans provided by the corporation?
DR.
DAVID E. KNOOP,  Mendham, N.J.
A.
Both you and your wife can participate in the corporation's qualified plan.
But an Internal Revenue Service rule could limit the amount of your contributions and the corporation's deductions, so that the full benefits would not be available to you both.
When a husband, a wife or both control a company, they are treated as one individual to determine limits under a plan.
And the total compensation that may be taken into account by an individual this year in a qualified plan is $150,000.
"Individuals might try to alleviate the effect of the I.R.S. rule by setting aside company profits for a cash bonus, for an unfunded deferred compensation arrangement or for nondeductible employee contributions to the plan or to an I.R.A.," said Howard J. Golden, partner of Kwasha Lipton, an employee benefits firm.
Spouses' I.R.A.
Choices  Q. When a beneficiary spouse takes over an I.R.A. where distributions have already begun, must the distribution continue as before or can the spouse commence a new distribution arrangement using the nonspousal joint tables?
SOL WIESEL, Delray Beach, Fla.
A.
A beneficiary spouse can continue to take distributions at least as rapidly as under the method in effect before the owner's death.
"Alternatively, the spouse could elect to distribute the entire I.R.A. and roll the proceeds over into his or her own new I.R.A. account," said Robert J. Garner of Ernst &amp; Young.
"The spouse, even if over 70 1/2, could then select a new beneficiary. The balance of the rollover I.R.A. could be distributed over the joint-and-survivor life expectancy of the spouse and the nonspousal beneficiary."
Brokerage Liquidation  Q. My brokerage account, in addition to stock, consists of Treasury notes, Fannie Maes, Freddie Macs and municipal bonds.
If my broker should become insolvent, how would it affect my holdings with their maturity dates in the distant future?
ANTHONY TARICONE, Brooklyn  A. When a brokerage firm is placed in liquidation, the Securities Investor Protection Corporation tries to replace the securities in the account.
It will first try to reconstitute your portfolio as of the date the firm failed, including those holdings with maturities in the distant future.
"If the defunct brokerage does not have the securities for delivery to the customer, SIPC. will advance funds to the trustee to purchase the missing securities on the open market," said Stephen P. Harbeck, senior associate general counsel of the corporation.
"The maximum SIPC may advance to satisfy a customer claim of cash and securities is $500,000," including $100,000 in cash.


Pediatric Clinic Opens in the South Bronx


Genetically Altered Tomato Moves Toward U.S. Approval
A Federal panel today cleared the way for Government approval of the first genetically engineered food, a firmer tomato that can ripen longer on the vine before being picked for shipment.
After three days of hearings, Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, said he thought that final action on the tomato, called the Flavr Savr, would come within 90 days, and other agency officials said approval was expected.


Abbott Near-Perfect; Yankees Are
The expectations arrived from Anaheim, Calif., before Jim Abbott ever did.
Reaching them was the trouble.
Sometimes last season they overwhelmed him, sometimes they aggravated him, but sometimes he reached the zenith and was the precise pitcher the Yankees drooled over.
Last night was one of those rare, nearly perfect, nights.
Confounding the nine right-handed hitters in Detroit's lineup with a nasty slider and a quality changeup while seeming to notch a groundout or a strikeout whenever he needed, Abbott scripted a tidy opening chapter for 1994 and finally closed the 1993 book that contained some disappointing chapters.
Abbott tossed seven scoreless innings and stifled an imposing group on three hits in steering the Yankees to a 4-0 victory at Yankee Stadium.


Jordan's First Crack As a Baron An Event
The headline on the front page of The Birmingham News sports section today read, "Barons Brace for Michael Mania."
And the Birmingham Barons, the Class AA White Sox affiliate with whom Michael Jordan made his professional debut tonight against the Chattanooga Lookouts, were indeed preparing for an onslaught of sorts.


Cott Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Pioneer Hi-Bred Int'l(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Business Digest
Failing that, they bolster production by diversifying and bartering.  [ 37. ] Companies  Three bidders are vying for Ford's First Nationwide Bank unit.
Ford has set a Monday deadline for offers on the subsidiary, which has 181 branches and assets of $16 billion.  [ 39. ] MCI Communications named Gerald H. Taylor president of its worldwide communications business, a move that solidifies Mr.
Taylor's position as the most important person in the company after its chairman, Bert C. Roberts Jr.  [ 39. ] Pegasus Technologies is negotiating for space 250 miles from the Air Force base in California at which it wanted to do sophisticated repair work using imaging X-ray technology.  [ 39. ] Your Money  Financial stocks are good values, analysts say, and may hold up well in shaky markets.
And a stronger economy should push up banks' profits as the demand for loans increases.  [ 35. ] Timid municipal bond owners might consider fixed portfolios known as unit investment trusts.  [ 35. ] Taxpayers can file for a payment extension if they owe the I.R.S. money and cannot pay the whole amount by April 15.  [ 35. ] Adjustable-rate mortgage funds lack a long track record, but they held their ground in a dismal first quarter, reporting a small gain while other mortgage funds declined.  [ 35. ]


Blue Book Of Trends Is Yellow
ALL right, phone book fans, it's time to take a close look at the Nynex Manhattan Yellow pages now being distributed to 1.2 million customers.
The plot may be baffling and the end hard to figure out, but as in previous editions there is a terrific array of characters that beats anything in Dickens.
The local color is sensational, and, most important, the layers of tiny detail authentically convey what has been going on around here.


Results Plus
BASKETBALL  Magic Clinches Playoff Spot for First Time  The Orlando Magic clinched the first National Basketball Association playoff berth in franchise history at home last night as Shaquille O'Neal had 40 points and 16 rebounds in a 117-103 victory over the Detroit Pistons.
O'Neal's first dunk, 1 minute 38 seconds into the game, shook the shot clock so violently that it quit working for the rest of the half.
Rookie Anfernee Hardaway had 26 points, 9 rebounds and 9 assists for the Magic, which also solidified its hold on the fourth seeding in the Eastern Conference and home-court advantage in the first round of the playoffs.
They are three games in front of Cleveland with nine games to play. (AP) Bullets 108, Cavaliers 98: Rex Chapman scored 29 points and Don MacLean had 26 points and 12 rebounds as Washington prevented visiting Cleveland from clinching a playoff berth.
Gerald Wilkins scored 21 points and John Williams finished with 18 points and 12 rebounds for the Cavaliers, who will clinch their fourth straight playoff berth with a victory or a Charlotte loss. (AP) Bulls 100, Pacers 94: In Indianapolis, Scottie Pippen's 3-pointer with 42 seconds left highlighted a 9-0 run as Chicago took advantage of Indiana's five turnovers in the final 1:40.
The Bulls have won 6 straight and 12 of 14 games. (AP) SuperSonics 111, Mavericks 93: Gary Payton scored 4 of his 22 points in an 11-0 burst to start the fourth quarter as the Seattle matched a franchise record with its 56th victory.
It moved the Sabres into a tie with Boston for second place in the Northeast Division, a point ahead of the Canadiens.
Donald Audette had the only goal of the game, his 28th of the season, and it was something of a fluke.
In the second period, Buffalo's Philippe Boucher took a shot from the point, which was stopped by Montreal's Patrick Roy.
The deflection bounced to Audette, who was standing to Roy's right.
Audette's crossing pass bounced off the stick of Canadiens' defenseman Patrice Brisebois and into the net. (AP) Flames 5, Sharks 2: Calgary helped determine San Jose's playoff berth.
The visiting Sharks' defeat, combined with Chicago's victory over St.
Louis, means they will be seeded eighth in the Western Conference playoffs. (AP) Blackhawks 6, Blues 1: Joe Murphy scored twice in the second period and Ed Belfour stopped 32 shots as Chicago beat visiting St.
Louis.
The Blackhawks won for only the second time in nine games (2-6-1) and prevented the Blues from clinching the fifth spot in the Western Conference playoffs. (AP) Mighty Ducks 3, Oilers 1: Garry Valk scored a key goal as Anaheim scored twice in the third period to beat the Oilers in Edmonton. (AP) TENNIS  Lendl Upset as Other Seeded Players Gain  Top-seeded Pete Sampras led a parade of favorites into the semifinals of the Japan Open yesterday in Tokyo.
Michael Chang and Boris Becker advanced with him, but not Ivan Lendl.
Sampras, the world's No. 1 player, outlasted seventh-seeded Patrick Rafter of Australia, 6-1, 5-7, 6-1, in their quarterfinal match on the hard courts of Ariake Colosseum.
Second-seeded Chang beat his fellow American David Wheaton, 7-6 (7-3), 6-3, and third-seeded Becker, of Germany, trounced the sixth-seeded American, Brad Gilbert, 6-3, 6-0.
Sweden's Henrik Holm blasted 15 service aces and beat Lendl, seeded fourth, 5-7, 6-1, 6-2, in 2 hours 14 minutes.
Among the women, fourth-seeded Amy Frazier beat the Belgian Sabine Appelmans, seeded second, 7-5, 6-2, and advanced to the final against either top-seeded Kimiko Date or third-seeded Naoko Sawamatsu. both of Japan. (AP) BOWLING  Hromek Leads Open to Stepladder Phase  Justin Hromek won seven of eight matches last night to go from third to first for today's stepladder finals of the $250,000 B.P.A.A.
United States Open in Troy, Mich.
Hromek defeated Eric Forkel in the final game of match play, 236-234, to hold onto the leading qualifier postion.
Hromek finished with an 18-6 match-play record, a 220 average over 56 games and 12,889 total pins. (AP) YACHTING  Yamaha Takes Fifth-Leg Whitbread Lead  The Japanese-New Zealand yacht Yamaha moved into the lead on the fifth leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race yesterday, taking an eight-mile advantage over Intrum Justitia of Europe as heavy winds continued to trouble the fleet off the coast of Brazil.
The four leading boats were Whitbread 60 Class yachts.
Merit Cup of Switzerland led the Maxi class, 23 miles ahead of its nearest rival, New Zealand Endeavor.
Endeavor was also slightly ahead of Tokio in the unofficial race for overall winner. (AP)


Brief Romance, Growing Fears, Then 2 Deaths
In a city of disconnected lives and romantic possibility, it was hardly a remarkable beginning: a wine tasting on a spring evening, a swirl of Beaujolais and conversation, a lovely separated woman and a lonely divorced man, strangers with savoir faire and talent, bruised but still open to a relationship.
She was Sarah Auerbach, 35, and she owned an apartment in Brooklyn Heights and was an executive with a Wall Street investment banker.
He called himself Rick Varela, though his name was Ricardo; he was 46, a recent arrival from Chicago, a management consultant with a big accounting firm who lived in a luxury building in Manhattan.


Kurt Cobain, Hesitant Poet Of 'Grunge Rock,' Dead at 27
Kurt Cobain, the ragged-voiced product of a Pacific Northwest timber town who helped to create the grunge rock sound that has dominated popular music for the last four years, was found dead today at his home here.
The police said they believed that Mr.
Cobain, the lead singer, guitarist and songwriter for the influential band Nirvana, killed himself with a single shotgun blast to the head.
A note was found next to Mr.
Cobain's body, which was discovered by an electrician who had gone to the house this morning to do some work, said Vinette Tichi, a spokeswoman for the Seattle Police Department.
Mr.
Cobain was 27.


Working Things Out by April 15, Without Fear and Trembling
Despite a much-publicized effort by the Internal Revenue Service to live up to the "service" part of its name, many taxpayers approach April 15 with fear and trembling.
Even if you owe money and are pressed for cash, try to relax.
It really is possible to work things out with the I.R.S., provided you file either areturn or Form 4868 for a four-month extension by Friday.
When you do file, you can pay in installments.


Reviews/Fashion; Some Realism, some Romance
Two well-established Seventh Avenue fashion houses garnered the most attention yesterday in the Bryant Park tents, where the New York fall shows continue.
Bill Blass, in the morning, and Oscar de la Renta, in the afternoon, put on fast-paced, professional shows.
Mr.
Blass focused on clothes that women could wear as well as admire on a runway or in a magazine.
Mr. de la Renta took off on a romantic flight of fancy.


Giuliani May Reject U.S. Money to Hire 5,000 New Police Officers
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he might refuse Federal money to hire up to 5,000 new police officers if the Government insists on telling him how to spend it.
The money, which is included in the Federal crime bill, would finance the hiring of 100,000 officers nationwide over five years.
But the bill would finance only 75 percent of the cost, requiring New York City, for instance, to spend about $75 million of its own.
After the first five years, local governments would have to pay the full costs to keep the new officers.


Knicks Miss Ewing, and Their Big Shot to Clinch


Fire Destroys 13 Town Houses in Trenton


Aaron Recalls No. 715
HANK AARON began yesterday by watching a videotape of his historic 715th home run.
Then he renewed his claim that baseball does not employ enough minority group members in the front office.
Aaron went to Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium today and appeared on NBC's "Today" show.
It was at that stadium 20 years ago, on April 8, 1974, that Aaron broke Babe Ruth's home-run record during a 7-4 victory over the Dodgers.
The Braves, who were in Los Angeles tonight, planned to honor Aaron in Atlanta on Wednesday. (AP)


Expatriates in Moscow
To the Editor:
A March 21 Business Day article quotes the Russian and American partners battling over Rosinka, a housing community for expatriates outside Moscow.


Someone to Watch Over New York: A Gallery of Faces


We'd Better Sign On To Law of the Sea
To the Editor:
William Safire is all wet about the international Law of the Sea (column, March 31).
This vast treaty does indeed take the oceans as the common heritage of mankind and sets rules for all countries on offshore territorial limits, rights of naval and maritime passage, protection of the marine environment and safeguarding of fisheries.
All of these reflect American interests.
While Mr.
Safire breezily takes these provisions for granted as "unobjectionable," they were contentious subjects of negotiation.


Review/Dance; Over a Year Later, Manhattan Can See 'Billboards'
"Billboards," the Joffrey Ballet's magnum opus to music by Prince, has finally made it to Manhattan, the New York State Theater, to be exact.
Very likely, your reaction to this four-part rock ballet by Laura Dean, Charles Moulton, Margo Sappington and Peter Pucci will be pretty basic: love it or hate it.


Review/Dance; A Mexican Choreographer Devises Puzzling Fragments
Four Latin American choreographers were featured in "Muevete," the program arranged by Merian Soto that was presented on Thursday night at the Bessie Schonberg Theater.
It was an evening dominated by solos.
The one group work was "Fractals II," by Jaime Ortega, a Mexican choreographer who is now based in New York.
The deliberately fragmentary steps he devised for David Figueroa, Tara Mooser, Melissa Rathbone and himself were fascinating because of their abruptness and nervous energy.


A Long-Running Saga Over Texas Schools
ON A BALMY March day in 1968, students at Edgewood High School here decided they deserved better than tattered textbooks, busted typewriters and tin cans used as beakers in science labs.
Four hundred students, about a third of the school's enrollment, walked out of classes after lunch.
They marched several blocks, carrying placards and chanting for better schools, to the school district administration building where they presented their grievances.


When Living for Baseball Is Second; Cancer Gives Phillies First Baseman a New Perspective on the Game
John Kruk has used many a person as a straight man.
Teammates.
Managers.
Coaches.
Reporters.
David Letterman.
Seldom, though, has Kruk's act been a solo, with a serious side to the Phillies' first baseman on display.
But, as Kruk says, cancer can sober a person real fast.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
POEMS FOR THE VERY YOUNG Selected by Michael Rosen.
Illustrated by Bob Graham. 77 pp.
New York:  Kingfisher Books. $15.95. (Ages 3 to 5)  OUT OF THE BLUE  Poems About Color.
By Hiawyn Oram.
Illustrated by David McKee.
Unpaged.
New York: Hyperion Books for Children. $18.95. (Ages 5 to 10)  ZOOMRIMES  Poems About Things That Go.
By Sylvia Cassedy.
Illustrated by Michele Chessare. 51 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $14. (Ages 8 to 12)  HALFWAY TO YOUR HOUSE  By Charlotte Pomerantz.
Illustrated by Gabrielle Vincent. 32 pp.
New York:  Greenwillow Books. $14. (Ages 3 to 5)


Russia's Version of Sticker Shock: The $50,000 Chevy
JUST inside the showroom of the General Motors dealership in downtown Moscow, a businessman from Uzbekistan ran his finger along a Chevrolet Caprice.
"This kind of car has long been my dream," he whispered, half to himself.
But such dreams are becoming elusive even for the country's burgeoning entrepreneurial class.


POSTINGS: $10 Million Gift; Columbia's Audubon Center Is Picking Up Momentum
Thanks to a $10 million gift, construction can begin later this year on the second building of the Audubon Biomedical Science and Technology Park in Washington Heights, Columbia University officials said last week.
The five-building, $300 million commercial and academic complex is being developed by Columbia across Broadway from the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
The first building, now under construction, is the six-story Audubon Business and Technology Center, which occupies much of the site of the historic Audubon Theater and Ballroom.


Enter Spring, Dressed Vividly in Yellow
WHAT is it about the color yellow for spring?
The bright sunny blossoms in various tones of gold seem to have a priority on the season.
There are other flowers, of course, in all kinds of colors.
But those with yellow petals dominate.
Think about it.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
I agree with the Philip Morris management in believing that we should all have a personal choice.
A corollary question is whether society should be obliged to pick up the medical bills of people who knowingly abuse their bodies with tobacco, alcohol or drugs.
In the law of torts, there is the doctrine of assumption of risk.
If people are to have the freedom of personal choice, then they must be ready to accept the responsibility for consequences.
HAROLD SHERMAN Ridgefield, Conn.


Movie Theaters At Airport Runways
I would like to express my dissatisfaction over the State of New York's ill-advised plan for building a multiplex movie theater on Republic Airport in Farmingdale.
The state, under pressure to show increased profitability, has succumbed to typical short-term bottom-line thinking.
That is, somewhere up in Albany or perhaps locally, some enchanter has lulled some bureaucrat into believing that the answer for increased airport income would be a new noncompatible business generating bushels of new leasing and sales-tax receipts.
Hence a 2,000-capacity movie-theater complex to be built next to busy runways.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
Several years ago, I applied for a middle-management position at Philip Morris.
After several interviews, all of which went well, I was asked to submit a urine sample for a drug-screening test, a routine part of the interview process.
The irony was rich.


Building a Better Kindergarten
You may not have noticed -- few grown-ups have -- but the equivalent of the Hundred Years' War is being waged in your local kindergarten classrooms, with legions of researchers, educators, policy makers and parents struggling silently over how and what kindergarteners should be taught.
The signs of battle can elude the untutored eye: an activity sheet here; a table of beans, buttons, geometric blocks and other math manipulatives there.
And the lines of battle can deceive: they have shifted with the latest findings on early childhood development and assessments of the quality of American education.
Even the goals have changed as Americans have redefined the role of school: To prepare children for the rites and rigors of academe?
To teach them social skills?
To Americanize and educate immigrant children quickly and well?
Always at the heart of the dispute, however, is the questions of how children learn best and, knowing that, how best to teach them, says Liliam G. Katz, a professor of early childhood education at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign.
"Debate over the answer," she added, "has raged back and forth like a pendulum for the last 100 years."
Where once the various sides squared off over curriculum issues of "play" or "activities" versus "academics," and "open" as against "structured" classrooms, today the debate often pits the "child-centered" approach against the "teacher-centered" one.
"In its pure form, the child-centered approach says that if you provide the right environment -- different activity areas, concrete objects to manipulate -- and let children loose in it, things will happen," said Professor Katz, who is president of the Washington-based National Association for Education of Young Children, the nation's largest professional association of early childhood educators.
The teacher-centered approach, very simply put, has the teacher pouring knowledge into children; youngsters learn skills -- often through drills and practice -- determined by the teacher and the school.
A Trend to Commercial Curriculums
The few national studies on the subject show that both approaches can be found in kindergartens throughout the country.
But researchers suggest a trend toward using commercially prepared curriculums that focus on narrowly defined academic skills, like letter recognition and counting.
And a drumbeat of voices is increasingly warning, sometimes with a religious fervor, that these curriculums are too tough and will lead more and more youngsters to fail.
Now a truce is being forged: Whatever teachers teach and however they teach it, their approach should be developmentally appropriate.
"We mean that while we shouldn't teach beyond what a kid is capable of knowing and learning, we shouldn't teach below what he is capable of knowing and learning either," said Bernard Spodek, a professor of early childhood development at the University of Illinois.
"The idea is to see what a child is capable of and then try to extend and challenge that without frustrating him."
The aim, researchers and educators agree, is to instill in kindergarteners a desire to learn.
And they should actually learn something, too; their intellectual abilities and problem-solving skills should be enhanced.
That kindergarten has changed was inevitable, if only because kindergarteners themselves have changed.
Most are veterans of day care, nursery school or some other preschool arrangement.
They are also full-fledged members of the television generation.
"Kindergarten may no longer be where all these children learn their colors or to count," said Rebecca S. New, an associate professor of education and coordinator of the graduate program in early childhood education at the University of New Hampshire in Durham.
Indeed, with television, movies and computers, educational toys and electronic games, knowledge that was once esoteric is now commonplace.
As a result, parents and teachers often expect more academically of the kindergarten crowd, although for many youngsters day care may have constituted poor-quality baby-sitting in an uninviting place.
The demand for a more academic, "back to basics" kingergarten accelerated in the 1980's, especially in the wake of "A Nation at Risk," a 1983 Federal commission report suggesting that many children in the United States were failing to achieve in school.
In a "push-down" effect, the pressure was on to give American students an earlier, some thought better start, and teach in kindergarten the math and reading skills once taught in first grade.
Recently, other pro-academic forces have come into play.
There are, for example, first-grade teachers who refuse to accept kindergarten graduates ill prepared for the basic-skills tests that elementary-school children are increasingly taking.
And there are kindergarten teachers who are certified for grades K though 6, 8 or 9 and teach kindergarten as they would fourth grade.
Professor New noted that society's success norms had risen.
"It's not enough to graduate from high school," she said.
"You must attend college. Parents, particularly minority or immigrant parents, acting as advocates for their children thus want schools to put youngsters in a competitive position. Pushing Children Prematurely?
The backlash took its time, but in the late 1980's books such as David Elkind's "The Hurried Child" appeared, suggesting that children were being pushed prematurely to act like adults in all aspects of life.
At the same time, early childhood development experts, who had focused on day care, awoke to the increase in kindergarten attendance.
In 1965 only 59.5 percent of 5-year-olds were enrolled in kindergarten, according to the National Center for Education Statistics; by 1992 the figure exceeded 80 percent.
The researchers started pushing their findings into the public's domain.
"All the literature said that young children learn best when they are interested in something, when it relates to their lives, when it offers a cognitive conflict -- that is, there is no easy answer, so they may need help and must work with others," said Professor New.
The response in some kindergartens has been a rejection of academics in favor of a kindergarten 50's-style, in which socialization skills are emphasized, friendships are made and children are cradled in a nurturing atmosphere.
Such a regimen functions almost as an extension of day care, teaching children to operate in a group, away from home and under the care and authority of someone other than their parents.
Youngsters are also socialized to the culture of school: arriving on time, following instructions and being quiet for some small part of a regulated day.
But just as the contemporary, academic kindergarten may set cognitive goals few 5 year-olds can attain, the retro-classic kindergarten may ignore children's cognitive development entirely.
"Learning is messy," said Yvonne Smith, a kindergarten teacher at Central Park East Elementary School on East 106th Street in Manhattan.
With a master's degree in early childhood education and 20 years of teaching experience, Ms.
Smith should know.
"Lots of lessons are imbedded in a single subject or activity," she explained.
"We're looking at animals, for example. There is vocabulary describing the animals, books about animals, the sorting of animals by color and shape, type and size. There are paintings to be made of animals and stories to write and recite about them. There is even measuring, especially since one child wanted to know how long it took a giraffe to swallow with such a long neck." An Impression of Organized Chaos
Organized chaos is what a visitor sees in this class of 25, with small groups of children intently clustered in different activity areas around the room, like the dry sand table, the writing table and the cooking corner.
There is a library and a listening area with tapes, and Huggy, the class guinea pig.
The children choose where they will work at the start of the day, their choices written for all to see.
Labels abound in this room, indicating with a name, a drawing, a numeral, gingerbread-type figures and a spelled-out number the nature of each activity area and how many children can work there.
"Children must assemble and disassemble, interact with other children and adults to figure out how the world works," Ms.
Smith explained.
"They must do it in a setting that takes care of and develops each child, physically, socially, emotionally and cognitively."
But they are not free to roam.
Through the pockets of quiet concentration and the hubbub of discovery, there is Ms.
Smith, watching and guiding; suggesting to one youngster that she has the makings of the color brown on her palette of many hues; listening to another child spin a tale from single letters on a page.
"But clearly, she knows that each letter stands for a word," Ms.
Smith said.
Is learning going on here?
"My son, Bryant, entered this class barely speaking English," said Mei Siu, who came to the United States from Hong Kong 10 years ago.
"Now he speaks it well. Sometimes he reads to me: he can't read the words, but he can tell me the story. More important, he is independent, confident in himself. I know of relatives whose children are in stricter, more traditional classes, but they haven't learned as much as my son."
Across town at Public School 163 on West 97th Street, an airy orderliness characterizes Ilene Golembiovsky's kindergarten class of 24.
There are fewer activity areas here, and everything from blocks to books is more neatly stored.
But on a dreary day this room is awash with artwork and names on the wall, and alive with children, seated on the floor eagerly counting out a classmate's six years.
It's Joshua's birthday, as the sign he proudly wears around his neck said.
"I am 6 six years old today."
"And one for good luck," Mrs. Golembiovsky said. "Six plus one is . . ."
"Seven," the class shouted.
"Good," said the teacher in the first of many encouraging words for the day.
In this class the teacher, with a master's degree in early childhood education and almost 29 years of experience, calls many of the tunes, determining the activities and imparting knowledge.
But her nurturing nature is unmistakable -- "I make sure to tell them when I make a mistake so they know it's no big deal," she said -- and the children willingly go along.
"Socialization is most important here," she said.
"Working together, sharing. We all have classroom jobs, so that we all learn to be both responsible and independent."
But, she added, "many of my parents really care about academics, learning to read, learning to count, pushing ahead, pushing ahead, pushing ahead."
Workbooks are used, as is a phonics-alphabet chant.
"They are what parents want these days, and surprisingly, the children love it because it's what the big kids do," Mrs.
Golembiovsky said, adding that the youngsters proudly point to finished pages as an accomplishment.
She considers the materials "supplemental, reinforcement for other things we do in class."
On this day there is also a project on shoes, with youngsters deciding who is wearing shoes -- as against boots or sneakers -- and how many there are of each color and what size, as they trace their footwear on paper, which they label with their names and will post for all to see.
Is learning going on here?
"My son Stephen didn't want to go to school," said his mother, Virginia Adams.
"Now even when he's sick, he wants to go. He had playtime in day care. Here, he's learned to write his name; he excitedly points to words and spells them out."
The lesson here is clear, said Deborah Stipek, a professor at the Graduate School of Education of the University of California at Los Angeles, who has studied the effects of both kinds of kindergartens on students.
First, most kindergartens offer some combination of child-initiated and teacher-directed, or at least teacher-guided, activities.
Second, people should not judge an activity by whether it is in some category, but rather by whether it is appropriate for particular children in a particular place.
In kindergartens of Spanish-speaking youngsters, for example, Claude Goldenberg, the associate director of the urban education studies center at U.C.L.A.'s Graduate School of Education, found "unambiguously academic" classes that emphasized drills and workbooks successfully teaching 5-year-olds the basics of reading and literacy development.
"To my surprise, these kids were learning," Professor Goldenberg said.
"And they weren't just testing well. I talked to them and their parents; these kids couldn't wait to show me how they could read; they loved school."
Even Professor Stipek's yet-unpublished research suggests that teacher-directed activities using drill and practice, worksheets and group instruction may teach some children important skills.
"What is important about any activity or teaching approach is that the child show enthusiasm and interest in what's happening in class," she said, "that the child take pride in his or her accomplishment, and that the child learns something from it."  Cautionary Tales of the Extremes
Cautionary tales abound about kindergartens at the extremes.
Virtually all the researchers and teachers interviewed said they knew of or had seen "sit down, shut up, count to 10" classes in which teachers had little time, and no patience, for children who deviated from a curriculum of activity sheets, drill and practice, requiring children to sit at desks or tables for long periods.
Several educators also spoke of observing "anything goes" classrooms in which teachers rarely intervened.
Some youngsters were overwhelmed into inaction by the choices available to them, or bored because no one was guiding and extending their activities.
Many simply cruised from activity to activity, turning what should have been a journey of self-discovery into an exercise in self-indulgence.
What can parents do to steer a healthy course for their children?
The answer, educators agree, is to see for yourself.
Parents should arrange to visit the kindergarten classroom and observe.
Begin by determining if your child enjoys school.
Professor Stipek cautioned, however, that "What looks like play to parents can be serious learning to kids. Ask the teacher why the children are making muffins or counting buttons."
A good teacher, she said, should be able to tell you the goal or purpose of an activity.
She should be able to assess whether each child is achieving that goal, and should adjust the activity accordingly.
Ms.
Smith said that "parents have to trust a school and their child's teacher. If they are uncomfortable with the teaching philosophy and approach, then they can never work in partnership with the teacher in their child's interest. Their child will never get the support he or she needs to learn."
Her advice in such cases?
"Take your child out of that class and find a kindergarten where both you and your youngster are happy."


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Maxwell Paces Rockets  Hakeem Olajuwon tried to respond to shouts of "m.v.p.! m.v.p.!" but the Rockets' guard Vernon Maxwell stole the show with 27 points yesterday as Houston beat visiting San Antonio, 100-89, in a Midwest Division showdown.
Houston increased its lead over San Antonio to two games. (AP)


Strong Profiles
"AT THE BOTTOM OF EVERYTHING THERE IS STILL THE cube," declares the furniture designer Dakota Jackson.
His four-story Manhattan town house off Gramercy Park is filled with prototypes of his geometrically inspired work.
A leather chaise sits on legs bent like a folded paper chopsticks wrapper, and his latest library chair, of laminated sweet-gum poplar faced in maple, has a back made of a rectangular block pressed into a curve.
In Jackson's hands, everything solid seems to melt into movement, a trick he learned as much from his days as a magician and a dancer as from his deep appreciation for Cubist art.
Modernism's ability to bring motion to form has helped make it "the theme of the century," he says.
In his home, form is also infused with emotion, thanks to richly hued walls and rooms filled with artwork by his children and his friends.


Conversations/Morihiro Hosokawa; Profile in Political Descent: Japan's Once-Rising Star
JUST eight months ago Morihiro Hosokawa seemed on the verge of smashing the established order that has kept Japan closed to outsiders and engendered world-class corruption.
A young, vibrant governor from the hinterlands, he talked in sweeping, direct terms about his "historical mission" to reform the country, and Japan's need to "construct a mature democratic nation." In a country that rewards those who never step out of line, here was a prime minister willing to talk like a revolutionary.
He sounded much like Japan's foreign critics, promising to tame bureaucracy and over-regulation that make some of the world's highest-paid workers feel so poor.
He looked the part he played, a descendant of samurais gone to J. Crew, showing up at last November's inaugural summit of Asia-Pacific leaders in Seattle wearing a bomber jacket and an aviator's scarf.


Reassessing a Dream -- A special report.; Years on Integration Road: New Views of an Old Goal
It has been 40 years since Brown v. the Board of Education, when the United States Supreme Court set the stage for all schools to be open to all children, no matter the color of their skin.
It has been 30 years since Congress passed a Civil Rights Act that banished barriers to equal access, officially ushering in an era in which blacks and whites were to live and work together.
But for many black Americans, this year of anniversaries is more a time of reflection than celebration.
From the young who never knew Jim Crow, to their elders who fought to destroy discrimination, many black Americans are raising questions about what integration has done, and what it can ultimately accomplish.


Bulkhead Seats
To the Editor: I recently underwent total hip replacement surgery and was advised by my doctor I could fly to San Francisco only in a bulkhead seat.
Even though I am a "frequent flyer," United wasn't very accommodating.
Luckily a friend at United was able to arrange a bulkhead window seat for me.


Israel and Settlers Must Practice Understanding
To the Editor:
"The Siege of Hebron: Scenes From a Novel" by Tova Reich (Op-Ed, April 3) raises the following important and difficult question: How can Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel avoid pressuring West Bank settlers until they must either compromise or choose martyrdom?


Building on Spring Break
MATT SOPER, a New York University graduate student, spent his spring break building housing for the homeless.
Mr.
Soper was one of 4,456 students who took part in Habitat for Humanity's Collegiate Challenge, now in its fifth year.
Students nationwide traveled to 93 Habitat locations to help build affordable housing for the homeless.
The program began Feb. 20 and ended yesterday.


The World; Tensions in South Africa


Making the Unaffordable Affordable
SPRING.
Time to fix leaky roofs, paint peeling walls, repair broken walks.
But tackling such improvements are far beyond the means of too many poor, elderly or handicapped homeowners in Westchester, people like Joseph C. Reyes, 69, whose Victorian house in Katonah is in bad shape.
Mr.
Reyes, who lives on Social Security and a small pension, cannot afford to make the necessary repairs.
In Bedford Hills, Lorraine Rossi, who suffered injury to her limbs and lives in a ground-floor condominium, cannot afford the remodeling needed to make the condominium suitable for wheelchair use.
Ms.
Rossi, a former schoolteacher, has been confined to a wheelchair since she lost control of her car on her way to school one icy morning five years ago, when she went over a 25-foot cliff.
She lives with her 86-year-old father, Paul J. Scagnelli, an amputee, who also uses a wheelchair.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HARTFORD'S SYNAGOGUES
An extensive tour of Hartford's historic synagogues will be led on Thursday by David F. Ransom and Mary Donohue, architectural historians of the Connecticut Historical Society.
The excursion, planned by the Jewish Historical Society of Greater Hartford and the Hartford Architecture Conservancy, will begin at 9:30 A.M. at the Jewish Community Center, 335 Bloomfield Avenue in West Hartford.
Included in the tour are drive-bys of the synagogues in Hartford's North End and Blue Hills neighborhoods, and visits to the former Emanuel and Agudas Achim Synagogues, the Charter Oak Cultural Center (formerly Beth Israel Synagogue) and Congregation Beth Israel.


Recent Turmoil in New York City Schools Is History Repeating Itself, Only Faster
"Hold on. Oh, my God, I've found just one so far," said Michael Casserly, executive director of the Council of Great City Schools.
Mr.
Casserly was scanning the list of the nation's 47 largest school districts, counting how many big city superintendents had been in their jobs more than three years.
"This is sad," he said, "One, one. I see two. Two out of 47!"


Sitting on Top Of the Tennis World; Sampras Has the Game for All Seasons
Pete Sampras, undisputed and currently unchallenged as the world's No. 1 tennis player, was minding his own business recently up in the first-class cabin on a flight between tour stops.
Sampras couldn't help but notice the baseball ace Barry Bonds sitting across the aisle, and neither could a horde of autograph hounds who paid the slugger nonstop obeisance until the seat belt signs were illuminated.
Meanwhile, there sat Sampras, the player who has outslugged everybody in his profession in three consecutive grand slam tournaments, in virtual obscurity.


The Great Phil Rizzuto Debate
THE POLITICS OF GLORY How Baseball's Hall of Fame Really Works.
By Bill James. 464 pp.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. $25.


The World; In Diplomacy, Plain Talk Is Often Just Plain Wrong
THE language of diplomacy may sound murky at home, but sometimes ambiguity sends the clearest message abroad.
And when diplomats speak most clearly to Americans, foreigners can get dangerously confused.
Defense Secretary William Perry learned that the hard way when he played Secretary of State for an hour on an interview show last week, telling his host in unvarnished -- and undiplomatic -- terms that the United States was not about to use military force to save Gorazde, a besieged Bosnian town.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Producer prices, March, percent change
0.5
0.2
Wednesday
Consumer prices, March, percent change
0.3
0.3
Retail sales, March, percent change
1.5
0.9
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
337
325
Business inventories, Feb., percent change
0.0
0.3
Friday
Industrial production, March, pct. chg.
0.4
0.5
This Week's Developments
Monday
Congress returns from recess
*4*G-10 central bankers meet in Basel, Switzerland
Thursday
Bundesbank council meeting
Friday
Tax-return procrastination must end


Going for the Gyoza in New Haven
JAPANESE restaurants are not a yen a dozen in Connecticut, so it is always a pleasure to welcome a new one.
Samurai, in downtown New Haven, provides a pleasant dining experience in terms of both food and tranquil surroundings.
There's nothing samurai-like or martial about the place, a two-story house across from the Shubert Theater with Japanese prints on pale yellow walls, a shoji screen at the entrance and huge white mulberry paper globes dangling from the ceiling in the two main dining rooms.
The rooms, probably at one time the parlor and dining room of the house, lead into one another, and in a third room at the back, a long sushi bar dominates, with a sparkling array of fresh seafood.
Up a long flight of mirror-lined stairs are additional dining rooms, well suited to private parties.
Japanese waitresses in happi coats extend greetings at the entrance door.


G. S. Zacharkow, Insurance Man, 67
George S. Zacharkow, a leader in the maritime insurance industry, died on Tuesday at his home in Bridgton, Me.
He was 67 and had lived in Laurel Hollow, L.I., until his retirement three years ago.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, according to Continental Insurance, his employer for 40 years.


A Watershed Event at the Met
GANESHA, THE elephant-headed Hindu god of beginnings, the remover of obstacles, has been working overtime at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
And he has conjured a triumph.
The public debut of the museum's Florence and Herbert Irving Galleries for the Arts of South and Southeast Asia on Wednesday not only puts several of the world's great artistic cultures on permanent display for the first time in Manhattan but does so on a scale matched by no American institution and by very few in the world.
The results are not flawless.
There are details of the installation one would have wished otherwise, and, as with any youngish collection (most of the 1,300 objects on view have been acquired within the last 20 years), some objects will doubtless be replaced over time by finer examples of their kind.
But the fact remains that the Irving Galleries opening is a watershed event -- for Asian culture in this city, for a museum whose claim to be encyclopedic takes a giant step closer to reality, and for art lovers who for years have had to see a meager sampling of the museum's splendid South Asian sculptures confined to drab hallway vitrines.


Like Firefighters, They Risk Their Lives
To the Editor:
As an emergency physician at Bellevue Hospital I was pleased to read about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's support for buying appropriate protective equipment for New York City's firefighters (news article, March 30).
Bellevue Hospital treats a large number of injured firefighters, Emergency Medical Services personnel and police officers, and I applaud any effort to reduce occupational injury among those who serve our city so bravely.


A Poet Reacts to Violence, but the Sweetness Shines Through
SOMETIMES it seems sweetness exists in a voice.
A child who sang, for whom life had no business being sweet.
It is a book that does not look flinchingly at violence, whether between schoolchildren for whom nobody "turned a face to them judged/ their dispute wiped their cheeks sent them back to their lessons," or the men who cruelly, sensuously fight one another outside bars, the soldiers who forget even the old Greek sensuality of why they are fighting.


Hauling as Much, for Much Less Pay
Behind the wheel of a groaning diesel rig hauling a 28-foot trailer, Tim Hart backed smoothly into the bay of a shipping warehouse, as deftly as an expert teamster.
But unlike the striking teamsters, who make over $17 an hour, Mr.
Hart is paid about $9 an hour for Miller Brothers Inc., a nonunion freight carrier in Denver.


Laurie C. Nash, Mark Dursztman
Dr.
Laurie Claire Nash, a daughter of Drs.
Warner and Artemis Nash of New York, was married last evening to Dr.
Mark Dursztman, the son of Joseph and Regina Dursztman of Flushing, Queens.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel performed the ceremony at the Water's Edge, a restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 34, is keeping her name.
She is a fellow in pulmonary medicine at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received her medical degree from Columbia University.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
Her mother is the director of pathology at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y.


Unfair to Jordan
To the Sports Editor:
He was the victim of two very questionable calls by Grapefruit League umpires, a sports magazine called his attempt a "match-book cover delusion" but rated him cover material anyway, and the last time this many Hall of Famers were complaining about the same thing was when the Government started levying sin taxes on alcohol.
Even The Times's Murray Chass admonished the White Sox owner, Jerry Reinsdorf, to bed his spoiled brat without supper.
Meanwhile, his work ethic has been criticized by no one; he has always been the first to the park, the last to leave.
He has displayed steady if unspectacular improvement, and one of basketball's greatest heroes is willing to spend a year or two in the minors to accomplish the dream he shared with his late father.


A Newcomer's Travails Inspire Shockand Outrage
To the Editor:
As a lifelong New Yorker who has just read "New York Observed: A Newcomer's Journey," I have come to the conclusion that I am sick and tired of reading about out-of-towners who move to New York City under the mistaken notion that it consists of only one borough and then do nothing but whine about how trying it is to live here.


B. C. Starr, L. P. Reffold
Beth Charna Starr, a vice president at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank, was married yesterday evening to Laurence Peter Reffold, a senior trainer in the information systems group at Johnson &amp; Higgins, an insurance broker.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the New York Palace Hotel.


Praising the Process
To the Editor
What Andrew Pollack characterized as time-wasting processes in "Think Japan Inc. Is Lean and Mean? Step Into This Office" (March 20) can be a remarkably civilized and efficient way, and sometimes the only way, to achieve consensus.


Lori M. Weiss, Robert S. Kost
Lori Michele Weiss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen A. Weiss of West Hartford, Conn., was married last evening to Robert Sumner Kost, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Kost of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer and the Rev.
Giles Spoonhaeur, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the interfaith ceremony at the Hartford Club in Hartford.
Mrs.
Kost, 26, is the sales development manager at Inc. magazine in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is a urologist in Hartford.


April 3-9: A Crash in Siberia; Crew Let Children Fly Aeroflot Jet
Even here, they used to joke about Aeroflot.
The food was inedible, and the torturous seats were made by the K.G.B.
Nobody is joking now.
The giant airline's safety record has fallen off badly since the dissolution of the Soviet empire.
In 1991 there were a record 36 crashes and 252 people killed, last year 11 crashes and 221 deaths.


Winnifred Senning and Sandy Ewing
Winnifred Alden Senning, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Senning of Santa Barbara, Calif., was married there yesterday to Alexander Cochran Ewing Jr., a son of Mr.
Ewing of Winston-Salem, N.C., and the late Carol S. Ewing.
Rabbi Alexis Roberts performed the ceremony at the Music Academy of the West.
The bride, 33, is keeping her name.
She is a producer of interactive television at A.T.&amp; T. in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr and received a master's degree in interactive telecommunications from New York University.


Megabytes Are Important
To the Editor:
Bernard Sharratt makes a startling point.
With so many copies available, by the time one ventures into a dusty museum "the work itself can seem just another reproduction" and perhaps a disappointing one.
This raises an interesting question: Are we any different from Narcissus in the ways in which we snatch up reproductions of art?
One must remember that he, too, fell in love with a reproduction, and it led to his end.


Stop Assaults in School, Not Hats
If American education is in the mess so many claim, perhaps it's not because students wear hats  [ "Student's Baseball Caps Prompt a Principal to Balk," March 27 ] , but rather because administrators concern themselves with such misguided issues.
If one seeks to return to a less rude past, when the wearning (or not wearing) of hats reflected civility and respect, one should go all the way back to the roots of this tradition -- religion.
As we have a principal of separation of church and state, school policy makers shoud promote the separation of fact from fiction.
Hats don't affect S.A.T.'s.
They don't control values or inhibit thinking.


The Politics of Ultimatums
From start to finish, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani spent last week demonstrating that he wanted to take control of the city's school system and shake up 110 Livingston Street, its base in Brooklyn.
On Monday, he named Edward N. Costikyan, a Democrat who endorsed him during the mayor's race, to draft a plan to break the Board of Education into five smaller borough boards.
He spent the next few days castigating Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines for his failure to make the staff cuts that Mr.
Giuliani wanted.
And on Friday, after winning the personnel reductions, Mr.
Giuliani followed up relentlessly by naming Herman Badillo as a fiscal monitor to investigate the board's finances.


April 3-9: Judge Blocks Pentagon; 'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' Gets a 'Don't Think So'
After the Clinton Administration struck a grudging compromise with Congress last year to allow homosexuals in the military so long as they kept their sexual orientation private, attention shifted to the courts and the legal challenges.
Last week, a Federal district judge blocked the Pentagon from discharging six gay service members until their lawsuit, the first challenge to the policy, is resolved.
The decision by Judge Eugene H. Nickerson of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York in Brooklyn raises the possibility that the policy could face serious hurdles.


A Gentle Saboteur
To the Editor:
As the chairwoman of the International PEN Women Writers' Committee, I was interested to see Edward Allen's review of Dubravka Ugresic's "Fording the Stream of Consciousness" (March 20).
Though the novel, written in 1988, shows few signs of the war clouds soon to burst over the former Yugoslavia (as Mr. Allen points out), political events have had a pronounced effect on the author's subsequent career, and your readers deserve to know how.


Mutual Funds; Tax Free Doesn't Mean Risk Free
MILLIONS of mutual fund investors are buying municipal bond funds for the tax-free income, which looks better and better as tax rates keep creeping higher.
But the tax break is not a measure of safety, and the risks in muni bond funds have come sharply into focus in 1994.
While muni shares keep throwing off income, they lost 6.2 percent of their value in the first quarter, more than any other type of bond fund.


Resurgent Sabatini to Meet Sanchez Vicario in Final
From hangdog to hot dog, Gabriela Sabatini has reinvented herself here at the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships.
With a barrage of playmaking that ranged from the instinctive to the incredible, she reached her first final in nearly a year with an assertive 6-2, 6-4 victory against sixth-seeded Lindsay Davenport this afternoon.
Martina Navratilova, too, had spent this week recalibrating and renovating her clay-court game, but unlike Sabatini, her halcyon week ended in the semifinals where, unlike Sabatini, she had to contend with the clay-court expertise of Arantxa Sanchez Vicario.


St. Murray of the Tabloids
REBELLIONS, PERVERSITIES, AND MAIN EVENTS By Murray Kempton. 570 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $27.50.


Hidden in the Folds
The languor of drapery in the classical mode


Bossy's Best
To the Sports Editor:
The fuss over Wayne Gretzky's passing Gordie Howe in career National Hockey League goals is understandable.
But the Great One's accomplishments as a scorer -- putting assists aside for the moment -- still trail Mike Bossy's feats.
In 1,118 games, Gretzky scored 802 goals, 71.73 percent.
In 752 games, Bossy scored 573 goals, 76.2 percent.
Bossy's career was filled with considerable physical abuse, close legitimate checking and a good deal of illegitimate punishment.
In contrast, Gretzky was protected as a superstar and franchise player; if an opponent gave him an aggressive look or made a gesture, the whistle would blow.
MARK B. LEEDS  New York


Evening Hours; Avedon In Person And Image
An exhibition opens with parties, March 23 and 29, at the Whitney Museum.


Mr. Bellow's Planetoid
IT ALL ADDS UP From the Dim Past to the Uncertain Future: A Nonfiction Collection.
By Saul Bellow. 327 pp.
New York: Viking. $23.95.


Correction
An article last Sunday about men's fragrances included one product in that category incorrectly. 360degrees, by Perry Ellis, is a women's fragrance.


Lauren L. Felton, Jonathan E. Roberts
Lauren Lee Felton, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Maxwell Felton of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Edward Roberts, a son of Renee J. Sokolow and Justice George F. Roberts, both of New York.
Rabbi Harvey M. Tattelbaum officiated at the St.
Regis in New York.
The bride, 25, is a lawyer in the criminal defense division of the Legal Aid Society in the Bronx.
She graduated from Columbia University and received her law degree from Fordham University.
Her father is the director of surgery at Kings Highway Hospital in Brooklyn, where her mother, Rhetta Felton, is an administrator.
The bride's maternal grandfather, Dr.
Samuel Berson, is the hospital's executive director.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL: FICTION
HITTING INTO THE WIND  By Bill Meissner. Random House, $19.


The Return of the Red Ribbon
In the history of the AIDS epidemic in New York, the Armory Ribbon Bee Project was only a poignant footnote.
For Jackie McLean and the others at the Park Avenue Shelter, it was something of a life saver.
Ms.
McLean had arrived at the shelter in fall 1992 after a fire destroyed her Bronx apartment.
She had no job.
Hope Sandrow, an artist, was organizing the project, in which women at the shelter would make tens of thousands of the symbols of AIDS awareness.
Ms.
Sandrow chose Ms.
McLean to run the project.


'The Tyranny Of the Majority'
To the Editor:
I empathize with Lani Guinier's desire to save the world, apparent from both her actions and comments at the time of her nomination as Assistant Attorney General and the information provided by Alan Wolfe in his review of her book.


Now You Don't See It. Now
"Magic Eye" books by Tom Baccei -- best-sellers in Europe and Japan -- have computer-generated pictures that contain hidden 3-D images. (In this country, a second one is just out.) To find the image you hold the page close to your eyes and very slowly move it away while trying to keep your gaze unfocused.
The hidden image may pop out after only two or three tries.
Or it may take longer.
"Don't worry," Baccei says.
"It took my Dad six weeks to get it." (Above: look for a big butterfly.)


A Mirror Of the World
A silent auction at Sotheby's benefits the Gay Men's Health Crisis, March 28.


NEW YORKER &amp; CO.
New York Magazine Ponders Major Redesign
New York magazine, whose graphic design is a landmark in journalistic circles, will soon have a new look.
How different remains to be seen.
"There's a possibility that everything will change," said Kurt Andersen, who became editor of the magazine in February.
That includes the cover design, which has remained untouched for 26 years.


The Numbers
It may be wrapped in 160,000 square feet of tent fabric, but Bryant Park is not the site of the latest installation by Christo.
Instead, it is the stage for a twice-yearly performance piece known as Seventh on Sixth.
Inaugurated in November, this fashion event has added 18 shows to the schedule: eight days crammed with 60 back-to-back runway productions.
The Council of Fashion Designers of America predicts that by Wednesday, 12,000 of fashion's faithful will have descended on the midtown park.
Here are some other vital -- and not so vital -- statistics, based on estimates from the council, designers and suppliers.
SANDRA BALLENTINE Seventh on Sixth's annual budget: $2 million.
Cumulative length of runways: 235 feet.
Models: 100, appearing in 3,500 outfits.
Makeup artists (not including assistants): 60, who will use 300 tubes of concealer, 100 bottles of eye-makeup remover and 16,000 cotton swabs during the week.
Hair stylists (not including assistants): 60, who will employ 40 gallons of hair spray, 52 gallons of gels and mousses and 6,000 bobby pins.
Journalists invited: 900, of whom 350 are photographers.
Evian water on hand: 14,000 ice-cold bottles -- gratis, of course.
Designers who took part in November not returning this season: 3.
Charge to designers to rent a tent: $25,000 for the bigger Gertrude Pavilion.
The smaller Josephine Pavilion rents for $14,200.
Work-hours required to erect Gertrude and Josephine: 24,000.
Average number of security guards on patrol: 70, including city police officers.
Shows that the director Robert Altman is filming for his movie about the fashion business, "Pret-a-Porter": 0.
Approximate number of gate-crashers expected at tomorrow's Anna Sui show: 200.
Nonfat yogurt ordered for models: 100 cases, along with 350 pounds of fresh fruit.
Fashion students exchanging labor for a glimpse of glamour: 600.


Suicidal in Venice Beach
SO WHAT'S WITH NORA Ephron and Christmas?
Her last movie, last summer's romantic hit "Sleepless in Seattle," included a number of Christmas scenes, one of them a Dec. 24 phone call to a radio psychiatrist that sets the whole plot in motion.
Now she has just finished shooting the New York portion of an untitled film described by publicists as "a Christmas comedy for the 90's, in which a group of people at a suicide hot line on Christmas Eve deal with love, birth, death and fruitcakes." The plan, logically enough, is to release it this Christmas.


On the Gulf Coast
To the Editor: In Cynthia Hacinli's report on Naples, Fla., ("A Low-Key Gulf Coast Retreat," Jan. 23) no reference is made to the Conservancy Inc. of Naples, which is the largest local environmental organization in Florida, nor to either of the Conservancy's two visitor centers.
One of these, in the city, is unusually diversified, with snake feedings, cages for injured birds large enough for them to practice flight again, and self-teaching electronic displays.
Visitors can take free boat rides in a mangrove lagoon.


Antonio Pagan: A Lightning Rod Gathers Storms
On the Lower East Side, political discourse can get ugly.
But even by its tough standards, the reaction to Antonio Pagan has been nasty.
One local paper regularly portrays him as as a cockroach.
A bloody syringe was once stuck on his office door.
A councilman for only two years, Mr.
Pagan is emerging as one of the city's most controversial politicians.
The 35-year-old lawyer's sharp tongue has made him the target of several defamation suits.
And his often abrasive style and stands against low-income housing and new social services have made him a lightning rod in the supercharged atmosphere of his district.


Oedipal Opera
To the Editor:
The article about the Lannan Foundation exposes yet another example of how a foundation set up for the purpose of helping the artist instead shoots him in the foot.
By subverting the wishes of J. Patrick Lannan, his son J. Patrick Jr. has created a bizarre Oedipus-like opera in which the whole art world gets to see the son kill the father by the subversion of the father's will.


Free Coaching For McEnroe
To The Editor:
With John McEnroe "Mad About Art" (March 27), the following may help as he starts his gallery:


Washington's Inner Voices
Forget about drinking bourbon and branch at the Monocle restaurant.
Forget about secretaries whose fingernails never touch a keyboard.
Forget about power as an aphrodisiac.
Washington is discovering spirituality and storytelling -- of the nonpartisan sort -- and the Rev.
W.
Douglas Tanner Jr. is leading the way.
Tanner is helping members of Congress, government aides, lobbyists, and campaign consultants to become centered (without benefit of polls).
He runs four meetings a week at his Faith and Politics Institute, and on Tuesdays it's time for power prayer, when the group with the most clout shows up -- five lawmakers and a human rights activist.


Therapy or Seduction?
BREAKDOWN Sex, Suicide, and the Harvard Psychiatrist.
By Eileen McNamara.
Illustrated. 289 pp.
New York: Pocket Books. $22.


Corrections
A front-page article last Sunday about the political prospects of the disk jockey Howard Stern misstated the occupation of Robert Goodman, a New York Libertarian Party member.
He is a cancer biologist in the radiology department of New Jersey Medical School in Newark and edits the party's newsletter; he is not a science writer.


Where's The Harm?
To the Editor:
Is it so bad for "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung" to stack the deck in favor of humane treatment for children with autism and other behavior disorders?


Sheri Gouveia, Nicholas Marchi
Sheri Susan Gouveia, the daughter of George and Susan Gouveia of Harrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to Nicholas Charles Marchi, the son of Nicholas and Carole Marchi of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Rayner W. Hesse Jr., an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Westchester Country Club in Harrison.


Still Bewitched by the Mystery of Melted Sand
WHEN SCANDINAVIA dominated furnishings design in the 1950's, Timo Sarpaneva of Finland changed glass: He frosted surfaces, tinted thin-walled vessels and revived bubbles.
In the 1960's, he went further, introducing chunky shapes and rough textures to modern glass.
Today, at 66, Mr.
Sarpaneva is the last of the original corps of Finnish industrial designers whose products dramatically transformed the interiors of homes and offices around the world after World War II.
The 80 glass, ceramic and metal objects in "Timo Sarpaneva: A Retrospective," at the American Craft Museum through June 18, evoke the strong forms and understated elegance of Finland's innovations in that period.


Most Writers Love New York
To the Editor:
It's unfortunate that the article on the New Orleans Writers' Conference ("At the Wordsmith's Anvil," March 27) chose to tap into the weary and predictable literary elitism that gives anyone in publishing in New York a bad name.
I found myself exhilarated by the enthusiasm of the participants.
Most take writing seriously and take whatever we New York editors, writers and agents say as gospel.
DAVID MASELLO  Associate Editor Travel &amp; Leisure New York


About Automobiles
A freestanding weekly section of automobile news features and advertising begins today.
Section 12.


When Keeping in Fashion Can Become a Health Hazard
LAST month during a group-therapy session for young women battling eating disorders, an emaciated teen-ager brought in a magazine photograph of Kate Moss, the exceedingly thin fashion model, and thrust it at the nurse leading the discussion.
"You say I have a problem?" asked the patient, who was hospitalized with anorexia nervosa in the Eating Disorders Program of the Westchester division of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in White Plains.
"Look at her. She's making a lot of money looking like this. She looks great."


No Headline
"Mayor Dinkins tried to restructure the Board through legislation and failed. Giuliani has done it through intimidation. If the quality goes up, he gets the credit, but if the system is now so traumatized that it fails to perform, the blame will lay with him. CITY COUNCILMAN KENNETH K. FISHER, on New York City's schools.  [ 39:4. ]


'I Came to Save the Union'
THE 300 letters in "Upon the Tented Field," edited by Bernard A. Olsen, date from July 31, 1982, through June 10, 1865, two months after the end of the Civil War.
They were written by six soldiers of the 14th New Jersey Volunteer Infantry to their families.
James M. McPherson, the Civil War historian, said the quality of the letters, especially those of Sgt.
Albert C. Harrison, was very high.
"These are volunteer soldiers who knew why they were fighting, had an understanding of the issues of the war, and had voluntarily placed themselves in harm's way because they did believe deeply in something," he said.


50 Years of Serving God, With an Attitude
"CELIBACY was never a problem," said the Rev.
Vincent J. Termine, "and I didn't take a vow of poverty. But obedience, ah. . ."
He smiled and rolled his eyes and shut his mouth to smother a booming laugh, this self-described brat from a dead-end street, Kosciusko Place near the Brooklyn Navy Yard, who seems to have come from old black-and-white movies, a burly 74-year-old with Bible stories and wicked winks and knobby hands that have snatched away dice in back alleys and paddled whole classrooms and hacked through teen-age rumbles.


Berkoff Directs a Quirky, Stylish 'Richard II'
RICHARD II (1367-1400) WAS NOT A good king.
He wasn't always a bad king either.
As characterized by W. C. Sellar and R. J. Yeatman in their classic parody of English history, "1066 and All That," Richard was an "unbalanced king." This is why he was so easily toppled by his first cousin Bolingbroke, who "quickly mounted the throne and said he was Henry IV, Part I."
"1066 and All That" dispatches Richard in two blithe paragraphs.
Yet it's probably as good an introduction as any to the genealogy of Shakespeare's history plays, including "The Tragedy of Richard II" now being given an exceptionally stylish production by Steven Berkoff in the Anspacher Theater at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
The Playbill includes a double-page spread outlining 200 years of Richard's family tree, which is helpful as well as intimidating: it reminds you of everything you've forgotten about the Plantagenets, Lancasters and all other claimants to the English throne.


Q and A
Biking in Tuscany
Q.
We will be renting a house in Tuscany, near Florence, in June and one of our party is an experienced mountain biker.
Can you give me any information about mountain bike expeditions during our visit or details about where to rent a mountain bike and find trail maps? -- Barbara Shapiro, Washington


Fighting Words From Publicists
To the Editor:
Joel Bleifuss frets that a survey found that 100 percent of the nation's local television newsrooms "had used video releases in their broadcasts -- often passing them off as independent reporting" -- and warns that journalists must urge the public relations profession to guard its ethics.
Whose ethics?
It seems to me that the video news release story has a host of characters, from the clients who pay to produce the videos to the station managers who broadcast them as "independent reporting" to the couch potatoes who eat it up.
JEAN M. LAWLOR  Warwick, R.I., March 21  The writer has several years experience in public relations.


Q.&amp; A.
Paying Off Underlying Mortgages Q. What happens when a co-op association finally pays off its underlying mortgage? . . .
Douglas W. Shannon, Manhattan A. First of all, said Mary Ann Rothman, executive director of the Council of New York Cooperatives, "maintenance probably goes down, because you don't have mortgage payments anymore."


Discontent Mounts in China, Shaking the Leaders
With China's economy still in overdrive, a new surge in inflation, labor unrest and corruption appears to be rattling the Communist Party leadership.
Chinese and Western officials say that concern in the Politburo about the stability of Communist Party rule may explain the vigorous crackdown this spring on political dissent, including the recent arrests of Wei Jingsheng and Xu Wenli, veterans of the "Democracy Wall" movement of the 1970's.
Both had been freed from prison only last year.


April 3-9; Maybe You're Sick. Maybe We Can Help.
You always get a little indigestion after drinking too much, and your head sometimes pounds by the end of a hard day.
And, yes, every September you feel glum and listless realizing that summer is drawing to a close.
But you have always regarded these as life's little torments and have thought of yourself as a healthy person.
Are you?
Could that indigestion be an ulcer?
Are those headaches migraines?
And are those autumnal blues a clinical depression?


Data Bank/April 10, 1994
Data Bank/April 10, 1994
Index of Leading Indicators
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.4
0.0
Consumer Credit
Monthly percent change
5.3
9.7
11.5
Coal Production
March 31
March 25
March 18
Thousands of net tons
20,703
21,823
22,533
Electric Power
In gigawatt hours
53,607
54,419
55,782
Weekly Jobless Claims
In thousands
337
331
340
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
April 8
March 31
March 25
Friday spot price, per barrel
$15.57
$14.79
$15.13
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.54
3.47
3.47
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.94
3.79
3.79


Saberhagen Completes 5-Hitter and Suspension
Bret Saberhagen sat for seven days and waited for this moment.
He sat on a rooftop on Sheffield Avenue in Chicago and watched the Mets open the season against the Cubs at Wrigley Field.
He sat in the clubhouse for two days and laughed at his teammates when they sneaked into the locker room to warm their frozen hands.
He went shopping on Michigan Avenue and organized a Masters' pool for the golf-loving members of the club.
Mostly, though, Saberhagen sat and waited for his turn to pitch.


Sleek Settings
MOST MODERN TABLEWARE HAS REFUSED TO GO OUT OF STYLE.
AND FOR good reason.
The designs are not only strong enough to withstand fickle tastes and trends but, more important, they have yet to wear out their welcome as useful domestic objects.
Take Jean Puiforcat's Art Deco coffee and tea services: Some styles have been in continuous production at the Paris-based firm since the 1920's.
Anything American from the 50's is so popular you would think everyone was still watching black-and-white television and eating TV dinners.
And Finnish products from that same decade -- such as the designer Kaj Franck's unadorned pottery -- have been reintroduced and promoted industriously by the manufacturer.
In fact, some items, such as the Viennese architect Josef Hoffmann's silver-plated bowl from 1906, have gone into production for the first time in the last decade.
What makes tableware "modern"?
Developed over the early part of this century, the modernist esthetic emphasized industrial design paired with craftsmanship, simplicity over ornamentation, the newest materials, cost-effective techniques and, above all, functionalism.
For the most part, these designs were mass-produced to meet a mass demand for streamlined, utilitarian objects at moderate prices.
Today, this tableware is being grabbed up by consumers seeking elegant yet unostentatious pieces for their homes.
"People are looking for better values," says Christopher Mount, a curatorial assistant in the architecture and design department of the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
The first modern tableware can be traced back to the 18th century, when Josiah Wedgwood, that pioneer of pottery, had the foresight to ride the tide of the Industrial Revolution and mass-produce earthenware that appealed to the British upper and merchant classes.
The company's motto, freely translated from the Latin, sums up his contribution: "I cut through hindrances." Wedgwood's basalt tableware, a simple coal-black design, has been turned out continuously since about 1770, yet it would fit in nicely at any SoHo dinner party today.
Since then, architects, artists and industrial designers have given their own expression to modernist tabletops.
The 1906 bowl by Josef Hoffmann was produced for the first time in 1984 by Alessi, the Italian design company, in conjunction with the Boston-based Markuse Corporation.
Markuse and Alessi not only see the merit in issuing well-designed tableware but also are responding to collectors obsessed with modernism.
As Jack Markuse, the corporation president, explains, "Alessi thinks everything is cyclical." (The company also manufactures tableware by such modernists as Christopher Dresser, recognized as Britain's first industrial designer, and Ettore Sottsass, the Italian architect.)
Among the foremost producers of early modernist tableware were the architects and artists of the Bauhaus school in Germany, influential in the 20's.
Their aim was to develop functional, technologically advanced designs made of the latest materials.
Bauhaus tableware -- curvaceous or determinedly rectilinear, depending on the designer -- is continually being reintroduced.
Marianne Brandt's quirky 1924 cocktail shaker, for example, which makes a bell sound when rocked, is an Alessi product.
Bauhaus influences are also evident in more recent tableware like TC-100, introduced by Rosenthal U.S.A. in the 1960's.
Now in the Museum of Modern Art's permanent collection, this stackable white service is considered a modern classic.
Scandinavian designers, unswerving modernists by birth, transformed free-form, organic shapes into durable and practical glasses, plates and vases.
Some artists, like the Danish jewelry designer and sculptor Henning Koppel, went straight for sensuality.
In the mid-50's, Koppel's biomorphic sculptural holloware represented a significant leap forward for the Danish silversmith Georg Jensen, for whom he worked.
Koppel's pear-shaped sterling-silver wine pitcher of 1948 was an almost erotic departure from the company's more florid, conventional designs.
In "Design 1935-1965: What Modern Was," Toni Lesser Wolf of Le Musee des Arts Decoratifs de Montreal described the pitcher's "pregnant belly" and neck of "undulating curves."
The Finns have tenaciously held on to their large corner of modernism.
The architect Alvar Aalto's famous 1936 vase with undulating sides, titled "Eskimo Woman's Leather Breeches," remains a staple of the 113-year-old Iittala company, now a division of Hackman Tabletop of Finland.
The industrial designer Tapio Wirkkala's crystal stemware, vases and candleholders, alternately organic and geometric, have been in continuous production at Iittala since 1946.
Timo Sarpaneva, a Finnish designer of international renown, makes glasses, cutlery, china and tea and coffee services.
His extensive oeuvre is currently the subject of a retrospective at the American Craft Museum in New York.
Sarpaneva describes his designs as distinctly Nordic: "We love nature. Finland's archipelago and granite rocks are a strong influence. But I don't make strange, curious things."
The Arabia division of Hackman Tabletop has been making ceramic tableware since 1874.
One of the company's best-known products is the solid-colored, multiple-use, stackable Kilta earthenware designed by Kaj Franck in 1951.
Its austere design made it an international favorite: Some 25 million pieces were sold before Arabia discontinued the line in 1975.
It was resurrected by the company under the name Teema in 1981, this time made of stoneware, a more durable material.
Franck's dishes had -- and still have -- a democratic appeal.
"Lots of young families couldn't afford to buy a whole set, so they bought it piece by piece in different colors," says Christopher Mount of the Museum of Modern Art, which held a Franck retrospective in 1992.
The designer was savvy: The Kilta saucer, for example, had no indentation in the center, so that if the cup broke, the saucer could be used as a butter plate.
That democratic, open-stock approach to dinnerware was a modernist theme in American tabletop design as well.
Introduced in the 30's, Russel Wright's pottery -- with its fluid forms, soft curves and muted shades -- met a demand for informal service in an increasingly domesticated nation.
Brightly colored Fiesta dinnerware was another vibrant presence in dining rooms and kitchens.
Both lines offered a mix-and-match dynamic at reasonable prices.
Fiesta is still manufactured by the Homer Laughlin China Company, in Newell, W. Va.
In 1982 in New York, Nan Swid and Addie Powell entered the modernist tableware industry by producing high-style but utilitarian pieces designed principally by architects.
Swid Powell's vision has been executed by such notable Americans as Robert Venturi and Stanley Tigerman, as well as industrial and fashion designers.
One of the company's most prolific contributors is the architect Richard Meier, whose white dinnerware is quintessentially minimalist modern.
Fine artists, too, continue to be attracted to the demands of designing tableware.
Among them is the painter Jennifer Bartlett.
Desperate to find the right glasses as models for "Twelve Noon," one in a series of paintings about daily life shown at the Paula Cooper Gallery in New York last fall, she finally decided to design her own.
The cylinder-shaped glasses are now sold by A/D, a SoHo gallery that commissions prominent artists to create domestic objects.
Bartlett's description of her glasses sums up the enduring passion for modernism.
"There aren't very many decorative elements on them, they aren't making a class statement -- and you don't have to be well-mannered to use them."  Where to buy the products on page 47:
Silver-trimmed glass platter from Anni Glass, $115.
At Bergdorf Goodman.
Stainless-steel ladle by Lino Sabattini for Zani &amp; Zani, $100.
At Modern Age, 123 Wooster Street.
Silver-plated pitcher by Calvin Tsao for Swid Powell, $200.
At Barneys New York, New York City; Beverly Hills, Calif., and selected stores.
Bloomingdale's.
Silver-plated bowl by Richard Meier for Swid Powell, $100.
At Barneys New York, New York City; Beverly Hills, Calif., and selected stores.
Stainless-steel teapot from Alessi, $350.
At Barneys New York, New York City; Beverly Hills, Calif., and selected stores.
Imperial China creamer, $65, and bowl, $40, by Frank Lloyd Wright.
At Tiffany &amp; Company.
Glass tumbler, $25.
At New Glass Gallery, 345 West Broadway.
Basalt teacup, $32, and saucer, $14.
At Waterford Wedgwood U.S.A. stores nationwide; (800) 677-7860.
Slate-top cherry dining table from Stoneline Designs, $4,298.
At Dennis Miller Associates, 306 East 61st Street.
Pearwood and cast-aluminum screen by Philippe Starck, with copies of photographs from the designer's collection, $4,450.
At Modern Age, 121 Greene Street.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
BRIGHTON BEACH: In one of the longest-running land disputes in Brooklyn, State Supreme Court Justice Lewis Friedman has upheld a developer's rights to build a 15-acre, 1,400-unit condominium project in Brighton Beach.
But opponents of the project, known as Brighton-by-the-Sea, which would replace the historic Brighton Beach Baths with a four-building complex, said that they were considering an appeal to continue the seven-year battle.


A Display of Zairian Masks
An exhibition of masks created in the Zaire River Basin is scheduled to open April 20 at the National Museum of African Art in Washington.
The show, the museum's first devoted exclusively to the subject, consists of more than 100 masks and a few items like combs and whistles on which masks have been depicted.
It is scheduled to run until Sept. 25.


Fire Survivors Look Back In Sorrow
Throughout the week, the survivors came to the charred remains of the four clapboard, shingle and faux-brick buildings on Huron Street.
Some came to visit friends, some to marvel at the luck of their survival or to gather any retrievable belongings.
But many came simply to gaze at the place that, until a roaring fire last weekend, they called home.


Cameos Bloom, and Not Subtly Either
IN THE FILM "NAKED IN NEW York," Jake, a young playwright struggling to grasp fame and hang onto his girlfriend, finds himself on Martha's Vineyard at cocktail party among stuffed shirts in summer wear.
Feeling forlorn as his girlfriend waltzes from this pretentious conversation to that, Jake asks himself with both disdain and awe, "Who are these people?"
Glad you asked, Jake.


Commercial Property/Downtown Brooklyn; Space Tightening In Discounted Area
TRUE or false?
No one wants to build new office buildings in New York City.
Companies abandoning downtown Manhattan move only to Jersey City, midtown or a faraway state.
Downtown Brooklyn is a you-can't-get-there-from-here place.
If you answered "true" to any of those statements, then Bruce Ratner, Joshua Muss, Charles Hack and a bunch of other developers want to disabuse you, fast.
Now that the city's years of ample space, scarce tenants and no financing are ending, the Brooklynites want their share of the action.


Patient Arrested in Killing
A 75-year-old man in a Bronx nursing home apparently bludgeoned to death a 65-year-old fellow patient with a heavy metal ashtray yesterday afternoon, the police said.
The older man, William Thompson, was arrested in the death of Raul Figueroa, who was killed inside a television room at the Bronx-Lebanon Special Care Facility at 1265 Fulton Avenue, in the Morrisania section.
The police said that the two men were alone in the room about 1 P.M. and that after Mr.
Thompson left, a security guard who went into the room discovered Mr.
Figueroa's body.
Mr.
Figueroa had been struck several times with a two-foot-high metal ashtray, the police said.
The nursing home refused to give details about the two men.


WESTERN TROOPS ARRIVE IN RWANDA TO AID FOREIGNERS
Convoys of Americans and Europeans and a planeload of French citizens fled the strife-torn capital of Rwanda yesterday as the United States, France and Belgium began a military effort to protect and evacuate 2,850 foreign nationals caught in tribal fighting that has killed thousands in three days of terror.
As the first foreigners were evacuated and the international rescue operation got under way, the fiercest fighting yet was reported in Kigali, the Rwandan capital.
New battles broke out to the north, and a force of 4,000 rebels of the minority Tutsi tribe was reported moving on Kigali from two directions.
Its leaders said the rebels could arrive as early as today, escalating the fighting between the Tutsi and the majority Hutu tribe even further.


Nasdaq Wants To Blackball Some Stocks
THE over-the-counter market for stocks was, only a few decades ago, widely viewed as a fairly seedy place where very dubious stocks were traded along with a few respectable but obscure ones.
A company that wanted credibility fled from that market as soon as it could.
The National Association of Securities Dealers, which operates the Nasdaq trading system, has moved a long way from that image, and now presents iteself as "the stock market for the next 100 years." Major companies like Intel and Microsoft have chosen to keep Nasdaq listings after they became major forces in their industries.


One Man's Legal Odyssey
AS HE SAT in the living room of his white-frame home on this city's hardscrabble, mostly Hispanic west side, Demetrio P. Rodriguez spoke intensely about how poor schoolchildren have been robbed by the Texas Legislature.
The state doesn't give property-poor school systems enough money, leaving them at a disadvantage, he complained.
"We want no more or no less than our fair share," said Mr.
Rodriguez, a quiet-spoken 67-year-old retired sheet-metal worker.
"But people have been so greedy and uncaring."


Working in Dubrovnik
The 12-day trip starts in a relaxing mode with two days on the Isle of Capri.
But for the next eight days, participants in the "Make a Mark '94" trip to Dubrovnik, Croatia, will spend much of their time refurbishing the city's Ivo Vukusic Orphanage.
The work is mainly painting and cleanup, said a spokeswoman for Noel-Olson Travelworld, organizers of the trip, which runs Aug. 5 to 17.
"It's not real hard labor," she said.


Buying and Preparing Soft-Shell Crabs
THE weather has been so cold this winter that the sight of soft-shell crabs in the fish store recently came as a surprise.
Spring had finally arrived after all!
Many people believe that soft-shell crabs are a particular species that comes into season around the time the first crocuses show their buds.
In fact, they are simply blue crabs that have molted their hard shells.
The early crabs on the market are mostly from Georgia and as far south as Louisiana, but as the temperature begins to rise they are brought in from Chesapeake Bay in Maryland, where there are more crabs for food than in any other body of water in the world.


4 Are Killed as 2 Small Planes Collide and Fall Into a Factory
Two small planes trying to land at Republic Airport collided over Farmingdale in Suffolk County yesterday morning and crashed into a factory, setting it ablaze, authorities said.
All four people aboard the two planes died.
One of the planes carried a flight trainer and his student, but it was not known which person was at the controls when the collision occurred, said Lieut.
John Gierasch, a spokesman for the Suffolk police.


UKRAINE TO CLOSE CHERNOBYL PLANT
Ukraine's Government has agreed to shut down the remaining nuclear reactors at its power plant in Chernobyl, which was heavily damaged in a catastrophic accident in 1986, the Clinton Administration said today.
After three days of meetings with an American delegation, Ukraine abandoned its insistence that nuclear production must continue at the plant, agreeing instead to a joint effort with the United States to find options like energy conservation and nonnuclear power generation to replace electricity from the plant, which generates about 1,800 megawatts of power.
A thousand megawatts is often described as the amount of electricity used by a million typical American homes.


Robert Massa; Writer and Editor, 36
Robert Massa, a writer about AIDS and an editor with The Village Voice, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
Mr.
Massa, who lived in Manhattan, was 36.
The cause was AIDS, said a friend, Eileen Blumenthal.


Teachers to the (Child) Stars
There are two teachers and three students inside a three-room house trailer parked in the shadow of Dopey Drive at the Disney Studios in Burbank, Calif. -- hardly an educational quorum, under normal circumstances.
The situation, however, is decidedly out of the ordinary, because the pupils in the well-appointed mobile home classroom are the juvenile stars of the popular television comdey series "Home Improvement."
"Do we have to do school now?" whines Zachery Ty Bryan, 12 years old, who portrays Brad, the eldest son.
"I don't want to do these stupid lessons." Steve Elster ignores Zachery's lament and plunges into a lecture on how amino acids contribute to hereditary cell defects.
As a studio teacher, Mr.
Elster is one of a cadre of professional hybrids on whom children like Zachery depend.
In order to do their jobs well, Mr.
Elster and his co-teacher, Daphne Boelsma, must be by turns tutors, friends, therapists, protectors and surrogate parents for their young charges.
While California minors toil making commercials, acting in television shows or movies, those who haven't graduated from high school must go to school three hours a day, 15 hours a week.
Although all states require a minimum number of hours of instruction for children working in the entertainment industry, only California law specified that even when a child's educational needs have been met, a state-certified studio teacher must be present on the set, serving as guardian of his or her health and safety, even during summer vacations.
With children so prevalent in movies and television the last few years, studio teachers have not been faced with the intermittent unemployment that plagued them in the past.
Hired by production companies from a roster maintained by the teachers' union, they earn more than public school employees when they do work -- though considerably less than their students do.
Children who work have to be registered in accredited school, and the curriculum covered by their studio teacher is determined by their school of record.
Students with continuing jobs, such as roles on television series, sometimes don't actually visit the schools at which they are nominally enrolled; they are often in independent study programs, which were developed for pregnant students trying to keep up with their lessons while out of school.
Rare Visits to 'Regular School'
Zachery, a sixth grader, and his two television brothers call their home schools "regular school," an apt term since studio schooling is predictably irregular.
Some children study with a studio teacher only a few days a year while appearing in commercials, while others spend several months making a movie or miniseries.
And since many situation comedies schedule a break one week each month, the youngsters in their casts can return to their home schools periodically.
Jonathan Taylor Thomas, 12, a sixth grader who plays Randy, the middle son in 'Home Improvement," says: "A lot of kids at my regular school don't understand.
They go, 'Oh, you're so lucky.
You don't have to go to school.' It's not like that.
We do the same exact work that the public schools do, but sometimes it's more difficult because we have to do it in a shorter amount of time."
Studio teachers maintain contact with their students' home-school teachers, getting copies of texts used and tests given.
In many cases, they fax or mail work done on the set to the classroom teacher.
For a junior high or high school student, they will keep track of work assigned by as many as six different teachers.
The goal of most studio teachers is to keep students academically up to grade level and personally down to earth.
Mr.
Elster's dry sense of humor surfaces when his pubescent scholars sound inappropriately mature.
"I like being on this show because I know I have a steady job," 12-year-old Jonathan tells a visitor.
"Right," Mr.
Elster adds.
"He has the ex-wives, the alimony, the mortgage to worry about."
How well studio schooling works depends on how important education is to the parents involved.
Parents who value learning communicate that ethic to their children, who work hard in school even while they're busy acting.
Conversely, the unmotivated student typically comes from a family more interested in a child's earning potential than in his acquisition of knowledge.
Arlene Singer-Gross has been a studio teacher for 15 years, 8 of them on the long-running comedy "Who's the Boss?" "I've worked with parents whose priority was, 'How come my child didn't get a close-up and the other child did?' rather than 'Can she read?"' said Ms.
Singer-Gross.
She briefly taught a 16-year-old whose parents considered education a necessary evil.
They were eager for the boy to take his high school proficiency exam so he could work longer hours as an actor.
"He had gotten the message," Ms.
Singer-Gross said.
"It wasn't like he wanted to do homework; he wanted to do his publicity photos. I felt in that situation, my job was to teach him life skills. I taught him how to write a check, how to balance a checkbook."
By law, California studio teachers may work with a maximum of 10 students, but the student-teacher ratio is usually one or two to one.
As in Ms.
Singer-Gross's experience, opportunities to tailor programs to a student's needs are abundant.
"I can take a child in the seventh grade and have him reading Shakespeare, if he's that advanced," she says.
"Or if a child is having a hard time with the multiplication tables, I can work on that for three days, design an approach just for him, or turn the math lesson into a game."
Actors and actresses are the beneficiaries of the societal assumption that because a person is attractive and personable, he or she is bright.
"I've taught some wonderful, sweet kids who were great when it was time for them to do their scenes, but they were struggling in school," says Laura Gary, a studio teacher who went on location when the movie "Free Willy" was filmed, and is currently working on "Full House," one of the television comedies that started the trend to family shows with young cast members.
She enjoys being able to explain and drill until a subject is mastered, without worrying about boring the faster learners that inhabit a large, heterogeneous classroom.
Zachery of "Home Improvement" says, "You get a lot more accomplished on the set because it's one on one with the teacher, not one on thirty. The teacher doesn't have to wonder about me not understanding something, because if I don't I'll just tell her. If I get it right away, we can just go on to the next thing."
Studio teachers are as aware of a student's moods as his academic strengths and weaknesses.
Although one of the professional child's survival skills is adaptability, the actor who goes directly from performing a very emotional scene to grappling with geometric proofs might not have an easy time making the switch.
"When they come into the schoolroom from the set, I try to give them a cooling-off period," Ms.
Singer-Gross says.
"I might encourage them to talk about the experience they went through and how they internalized it, or instead of doing math, which takes more concentration, I give them an assignment to read for a while, so they can calm themselves down."
When she isn't making a movie like "The Addams Family" or its sequel, 14-year-old Christina Ricci attends a suburban public school in New Jersey.
For the four months she will work on the upcoming film "Casper" (about the friendly ghost), school is a one-room trailer that she has adorned with a Red Hot Chili Peppers poster, berthed on the Universal Studios lot.
Although there are desks in the trailer, Christina can lie on the floor, pop a tape into her cassette player and drink a soda while she completes her assignments.
"Here I call my teacher Rhona," she said.
"In regular school, it would be Ms. Gordon." That reflects the rapport and trust that frequently, and rewardingly, develop between student and studio teacher.
Like the private tutors once engaged for children of privileged class, studio teachers, by virtue of the intimacy and variety of situations they share with their students, inevitably impart more than the basics.
When a teacher and student eat dinner together on location, a number of teachers say they can't help but notice a child's table manners and would be inclined to correct them if the need were obvious.
Everyone expects that addition, subtraction and the causes of the Civil War will be covered in school.
But questions of values that may not arise in regular classrooms are inescapable in an environment that is part school, part glamorous workplace.
"There is no other business that tolerates the kind of behavior you see in this one -- spoiled, demanding behavior," Ms.
Gordon says.
"It happens with adults, teen-agers and young children. I've worked with children who were supporting their families and the balance of power was off. It got to be, like, who's running the store here? The kid was used to controlling everybody, and I felt it was up to me to teach him to treat adults with respect, because no one else had done it."
But while it is inevitable for studio teachers to take on a variety of roles in their students' lives, including buddy and confidant, often what a young person really wants in a friend is someone the same age with the same interests, fears and curiosities.
Lecy Goranson portrayed the eldest daughter on the top-rated television show "Roseanne" from age 13 to 18, and during that time, she said, she craved friends in her own age group.
Ms.
Goranson attended Vassar her freshman year, and at 19 is currently taking night classes at the University of California at Los Angeles.
"When I went to college," she said, "I was better prepared in some ways than my peers, because I was always around adults on 'Roseanne,' and that was a very advanced learning experience."
"But I think I missed out being isolated," she continued.
"Even though my TV sister, Sara Gilbert, is really smart, there were still just the two of us in a little room. There was no recess, no walking from one class to the next where you would see other kids. You don't learn just from books or from your teacher. You learn from other students, too, from hearing what they have to say. When I think about having sat in the same room for hours and hours every day for five years -- the closest parallel I can draw is a prison."
The 7-year-old stars of "Full House," Ashley and Mary-Kate Olsen, "do school" in a blue-carpeted second floor schoolroom inside a Burbank sound stage that is windowless, but hardly prison-like.
The saucer-eyed twins (identical except for temporarily differing patters of baby tooth loss) sit on the flowered cushion of a white wicker loveseat taking turns ready a picture book, "Josefina Finds the Prince," aloud with their teacher, Ms.
Gary.
A rehearsal for "Full House" is going on directly below, on the permanent set for Uncle Jesse's attic apartment.
Growing Up on 'Full House'
The twins have shared the pivotal role of Michelle since they were nine months old.
They have thus virtually grown up on "Full House," and their parents, acting coach and teachers have made special efforts to infuse the twins' lives with elements of normalcy, including ballet classes for Ashley and riding lessons for her sister.
The show films on a four-day workweek, so the girls attend separate second-grade classes at a private school on Mondays and every fourth week, when the show is on hiatus.
To eace the transition between the two school settings, Ms.
Gary has deliverately made herself less available in her classroom, prohibiting questions from her two students in the middle of a test, for example.
The attempt to foster autonomy makes sense, but it seems to be an uphill battle.
When Ms.
Gary previews a nutrition test that will have to be completed and sent to their school ("Which picture shows a balanced meal?"), the girls, natural cuddlers, get up from their Lilliputian desks and each cling to one of her arms as they study the material.
Independence, manners, spelling, a sense of persective about show business and single-cell reproduction -- if children in studio school learn all their lessons, they have the chance to avoid what every child dreads, being different.
"I've met kids in this business who have never been around kids their own age and they don't know how to relate to them," Christina Ricci says.
"It's weird."


Chamber Music Featured
IT'S another busy musical Sunday, with an abundance of solo and chamber concerts from which to choose.
First up, in Storrs, is the Chamber Music Brunch at Zenny's, where the food is supposed to be first rate, and the music certainly should be, considering that the Muir String Quartet will be playing the Ravel F Major and, with the cello assistance of series director Warren Lash, the gorgeous Schubert Quintet in C. Brunch is at 11:30 A.M., followed by music at 1:15 P.M.
The number for for reservations is 429-7510.


New Neighbor, New Nightmare
For more than 22 years, Martha Sedgwick, a painter, and her husband, Cris Cristofaro, a sculptor, lived and worked peacefully in a loft building at 156 West 22d Street.
Then, they say, the brothel tried to move in.


Whitaker Homecoming Is a Popular Decision
Pernell Whitaker scored a unanimous 12-round decision over Santos Cardona tonight before a crowd of 7,868 here at the Scope in his hometown.
It was Whitaker's first fight since his hotly debated draw with Julio Cesar Chavez in September.
Whitaker (33-1-1) danced on the rare occasions Cardona closed in on him, but generally the World Boxing Council welterweight champion was not compelled to run or hide from the top-ranked challenger.
Whitaker threw a strong mix of body and head shots from the outset, but Cardona (29-4) was able to counter with enough shots to cause a little puffiness below Whitaker's right eye by the sixth round.
Cardona has been knocked out just once in his 33-fight career and his strong chin was in evidence against Whitaker.


Back to the Future
MODERN ARCHITEC- ture, it is sometimes said, took a wrong turn in the years after World War II.
A movement that had started out in the 1920's with an idealistic agenda for social change had transformed itself into the slick style of American corporate culture.
But there was a time when the modern movement and corporate America were not thought to be opposed in their aims.
From the late 1940's to the early 1960's, the industrialist and the designer were commonly viewed as partners, allies in the pursuit of humane goals.
General Electric and the disciples of the Bauhaus were of one mind in supposing that progress was the 20th century's most important product.
And for those who grew up imbibing the atmosphere of those years, modernism's "wrong turn" made for memories that remain extraordinarily potent.
Those images of late modernism are now resurfacing, as architects born in the postwar decades ease into the productive phase of their careers.
For these architects, a full generation younger than those who formulated the post-modern framework, the modern movement is not the esthetic equivalent of a father figure crying out for Oedipal assault.
It more nearly resembles a lost paradise, a mechanical Eden from which contemporary society has been rudely expelled.
These younger professionals spent their childhoods in the golden age of "The Affluent Society," the optimistic era that adopted the stripped-down, glass-walled International style as a conspicuous sign of prosperity at home and global influence abroad.
In contrast to the socialist utopia envisioned by the modern movement's European pioneers, this was marketplace modernism, American-made and proud of it.
The messianic fervor of the early 20th century's architectural manifestoes had given way to the visceral thrill of physical realization.
"Let us rebuild everything," Le Corbusier declared in the 1920's; by the 50's, that declaration had led to tangible results, with buildings that reshaped the way people looked at the landscape, at art, at city streets, at the workplace and at the home.
The period was rich in individual buildings of great merit, such as Lever House and the Guggenheim Museum in New York City, and the Case Study houses, a series of modern prototypes designed by a variety of architects and built in and around Los Angeles in the postwar years.
These designs carried the ideal of experimentation forward into practical application.
Each of them showed how new materials, new methods of construction and new visual and spatial relationships could produce new perspectives on familiar places and institutions.
But these examples, remarkable as they were, were also episodes in a larger story: the broadening of an avant-garde esthetic into the cultural mainstream.
Modernism at mid-century was still part of the canon of educated taste.
Along with abstract painting, atonal music and new wave film, it held its place in the curriculum of cultural sophistication.
And the commercial victory of modern design pointed toward the possibility that a cherished liberal ideal might soon be attained.
An equilibrium could be struck between educated taste and the mass market.
After all, executives at the Four Seasons and office workers at Zum Zum lunched in the same design universe.
What was to prevent the expansion of the egalitarian spirit to the culture at large?
Wouldn't a rising tide lift all art forms?
THOUGH MODERNISM had become the academy, it was still a young academy.
And its output was powerfully appealing to young minds.
The shiny newness of modern buildings, so like a mechanical birthday toy.
The gadget fascination of functionalism.
The magic disappearing act performed by walls that dissolved into glass or into the unstructured interior of the open floor plan.
Above all, perhaps, there was the narcissistic pleasure that flowed to the young from the prevailing postwar idea that all this was being done for them -- for the future.
All the glass towers, the superhighways, even the rocket ships so glowingly described by Werner von Braun on "Man in Space," a late 50's Walt Disney television program: These revolutionary designs had been created for the race of gilded children who would never know the Depression except as a tale told to foster gratitude for the abundant fruits of progress.
To be born into this environment was to be doubly privileged, or perhaps cursed: to mistake the privilege as a birthright, a natural order of things.
And, for a brief moment, before the 60's turned into "The Sixties," the young had one foot in the ionosphere of infinite possibility that modernism had spread before it.
The future was here, or perhaps just a short flight away on an Eastern Airlines Whisperjet, an icon of the 60's with its crisp white fuselage trimmed with blue stripes and black sans-serif type, its flight attendants dressed in Jacqueline Kennedy-style outfits, its image explicitly marketed to youth with the jaunty blue-and-white youth-fare card.
Beyond, the whole world beckoned, like the stylized globe on the Pan Am flight bag, another mesmerizing symbol of the blue and white life (before metal detectors): the dream of drifting through cloud and sky toward endless happy landings.
AND THEN THE dream crashed.
A movement that had started out in opposition to the status quo found itself under attack for having become it.
Instead of resembling an enlightened coalition between art and industry, modernism came to seem like a mindless juggernaut with designs on everything in sight.
The idea that modernism was historically inevitable, a claim often put forward by the movement's advocates, now seemed like the best possible reason to resist it.
The idealistic globalism of the International style had become indistinguishable from the threat of imperial overreach.
The blue and white life was no longer so pure when bombers began streaking across Southeast Asian skies.
The machine in the garden was apparently killing off all the plants.
This about-face in perception demanded something more than simply modifying modern principles.
Rather, the principles themselves had to be rejected, as if the entire movement had fallen prey to the market law of planned obsolescence.
And, in a sense, it had.
The pact with industry turned out to be somewhat Faustian.
The pioneer figures of modernism were gone, and with them the movement's creative spark.
Consumption, not creation, had become design's dominant force; novelty and change, its governing principles.
TO AN EXTENT, MARKET forces are also responsible for reviving the aura of modern design.
"New Modernism" as a concept fits neatly into the theme of "return" that has been a marketing motif for two decades.
At the same time, the modern aura appeals to architects who are looking for fundamentalist principles that can redeem architecture from market tyranny.
The expression of structure, the paring away of ornament, the reduction of space to eloquent void: Once again, these concepts are seen to deliver design from the superficial whimsies of image, stagecraft and style.
There are also those who concur with the German philosopher Jurgen Habermas that modernity is "an incomplete project," that architects should not abandon modernism's overarching ideal of reason, even if society can do no more than reach fumblingly toward it.
The prospect of a modernist revival is not likely to delight those who believe that architecture has gained from the awareness of history promoted by the post-modern movement.
Actually, today's reappraisal of modernism is partly the result of that movement.
For with the deepening of historical awareness has come the understanding that modernism was not a radical break with the past.
Rather, it was a flowering of ideas that had been germinating in Western civilization since the Enlightenment.
What is driving architects toward modernism today is a fusion of personal and cultural memory: a desire to reconnect with a time in their lives and a moment in architecture that were both suffused with radiant promise.


English for Immigrants
SLEET pelted the windows of Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan one March evening, but it didn't deter dozens of Mexican immigrants from filling three classrooms, eager for free language lessons.
Hunched over small desks, they described the weather in halting, heavily accented English.
"It is snowing again," they chanted, carefully writing each word in their notebooks.
"When will spring arrive?"


2 U.S. Companies Begin Tours of Three Gorges
Two American companies have begun offering luxury cruises through the Three Gorges of China's Yangtze River.
Regal China Cruises of New York began operating last Christmas but will not have its three German-built river cruisers in full service until the end of April, said David Yiu, president of the company.
Victoria Cruises, also of New York, will put the first two of six planned cruisers into service in May, said James Pi, the company's president.


Buying and Preparing Soft-Shell Crabs
THE weather has been so cold this winter that the sight of soft-shell crabs in the fish store recently came as a surprise.
Spring had finally arrived after all!
Many people believe that soft-shell crabs are a particular species that comes into season around the time the first crocuses show their buds.
In fact, they are simply blue crabs that have molted their hard shells.
The early crabs on the market are mostly from Georgia and as far south as Louisiana, but as the temperature begins to rise they are brought in from Chesapeake Bay in Maryland, where there are more crabs for food than in any other body of water in the world.


Sports of The Times; Amazing: Mets of '69 Really Were Champs
Twenty-five years.
It just doesn't seem possible.
Twenty-five years since the New York Mets stopped being the Worst Team in the History of Baseball and became the world champions of 1969.
By doing so, they became the prototype for every underdog team that ever dared to dream.
It was a wonderful, enjoyable team during a bizarre, electric age.
People should know about that team and that time.
Sports are mostly about today, about right now.
As well they should be.
Today's fans care most about whether Barkley or Ewing can win a championship in Jordan's absence.
Today's fans are debating whether the Rangers can win a Stanley Cup.
Today's fans are celebrating Arkansas's victory in the Final Four.
Every championship is special, by definition, but I am here to tell you that the 1969 championship by the New York Mets was extraordinary, for any city, for any year.


Fleeing Vietnam
SOUTH WIND CHANGING By Jade Ngoc Quang Huynh. 305 pp. St. Paul: Graywolf Press. $20.


Charlotte Erdman, Peter F. Rizzo
Charlotte Eve Erdman, a daughter of Eldred P. Erdman of Hopewell, N.J., and David Erdman of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Peter Foley Rizzo, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas D. Rizzo of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward F. Maloney performed the ceremony at St.
William's Catholic Church on St.
Simon's Island, Ga.
Mrs.
Rizzo, 31, was until recently a vice president in New York with Quality Care Systems Inc., a managed health-care company.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of the New Jersey Aluminum Company in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother is a founding partner in Old Grange Graphics Inc., an art reproduction company in Hopewell.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Eleanor C. Erdman.


The Post-Modern Pants Suit, in Panorama


Louise Klebanoff, Peter Fleischman
Dr.
Louise Michelle Klebanoff, a daughter of Gail G. Klebanoff of Verona, N.J., and the late Michael Klebanoff, was married last evening to Peter Norman Fleischman, the son of Harry Fleischman of Wantagh, L.I., and the late Natalie Fleischman.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated at the Puck Building in New York.
Dr.
Klebanoff, 35, is keeping her name.
She is a neurologist at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a medical degree from Georgetown University.
Her father was a real estate investor in West Orange, N.J.


Best Friend


Park Battle: For Dogs Or Toddlers?
On April 18, work is to begin on the Tudor City Playground, a tiny public park and former drug haven on the steps that lead to Tudor City from the south side of 42d Street.
New play equipment and rubber matting for toddlers are on their way, and the sitting area, where no families sat for many years, will be refurbished.
But some of Tudor City's dog owners, whose animals will no longer be able to use the area, are fighting the renovation.


April 3-9: Dodging the Graft; New York City Police Tackle Drug Arrests Again
Keeping a campaign promise, New York City Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani last week ended the two-decade-old practice of making drug crimes the exclusive purview of special narcotics squads and ordered uniformed police officers to begin arresting drug dealers again.
After the Knapp Commission revealed widespread corruption in the early 1970's, police commanders were reluctant to use uniformed police in fighting narcotics crime.
Corruption declined, but drug sales soared.


Megabytes Are Important
To the Editor:
Congratulations on entering the literary electronics age with Bernard Sharratt's review of "Microsoft Art Gallery: The Collection of the National Gallery, London" (March 6).
That's a first -- and I hope not the last.


The Executive Computer; How Lotus Is Raising the Level of Group Dynamics
FOR most of its four years on the market, Lotus Notes was something of a misfit in the software industry, a quirky individualist in an era of me-too products.
But Notes is now one of the hottest selling programs in the business-software market.
Last year revenue from Notes sales more than doubled, to about one-tenth of the Lotus Development Corporation's total revenues of $981 million.
And industry analysts expect Notes to do even better in 1994.
By the end of the year, they predict, more than a million people will be using it.


The Game Arrives, Prozac for National Soul
Baseball arrived in the nick of time, on Easter Sunday night no less, risen from a dark winter of cold confusion.
What were we to make of the disappearance of Tonya and Nancy, the breakup of Jimmy and Jerry, the lessons of Old Momma's college basketball championship?
Now we don't have to deal with them at all.
Less than a week into the new season, the American anxiety levels have dropped and the sun is shining.
Do we care how much of this good feeling is spring and how much is The Game, Prozac for the national soul?
So what if a wild card, a second-rate team, can win the World Series this year.


Teachers to the (Child) Stars
There are two teachers and three students inside a three-room house trailer parked in the shadow of Dopey Drive at the Disney Studios in Burbank, Calif. -- hardly an educational quorum, under normal circumstances.
The situation, however, is decidedly out of the ordinary, because the pupils in the well-appointed mobile home classroom are the juvenile stars of the popular television comdey series "Home Improvement."
"Do we have to do school now?" whines Zachery Ty Bryan, 12 years old, who portrays Brad, the eldest son.
"I don't want to do these stupid lessons." Steve Elster ignores Zachery's lament and plunges into a lecture on how amino acids contribute to hereditary cell defects.
As a studio teacher, Mr.
Elster is one of a cadre of professional hybrids on whom children like Zachery depend.
In order to do their jobs well, Mr.
Elster and his co-teacher, Daphne Boelsma, must be by turns tutors, friends, therapists, protectors and surrogate parents for their young charges.
While California minors toil making commercials, acting in television shows or movies, those who haven't graduated from high school must go to school three hours a day, 15 hours a week.
Although all states require a minimum number of hours of instruction for children working in the entertainment industry, only California law specified that even when a child's educational needs have been met, a state-certified studio teacher must be present on the set, serving as guardian of his or her health and safety, even during summer vacations.
With children so prevalent in movies and television the last few years, studio teachers have not been faced with the intermittent unemployment that plagued them in the past.
Hired by production companies from a roster maintained by the teachers' union, they earn more than public school employees when they do work -- though considerably less than their students do.
Children who work have to be registered in accredited school, and the curriculum covered by their studio teacher is determined by their school of record.
Students with continuing jobs, such as roles on television series, sometimes don't actually visit the schools at which they are nominally enrolled; they are often in independent study programs, which were developed for pregnant students trying to keep up with their lessons while out of school.
Rare Visits to 'Regular School'
Zachery, a sixth grader, and his two television brothers call their home schools "regular school," an apt term since studio schooling is predictably irregular.
Some children study with a studio teacher only a few days a year while appearing in commercials, while others spend several months making a movie or miniseries.
And since many situation comedies schedule a break one week each month, the youngsters in their casts can return to their home schools periodically.
Jonathan Taylor Thomas, 12, a sixth grader who plays Randy, the middle son in 'Home Improvement," says: "A lot of kids at my regular school don't understand.
They go, 'Oh, you're so lucky.
You don't have to go to school.' It's not like that.
We do the same exact work that the public schools do, but sometimes it's more difficult because we have to do it in a shorter amount of time."
Studio teachers maintain contact with their students' home-school teachers, getting copies of texts used and tests given.
In many cases, they fax or mail work done on the set to the classroom teacher.
For a junior high or high school student, they will keep track of work assigned by as many as six different teachers.
The goal of most studio teachers is to keep students academically up to grade level and personally down to earth.
Mr.
Elster's dry sense of humor surfaces when his pubescent scholars sound inappropriately mature.
"I like being on this show because I know I have a steady job," 12-year-old Jonathan tells a visitor.
"Right," Mr.
Elster adds.
"He has the ex-wives, the alimony, the mortgage to worry about."
How well studio schooling works depends on how important education is to the parents involved.
Parents who value learning communicate that ethic to their children, who work hard in school even while they're busy acting.
Conversely, the unmotivated student typically comes from a family more interested in a child's earning potential than in his acquisition of knowledge.
Arlene Singer-Gross has been a studio teacher for 15 years, 8 of them on the long-running comedy "Who's the Boss?" "I've worked with parents whose priority was, 'How come my child didn't get a close-up and the other child did?' rather than 'Can she read?"' said Ms.
Singer-Gross.
She briefly taught a 16-year-old whose parents considered education a necessary evil.
They were eager for the boy to take his high school proficiency exam so he could work longer hours as an actor.
"He had gotten the message," Ms.
Singer-Gross said.
"It wasn't like he wanted to do homework; he wanted to do his publicity photos. I felt in that situation, my job was to teach him life skills. I taught him how to write a check, how to balance a checkbook."
By law, California studio teachers may work with a maximum of 10 students, but the student-teacher ratio is usually one or two to one.
As in Ms.
Singer-Gross's experience, opportunities to tailor programs to a student's needs are abundant.
"I can take a child in the seventh grade and have him reading Shakespeare, if he's that advanced," she says.
"Or if a child is having a hard time with the multiplication tables, I can work on that for three days, design an approach just for him, or turn the math lesson into a game."
Actors and actresses are the beneficiaries of the societal assumption that because a person is attractive and personable, he or she is bright.
"I've taught some wonderful, sweet kids who were great when it was time for them to do their scenes, but they were struggling in school," says Laura Gary, a studio teacher who went on location when the movie "Free Willy" was filmed, and is currently working on "Full House," one of the television comedies that started the trend to family shows with young cast members.
She enjoys being able to explain and drill until a subject is mastered, without worrying about boring the faster learners that inhabit a large, heterogeneous classroom.
Zachery of "Home Improvement" says, "You get a lot more accomplished on the set because it's one on one with the teacher, not one on thirty. The teacher doesn't have to wonder about me not understanding something, because if I don't I'll just tell her. If I get it right away, we can just go on to the next thing."
Studio teachers are as aware of a student's moods as his academic strengths and weaknesses.
Although one of the professional child's survival skills is adaptability, the actor who goes directly from performing a very emotional scene to grappling with geometric proofs might not have an easy time making the switch.
"When they come into the schoolroom from the set, I try to give them a cooling-off period," Ms.
Singer-Gross says.
"I might encourage them to talk about the experience they went through and how they internalized it, or instead of doing math, which takes more concentration, I give them an assignment to read for a while, so they can calm themselves down."
When she isn't making a movie like "The Addams Family" or its sequel, 14-year-old Christina Ricci attends a suburban public school in New Jersey.
For the four months she will work on the upcoming film "Casper" (about the friendly ghost), school is a one-room trailer that she has adorned with a Red Hot Chili Peppers poster, berthed on the Universal Studios lot.
Although there are desks in the trailer, Christina can lie on the floor, pop a tape into her cassette player and drink a soda while she completes her assignments.
"Here I call my teacher Rhona," she said.
"In regular school, it would be Ms. Gordon." That reflects the rapport and trust that frequently, and rewardingly, develop between student and studio teacher.
Like the private tutors once engaged for children of privileged class, studio teachers, by virtue of the intimacy and variety of situations they share with their students, inevitably impart more than the basics.
When a teacher and student eat dinner together on location, a number of teachers say they can't help but notice a child's table manners and would be inclined to correct them if the need were obvious.
Everyone expects that addition, subtraction and the causes of the Civil War will be covered in school.
But questions of values that may not arise in regular classrooms are inescapable in an environment that is part school, part glamorous workplace.
"There is no other business that tolerates the kind of behavior you see in this one -- spoiled, demanding behavior," Ms.
Gordon says.
"It happens with adults, teen-agers and young children. I've worked with children who were supporting their families and the balance of power was off. It got to be, like, who's running the store here? The kid was used to controlling everybody, and I felt it was up to me to teach him to treat adults with respect, because no one else had done it."
But while it is inevitable for studio teachers to take on a variety of roles in their students' lives, including buddy and confidant, often what a young person really wants in a friend is someone the same age with the same interests, fears and curiosities.
Lecy Goranson portrayed the eldest daughter on the top-rated television show "Roseanne" from age 13 to 18, and during that time, she said, she craved friends in her own age group.
Ms.
Goranson attended Vassar her freshman year, and at 19 is currently taking night classes at the University of California at Los Angeles.
"When I went to college," she said, "I was better prepared in some ways than my peers, because I was always around adults on 'Roseanne,' and that was a very advanced learning experience."
"But I think I missed out being isolated," she continued.
"Even though my TV sister, Sara Gilbert, is really smart, there were still just the two of us in a little room. There was no recess, no walking from one class to the next where you would see other kids. You don't learn just from books or from your teacher. You learn from other students, too, from hearing what they have to say. When I think about having sat in the same room for hours and hours every day for five years -- the closest parallel I can draw is a prison."
The 7-year-old stars of "Full House," Ashley and Mary-Kate Olsen, "do school" in a blue-carpeted second floor schoolroom inside a Burbank sound stage that is windowless, but hardly prison-like.
The saucer-eyed twins (identical except for temporarily differing patters of baby tooth loss) sit on the flowered cushion of a white wicker loveseat taking turns ready a picture book, "Josefina Finds the Prince," aloud with their teacher, Ms.
Gary.
A rehearsal for "Full House" is going on directly below, on the permanent set for Uncle Jesse's attic apartment.
Growing Up on 'Full House'
The twins have shared the pivotal role of Michelle since they were nine months old.
They have thus virtually grown up on "Full House," and their parents, acting coach and teachers have made special efforts to infuse the twins' lives with elements of normalcy, including ballet classes for Ashley and riding lessons for her sister.
The show films on a four-day workweek, so the girls attend separate second-grade classes at a private school on Mondays and every fourth week, when the show is on hiatus.
To eace the transition between the two school settings, Ms.
Gary has deliverately made herself less available in her classroom, prohibiting questions from her two students in the middle of a test, for example.
The attempt to foster autonomy makes sense, but it seems to be an uphill battle.
When Ms.
Gary previews a nutrition test that will have to be completed and sent to their school ("Which picture shows a balanced meal?"), the girls, natural cuddlers, get up from their Lilliputian desks and each cling to one of her arms as they study the material.
Independence, manners, spelling, a sense of persective about show business and single-cell reproduction -- if children in studio school learn all their lessons, they have the chance to avoid what every child dreads, being different.
"I've met kids in this business who have never been around kids their own age and they don't know how to relate to them," Christina Ricci says.
"It's weird."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
VAN GOGH'S ROOM AT ARLES By Stanley Elkin.
Penguin, $10.95.
In three novellas the author explores the comic potential of ordinary people in extraordinary circumstances: a disabled professor whose wife has just left him; a commoner who has snared the attentions of England's crown prince, and a small-time teacher whose lodging at a highbrow conference is the room of the title.
Last year our reviewer, Meg Wolitzer, called the book "a subtle, complicated, often astonishing collection."  RACE MATTERS By Cornel West.
Vintage, $9.
The title of this book has a double meaning: it is a work devoted to racial issues in America, and it also examines the extent to which these issues matter in shaping our institutions.
Cornel West, who has added a new epilogue to this edition, demonstrates the divisiveness of racial interactions in essays on subjects like black-Jewish relations and white fear of black sexuality.
He also offers possible solutions, seeing hope in new leadership and in public intervention to combat poverty and ignorance.
"His analysis is strong," Paul Delaney said here last year.


The Arts of India
To the Editor: I enjoyed "What's Doing in New Delhi" (Feb. 13) as a reminder of my visit there in June 1993.
I would like to recommend the Delhi Darbar Tour, daily full or half-day city tours thatinclude the major sites.
It can be booked through the American Express Travel Office in A-Block, Connaught Place.


Is Knight a Saint or Sinner? Recruits Willing to Find Out
Neil Reed is a coach's son.
Andrae Patterson is an Air Force brat.
Reed is a 6-foot-2-inch point guard, Patterson a 6-9 power forward.
Reed is white; Patterson is black.
They became fast friends last summer when their lives intersected at Bob Knight.
When Reed announced he would play next season for Indiana University, there were classmates at East Jefferson High School in Metairie, La., who feared he had lost his mind.
When Patterson said he was going to Knight after he graduates from Cooper High in Abilene, Tex., neighbors sent letters to his home suggesting that the local star and member of the school choir rethink his choice.


Marilynne Herbert Andrea McDermott, Robert Hyer Jr.
Andrea Karen McDermott, a vice president and the legal counsel in the New York office of Bank Brussels Lambert, was married yesterday to Robert Edward Hyer Jr., an investment banker in New York.
The Rev.
Gerard Steffener performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Hyer graduated from Georgetown University, from which she also received a law degree.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. McDermott of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Her father, who won a silver medal in speed skating at the 1952 Winter Olympics in Oslo, retired as the postmaster of Edgewater, N.J.


'The Tyranny Of the Majority'
To the Editor:
In his review of Lani Guinier's book, "The Tyranny of the Majority" (March 13), Alan Wolfe mangles Ms.
Guinier's central thesis.
Ms.
Guinier argues that when political interests and alliances are deeply entrenched, "51 percent of the people should not always get 100 percent of the power." In Mr.
Wolfe's distorted reframing, however, Ms.
Guinier is said to believe that "no one should ever lose more than anyone else." That is a patently silly statement, and whatever else might be said of her, Lani Guinier is not a silly woman.


Italian Influence Yields to Spanish Fare
ARRIVEDERCI, Italy.
Hola, Spain.
What was Mona Lisa in Smithtown is now Cafe Barcelona.
For more than a decade, the restaurant had an Italian name and menu, but its soul was Spanish.
So, too, were its owners and chefs.
Cafe Barcelona shines with spanking-white stucco, mirrored walls and strings of white lights outlining its brick arches.
Travel posters of Spain and wrought-iron chandeliers and sconces emphasize the Iberian flavor.
Mona Lisa always had some Spanish choices on its menu, and over the years knowing diners found them to be the restaurant's strength.
Cafe Barcelona also sports a multinational menu, but stick with Spain.
One Italian holdover, veal francese, was the only disappointing dish sampled.
It had a soggy fall-away crust and was awash in a watery sauce.
For openers, order the Spanish potatoes ($2.95), the least expensive appetizer and the best.
These homemade potato chips are crisp and chewy at the same time.
They make a perfect nibble with drinks or a great side dish at entree time.
Other sterling Spanish starters are the shrimp ajillo, the platter of chorizos and the garlic soup.
The shrimp were set over a sit-up-and-take-notice garlic sauce flecked with red-pepper flakes and parsley.
The chorizos, Spanish sausages, were sliced in rounds and absolutely addictive.
The spirited garlic soup, crowned with crunchy homemade croutons, awakened taste buds.
Also satisfying were the classic escargots and the avocado halves filled with tiny shrimp and crabmeat.
Coming up short, though, was a marinated seafood salad dominated by surimi, imitation crabmeat.
Caesar salad is large and recommended.
Our waiter, an amiable man, said that everyone at the table would be jealous of the person ordering the Galician pork chops.
He was right.
The three tender chops were smothered in peppers, onions and cubes of roasted potatoes.
Twin veal chops receiving the same treatment also scored.
Veal extremena, fork-tender medallions combined with onions, peppers and slices of chorizo, was another Spanish sensation.
Two Iberian chicken dishes made beautiful memories, chunks of breast meat in a snappy garlic sauce and crunchy-crusted chicken villaroy.
The villaroy consisted of two breasts that were coated with a creamy bechamel sauce and then breaded and baked.
A hearty beef dish also won our hearts.
Medallions King Alfonso featured three butterflied filet mignons covered with a mushroom-laden brown sauce spiked with brandy.
Mariscada, the Spanish seafood stew, is a dish that often receives mixed notices.
Cafe Barcelona's version is no exception.
It is offered with a choice of green, red or garlic sauces.
The nicely seasoned red sauce that we tried was a hit, but its briny partners were a varied lot.
The sweet half- lobster was the star.
Shrimp and scallops were supporting players.
Clams were a mixed assembly of tender and chewy, and mussels were strong-tasting.
Shrimp in green sauce, a delicate amalgam infused with parsley and a touch of garlic, was a success.
This subtle dish is not meant to be a rouser.
At dessert time, say adios to Spain.
The flan is merely standard.
Better bets are the various cheesecakes, the good pecan pie, the made-at-the-table zabaglione poured over sliced bananas and another tableside banana treat in which the fruit is flambeed in Kahlua and tequilla and served over ice cream.
The smooth, supple red wines of Spain often offer extraordinary value and exceptional quality.
Thirteen of Cafe Barcelona's 19 wines are Spanish.
Seven are from Rioja, the country's prime production area.
Muga, a small family-run Rioja bodega that specializes in traditionally made, complex, aromatic wines, is well represented by its 1989 Reserve ($22.95), a ruby-colored red with a haunting fragrance.
Muga's far less distinguished white ($18.95) is, nevertheless, a crisp, straightforward possibility.
Cafe Barcelona
Very Good
197 Terry Road, two blocks south of Route 347, Smithtown. 724-8955.
Atmosphere: Warm, Spanish sparkler.
Service: Amiable and efficient.
Recommended dishes: Spanish potatoes, shrimp ajillo, escargots, Spanish sausages, garlic soup, Caesar salad, avocado stuffed with seafood, shrimp in green sauce, veal extremena, Galician veal chops, Galician pork chops, medallions King Alfonso, chicken ajillo, chicken villaroy.
Price range: Lunch entrees, $5.95 to $16.95.
Four-course early bird dinner, $11.95.
Dinner: Appetizers, $2.95 to $7.25; entrees, $13.95 to $18.95.
Credit cards: American Express and Diners Club. Others applied for.
Hours: 11:30 A.M. to 9:30 P.M. from Tuesdays through Thursdays, 11:30 A.M. to 11 P.M. on Fridays, 2 P.M. to midnight on Saturdays and 2 to 9:30 P.M. on Sundays.
Closed on Mondays.
Reservations: Needed on weekends.
Wheelchair accessibility: No steps.


Navy Prepares a Manual About Sexual Harassment
With its penchant for by-the-book precision, the military has manuals for just about everything -- legal manuals to punish lawbreakers, technical manuals to assemble weapons.
Now, the Navy has prepared a new manual on how to recognize, prevent and deal with sexual harassment.
Intended to serve as a comprehensive resource for thousands of Navy commanders worldwide, the manual defines the problem, tells how to handle complaints and holds commanders responsible for eliminating harassment in their ranks, with an implicit threat that promotions could be jeopardized if they do not.
The Navy will distribute the manuals fleetwide by early fall.


A la Carte; More Than Just a Mere Bakery
NOT all ethnic food on Long Island is in restaurants.
There are bakeries like the Paradise at 26 Glen Street in downtown Glen Cove that offer robust Portuguese bread, rolls, pastries, sausages and cheese.
Customers who do not want to wait until they get home to dig into the Paradise's billowy white rolls or dense, moist and crusty cornbread can eat at one of the five tables in the bakery.


En Route to Medical Treatment


No Sweat
Uptown -- Almost nothing scares Evel Knievel, even now that he has been retired for 14 years from the business of slam-dancing with death.
"I don't even know if I'm scared of the electric chair," Mr.
Knievel said on April Fools' Eve at the bar of the Omni Berkshire Place in midtown.
Wearing a windbreaker with the logo of the golf-club manufacturer he owns, he looked trim, tan and handsome at 55.
He lives in Las Vegas, Nev., but was in town to give a slide lecture about his career the following night at the Grand, a nightclub in the East Village.
He wasn't scared of getting up to talk in front of a gnarly crowd of club kids less than half his age.
"I've done it before," he said.


Condemn Singapore's Brutality
If people were caned for vandalism in New York, would we have a safer city?
That seems to be the conclusion from the talk shows, public opinion surveys and letters to editors across the country.
Michael Fay, the 18-year-old American who has been sentenced to a caning in Singapore, is not doing well in the polls.
At his hometown paper, The Dayton Daily News in Ohio, the calls and letters are running two-to-one in favor of inflicting this form of torture on a young man who spray painted a car.
And the Singapore Government is pointing to American public opinion as vindication for its uncompromising policy.
The comparison is made again and again: Singapore and New York.
Clean streets vs. dirty ones.
Safety vs. muggings.
Order vs. chaos.
Clearly Mr.
Fay's predicament has touched an American nerve.
For many who envy Singapore's orderly, clean society, who are tired of the dirt and danger of U.S. cities, the threat of pain and humiliation for transgressors seems worth the price.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
RIVERDALE  At a Wave Hill Concert, The Sound of Beethoven
Beethoven sonatas will be heard today at Wave Hill, the 28-acre public garden, when Susan Kagan, a pianist, and Beverly Somach, a violinist, present an afternoon program.


Kim M. Thoene, Michael T. Mena
Kim Marie Thoene, a daughter of Nancy Eddy of Fort Myers, Fla., and J. J. Thoene of Louisville, Ky., is to be married today to Michael Thomas Mena, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilfred D. Mena of Naples, Fla.
The Rev.
Gerald Boisvert is to perform the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Naples, Fla.
The bride, 31, graduated from Vanderbilt University and from Belmont College.
She is a marketing consultant in New York for Bridgestone/Firestone Inc., the tire company, in Nashville.
She is a stepdaughter of Clarence N. Eddy.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Illinois Wants Grant's Tomb
If State Senator Judy Baar Topinka of Illinois had her way, Grant's Tomb would be packed up and shipped out of New York City on the next train.
But officials at Riverside Park, where Grant and his wife, Julia, are entombed at the General Grant National Memorial, say the Senator was overreacting when she said city workers and the National Park Service had allowed the tomb to become a graffiti-scarred hangout for drug dealers and muggers.
Although Grant's Tomb stands in a New York City park, its upkeep is a Federal responsibility.


Plenty of Ammunition In Salary Cap Battle
After the first negotiating session between labor representatives of the owners and the players last month, Richard Ravitch made a comment that attracted virtually no notice but most likely signaled an important element of the owners' strategy as the talks for a new labor agreement proceed.
Noting that reporters always write about differences among the owners, Ravitch, the owners' chief labor executive, said: "I can't believe that with what is happening in the game that there aren't differences of opinion among players. Guys who were making millions of dollars last year aren't."


'I Speak Only From Love -- and Exasperation!'
THE COLLECTED WORKS OF HAROLD CLURMAN Six Decades of Commentary on Theater, Dance, Music, Film, Arts and Letters.
Edited by Marjorie Loggia and Glenn Young.
Illustrated. 1,101 pp.
New York: Applause Books. $49.95.


Bottom Line; This Much Is Clear: Taxes Just Aren't What They Seem
TENS of millions of Americans will file their income tax returns this week dead certain that their taxes are going up.
But as a proportion of the national economy, or of people's total income, or of any other yardstick of what Americans earn and are worth, the amount that Federal, state and local governments collect each year in taxes has hardly changed in 25 years.
Taxes amounted to 27.8 percent of gross domestic product in 1991, the last year for which statistics are complete.
Since 1969, the figure has never risen above 28.5 percent or fallen below 26.7.


The Men Who Really Run Fortress Japan
HAVING spent a part of his youth in the New York City area, including a year at Scarsdale High School, Tatsuya Terazawa is as comfortable with America as he is with Tokyo.
But an experience during his years at the Harvard Business School crystallized for him the gulf that separates Japan, the country he now serves as an elite government bureaucrat, and the United States.
Mr.
Terazawa's class was studying a failed airline and it was shown a taped interview with the company's president.
The president noted with pride that through it all he had never sought Government help.
The class, Mr.
Terazawa recalled with astonishment, erupted into applause.


POSTINGS: Third Manhattan Office; Driver's License Express
Spending an afternoon waiting to get a driver's license renewed has never been fun.
In the hope of making the process less painful, the State Department of Motor Vehicles has been opening satellite offices in business locations.
The third such office opens tomorrow in Five Penn Plaza, at 300 West 34th Street.


William E. Zeiter; Corporate Lawyer, 59
William E. Zeiter, a corporate law specialist in Philadelphia, died on Friday at the University of Pennsylvania Hospital.
He was 59.
The cause was a thoracic aneurysm, said his wife, Jean, of Philadelphia.


When Is A Roof Not a Roof?
TWO COASTS.
TWO ROOFS.
TWO major civic projects.
Riverbank Park in New York and Yerba Buena Gardens in San Francisco have a lot in common.
Both were conceived to placate communities that had been saddled with controversial buildings.
Both have resulted in public spaces of high architectural caliber.
And both could have gone further in developing the concept on which they literally rest: a roof can be the bottom of a building as well as the top.
Riverbank Park has gained notoriety as the smelly park, the one built atop an offshore waste treatment plant in the Hudson River.
First proposed in 1969 as compensation for foisting this classic Not-In-My-Back-Yard project on nearby Harlem, the 28-acre park finally opened a year ago, after 24 years of bureaucratic wrangling.
Despite the chemical whiffs that periodically assail the nostrils (the city's sanitation engineers say they are working to eliminate them), the place is a popular success.
With its pools, gym, outdoor rink and running track, it may be the most lavish sportsplex in town.


Commodities Danced in the Go-Go Years
To the Editor:
To believe the news media, Hillary Rodham Clinton's success in trading commodity futures in the late 1970's was so remarkable that there must have been malfeasance.
Remarkable, certainly, but not an isolated case.


Of Autism And Critics
To the Editor:
In his essay "A Few Scary Pictures Can Go a Long Way"  [ March 20 ]  Walter Goodman says the CBS newsmagazine "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung" used "shabby tricks of the trade" in a recent report on the Behavior Research Institute, a controversial treatment center that used punishment along with rewards to control the behavior of extremely troubled children.
In fact, Mr.
Goodman trotted out a few tricks of his own in trying to advance his perennial thesis that newsmagazines sensationalize the news.


Commodities Danced in the Go-Go Years; Clintons and Business
To the Editor:
Perhaps somewhere there is a vague code of public official behavior to which only you are privy, which holds that if the wife of a governor gets assistance from a source whose client has regular transactions with the state, and such transactions are resolved favorably to the lawyer's client, then the act of receiving advice from the lawyer is tainted.
Or is it the favorable transaction that is tainted?


The Psychedelic Cure
THE OLD, WHITE HOTEL SOUTH OF Amsterdam was the last stop on the junkie express, and most guests packed light.
Nicola and Marcel brought only what they needed for the night: two syringes, a pink silk tourniquet, a Robert Ludlum novel and five grams of heroin.
It was to be the young couple's last binge as addicts, for the next day they planned to kick drugs forever.
"I want to feel real things again, really happy or really unhappy," said Nicola, pacing nervously.
"When you take opiates, you can't feel real things." Marcel ruefully eyed his bandaged wrist, broken by a drug supplier who hadn't been paid.
"Dope life," he sighed, "is no life at all."


The Nation; Inside Academia: Krazy Kat Meets the Lit Krits
In its 31-year run from 1913 to 1944, George Herriman's cartoon "Krazy Kat" may not have attracted the mass following of "Li'l Abner," "Gasoline Alley" or the "Katzenjammer Kids." But in its influence on the arts it has been second to none.
Krazy Kat was the subject of a 1922 jazz ballet by John Alden Carpenter and a 1988 novel by Jay Kantor.
Willem de Kooning and Jack Kerouac were both Krazy Kat fans.
Critics have enthused over the cartoon strip's playful, "Joycean" language, Beckett-like dialogue, and the bleak, surreal setting of Herriman's Coconino County, an existentialist's dreamland where mesas can suddenly turn into mushrooms and day abruptly into night.
It is never even clear whether Krazy is male or female.
In the current issue of the journal Postmodern Culture, Elisabeth Crocker, a doctoral candidate in the Department of English at the University of Virginia, subjects Krazy Kat to the analytical scalpels of contemporary literary criticism, which attempts to deconstruct many of the beliefs and ideas Western culture takes for granted, showing them to be human inventions, not timeless truths.
The meaning of sexuality, language, even of reality itself are all fair game.
Perhaps it's only appropriate, then, that her essay, " 'To He, I Am For Evva True': Krazy Kat's Indeterminate Gender," exists not only on paper but in the amorphous geography of cyberspace: It is available as a hypertext document in a layer of the Internet called the World Wide Web, which can be reached through many online services using a program called Mosaic.
By pointing and clicking on the panels, readers can unearth a level of interpretation Krazy Kat him/herself might find startling -- including the manner in which society "constructs" sexual roles.


Shouldn't Art Support Start at Home?
Your frequent articles on the Westchester Arts Council (the latest, "Art Advocates Troop to Albany to Seek a Piece of the Pie," March 20) and its attempts to seek public funds omit a crucial reality: that the council evidently sees itself as a quasi-public agency with more and more financing from the public rather than the private sector.
Meanwhile, political double-talk is still alive and well in the state of New York.
Senator George E. Pataki, who with Change-NY laments the use of public funds for a myriad of agencies that should, in his view, be privatized, apparently sees nothing wrong in using tax money to help pay $100,000 a year to the council's executive director, Janet T. Langsam, who administers an annual budget of about $1.5 million.
Consider that her salary is just $20,000 less than that of County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, who administers an annual budget in excess of $1 billion.


Treating Mental Illness Is Not a Frill
When Joseph Coatsworth, vice president for governmental relations at the Connecticut Hospital Association, says that the use of psychiatrists depends on one's income bracket, he makes it sound as if treatment for mental illness is an unnecessary frill. ("Q&amp;A: Health Care After the Clinton Proposals," March 20.)
Mental illness is real illness and it doesn't respect artificial boundaries such as income levels, or, for that matter, age, sex or race.
Anyone who has ever suffered from a mental illness, or whose relative has, knows the pain it causes.


Saudis Strip Citizenship From Backer Of Militants
Saudi Arabia has taken a highly unusual step in stripping a scion of one of its wealthiest merchant families of citizenship because he supports Muslim fundamentalist movements active in Arab countries.
Saudi newspapers quoted the authorities on Friday as saying they had acted against the man, Ussama Bin Laden, "because of his irresponsible behavior that contradicts the interests of Saudi Arabia and harms sisterly countries, and his refusal to obey instructions issued to him."


Views on Co-op Sublets and Seller Rights
To the Editor:
All your articles on restrictive subletting policies in co-ops are written from the perspective of an owner who bought high and now wants to sell when the market is low.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
Reading Roger Rosenblatt's article, I could not help but think how far America has come from its roots.
America offered a new life, with no promise of success.
Immigrants required a huge store of responsibility for themselves and their families to make it here.


Trading Vacations For No Homework
AS SUMMER approaches, schoolchildren start to get restless; for most of them the school year is about to end.
Their parents, on the other hand, start to worry.
They fill out applications for summer camp and figure out vacations, but wonder just how their children will retain what they've learned until the fall.
For some children, though, the three-month summer vacation doesn't exist.
They attend year-round schools, such as the private Beacon Schools in Oakland, Calif., where the 370 students have one of the nation's longest programs, attending classes 35 to 60 days a year more than the normal 180.


Disgusted Jordan Tosses Bat
Michael Jordan went hitless again tonight, in four at-bats, in this his second professional baseball game.
In Hoover Metropolitan Stadium, the 31-year-old rookie right fielder and former all-universe basketball hero struck out three times and hit a soft grounder to shortstop in which the throw beat him by a step.
In two games with the Birmingham Barons, Class AA affiliates of the White Sox, Jordan, in facing Chattanooga pitching, is 0 for 7.
In his first two at-bats tonight, Jordan struck out twice, looking.
After the first whiff, he expressed displeasure at the call over his shoulder to the plate umpire, Ray DiMuro.
After the second strikeout, a pitch that DiMuro believed nailed the low outside corner, Jordan waved his arm in disgust and tossed the bat to the ground.
DiMuro turned his back, aware that the crowd of 8,626 might not appreciate an ejection of Jordan.


Simply Sumptuous
FANNIE MERRITT FARMER, WHO transformed recipe writing from the impressionistic descriptions of the 19th century into formulas with precise measurements and scientific instructions, was the mother of modern cooking.
Like all mothers, she might well be horrified at how her progeny has evolved.
A mere three courses at a stylish dinner party?
In Mrs.
Farmer's day, six courses epitomized modern elegance.
Home-cooked dishes so simple, so pared of fat and calories?
Ornate preparations and rich ingredients were, in early modern cooking, the hallmark of a savvy hostess.
And today, some of the best hosts supplement their dishes with store-bought items like pate or dessert.


The World; Through the Serbian Mind's Eye
THE pictures hang in home after Serb home Balkan equivalents of "Washington Crossing the Delaware," and keys to the mind-set of the Serbs.
They are instantly recognizable icons of the 500-year struggle against the Ottoman Turks, a struggle that shaped the fierce nationalism that has fueled the most brutal warfare in Europe since World War II.
"The Maiden of Kosovo" shows a young woman giving drink from a jug to a wounded Serbian warrior (with slain Turks nearby) who has fallen on the battlefield at Kosovo in 1389.
Prince Lazar's defeat there by the Turks is venerated among the Serbs in the way Texans remember the Alamo.


Political Notes; Green's Town Meetings Off and Running, Either Way
Taking a cue from Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Public Advocate Mark J. Green launched a series of town meetings last week to hear the complaints and concerns of New Yorkers.
And it did not go unnoticed in political circles that the first place he went was where Mr.
Giuliani is politically weakest: to the heart of black Brooklyn.
For more than an hour Monday night, Mr.
Green fielded questions at the Bridge Street African Methodist Episcopal Church in Bedford-Stuyvesant, his aides seated behind him just as Mr.
Giuliani's sit behind him at his own sessions.


With Humor and Hardware, A New Generation
BURIED in a pile of long-discarded floppy disks were the very first versions of "Reader Rabbit" and "Where in the World Is Carmen Sandiego?" A computer-savvy 5-year-old girl ("I'm almost 6!") sniffed in dismissal of the crude graphics and tinny sound quality.
"Reader Rabbit" will celebrate its 10th anniversary this summer, and "Carmen" came out in 1985.
The young reviewer's comments seemed harsh about two of the classic programs that started the revolution in educational software, but compared with today's multimedia offerings her assessment is valid.


Hot Islanders See Rangers as Just Another Team to Beat
Seven games ago, the Islanders suffered a demeaning 4-1 loss to the Sabres in Buffalo.
The defense was off.
The top lines could not score.
Coach Al Arbour blasted his players collectively for their lack of effort, heart and determination.
Even though the Islanders were in 10th place in the Eastern Conference, he would not allow them to roll over.
They would fight this season out, forget the disappointments of the last five months and surge forward.


The Principals Of Success
ASK celebrated principals about the secrets of their success and they are likely to use the lexicon of politicians.
There is talk of empowerment and pluralism, the importance of visibility and a stress on reaching out "into the community." Of course, their communities are not town halls but lunchrooms.
So when the National Association of Secondary School Principals recently named Ann Blakeney Clark of Alexander Graham Middle School in Charlotte, N.C., principal of the year, the crucial elements its judges seemed to find in her and in the principals who were finalists were progressive programs that integrate students and parents in campus decisions as well as programs that stress student performance rather than attendance.
The organization sponsors the award in conjunction with the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.


Business Diary: April 3-8
THE ECONOMY After a Merely Gray Monday, the Sun Burst Forth on Tuesday After unpleasant inflation signals a week ago, Wall Street was braced for a black Monday, with the President's economic advisers even piping in over the weekend with soothing words on interest rates.
But in a day of yo-yo trading, with the Dow industrials down more than 80 points during the session, Monday was merely gray, as the Dow lost 42.
Investors were so relieved not to witness the crash of '94 that the next day the Dow shot up 82, the biggest rally in two years.
That done, it settled for small rises the next two days, before slipping back on Friday to end the week 38 ahead -- all the while, of course, acting as a faithful mirror to interest rates.
The question now: having had a moderate "correction," then an upward correction to that correction, is the market now correct -- or is there still some tidying up to do after that long bull-market party?
Hint: Watch interest rates.


Holistic Massage Therapy Adopted for Pain Management
IN a hospital room at South Nassau Communities Hospital in Oceanside, Thomas Hennerty of Wantagh lay on his back with his eyes closed while Elizabeth Valenzuela massaged his chest.
"There are no words to describe how calming and soothing this feels," Mr.
Hennerty, an emphysema patient, said.
"When she hits certain spots it's like she's pushing something out of me. I can feel her opening my chest. This morning I was having a tremendous mucous problem, and now I can breathe."


Enter Spring, Dressed Vividly in Yellow
WHAT is it about the color yellow for spring?
The bright sunny blossoms in various tones of gold seem to have a priority on the season.
There are other flowers, of course, in all kinds of colors.
But those with yellow petals dominate.
Think about it.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
I am a doctor, a former two-pack-a-day smoker who stopped in 1959.
I was in charge of a 35-bed ward at the Cincinnati Veterans Hospital.
All my patients smoked.
In a six-week period, three died of lung cancer and five died of emphysema.
I decided (as I smoked while writing the death summaries) that tobacco was not good for me.
I was right.
It is not good for anyone, and in a truly sane, caring world, those smart, cultured, rich hypocritical people pictured in your article would be out of work and possibly in jail for murder.
C.
KILGORE, M.D.
Ithaca, N.Y.


Streetscapes/Hotel Pierre; Replacing a Landmark's Aging Copper Mansard
LONG after Charles Pierre built the hotel at 61st Street and Fifth Avenue that still bears his name, its distinctive mansard roof has given out.
The three-story-high copper roof, one of the treasures of the New York skyline since 1930, will be removed and replaced this summer.
Charles Pierre was Sicilian, born Pierre Casalasco about 1880 to a father who operated a hotel.
At age 18 he ran away to Monte Carlo and then went on to work at the Ritz in Paris.
From there he went to London and became headwaiter at the Savoy, where he met Louis Sherry, the New York restaurateur.


Gay Businesses Follow Influx of Gay People
On May 1, A Different Light will move from the West Village to 151 West 19th Street between Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue.
That the company, a focal point in gay literary circles, decided to move its flagship store to Chelsea seems to confirm what local residents have observed in recent months: that Chelsea has become a magnet for gay businesses, which were once centered in the West Village.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Mark Langston, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 6.
Called up Brian Anderson, pitcher, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.


Virtual Home
OVER THE PAST TWO months, I have completed an attic studio, created a new home office, built a two-room vacation cabin and even drafted plans for the first floor of a house.
My industriousness might raise eyebrows, considering that I can't draw and don't have an architecture degree.
But the big catch is that none of the projects are real -- well, they're virtually real.
They are the fruits of a foray into the world of CAD (short for Computer-Aided Design, though to me it sometimes stood for Crazy, Absurd Data).
In the process, I have often felt like Alice falling down the tunnel to Wonderland, except that I haven't been following a rabbit, but a mouse.
CAD, which over the past 15 years has allowed many architects to replace their drafting tables with computers, is now moving steadily from the professional office into the home.
A host of software packages with names like "My House," "Design &amp; Build Your Deck" and "Visio Home" offer nonprofessionals the means to design everything from furniture layouts to new kitchens to entire houses; some even calculate all the costs entailed.
Many of the software packages now come with three-dimensional capability, so that with a click of the mouse, you can see your design from a variety of angles.
It's a little bit like entering a cartoon you've drawn yourself, as in "Who Framed Roger Rabbit."


FLASHXARD
How well people read and understand printed material is directly related to the amount of education they have received, according to a report recently released by the National Center for Education Statistics.
More than one in seven people without any college education scored in the lowest level of literacy, while over 40 percent of college graduates scored in the top two levels of literacy.
The report is based on a survey conducted in 1992 with nearly 27,000 people 16 and older, including 1,100 inmates of Federal and state prisons.


Opera Tickets on Sale For Glyndebourne
Mail-order tickets are now on sale for performances at the rebuilt opera house at Glyndebourne, in the rolling hills of the Sussex countryside 54 miles from London, which will open with Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" on May 28.
The $50 million building, designed by Michael Hopkins, was shown to the public on Jan. 31.
The Glyndebourne season, which runs from May 28 to Aug. 25, will also feature "Eugene Onegin," "The Rake's Progress," "Don Giovanni" and "Peter Grimes." Prices range from $15 for standing room to $150.
Contact: Glyndebourne Festival Opera Box Office, Lewes, East Sussex BN8 5UU; (0273) 813813 (recorded information outside box office hours).
Beginning this month, tickets may be ordered by mail.
On May 4, orders can be booked by phone.


Buying and Preparing Soft-Shell Crabs
THE weather has been so cold this winter that the sight of soft-shell crabs in the fish store recently came as a surprise.
Spring had finally arrived after all!
Many people believe that soft-shell crabs are a particular species that comes into season around the time the first crocuses show their buds.
In fact, they are simply blue crabs that have molted their hard shells.
The early crabs on the market are mostly from Georgia and as far south as Louisiana, but as the temperature begins to rise they are brought in from Chesapeake Bay in Maryland, where there are more crabs for food than in any other body of water in the world.


Untamed Europe
It sounds like the perfect volume for people who want to party hearty.
But "Wild Italy" by Tim Jepson, a new 224-page book published by the Sierra Club, is a handsomely illustrated guidebook to Italy's most intriguing mountains, forests, coastal lands and swamps.
Besides detailed information on specific places, like the national park at Monti Sibillini and Etna, Europe's largest active volcano, the guide describes local flora, fauna and creatures.


Buying and Preparing Soft-Shell Crabs
THE weather has been so cold this winter that the sight of soft-shell crabs in the fish store recently came as a surprise.
Spring had finally arrived after all!
Many people believe that soft-shell crabs are a particular species that comes into season around the time the first crocuses show their buds.
In fact, they are simply blue crabs that have molted their hard shells.
The early crabs on the market are mostly from Georgia and as far south as Louisiana, but as the temperature begins to rise they are brought in from Chesapeake Bay in Maryland, where there are more crabs for food than in any other body of water in the world.


Atlantic City Seeks to Lure Non-Gamblers
As campaigns for casino gambling gather momentum in neighboring states and elsewhere in New Jersey, Atlantic City is betting that it can reinvent itself as a convention center and seaside tourist attraction.
That is brave talk for a city that has 12 mammoth casino hotels and parking garages but not a single golf course, movie house or even a supermarket.
Even the best natural attraction, the ocean beach, shuts down for most of the year for swimming.


Cuomo Attempts to Mediate Between Cortines and Mayor
A day after Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines announced his resignation in a confrontation with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo sought yesterday to mediate the dispute.
He urged both leaders by telephone to put aside their differences -- "an eminently achievable result," he said.
Mr.
Cortines reported for work at the Board of Education headquarters in Brooklyn yesterday morning, and in meetings with leaders of parents' groups and phone conversations with associates, he said that he felt he had lost the Mayor's support and that unless he got it back he would not reconsider his resignation.
But he made it clear that his mind was not closed.


Prosecutor's Duty and a Sister's Dilemma; Bronx District Attorney Led the Police to a Rape Suspect: Her Brother
Michele L. Monagas and Anthony James Monagas share a father but little else.
They were raised by different mothers, he in Queens and she in Brooklyn, and there their lives took very different courses.
He dropped out of high school and drifted to Florida, where he worked as a laborer.
She graduated from John Jay High School and later received a degree in molecular biology from Long Island University, intending to become a doctor.


Gilding the Apple
Down in New Zealand, they grow kiwis, sheep and lots of apples.
Naturally, they're always tinkering with their products.
And Arend Kootstra and colleagues announced in the March issue of Orchardist that they had discovered something new under the sun.
If you take an apple that hasn't reddened, cover up part of it with sun screen (or rubber bands), and then irradiate it, the apple will turn red except where the radiation has been blocked.
You can make any design you like, say, a happy face, or a brand or a snappy New Zealand logo.


A Plant Closes, To Little Note
On March 22, Berger Industries made the kind of announcement that might have been expected to shock a community.
The company said it was closing its steel fittings division at 74-16 Grand Avenue, eliminating 100 jobs.
But the news of the company's departure has gone virtually unremarked in this mostly middle-class, residential community.
At a time when manufacturing has steadily declined in New York City, residents seem to have become used to the idea of plant closings.


An Ageless Moliere Speaks to the Ages
ANY AGE THAT PRODUCED Moliere would be a golden age of theater.
There are no better comedies than his.
None that go so directly to the heart of human folly or chronicle the ravages of absolutism with such explosive joy.
The titles alone -- "The Misanthrope," "The Miser," "The Affected Young Ladies," "The Learned Ladies," "George Dandin, or the Confounded Husband" -- indicate some of the social extremists he pursued with such glee.
Types plucked from the good bourgeoisie of 17th-century France and from the glittering society that swirled about the Sun King, Louis XIV, they have proved to be types for all times.


Insuring Vintage Homes
A HISTORIC home -- or any home that's more than 100 years old -- presents a special insurance challenge to homeowners hopeful of restoring something close to original conditions after a loss.
The replacement of wainscotting, wide floorboards, stained-glass windows, paneling or intricate moldings is expensive.


Judge Blocks Reopening of Exploded Pipeline
A state judge ordered a natural gas company today to halt its plans to reopen a pipeline that exploded near an apartment complex in Edison, N.J., last month.
The judge, Joseph C. Messina of Middlesex County Superior Court, granted a request from Mayor George Spadoro of Edison for a restraining order against the company, the Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation.
It had wanted to resume pipeline operations on Monday or Tuesday near the Durham Woods apartment complex.


Rwanda Update
These were the major developments yesterday as fighting continued in RWANDA and foreign troops began to move into the area to help evacuate foreigners from the capital, KIGALI.
About 360 United States marines were sent from ships off the coast of SOMALIA to BUJUMBURA, the capital of BURUNDI, to help evacuate the approximately 250 American citizens from Rwanda.


In Battle Over Toxic Waste, The Question Is: Cap or Dig?
Seven years after a metal refiner agreed to rid a piece of its property in Maspeth of toxic waste, the project remains stalled as a constellation of combatants -- including the company, state officials, community leaders and the United States Post Office -- struggle over its future.
The struggle boils down to two simple options: removing the toxic material, or covering it up.


Going the Self-Help Route
FOR supporters of public schools, the saying "you get what you pay for" is taking on new meaning.
Across the nation, communities impatient with the continuing school financial crisis are digging into their pockets to support sagging school budgets.
Outside an elementary school in California, parent volunteers hawk supermarket gift certificates.
At an apple festival in southeastern Kentucky, an eager crowd snaps up $25 chances on a pickup truck.
In the New York City suburb of Bronxville, former high school graduates buy $100 personalized bricks for an "Alumni Walk."


Habitats/On Babylon's Waterfront; Pitcher Cuts No Corners
THE cars of baseball fans and sightseers hoping to catch a glimpse of Bret Saberhagen, the Mets pitching star, now find a strange sight at the end of the peninsula in Babylon, L.I., where he bought a waterfront home last April.
What was then a glamorous brick hipped-roof French villa is now a skeleton, a deconstructed house stripped to its 2-by-4 studs, its mellow maple French Provincial mantel stacked with glass doors and its bleak brick chimney stack exposed to the elements.


Serbs Take Key Area Above Bosnia Town
Nationalist Serbs overran strategic high ground above the eastern town of Gorazde on Friday with tanks, artillery and infantry attacks, United Nations officials said today.
It was the most successful thrust so far in the 12-day offensive against the predominantly Muslim town, where 65,000 people are trapped by a Serbian siege.


April 3-9; Pedaling Fall Fashions


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
105.29
103.60
113.34
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7115
1.6970
1.6046
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3848
1.3885
1.2571
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4760
1.4740
1.5285
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$384.50
$391.80
$337.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


A Brand-New Season, but the Same Old Carter Heroics
Blue Jays 8, Mariners 6
Joe Carter, evoking memories of last year's World Series, hit a two-run homer off Bobby Thigpen in the ninth inning in Toronto yesterday to give the Blue Jays an 8-6 victory over the Seattle Mariners.


MODERN ON THE EDGE
MODERN IS NOT WHAT YOU THINK IT IS.
IN FACT, IT never was.
The flat roofs, steel I-beams and characterless plate-glass windows that shout "modern" in every mall across America are but one facet of a design esthetic that, by definition, is constantly reinventing itself.
For modern is not a style.
It is an attitude that embraces a dynamic present and uses its innovations to improve everyday life.
Now, a new generation of architects and designers is rediscovering its original revolutionary spirit.
So why do some people cringe at the very word "modern"?
It's an image problem that can be traced back to Le Corbusier's definition of the ideal house as a "machine to live in." At the time he coined the phrase, machines were still thrilling newcomers in a world festooned with vestigial traditions: duster coats, antimacassars, dumbwaiters.
Ardent populists, the masters of modern still failed to consider that although people may have welcomed machines into their lives, they never wanted them as exclusive company.
Or that although mass production made life easier, Corbusier's dream of the "standard house for normal, standard people" was an insult to those who believed in the sacredness of a heterogeneous society.
It didn't help that modern -- sheer poetry in the hands of geniuses of minimalism like Mies van der Rohe -- was easy to duplicate on the cheap.
Part of the problem was misinterpretation.
Even Corbusier's own villa masterpieces were intimately scaled, exquisitely crafted sculptures.
The popular notion of modern -- sober and stark -- was probably shaped less by reality than by the movies and such ballyhooed shows as the 1932 exhibition on International style at the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Still, it was a vision that held sway over our minds and magazines until the 70's, when post-modernism unlatched the door to the past.
Design students started poring over classical monuments, then moved on to long-overlooked 20th-century modern achievements.
One was Pierre Chareau's Maison de Verre in Paris, completed in 1932.
Here, poetry and industry are wedded with fluid precision.
There are walls that slide and roll, retractable stairs and a nesting table modeled on airplane propeller blades.
Its glass-block facade aglow with the light from within, the Maison de Verre achieved cult status a decade ago, yet Chareau's name still doesn't figure in standard architecture guides.
A similar fate befell the architect Eileen Gray, whose Cubist-inspired furnishings of the 20's and 30's were rediscovered for reproduction in the early 80's.
Although Gray used chrome in furniture before Mies van der Rohe or Le Corbusier, she ultimately rejected it as cold, fragile and, as she declared in 1929, "contrary to good taste." Her contemporaries defined modernism by function; she added comfort and wit.
She called a bulbous leather chair resembling stacked inner tubes "the Bibendum chair," after the balloon-limbed Michelin-tire icon.
One of the most fertile, untapped strains of modern drew its inspiration from local landscapes.
These buildings look as if they belong to the traditions of place, but function in a resolutely contemporary way.
William Wurster was one of the first to explore this potential in the houses he designed in the San Francisco Bay area between 1927 and 1942.
Drawing on indigenous building types, he stripped wide verandas and interior courtyards of their nostalgic trappings.
Today, regional modernism has a particular resonance for architects interested in designs that are sensitive to the environment.
As modernism becomes more inclusive, it is easier to embrace its idiosyncratic monuments.
Casa Malaparte, for one.
This mysterious villa on a cliff above the Bay of Naples seems to have been shaped by the eroding winds of time.
The cascading steps descending from its roof appear both ancient and modern, natural and an extraordinary feat of engineering.
More recently, the work of the American architect Paul Rudolph has passed from being violently reviled to warmly appreciated.
When his Yale Art and Architecture Building, with its corduroy-concrete exterior and 37-level interior, caught fire in 1969, it was rumored that a student was responsible.
Today, seminars are held about its dynamic rendering of space.
It is from such atypically modern architecture that the "new modernists" take their cues.
This generation, a sampling of whose work is shown on the following pages, understands that modernism possesses a vigor and authenticity unrivaled by period styles.
Liberated from preconceptions, these designers are inspired by the past, pure geometry, philosophy, even music.
As a way of thinking, modern is demonstrating its ability to reinvent itself and to shape the present well into the next century.


Broom Brigade Will March on Montague Street
On Earth Day, an annual celebration of the environment, hundreds of volunteers will be pruning and painting in some of the city's parks, but a group of Brooklyn Heights residents has found another way to mark the day.
Armed with brooms, they will be sweeping down Montague Street, the area's unofficial Main Street.


Neighbors


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Home Design/Magazine Part 2  Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A


On a Farm, Calving Teamwork
INSIDE the wood-frame barn, Kent Bovard, the 24-year-old herdsman at David and Peggy Rockefeller's Hudson Pines Farm here, was carefully regarding the new calf, born just minutes earlier and whose mottled black-and-white coat still glistened with amniotic fluid.
Breathing evenly and already wide-eyed, the calf rested in the straw-matted walkway between the stalls and the open back of the building, where outside the first downpour of spring resounded in the dark of the barnyard.
The calf's mother, an imposing and similarly mottled heifer, stood next to her recumbent offspring and after a few moments, perhaps of self-satisfaction, bent down and concernedly sniffed the steaming air around the calf.
Convinced that it was indeed hers, the heifer began to lick away the amniotic fluid from the calf's coat.
This first grooming assured Mr.
Bovard of the heifer's mothering instinct, and so he paused against the walkway's metal gate to appreciate this miraculous ritual of the farm.
But not for long.


The Antiquing of the South Bronx, uh, SoBro
ON the day Myrna Weiss recalls most fondly, a limousine pulled over on Antique Row, the blocklong strip of shops that has become known among seekers of old furniture, china, rugs and assorted bric-a-brac as the jewel of the South Bronx.
"My first thought was, 'Oh no, not this!' " Ms.
Weiss said.
"I was afraid the drug dealers had arrived."


An Enigmatic Morrissey Still Battles His Demons
If TWO WORDS COME CLOSE TO encapsulating Morrissey's sensibility, they are isolation and insularity.
The singer once declared: "All those things like love, sex, sharing a life with somebody are actually quite vague. Being only with yourself can be much more intense." He rejects the idea that "no man is an island," finding perverse solace in a self-pity that's really narcissism turned inside out.
His island mindset also comes through in the parochialism and nostalgia that has characterized his music and lyrics, a hankering for an idyllic Britain that may never have existed.
This yearning is combined with his disdain for contemporary British pop culture, which is both Americanized and increasingly multiracial.


Biblical Frescoes
To the Editor: In his fine article about the Italian town of Bressanone-Brixen ("Kings and Emperors Passed This Way," Jan. 2), Paul Hofmann said the biblical frescoes in the cathedral's cloister were random scenes.
You might be interested in "Biblia Pauperum: A Facsimile of the 40-Page Woodblock" edited by Avril Henry (Cornell University Press, 1987).
Biblia Pauperum is a name given to a standard presentation of biblical imagery occurring throughout medieval Europe in devotional books and ecclesiastical art, in which two stories from the Hebrew Bible are paired with one story from the life of Jesus.
The Bressanone cloister reproduces precisely this fascinating symbolic pattern.
GAIL RAMSHAW  Philadelphia


Fighting Words From Publicists
To the Editor:
We strongly endorse the warning to journalists to guard against communications abuses.
The credibility of our profession and our 15,000 members rests on openness, integrity of fact and upfront declarations of representation.
Anything less is unacceptable.
Conversely, any television station that uses video material that isn't its own without indicating the source is ethically irresponsible.


Previously Engaged
To the Editor:
Great credit goes to the Lannan Foundation for its forward-looking collecting and its risk-taking generosity to institutions dedicated to the presentation of contemporary art  [ "In L.A., Political Activism Beats Out Political Art," March 20 ] .
There is, however, one clarification I should like to make.
Although the Lannan Foundation paid the bulk of the production costs for Chris Burden's "Other Vietnam Memorial" and eventually acquired the work, Burden originally proposed the piece at my invitation for inclusion in "Dislocations," a 1991 exhibition I organized at the Museum of Modern Art.


Caryn Dillon, Jay Finnegan
Caryn M. Dillon, a daughter of Mrs.
James E. Dillon of Williston Park, L.I., and the late Mr.
Dillon, was married yesterday to John James Finnegan, a son of Mrs.
Michael Finnegan of Brooklyn and the late Mr.
Finnegan.
The Rev.
Frank Nelson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Aidan in Williston Park.


To Get Attention In Albany, Enter The Lobbyists
EARLY this month, as budget negotiations in Albany reached a fever pitch and the clamor from a myriad of special-interest groups grew ever louder, Robert E. Biggerstaff, a lobbyist for the New York Association of Small City School Districts, scurried to earn his keep.
Passionate about a range of issues, including declining aid to school districts and financing for occupational education, the spectacled 48-year-old lawyer explained that there was "a lot on the line in Albany" this year.


The Fat, the Proud, the Many?
When Charles Barkley emerged in the National Basketball Association as the Round Mound of Rebound, he was considered something of a freak -- a full-figured kind of guy who could play.
But that was in the days of fitness fanaticism.
Lately, trend-spotters have been talking about a return to pleasure -- smoking, relaxing, eating.
And this year's N.C.A.A. tournament, now a shared national experience, would suggest that poundage is back.
It featured so many round mounds, it could have been called hog heaven instead of March Madness, and not just because President Clinton's Razorbacks did so well.
The President himself, come to think of it, is pretty well rounded.


Potpourri of Celebrations
A birthday surprise for Gloria Steinem, a benefit at Hunter College and a perfume's debut.


Six Finalists Remain for Hunter Presidency
The search for a new president for Hunter College to replace Paul LeClerc, who left in December to become president of the New York Public Library, has been narrowed to six candidates.
The six, all of them women, will be visiting the campus at Park Avenue and 68th Street in the next few weeks to meet with students, teachers and staff members before a committee of the City University of New York, Hunter's parent, makes its selection.


NEWS ABOUT THE MAGAZINE
One topic has stood out from the reader response to the Magazine redesign that started Oct. 31.
Many readers have taken favorable notice of new features and formats and increased editorial content and color.
But the most frequent reaction has been a complaint, epitomized by a five-word letter from Daniel S. Woloshen of Fairfield, Conn.: "Your print is too small."
You're right, Mr. Woloshen, and we have just enlarged it.


A Roving Professor In Health Sciences
WHEN the Cable News Network reported the firebombing of a synagogue in Lubeck, Germany, two weeks ago, one Connecticut viewer had an immediate and personal reaction.
He called a former college classmate, now a reporter, and recalled his visit there in 1982.
The viewer, Prof.
Stanley S. Katz of Quinnipiac College in Hamden, came across the synagogue during a trip to Germany to attend a meeting of the World Congress of Gerontology in Hamburg.
Looking for a restaurant one evening, he and his wife, Sylvia, happened onto a four-story brick building with a Star of David visible on the pediment.


Chinese Bed-and-Breakfast
Bed-and-breakfast in Beijing and Shanghai form the centerpiece of a new tour to China, organized by American-International Home Stays.
Visitors stay in private homes with families in the two cities, sampling apartment living in Shanghai and life in a rural home in the capital.
Besides providing breakfast, lunch and dinner, host families, who all speak some English, provide a glimpse of day-to-day life in China, according to Joseph Kinczel, who started the company in 1988 with home stays in the former Soviet Union.  (Russian home stays are still offered.)


Threshold for Investor Class Actions
To the Editor:
Susan Antilla failed to address the impact of frivolous securities lawsuits on corporate disclosure.
Financial analysis and investors rely on companies voluntarily to provide prospective performance information to guide their investment decisions; the current surge in litigation is making it much harder to obtain such information.


Jane Borthwick, John R. Beeson
Jane R. Borthwick, the president of Porthault Linens Inc. in New York, the American division of the French linen manufacturer, was married yesterday to John R. Beeson, a personnel director at Hallmark Cards in Kansas City, Mo.
The Rev.
Margaret Ruth performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Episcopal Church in Kansas City.
The bride graduated from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Borthwick of Gisborne, New Zealand.
Her father, now retired, was a resident representative for the United Nations Development Program in Somalia.


MANHATTAN UPDATE
*
MIDTOWN: The City Planning Commission voted 10-1 last week to approve a proposal for a 42d Street trolley.
The proposal now moves to the City Council, whose subcommittee on zoning and franchises will conduct a public hearing on April 19.
The Planning Commissioner, Joseph B. Rose, who voted for the trolley, said there was "a lot of concern" about the plan.
Community boards have criticized its cost and say they fear disruption caused by the laying of tracks.
Mr.
Rose said the plan had been refined and was still being worked on.


Sports of The Times; The Masters' Invisible Front Nine
IF you were watching the Super Bowl on television, wouldn't you expect to see the first half?
If you were watching a World Series game, wouldn't you expect to see the first four innings?
But if you're watching the Masters today, you won't see much of the front nine at Augusta National.


Turning On the Juice
Jean-Georges Vongerichten, the puckish French-born chef and owner of the Jo Jo and Vong restaurants in Manhattan, is the enfant terrible of modern French cooking.
A decade ago, he turned his back on traditional meat stocks and glazes and built a vibrant and spare cuisine from juices, vinaigrettes, flavored oils and light broths.
He juiced carrots, for instance, spiked the juice with cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg and cayenne pepper and doused it all on shrimp.
He seasoned radish juice with chervil and used it on cod.
He put ginger in pineapple juice and tenderized chicken.
He reduced mushroom broth to a syrup and drizzled it over scallops steamed in artichoke broth.
A juniper oil became a foil for pork chops; a sweet pepper oil a glaze for chicken.


Moore's Sloppiness Outdoes Key's Finesse
Jimmy Key was the picture of precision for five innings yesterday, operating like a human pitching machine.
Put a coin in the slot and watch pitches hum around the strike zone.
They looked tantalizing until the Tigers flailed and produced out after out.
This pitching machine was pretty clever.
Mike Moore was also effective for the first five innings yesterday, stifling the Yankees in his plodding manner.
Moore was the sloppy, untucked shirt to Key's freshly pressed suit, but he made the Yankees look as futile as the Tigers.
Through five innings, neither had surrendered a hit and that was remarkable since only one double no-hitter has ever been thrown in major league history.


Eileen Danoff, Steven Kaufman
Eileen Rochelle Danoff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Danoff of Baltimore, was married there last evening to Steven Lee Kaufman, the son of Maxine Colen of New York and the late Robert H. Kaufman.
Rabbi Donald Berlin performed the ceremony at Scarlett Place, a catering establishment.
Mrs.
Kaufman, 27, was until recently the director of special events for the Maryland chapter of the Arthritis Foundation in Baltimore.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is the senior partner of Danoff &amp; King, a Baltimore law firm.


Ruth S. Sachs, David S. Kalvar
Ruth Schaff Sachs, the daughter of Manya S. Greif of Ruxton, Md., and Louis S. Sachs of Freeland, Md., was married last evening to David Seth Kalvar, the son of Stuart and Judith Kalvar of Hempstead, L.I.
Rabbi Gila Colman Ruskin performed the ceremony at the George Peabody Library in Baltimore.
The bride, 26, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is an associate merchandiser at J. Crew, the catalogue and retail company in New York.


Even Children Get the Blues
A 6-YEAR-OLD girl is having a bad day. "My teacher was mean to me," she says.
"I didn't get invited to the birthday party," cries an unhappy third grader.


JOHN MACK'S ABDUCTEES
If enormous energy could be harnessed to transport beings across entire worlds, then why would these spectacular travelers be so limited in their genetic technology that they needed an unending stream of human abductees to fiddle around with?
If there were life forms capable of a technology that could propel them across the universe, is it likely that such wondrous creatures would need to snatch and probe like a bunch of clumsy proctologists?
And wouldn't such extraordinary encounters provoke more original stories?
EDWARD DOOLEY Needham, Mass.


Tubbs Resigns And Joins T.C.U.
Billy Tubbs, Oklahoma's winningest basketball coach, left today after 14 seasons to take over the struggling Texas Christian program.
Tubbs, who is 59 years old, replaced Moe Iba, who was fired in March after seven seasons.
T.C.U. ended the season 7-20 and with attendance averaging 3,000.


Views on Co-op Sublets and Seller Rights
To the Editor:
Though I sympathize with some of his points, I take strong issue with the conclusions of a letter from Joshua Stein  [ Feb. 6 ]  about shareholders' difficulties in selling their units.
As a director of a co-op, I have seen this issue from both sides.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
On April 13, I will celebrate one year free of a 40-year servitude to cigarettes.
I wonder if any of the Philip Morris executives in Roger Rosenblatt's article "How Do Tobacco Executives Live With Themselves?" (March 20) have a clue -- or for that matter, care -- what withdrawal from nicotine is really all about?
After going through intense periods of depression, anxiety, insomnia and physical pain, I cannot join them in calling the smoking of cigarettes simply a habit.


Evolution of a Swedish Eccentric
MY first Saab was the product of a broken home.
It was baby blue, a 1968 model with a V4 engine, which I had not seen before and have not seen much since, except in motorcycles and pretty boats.
But I mispeak; the Saab was not actually mine.
It belonged to a friend and was, essentially, her entire divorce settlement.
All the same, she lent it to me when she went on vacation, and I treated it like my own, tossing it this way and that over back roads in Pennsylvania for a couple of weeks.


When Diamonds Were a Girl's Best Friend
Publishers often fear that the simultaneous publication of two books on the same subject will set up a competition, to the detriment of one.
The truth more often is that the more there is available on a subject, the greater the interest stirred up in it will be.
Baseball fans surely will want to read both WOMEN IN BASEBALL: The Forgotten History (Praeger, $22.50), by Gai Ingham Berlage, and WHEN WOMEN PLAYED HARDBALL (Seal, paper, $14.95), by Susan E. Johnson.
Ms.
Johnson, a sociologist and a member of the Society for American Baseball Research, for the most part chronicles the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League from 1943 to 1954.
Ms.
Berlage, who teaches sociology at Iona College, places the history of the women's league within the larger story of women's interest in baseball from the end of the Civil War to the rise of girls' Little Leagues in the 1990's.
"When Women Played Hardball" is as much a fan's memoir as it is a history, somewhat in the manner of Lawrence S. Ritter's classic oral history, "The Glory of Their Times," with the difference that Ms.
Johnson had the extraordinary fortune to see her heroines at their peaks.
Her book is built around the legendary 1950 championship series between the Rockford (Ill.) Peaches and the Fort Wayne (Ind.) Daisies, and includes wonderful recollections by the players.
The author asked Alice Pollitt of the Peaches, "Do you remember a wonderful play that you made, a great moment on the field?" "Yes," she replied "with some relish." "It was with Betsy Foss. I broke her leg." The book is particularly engaging because behind every historical anecdote is a personal recollection.
For instance, Vivian Kellogg of the Grand Rapids (Mich.) Chicks showed Ms.
Johnson a scrapbook of publicity photographs, including one of a teammate with the caption, "Applying makeup is important to Ruth Lessing." The author asked if the caption was accurate.
"No," Ms.
Kellogg answered.
"It was all just publicity."


BEST SELLERS: April 10, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
4
87
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
2
8
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
4
3
12
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
5
5
23
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
6
6
52
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
7
5
ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials from reaching North Korea.
8
8
7
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
9
1
ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
10
11
2
RIVER GOD, by Wilbur Smith. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $24.95.) Ambition, greed and romance in Egypt at the time of the Pharaohs.
11
9
11
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
12
31
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
13
10
9
FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an accident, creates familial tension.
14
12
4
SECOND NATURE, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $22.95.) A woman adopts a "wolf man" and, by teaching him, learns a lot about good and evil.
15
13
7
MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers a string of surprises.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
48
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
6
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
3
3
16
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
4
4
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
5
5
5
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
7
4
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
7
6
13
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
8
8
19
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
9
27
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
10
11
8
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
11
4
I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $19.) The late humorist's description of his experience following heart surgery.
12
10
31
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
13
13
34
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
14
14
86
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
15
12
33
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
12
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
46
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
4
2
FIRST THINGS FIRST, by Stephen R. Covey, A. Roger Merrill and Rebecca R. Merrill. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Ways to organize your life to be successful.
4
3
24
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice on women's health and fitness.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) ANCESTRAL TRUTHS, by Sara Maitland. (John Macrae/Holt, $22.50.) A splendid novel, formally a book-length family reunion at which everyone is peculiar; its prime focus is on a woman trying to remember whether she killed her male traveling companion (she certainly wanted him dead).
THE DEATH OF THE MESSIAH.
From Gethsemane to the Grave: A Commentary on the Passion Narratives in the Four Gospels, by Raymond E. Brown. (Anchor Bible Reference Library/Doubleday, 2 vols., $37.50 each; boxed set, $75.) A 1,600-page treatment by a distinguished scholar; meant for experts, readable by any interested person.
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Mr.
Kissinger's "great man" history of diplomacy focuses on individuals, not trends or forces, and shows his reverence for cool thinkers who employ both power and analysis.
E.M.
FORSTER: A Biography, by Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally punctuated by little bursts of liberation.
THE END OF THE HUNT, by Thomas Flanagan. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $24.95.) This splendid novel, last of a trilogy, brings Ireland's tragic history down to the civil war of the 1920's.
Analogies will be drawn with the present.
HERE: Stories, by Elizabeth Inness-Brown. (Louisiana State University, $19.95.) Short stories concerning chiefly people encompassed (or imprisoned) wholly by the present, without a clue how to get out of it or beyond it.
LIVING IN THE SHADOW OF DEATH: Tuberculosis and the Social Experience of Illness in American History, by Sheila M. Rothman. (Basic Books, $25.) A social history of tuberculosis using the "illness narratives" of patients to chart a disease from the unscientific perspective of the patients.
THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath &amp; Ted Hughes, by Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $23.) In the course of a contrarian approach to the Plath myth (genius-housewife crushed by odious male poet), Ms.
Malcolm raises pages of provocative questions about the values, and value, of biographers.
STONES FROM THE RIVER, by Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to 1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.
THE WAY TO THE CATS, by Yehoshua Kenaz. (Steerforth Press, $20.) An unremittingly bleak novel of age, death and decay, set in a Tel Aviv hospital where there are few visitors, and they as disagreeable as the patients.
WHAT IS TOLD, by Askold Melnyczuk. (Faber &amp; Faber, $21.95.) This genially pessimistic first novel follows the fortunes of three generations of cosmopolitan Ukrainian-Americans from places like Paris and Berchtesgaden to places like Free Fall, N.J., in a narrative presided over by presences from the spirit world.


Boys and Girls Together
AROUND noon each day the staff of the cruise ship American Adventure folded up the breakfast buffet, replacing it with lunch.
This prop-wash of food made clear the ship's focus on children: watermelons carved like pirates, yes, and fruits in profusion, but also hot dogs, hamburgers, chickenburgers, french fries, tureens of ketchup, rolls, bread, soups, yogurts, fajitas and tacos, fried chicken in cookie shapes, pastas, cole slaw, more french fries, carrot sticks, celery, cakes, pies and Jell-O.
In the place of honor were two bowls the diameter of a steering wheel.
They contained jellybeans and M &amp; M's.
Those bowls, which always tempted me to plunge my hands in up to the wrist, symbolize both what is done well by the new company operating the American Adventure, and its lapses into excess.


Fighting Words From Publicists
To the Editor:
Joel Bleifuss took an excessive slam at my profession, public relations, in "New Angles From the Spin Doctors" (Viewpoints, March 20).
Yet his profession, journalism, is not without its warts.
During my years as a journalist, I was often instructed to write about companies that advertised in my publications or that my publishers hoped to attract (I always refused).
As a publicist, I've met editors who refused to cover my clients unless they advertised.
I've even had journalists decline to write about a client because it was a black-owned business.


U.S. Assails Crackdown
With President Clinton facing the issue of whether to extend China's preferential trade status this year, the White House bluntly warned Beijing today that it was "deeply troubled" by a new crackdown on dissidents.
The White House spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, urged Beijing in a statement to release the dissidents immediately.
China has flatly rejected any link between its trade orivileges and its human rights policy.


The Nation: The Bias Suits Are Piling Up; The Men in the Gray Federal Bureaucracy
PRESIDENT CLINTON promised to make his Administration "look like America." The Cabinet he chose surely does.
But the permanent Government -- the top-tier bureaucrats who run the country no matter who is President -- looks more like the United States Senate.
Roughly 90 percent of the positions in the Government's top pay grades are held by white men.
Judging from the files of the Federal courts, a glass ceiling has been erected in the architecture of the Government.
Above it, where real power resides, stand eight Cabinet officers who are women or black or Hispanic -- and 50,000 white men.
Below it, tens of thousands of frustrated people look up in anger, believing they have been cheated of promotions and power by virtue of their skin or their sex.


Concerto Rarity


Still Water
IN A SUBURBAN TOronto garden, the architects Brigitte Shim and Howard Sutcliffe have demonstrated that the modernist vocabulary is not an affront to nature, but a rich means to echo it.
"We wanted to create a space of metaphysical calm," says Shim.
To symbolize time's passage, they chose materials -- wood, steel and granite -- that weather at varying rates.
A crushed-stone path leads to the centerpiece of the design, a painted steel pavilion cantilevered over a forested ravine.
Its stone base seems to float on a serene reflecting pool.
Columns as slender as spring saplings, painted in Mies van der Rohe's favorite graphite black, support the wing-shaped roof.
For all its angular modernity, the design recalls traditional Japanese tea gardens, where a twisting route serves as a symbol of our passage through life.


When One Speaks of French, One Speaks of the National Soul
To the Editor:
In "Tempest in a Demitasse" (Op-Ed, April 4), Jacques Toubon, French Minister of Culture, hails a law proposed in France that bans foreign, especially English, words from the public domain.
The new French trinity is egalite, fraternite, francais!


Trans-Atlantic Flights To Dublin Now Nonstop
FROM 1945 until the late 1950's, 80 percent of trans-Atlantic air traffic went through Shannon Airport in western Ireland, a refueling station for planes that did not have the range to travel nonstop between North America and the European capitals.
It was at Shannon, in 1947, that the first duty-free shop opened, giving travelers somewhere to spend their money during the stopover.
The advent of more advanced jets ended the need for the refueling stop -- but it did not mean the end of Shannon.
Seeking to protect jobs at the airport and among those people dependent on tourism in western Ireland, the Irish Government decreed that all flights to and from Ireland that did not start or terminate at Shannon -- meaning those to and from Dublin, 120 miles to the east -- would continue to be required to stop there.


Israel and Settlers Must Practice Understanding; Cold-Blooded Killer
To the Editor:
"The tyrant dies and his rule is over; the martyr dies and his rule begins." Soren Kierkegaard's words have never been more applicable than in the wake of Baruch Goldstein's antihuman, anti-Jewish act of barbarism in Hebron.
Condemnation of the massacre was swift and thoroughgoing.
Yet Dr.
Goldstein's horrific deed has been magnified to the point of taking on a life all its own.


Kohl's Challenger Is Coming on Visit to Try to Reassure U.S.
Rudolf Scharping, the Social Democratic challenger to Chancellor Helmut Kohl in Germany's elections on Oct. 16, is taking his campaign to the United States in the coming week, hoping to persuade President Clinton and other leaders that he will be as reliable an ally as Mr.
Kohl.
"There are some people in Germany who believe that NATO could be replaced by something else," he said before his departure, distancing himself from more radical members of his party who have suggested replacing the alliance with a 52-nation European security conference instead.


Rights Chief Upsets Board Of N.A.A.C.P
The new director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People held a closed meeting on Friday with black militants and leftists to discuss increasing their influence in the organization.
The session has angered N.A.A.C.P. board members, who learned of it only afterward.
The meeting in Detroit was led by the group's executive director, Dr.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr., whose spokesman said today that Mr.
Chavis did so at the behest of some of those invited.
The spokesman, Don Rojas, said the meeting was organized by the group's Detroit chapter, which mailed out the invitations.


South Africa Is Hoarding As Fear Rises
In this city's white enclaves, supermarkets report widespread hoarding, gun shops are low on weapons and ammunition and fear has been the main topic on talk radio.
Three weeks before South Africa's first nonracial elections, uncertainty has turned into something more troubling, particularly after the streets of the capital became a battlefield during a march by Zulu nationalists almost two weeks ago.
Many whites fear that the elections scheduled for this month will be followed by strikes, violent marches and looting and that power plants and water supplies will be sabotaged.


Pamela Orthwein, Colby Jensen
Pamela Ann Orthwein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Adolphus Busch Orthwein Jr. of Atlanta, was married yesterday to Christopher Colby Jensen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert David Jensen of Old Saybrook, Conn.
The Rev.
Foley Beach, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
Philip in Atlanta.
Mrs.
Jensen teaches kindergarten at the First Congregational School in Winter Park, Fla.
She and her husband graduated from Rollins College.
Her father, a lawyer, is the president of the Willeo Creek Development Company in Atlanta.
Her mother, Judy Orthwein, is a counselor at Murdoch Elementary School in Marietta, Ga.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on March 20 about new projects at Newark International Airport reversed two sets of construction costs -- for the international terminal and for the monorail system.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey is spending $110 million on the terminal and $378 million on the monorail.


Trials and Tribulations
'Does your dog hate to see you leave?" a Village Voice classified advertisement begins. "Does your dog cry, urinate, defecate, destroy the house when home alone?
If so s/he may be suffering from SEPARATION ANXIETY and be eligible to participate in a major pharmaceutical company sponsored study."


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  It never came.
Coffee fell on it.
The dog ate it.
In the realm of excuses, an amazing array of disasters can befall a utility bill.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Driven from Manhattan and Brooklyn by 80's rents, a cadre of antique dealers has found happiness in the South Bronx.


Sarah E. Nash, Michael Sylvester
Sarah Elizabeth Nash, a managing director at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, the New York investment bank, was married on Friday to Michael Sparks Sylvester, the chairman of Foamseal Inc., a manufacturer of sealants and tapes in Cleveland.
The Rev.
Hugh C. Hildesley performed Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
The bride, 40, graduated from Vassar College.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Peter H. Nash and Mrs.
Elizabeth P. Nash of Montreal.
Her father, now retired, had a general medical practice in Montreal.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


JUST TAKE AWAY THEIR GUNS
What a radical idea -- take guns away from criminals, instead of from law-abiding citizens!
Why hasn't anyone thought of this before?
Wilson makes so much sense that, in our confused system of justice, his proposal probably will never become reality.


More Buyers Turn to Mortgage Brokers
THE Greenbergs were in a hurry.
They had just sold their house in Chappaqua, N.Y., and had found a new home in nearby North Tarrytown.
With interest rates rising and movers virtually knocking at their door, they needed a mortgage quickly.
Like most borrowers these days, Christine and Mark Greenberg checked newspaper ads and called banks in search of the best rates.
The mortgage they chose, however, wasn't obtained through a bank, a savings and loan or even a mortgage banker.
Instead, the Greenbergs found their loan through Homerica Inc., a mortgage broker with offices in Harrison, N.Y., and Westport, Conn.


Correction
An article on March 20 about a planned retirement community in South Carolina referred incorrectly to the previous activity of the developer, the Del Webb Corporation.
The South Carolina development is not Del Webb's first project in the East; the company built Sun City Center south of Tampa, Fla., in 1962 and sold it eight years later.


On Sunday; Cutting Chains That Still Bind Girls in School
THE way Angie Perez sees it, the best answer sometimes is silence.
The Central Park East Secondary School freshman is quiet in some classes because the boys mock her wrong answers or call her a nerd for giving the right answers.
At 14, she has teased out the gender calculus in which girls get points for pleasing boys and boys get points for being in charge.
"I like sensitive, quiet guys," says Ms.
Perez.
She lives in Washington Heights and hopes to become a criminal defense lawyer.
"I've only met one boy in my class who is real sensitive. The rest, they're tough. If the girls let the guys know they don't like guys like that, maybe they would act different."


Corrections
An article yesterday about reaction to the resignation threat of the New York City Schools Chancellor misspelled the first name of the leader of a parent's group in some editions and named the organization incompletely.
He is Jon Moscow; the group is the Parents Coalition for Education.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL: NONFICTION
CRACKING THE SHOW  By Thomas Boswell. Doubleday, $23.


Sound Bytes; A Computer Bridge Builder
WHILE Lotus Development is attracting attention with its Notes groupware product, Raymond Ozzie, the creator of the software, says he prefers to "build things and stay in the background."
It was a decade ago that Mr.
Ozzie, a former Data General engineer, began work on Notes, which he envisioned as software that could enable teams of people to collaborate through computer networks.
With some reluctance, Mr.
Ozzie joined Lotus in 1983 to lead the development team on a new version of Lotus 1-2-3.
He was talked into the job by the founder of Lotus, Mitchell Kapor, who promised to help Mr.
Ozzie start his own company in exchange for his work on the spreadsheet package.


Roller Hockey Team Finds a Home
WINTER seems to have finally faded away and the New Jersey Devils' season will soon be over, depending of course on how the team fares in the playoffs.
That means in-line wheeled skates will replace ice hockey skates in the Brendan T. Byrne Meadowlands Arena as the New Jersey Rockin Rollers join the Roller Hockey International League as a new team this summer.
The owner of the team, E. Burke Ross Jr., an investment banker who owns two radio stations in Morris County, had to win a legal battle against the Devils to bring his team into the Meadowlands.


A Storefront Exhibition Meant to Nurture the Nontraditional
ALTERNATIVE spaces directed by professionals appeared in the early 1970's, their purpose being to accommodate artists without gallery affiliations.
Today, the overflow seems bigger than ever but these seedbeds of talent (or hotbeds of dissidents, depending on your view) have not increased in number.
Nor can their offerings any longer be regarded as unorthodox, the line dividing the avant-garde from the establishment having long since disappeared.
In any case, Connecticut, although it abounds in artists' collectives, boasts only one true alternative space: Real Art Ways, in Hartford.


No Talking In Class
JOHN BRYAN is in the growing ranks of a relatively silent generation of professors.
As an assistant professor of English at the University of Cincinnati, Dr.
Bryan lets the computer and its software do most of the talking in his class on science writing.
Using a software program called "Daedalus Interchange," manufactured by the Daedalus Group Inc., in Austin, Tex., he "lectures" his 25 students through a conference window on an I.B.M.-compatible computer.
This program splits the computer screen into two windows; a conference window on the top portion of the screen enables students to receive instructions from Dr.
Bryan, and a user's editing window on the bottom functions as a notebook for students.


Knicks and Nets Turn the Page to Chapter 5
It could be the final chapter of the Knicks-Nets rivalry this season.
Or they could meet again in a first-round playoff series.
Either way, both teams will bring their usual disdain for each other to this afternoon's game at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
And the recent history of the series makes the nationally televised matchup even more intriguing.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FRENCH GUITARISTS
Two young guitarists from France are making their first United States appearance at the Desmond-Fish Library in Garrison on Friday at 7:30 P.M.
Laetitia Viallet and Anthony Regis, who perform as the Duo D'Aulide, will perform works from the 16th through the 20th centuries, including selections by Bach, Scarlatti, Gluck, Albeniz, Ravel, Falla, Leo Brower and Henri Sauget.


Portugal's Esthetics, Reflected in Old and New Ceramic Tiles
IT is fitting that the Snug Harbor Cultural Center, formerly a rest home for seamen, should be the scene of a show about Portugal, the first European power to rule, as it were, the waves.
Unlike the Portuguese show replete with travel posters and silver caravels that appeared a year or so ago at the Newark Public Library, the Staten Island production sticks to esthetics, presenting tiles, old and new, together with paintings and prints by contemporaries and architecture in the form of photographs, models and plans.


Don't Worry, Be Peppy
Lloyd Cutler, the 76-year-old Washington legal establishmentarian, was asked by a reporter if he would consider staying on as President Clinton's White House counsel beyond the short period that had been announced.
Mr.
Cutler replied that he limited his planned stay "in part because I'm married fairly recently to a very young and peppy wife and I want to spend some more time with her."
Peppy is a swell word.
Like swell, it is Old Slang, part of the razzmatazz language used by Generation Z (the incipient geezer set), which can still recall the lyrics of Ira Gershwin and Cole Porter.
I can remember my mother telling me how to do well on television in the early 50's: "Be peppy!"


Making Repairs to a Ceiling Fixture When Its Bulb Falters
CONVENTIONAL ceiling-light fixtures with incandescent bulbs ordinarily function for years without trouble.
But when a ceiling light flickers, emits crackling noises or will not light, repairs can be made.
First check the bulb.
Be sure the fixture is switched off, and then stand on a safe platform like a stepladder and remove the fixture's globe or shade.
Pass it to a helper or set it down before proceeding.
When using a stepladder, climb no higher than the second rung from the top.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


When Tenants Become Owners: A Tale of Grass-Roots Redemption
On the night of March 1, 58 years into her life on Broadway Terrace, Lena Morais became a pioneer in the grassroots redemption of her home from America's savings-and-loan debacle.
So did Mrs.
Morais's daughter, Jeanette, who spent her childhood in the building at No. 15 and now lives upstairs from her mother.
And so did Sergio Cruz, an electrician who lives in No. 11.


O.K., Draw! Architects Join Fight for Park
For more than a decade, a coalition of neighborhood and environmental groups has fought an increasingly bitter battle to stop Long Island College Hospital from building an eight-story parking garage on the northeast corner of Van Voorhees Park.
The opponents have petitioned the Borough President, organized letter-writing campaigns and, after the project won the approval of the City Council, filed suit to challenge the approval process.
All to save the park, which is in Brooklyn Heights and Cobble Hill.


Richard Kitchen; Home Furnishings Designer, 44
Richard Kitchen, a home furnishings designer in Manhattan, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
He was 44 years old.
The cause was AIDS, said a brother, Gregory.


Luxury to Spare
THE INTERIOR DESIGNER Vicente Wolf recalls, "When I started in the 1970's, modernism was completely stark." He still likes spare spaces but now enriches them with references to the past.
Reflected in the living room mirror of this New York apartment are furnishings ranging from 18th-century Italian to 20th-century International style -- strong complements to the open plan and the interplay of lines and shapes.


Wall Street; Utilities: Way Down and Likely to Be Out a While
HOW bleak is the outlook for utility stocks?
The group, whose fortunes in the market move inversely with interest rates, managed to get a rock-bottom 96 out of 96 rating by Value Line last month.
And little wonder.
The Dow Jones utility average finished on Friday at 194.63, a drop of more than 20 percent over the last six months, and analysts aren't expecting any big turn.
Cold weather may have helped electric utilities over the winter but not enough to amount to big earnings gains, the pros say.
Regulators have not been generous with rate increases and a number of players are competing on price because of a power glut.


The Nation; Is the Press Being Too Hard On the Clintons -- or on Itself?
THE President had a roving eye, and that was the least of his troubles.
The First Lady commandeered a Secret Service man to keep tabs on him.
Party leaders dispatched one especially brazen mistress off to study the Asian silk trade during his campaign.
He larded his domestic-affairs staff with back-home cronies who caused endless mischief, and he left foreign affairs utterly adrift.
His preferred presidential pastimes included hosting show-biz celebrities, golfing and poker.
A lot of this comes from historians, not journalists, because until Teapot Dome, investigative reporters pretty much left Warren G. Harding alone.
They pretty much left all Presidents alone until 1972 and Watergate, when reporters abandoned a tradition of indulgence for a new principle: that Presidents, given such power and such tempting opportunities to abuse it, deserve neither trust nor privacy.


Elizabeth Hirsch, Jonathan Stern
Elizabeth Rhonda Hirsch, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Adrian Hirsch of Lawrence, L.I., is to be married today to Jonathan Marc Stern, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Stern of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Barry H. Greene is to perform the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
The bride, 28, is a corporate communications specialist at CMP Publications, a publishing company in Manhasset, L.I.
She graduated from Northwestern University, from which she also received a master's degree in journalism.
Her father is the president of Towers Management, a real estate company in Brooklyn.


Whitewater and the Press
There is a kind of tidal rhythm to the attitude of the press -- and the public's attitude toward journalists -- when a political crisis is brewing.
First come the revelations.
Then follows a period of full media mobilization, with reporters scurrying everywhere.
Then arrives the backlash.
Officials complain that journalistic obsessions are derailing the nation's business.
Politicians assert that the public is weary of incomprehensible details that, after all, give only an incomplete picture of events that would probably be innocuous if the full facts were available.
The "so whats?" and "everybody does it" take hold.
Journalists themselves begin to worry that a "feeding frenzy" could lead to the ritual destruction of yet another Presidency.


A Newcomer's Travails Inspire Shock and Outrage
To the Editor:
I have just been reading Janny Scott's cri du coeur and am sitting here stunned by my complete lack of sympathy.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL: FICTION
BRITTLE INNINGS  By Michael Bishop. Bantam, $21.95.


Apply to College (Hold the Paper)
THOSE aren't just computer nerds applying for college via the high school's modem.
At 100 high schools in Washington State, seniors fill out a single application on their screen and send it to colleges of their choice through ExPAN, a new computer network being marketed by the College Board, a nonprofit sponsor of the Scholastic Assessment Tests.
The network also permits students and guidance counselors to access information about universities and compile a resume.


Finding the Perfect Place for the Perfect Plant
IT'S funny how you bump into a plant at exactly the right moment.
I'd just come back from a weekend on the family farm in Maryland, where I expected to find more winter damage.
We'd had our share of bitter nights down there, and plenty of snow.
And I was relieved to see that my fig tree survived. (I think. The tips of the branches look scorched, but there are buds. We'll see how well they leaf out.)
Another happy surprise was the salad growing inside my cold frame.
I'd buttressed it with hay bales late last fall, and sprinkled in the last of my spinach, arugula and oak-leaf lettuce seeds.
I didn't really think they would germinate, but it must have gotten quite cozy in there, insulated by the snow that lay at times a foot deep over the old glass storm windows that serve as the frame's lid.
The frame faces south, though, so snow melts there first on a warm winter day, and there must have been enough of those days to coax those leaves to grow.


Haiti Policy Brings Blast At Clinton
Two human rights groups assailed the Clinton Administration today, accusing the President of failing to support Haiti's ousted President fully and of embracing "a murderous armed force."
"Your Administration's failure to support and protect the fundamental human rights of Haitians has contributed to a human rights disaster that has tarnished your Presidency and discredited your stated commitment to democracy and human rights around the world," said an open letter from the two groups, America's Watch and National Coalition for Haitian Refugees.
"The U.S. Government has embraced a murderous armed force to act as a counterweight to a populist President it distrusts."


The Way They Looked
At the beginning of the 1904 baseball season, an amateur photographer wandered onto the playing field at the Polo Grounds and asked the star pitcher of the New York Giants to pose.
Christy Mathewson obliged with a demonstration of his "body swing" -- now called a windup -- and Charles M. Conlon embarked on a 38-year career in which he virtually invented the iconography of the national pastime.
Through 1942, Conlon (1868-1945) spent his summers carting his bulky Graflex camera (which until 1934 used glass negatives) to various ball parks to capture images of the players in action and in repose -- images so vivid and fresh that "ballplayers from another era are standing in the sunshine of the 20th century," as Neal McCabe and Constance McCabe write in BASEBALL'S GOLDEN AGE: The Photographs of Charles M. Conlon (Abrams, $29.95).
Conlon remained an amateur photographer -- he was a proofreader at The New York Evening Telegram -- but his avocation made him "de facto the official photographer of baseball," one whose visions of the sport were seen annually for decades in Baseball magazine, the annual baseball guides, The Sporting News and baseball textbooks.
Conlon once reminisced, "The fun I have had, the days in the open, the associations, the confidences I have enjoyed -- well, you can't buy those things." The 205 shots Constance McCabe, a photography conservator, has chosen from the 8,000 surviving Conlon negatives convey the eternally fresh wonder a spectator might feel at being in the open air alongside John McGraw squatting by third base, or watching Babe Ruth and Lou Gehrig warm up on the sidelines.
Thanks to excellent production, and a brilliant job of design by Carol Robson, great names from the recesses of baseball antiquity come vividly to life, from Honus Wagner, Napoleon Lajoie, Ty Cobb, Joe Tinker, Johnny Evers, Frank Chance and Walter Johnson to Grover Cleveland Alexander, Jimmie Foxx, Rogers Hornsby and Tris Speaker.
Ms.
McCabe's brother, Neal, brought his lifelong enthusiasm for baseball to his research on Conlon and his subjects; the text offers delightful nuggets of information about the innumerable firsts that Conlon recorded: the first American League umpire, the first batter in the World Series, the first photo on a baseball bubble-gum card.
"Baseball's Golden Age" is equally enthralling in image and word and amply illustrates the timeless fascination of the field of dreams.
MICHAEL ANDERSON


MONSTERS TO BELIEVE IN
Dark and forbidding stretch the waters of Loch Ness, the strange lake that cuts deep through the mountains of Scotland.
Some 3,000 witnesses have testified to seeing the furtive monster that lives there.
Most would probably be quite unshaken to learn that the best-known evidence for the monster, the 1934 "surgeon's photograph," was a contrived illusion, according to the recent confession of one of the perpetrators.
After all, the eyewitnesses know what they saw, regardless of some prankster's trick photography.


I, the Jury: Why This Novelist Can't Resist a Good Book Panel
THE announcement of book prizes, however prestigious the award, however admired the recipient, is inevitably greeted with some derision.
Perhaps public perception has been infected by the modern mistrust of authority, or else by a special cynicism about literary politics or even by a healthy passion for books that flares into indignation when a favorite is overlooked.
Controversy will doubtless flare this week at the announcement of the 1994 Pulitzer Prizes, though all things considered, the controversies associated with the Pulitzer probably contribute greatly to the fame of the prize, giving some sense of drama and importance that mere Olympian pronouncements lack.
Luckily for writers, there are lots of prizes -- the Pulitzer, the PEN/Faulkner, the National Book Awards, the National Book Critics Circle Awards, along with local prizes and prizes with special categories -- writers under (though never over) a certain age, first short stories, first novels, minorities, women.
And like many writers I've been called on over the years to serve on the prize juries.


SURFACING
FASHION  The Kramer shirt: Kramer, the frantic neighbor on "Seinfeld" played by Michael Richards, is an unlikely fashion icon.
But his beatnik-style, short-sleeved shirts are so popular that the fashion industry is calling the style the "Kramer shirt."  STATUS  Cadillac golf carts: With hood ornaments, sleek grilles and custom wheels, they look like baby Cadillacs, which is presumably what their owners want.
From Elmco Inc. in Cooksville, Ill.
Prices begin at $8,795.
ADVERTISING  Isn't that Muddy Waters?
Television commercials for Timberland, Diet Coke and the Gap have all used songs that the famed blues singer wrote or popularized -- just the fate he must have imagined for them.


This Wasn't Supposed to Be Here


Prison Boot Camps Prove No Sure Cure
No one complained at 5:45 this morning when a drill instructor shouted for another round of push-ups on the cold and wet pavement wriggling with worms that crawled from the newly thawed earth.
But a few hours later, 38 young inmates sat in a circle and spoke uneasily about the final task in this grueling boot camp prison: they had to go home.
"My name is Mr. Cooper," a drug dealer from New York City told other inmates here a day before his release from Lakeview Shock Incarceration Facility, half a mile from Lake Erie.
"I'm not. . . . I'm excited but I'm scared. I've got to do it on my own. It's about time I grew up."


TV Stations Unite to Tell the French About AIDS
Reflecting concern that France has the highest number of AIDS patients in Europe, six television channels coordinated their signals this week to broadcast a four-hour program aimed at increasing awareness of the gravity of the disease.
The broadcast, with appearances by popular entertainers and medical experts and messages from President Francois Mitterrand and Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, aimed to raise $20 million for research and associations working with patients.
The $1.5 million cost was shared by the six channels.


Fast Forward
Just when you finally figure out how to operate the VCR, the industry steps in and pulls a fast one.
What's next?
Movies on compact disks.
Philips, the electronics giant that played a major role in developing audio cassettes, has never quite capitalized on several of its innovations.
It has been marketing movies on CD's (shown below) for about six months, but their fate also seemed in doubt because there was no industry standard.


Riverside Park Changes
The Riverside Park Fund was born six years ago when some residents of Riverside Drive banded together to improve the park, whchruns from 72d to 158th Streets.
The fund relies almost completely on private support.
There are plans to restore a 4-mile riverside path - initially using $1.3 million dollars inFederal financing - by turn of the century.
Here is a lisst of other plans and accomplishments. 1.
New playground, planned for 1995 or 1996, at a cost of $162,000. 2.
Volunteers have relandscaped Tiemann Place Gardens, over the last year and a half. 3.
Densely wooded spot, a natural habitat for birds, to be enhanced by creating food and water sources and improving footpaths to the area. 4.
New playground to be built in 1995, at a cost of $150,000. 5.
New equipment and benches installed four years ago, at a cost of $40,000. 6.
The Fire Fighters Memorial resotred in 1991, at a cost of $2.1 million. 7.
Relandscaping and erosion control around the Joan of Arc monument, at a cost of $50,000. 8.
Relandscaping of Mount Tom, at a cost of $150,000 9.
New sidwalks at the 83d Street playgound, which will also get water and gas lines to the comfort station and offices. 10.
A program last summer directed the homeless inthe park to social services, at a cost of $150,000.
A visitors center and restaurant are planned for the rotunda. 11.
Reconstruction has been done of the seawall near the marina of the 79th Street boat basin.
Dredging of the basin is incomplete.
Public access to the marina is restricted to boat owners. 12.
A $250,000 renovation of the Neufeld playground was completed in 1992. 13.
Volunteers helped create a new ballfield at 72d Street in 1991, at a cost of $60,000. 14.
An unused southbound entrrance ramp to the Miller Highway is being removed and the 72d Street entrance is being restored.
A statue of Eleanor Roosevelt will be built at the entrance inthe next two years.
RK


When Modern Was Brand New
IN MODERN DANCE, YOU CAN GO home again.
Thanks to revivals, it's possible to return to the now-legendary time when this century was young and modern dance was new.
Through the efforts of historians and dancers blessed with miraculous memories, the ground-breaking choreography of Isadora Duncan, Ruth St.
Denis and Ted Shawn lives again.
Works by Duncan, whose life was cut short in 1927 at age 49, have amazed New Yorkers since the 1970's, thanks in large part to the dedication and flair of Annabelle Gamson and the dancers she has influenced.
More recently, reconstructions of pieces that by St.
Denis and Shawn created for themselves and their Denishawn company have been performed with increasing credibility.
This is especially true of productions supervised by Jane Sherman, who danced with Denishawn for three years, beginning in 1925, and Barton Mumaw, a protege of Shawn who appeared in Denishawn's final concert in 1931.


Looking Back in Sorrow


Bearing Kimchi, A Dodger Is a First
Baseball is a game of firsts, mosts and longests, and though his major league career has been brief, Chan Ho Park has already amassed his share.
He is apparently the first player ever to bring his own kimchi -- Korean-style pickled vegetables -- to spring training.
He has autographed more balls in English and Korean than anyone.
No one in the American version of the game has ever been so scrutinized in Seoul.


Jeh Johnson and Susan DiMarco
Dr.
Susan DiMarco and Jeh Johnson grew up across the street from each other on Cottam Hill in Wappingers Falls, N.Y.
He remembers her Hula-Hooping in the driveway for hours and rolling up the skirt of her uniform on the way to the school bus; she remembers that he was too shy to talk to girls.
Mr.
Johnson, whose first name is pronounced "jay," is now 36.
Until recently, he was known as the most eligible bachelor partner at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison, the New York law firm.


For Baldessari, de Chirico Is Just One of the Guys
THERE IS A CERTAIN TYRANNY to the way museums are arranged according to medium, school and period.
The Surrealists famously talked about the chance meeting on an operating table of a sewing machine and an umbrella.
You wonder what might have happened, Surrealistically speaking, if one of them had gotten his hands on a museum and shaken it like a snow dome, so that French 18th-century paintings landed with netsukes and photographic archives with Persian carpets.
That's the gist of what the influential Los Angeles Conceptualist John Baldessari has done at the Museum of Modern Art, as the latest artist to organize an Artist's Choice show.
He has combined bits and pieces from disparate parts of the Modern's holdings to make a new work called "e.g., Grass, Water Heater, Mouths, &amp; etc. (for John Graham)." (The piece is on view through May 10.)


Benefits
To Benefit Creativity  MONDAY -- Now in its 23d season, Playwrights Horizons, which presents the works of contemporary playwrights, composers and lyricists, will hold a benefit party at Roseland, 239 West 52d Street.
Martin Short, Blair Brown, Michael Moriarty and several other entertainment figures are expected at the event along with music by the Red Hot Charlie Peppers, a 14-piece swing orchestra.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 564-1235.
Sotheby's Sculpture Auction  TUESDAY -- Works by contemporary sculptors will be auctioned at Sotheby's to benefit the International Sculpture Center in Washington.
The event will start with cocktails at 6 P.M. and will be followed by an auction of 34 items.
Tickets, $100, from (202) 785-1144.
Meredith Monk and Dinner  TUESDAY -- Meredith Monk and her many-faceted production company, House Foundation for the Arts, will benefit from a 6:30 P.M. dinner at Flowers, 21 West 17th Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 206-1440.
Caribbean Night in Brooklyn  TUESDAY -- The Brooklyn Historical Society's annual celebration dinner will salute the peoples and foods of the area starting at 6:30 P.M. with cocktails at the society, 120 Pierrepont Street, near Clinton Street, in Brooklyn Heights.
Guests will then proceed to the nearby Borough Hall for a Caribbean dinner, award presentations and a welcome by Howard Golden, the Brooklyn Borough President.
Tickets, $175, from (718) 624-0890.
Fashion Helps the Homeless  WEDNESDAY -- The Black Girls' Coalition, a group of top black models, will hold a fashion show and cocktail reception with dancing at the Puck Building, Lafayette and Houston Streets.
The 8:30 P.M. event will benefit Housing Works, which provides housing and other services to homeless people with AIDS.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 966-0466, ext. 229.
Dinner and Show for the Arts  WEDNESDAY -- The American Federation of Arts will hold its annual theater benefit at the 8 P.M. performance of "Carousel" at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center.
Cocktails and dinner will be at Josephina, a restaurant opposite Lincoln Center, at 1900 Broadway, from 5:45 to 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 988-7700, ext. 36.
Antiques Preview  THURSDAY -- A 5:30 to 7:30 P.M. preview of the Park Avenue Antiques Show at Wallace Hall on Park Avenue at 84th Street, will benefit Kids of the New York University Medical Center, a group of parents and staff members concerned with children's welfare.
Dinner and entertainment will follow at the Essex House.
Tickets, $50 at the door for the preview alone, or $250 for preview and dinner, from (212) 263-5870.
Remembering a Son  THURSDAY --The Jeffrey Modell Foundation was established seven years ago by Fred and Vicki Modell in remembrance of their 15-year-old son who died of primary immune deficiency, a genetic disorder.
A black-tie fund-raiser for the foundation, which benefits pediatric immunology research, will be held at the Plaza starting with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner, dancing and an auction of items that include Michael Jordan's basketball jersey.
Stephen B. Siegel, president of the Edward S. Gordon Company, the real-estate concern, will be honored.
Tickets, $400, or $200 for persons 35 and under, from (212) 575-1122.
Semper Fidelis  FRIDAY -- Since its founding in 1962, the Marine Corps Scholarship Foundation has awarded $10.2 million to sons and daughters of marines and former marines.
The foundation's annual ball will be held at the New York Sheraton Hotel starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Black tie or uniform.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Museum's Salute to Spring  APRIL 18 -- The Museum of the City of New York will be the setting for its annual spring lecture symposium and luncheon at which interior and garden designers will display their latest creations and will give historical perspectives on things like royal table settings from the 17th to the 19th centuries.
Titled "Grand Design," the benefit for the museum on Fifth Avenue at 103d Street will start with 11 A.M. coffee in the courtyard followed by slide lectures, including one by Carolyn Sollis, the executive editor of House Beautiful magazine.
Luncheon is to follow in the flower-filled Rotunda and Silver Galleries.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 534-1672, ext. 253.


Under Suspicion


Efficiency, Not Ego, Gives Edge to a Design Firm
AT first, M. Arthur Gensler Jr. ran into a wall with his company's plans to transform a 600,000-square-foot Bank of America data center here into attractive office space four years ago.
The plans were rejected by Dan Costello, head of corporate real estate for the bank in San Francisco, who called them "grandiloquent," and said he wanted a no-frills, quality design.
He set the cost at $35 million, or $60 a square foot, for the entire job, including furniture and telecommunications equipment, which he acknowledged was "an extremely tight budget."


The Nation; How Safe Is Flying? Don't Ask!
IT is the rarest of rarities: something good that no one in government wants to take credit for, or even talk about.
The major United States airlines have gone more than two years without a fatal accident.
Not since March 22, 1992, when a 27 people died as a USAir jetliner crashed into Flushing Bay on takeoff from La Guardia Airport, has there been a fatality involving a scheduled commercial airliner.


Why West Is More Than West
IT IS HEARTENING TO SEE, BOUND AND PRINTED, a document as strong and committed as the national standards for arts education, a proposed national curriculum for kindergarten through high school, developed by a consortium of arts education associations.
It was recently presented to Secretary of Education Richard W. Riley after seven months of revision and criticism, and was hailed by the chairmen of the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Endowment for the Humanities, both of whom urged its adoption by communities.
Unfortunately, these standards for the study of dance, music, theater and the visual arts are so sweeping that they are probably impossible to put into practice, at least during the 15 percent of the school day the report envisions.
But since their adoption is optional, it may be just as well that they are so grand.
We will probably see only a watered-down version of these requirements in classrooms, as staffing, budgetary and political pressures force compromises.


Of Autism And Critics
To the Editor:
In his essay "A Few Scary Pictures Can Go a Long Way"  [ March 20 ]  Walter Goodman says the CBS newsmagazine "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung" used "shabby tricks of the trade" in a recent report on the Behavior Research Institute, a controversial treatment center that used punishment along with rewards to control the behavior of extremely troubled children.
In fact, Mr.
Goodman trotted out a few tricks of his own in trying to advance his perennial thesis that newsmagazines sensationalize the news.


Views on Co-op Sublets and Seller Rights
To the Editor:
Although Edward T. Braverman correctly concludes  [ letter, March 6 ]  that a co-op should review its by-laws to see if limits are set on sublet fees, he misstates the decision of the Appellate Division in Bailey v. 800 Grand Concourse Owners.
It did not say that "a sublet fee that amounted to 30 percent of a tenant/shareholder's annual maintenance obligations was excessive."


Enter Spring, Dressed Vividly in Yellow
WHAT is it about the color yellow for spring?
The bright sunny blossoms in various tones of gold seem to have a priority on the season.
There are other flowers, of course, in all kinds of colors.
But those with yellow petals dominate.
Think about it.


Corrections
An article on March 27 about the increasing capacity of the radio spectrum to support new communications services referred incorrectly to the frequencies used by most services today.
The highest frequency in common use is two gigahertz (two billion cycles per second), not two megahertz (two million cycles per second).


JUST TAKE AWAY THEIR GUNS
The abandonment of Fourth Amendment rights, as advocated by James Q. Wilson, a college professor of public policy, is appalling in its effete capitulation to tyranny ("Just Take Away Their Guns," March 20).
Secure in the belief that persons of his social stratum will never be subjected to abuse, Wilson is perfectly willing to sacrifice the dignity of others.
"Young black and Hispanic men will probably be stopped more often than older white Anglo males or women of any race," he says, rather cavalierly.
This kind of intellectual bankruptcy gives ivory-tower thought a bad name.


Eva Lindholm, Iraj Ispahani
Eva-Kristiina Lindholm and Mirza Iraj Ispahani, vice presidents in the global asset management division of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in Geneva, were married on Friday in a civil ceremony at the Registry Office in Geneva.
Mrs.
Ispahani, 30, who is known as Eva, is a daughter of Karl A. P. Lindholm and Raina K. J. Lindholm of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
The bride graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the vice president of the Central National Gottesman Company, a pulp and paper broker in Tarrytown, N.Y.


The Blues Dwindle Down to a Precious Few Along Atlantic
The powerful, rapacious bluefish -- the most important species in the marine recreational fishing industry from Cape Cod to Virginia -- is on the decline all along the Atlantic seaboard.
Those who began angling for bluefish 15 years ago chose a good time to do so.
From then until about 1990, the fish were abundant, and many large specimens, 15 pounds and more, were present.
In 1979, the total recreational catch along the Atlantic coast was more than 140 million pounds.
It dropped to 86 million pounds in 1984, rose to nearly 130 million pounds in 1986 and has been declining ever since, falling to 37 million pounds in 1992.
Landing figures for 1993 are not yet available, but there is every reason to believe that the downward trend is continuing.


Rowena Conhaim, Keith G. Arndt
Rowena Conhaim, the daughter of Louis E. Conhaim of New York and Dr.
Ita Standen Raz of London, was married yesterday to Keith G. Arndt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul H. Arndt of Kinderhook, N.Y.
The Rev.
Charles Ayers performed the Dutch Reform ceremony at the New York Academy of Sciences in New York.
Ms.
Conhaim is keeping her name.
She is a senior manager at Margolin Consultants, a management consulting and executive recruitment concern in New York.
She graduated from the University of the Arts.


Rangers' Family Filled With Distant Relatives
En route to the regular-season championship of the National Hockey League, the 1993-94 Rangers have often been defined by two primary subgroups: former Edmonton Oilers and former Chicago Blackhawks.
The former Oilers are seven veterans with Stanley Cup rings, led by Mark Messier, the captain, whose personality dominates the clubhouse.


Outside In
[ Excerpt from "Nightline," March 7, 1995.
Topic: President Clinton's 1996 budget.
Guests: Senator Oliver L. North, Republican of Virginia; Senator Al Sharpton, Democrat of New York, and Representative Sonny Bono, Republican of California. ]
Ted Koppel: Specifically, which programs do you define as unnecessary, Senator North?


Light at the End Of the Chunnel?
FOR many car-conscious Americans awaiting the opening of the Channel Tunnel, the most disappointing thing to learn is, You won't be able to drive through it.
Only trains -- some carrying cars -- will make the 31-mile trip between Calais, France, and Folkestone, England, and exactly when is not certain.
The first train, filled with dignitaries, is scheduled for May 6.
The start of regular service is another matter.
Testing and late delivery of equipment is causing delays.
The tunnel was originally scheduled to open a year ago, in the spring of 1993.
Then its opening was postponed to last December.
On April 1 Alastair Morton, chairman of Eurotunnel, the British and French consortium that will operate the tunnel, announced that full service would not start until September.


Las Vegas Stakes Claim in 90's Water War
The mirage that grew out of Bugsy Siegel's mid-century vision of showgirls and slot machines is now a metropolitan area of nearly one million people.
But the nation's fastest-growing city, stitched to a Mojave Desert valley that receives only four inches of rain a year, is running out of water.
So, rather than try to curb a growth rate of nearly 1,000 new residents a week, the water czars of southern Nevada have their eyes on the main artery of the American West, the Colorado River.
The river runs downhill from its source in the Rockies, but it also follows another cardinal rule: in the American West water flows toward money and power.


N.C.A.A. Ethics
To the Sports Editor:
The article on the former State University of New York at Stony Brook basketball coach, Joe Castiglie ("Moving On: Dream Dies for a Young Basketball Coach," The Times, March 20), left incorrect impressions about National Collegiate Athletic Association policies.


Tunnels, Trestles and the Pullman Porter
To the Editor:
David Haward Bain's review of Henry Kisor's "Zephyr: Tracking a Dream Across America" (March 20) stirred memories of a period when the early diesel streamliners gave an emerging generation hope for a future that was sorely threatened by events and conditions of the mid-1930's.
The Pioneer Zephyr, more generally referred to as the Burlington Zephyr at the time, made the run between Chicago and Denver as early as 1934, I believe, when the California Zephyr was only a gleam in someone's eye.


Family Vacations: Ten of the Best
SOMETIMES it's the mini-disasters and unplanned detours that make a family vacation memorable, as when young Gary Montgomery fed a bag of cinnamon rolls to Freckles the dog en route to a camping trip in the Texas Hill Country -- with unfortunate results for the bedrolls.
His mother, Bettye Montgomery, 52 years old, an administrative assistant at a Houston accounting firm, laughs about it now.
"Our boys learned a valuable lesson that year: You don't feed dogs cinnamon rolls when you're going on a long trip."


Biltmore Hotel
To the Editor: It was refreshing to read William Grimes's excellent article "The Biltmore Bounces Back in Florida" (Jan. 23).


The Wait for Daycare: Two Years and Counting
City officials selected two sites in Fordham to offer affordable daycare to residents two years ago, but residents still have a few more months to wait before the new centers can get started.
The holdup is that the money, some $15 million, is not yet in place.
That's because it's coming from various sources, including the city, the state, a range of private foundations -- including the James C. Penney Foundation, the Booth Ferris Foundation, and the Rhodebeck Charitable Trust -- and various businesses, like Chase Manhattan Bank and Citibank.


Making Repairs to a Ceiling Fixture When Its Bulb Falters
CONVENTIONAL ceiling-light fixtures with incandescent bulbs ordinarily function for years without trouble.
But when a ceiling light flickers, emits crackling noises or will not light, repairs can be made.
First check the bulb.
Be sure the fixture is switched off, and then stand on a safe platform like a stepladder and remove the fixture's globe or shade.
Pass it to a helper or set it down before proceeding.
When using a stepladder, climb no higher than the second rung from the top.


Around Midtown, Luxurious Lunch
ADRIENNE ** (212) 903-3918; 700 Fifth Avenue, at 55th Street in the Peninsula Hotel; $$$$; all major credit cards
Its stunning floor-to-ceiling windows look out onto bustling Fifth Avenue; within, a sense of opulence and privacy hovers over Adrienne's well-spaced tables, deep armchairs and roomy rose-tinted banquettes.
The contemporary American menu is beguiling: starters for lunch include terrine of grilled portobello mushrooms, goat cheese and roasted peppers; grilled tenderloin of lamb served with a curried couscous cake, and salad of lobster marinated with basil and smoked shallots and tossed in a truffle vinaigrette.
Follow with pecan-breaded sea scallops in brown-butter sauce with asparagus; pan-seared loin of venison with black peppercorn sauce, or a grilled duck breast that comes with caramelized onions and wild mushrooms. (Review: 12/4/92; article: 2/26/93)  BICE ** (212) 688-1999; 7 East 54th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Soft light warms the beam-crossed ceiling; brass sconces stand out against the beige tones and wood of this stylish Italian restaurant.
The current menu features alluring pastas, salads, and simple grilled or roasted fare.
Begin with beef carpaccio with an arugula-radicchio salad topped with shaved parmesan; shrimp salad with Tuscan beans and basil; marinated salmon tartare with chives, and warm goat cheese with a lentil and beet salad.
Then try penne in a spicy tomato sauce; fettuccine tossed with Maine lobster and wild mushrooms; risotto with peas and saffron; rigatoni with eggplant, tomatoes and aged ricotta; grilled cornish hen with garlic and fresh herbs, or sauteed duck breast served with an orange sauce. (Review: 6/8/90; article: 10/30/92)


Finnegans Feast
The nasty old Irish ingestion jokes are rarely heard around this city these days, the ones that say an Irish seven-course dinner is a six-pack and a boiled potato or that "Irish Gourmet Cooking" is among the shortest books ever written.
One reason is the Commons Restaurant, in the basement of Newman House, where James Joyce once studied.
It is a stunning four-story Georgian building in the center of the capital on St.
Stephen's Green, which is part of University College of Dublin.
The Commons is the new favorite eating place for the powerful and glamorous of Irish society, and notables from abroad.


Musical Family's Contributions to Society
LINDA RODGERS EMORY, a daughter of the composer Richard Rodgers, resembles her father musically and in her features.
She, too, is a talented songwriter, and had she been born into a different generation -- one that nurtures the worldly ambitions of girls -- her own life might have taken a different turn.
But Ms.
Emory, who lives on a country road here with her husband, Eric, a financial planner and jazz drummer, is no Nannerl Mozart or Fanny Mendelssohn, whose musical accomplishments are usually noted within parentheses in their brothers' biographies.
A devoted pianist whose parents did not encourage her to take the concert route and a composer whose songs have never reached the wide public they perhaps deserve, she set off on a different course and is now making her mark as a social worker and researcher.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL: NONFICTION
FIELD OF SCREAMS  The Dark Underside of America's National Pastime.
By Richard Scheinin.
Norton, paper, $14.95.


'The World Is One Vast Madhouse'
MESHUGAH By Isaac Bashevis Singer.
Translated by the author and Nili Wachtel. 232 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


The Legend of Satchel Paige
DON'T LOOK BACK Satchel Paige in the Shadows of Baseball.
By Mark Ribowsky.
Illustrated. 351 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


A Newcomer's Travails Inspire Shockand Outrage
To the Editor:
Let me get this straight.


Jennifer Bancroft, Kevin G. DaSilva
Jennifer Alexas Bancroft, the daughter of Wilfred C. Bancroft of Lehigh Acres, Fla., and Carmen A. Bancroft of Arverne, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kevin Gil DaSilva, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman J. DaSilva of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
The Rev.
Emily E. Odom performed the ceremony at Glenwood Presbyterian Church in Glenwood Landing, N.Y.
The bride's uncle the Rev.
Clarence R. Bancroft also officiated.
Mrs.
DaSilva, 28, is an associate at Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts, a law firm in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received her law degree from Columbia University.


I.R.A. Mounts More Attacks As Truce Ends
The Irish Republican Army resumed its attacks on British security forces early today after its self-imposed, three-day cease-fire expired.
The attacks hurt no one.
In Belfast, a homemade bomb was hurled at a police station and a grenade was fired at a mobile patrol; shots were fired at two army posts along the border between the Republic of Ireland and this Protestant-dominated British province.
But the assaults threw into doubt the prospects for the new peace initiative announced by Ireland and Britain in December.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
The freedom-of-choice mantra that Philip Morris spokespeople intone loses legitimacy when you think of the carcinogens to which nonsmokers are exposed every time someone lights up.
Smoking is no more a matter of freedom of choice than is driving drunk on a crowded highway.
SCOTT DOUGLAS Wilton, Conn.


A Clean Sweep
TAKING OFF FROM modernism's form-follows-function constraints, the architect Steven Holl embraces minimalism that is open to the imagination.
Neither historical models nor practical demands triggered the creative impulse behind this 7,000-square-foot Texas house.
Instead, Holl's inspiration was a score by the Hungarian composer Bela Bartok, "Music for Strings, Percussion and Celeste." The result is a symphony of interconnected masonry and limestone pavilions whose arched roofs rise like musical crescendos, then dip with the undulating landscape.
Inside, a spare first impression gives way to a variety of references to both nature and art.
Polished terrazzo stairs flow like glaciers from the entrance hall toward the living room and garden.
Nearby, a blue-washed wall evokes the saturated hues of Latin American painting and architecture.


Corrections
The Habitats column on page 6 of the Real Estate section today, about a home reconstruction by Bret Saberhagen of the New York Mets, includes a duplicated headline in some copies, resulting in an omission in the last paragraph.
The affected sentence should read, "We waited for them to say something -- like 'hello' -- but they sat there and stared and then just drove away."


INSIDE
Hardball in the Melting Pot
More than an earned run average rests on the performance of Chan Ho Park, the first Korean to play major league baseball.
Page 16.
Meeting Rocks N.A.A.C.P.
Without notifying his board, the new director of the civil rights organization held a closed meeting with militant leaders.
Page 19.


Threshold for Investor Class Actions
To the Editor:
In "Changing the Rules for Class Actions" (Wall Street, March 27), Susan Antilla significantly misrepresented portions of my proposed legislation to reform the private securities litigation system.


Nancy Cashman, Michael C. Rau
Nancy Page Cashman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Cashman of Wilmington, N.C., was married there yesterday to Michael Curtis Rau, the son of Dr.
John H. Rau of Leonia, N.J., and Gail Read Brown of Garrison, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
E.
Douglas Vaughn Jr. performed the ceremony at First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Rau, 25, is a project manager in integrated marketing services in Falls Church, Va., for the International Business Machines Corporation.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in integrated marketing communications from Northwestern University.
Her father, a urologist, is a senior partner in Hanover Urological Associates in Wilmington.
Her mother, Diane Cobb Cashman, is a freelance writer.


Ravens Team Up With a Renewed Yale Field
BABE RUTH played there, as did Lou Gehrig, Ted Williams, Ron Darling and a first baseman from Greenwich named George Bush.
So, too, did the old Brooklyn Dodgers and Boston Braves, along with Albie Booth and Larry Kelley, Yale football immortals who also starred in baseball.
Indeed, no other ball park in Connecticut is as steeped in history as Yale Field.
But the question now is whether people will flock back to the field to see minor league baseball on what for 67 years has been almost wholly a university preserve -- even at a refurbished baseball shrine that is home to the state's newest professional sports team, the New Haven Ravens of the Double-A Eastern League.


Faith Of the Orthodox Born in Russia
INCENSE filled the air.
Early morning sunlight streamed through stained-glass windows, giving luster to the crimson, blue and gold of icons on the altar.
Candles burning in golden candelabra added to the glow.
St.
Nicholas Russian Orthodox Church in Stratford was dressed in its finest and ready to celebrate.
Parishoners had cleaned the church, cooked platters of blini and blintzes and invited family and friends to a worship service and banquet recently commemorating three anniversaries.


OUTSIDE LOOKING IN
It is no paradox that the actively alcoholic friends of Leslie Garis confide in her with their problems (Hers: "Outside Looking In," March 6).
Any bartender worth the salt off a frosty margarita can claim the same of the regulars who bend an elbow night after night and "instinctively understand" that they won't be judged.


Lehman A Surprise At Hostile Masters
When nerves are exposed and throats are dry on Sunday down in Amen Corner, experience might yet prove to be the key element for winning the Masters.
But after three rounds, the leader of the season's first major championship is a player who has never won on the PGA Tour and who is playing in just his second Masters.
Tom Lehman, who somehow managed to stop his iron shots and hole his putts on greens that were reminiscent of the New Jersey Turnpike, shot a 69 today at Augusta National and took a one-stroke lead over Jose Maria Olazabal of Spain, who also shot 69, after three rounds of the 58th Masters.
Four strokes back is Jim McGovern of River Edge, N.J., who shot 71.


World Markets; A New Theory of Continental Drift
HAVING slavishly followed the American stock and bond markets downward over the previous few weeks, it was only fitting that the European markets bounced back somewhat last week in synch with their counterparts across the Atlantic.
By the close on Friday in London, the Financial Times-Stock Exchange index of 100 leading shares stood at 3,120.8, up 34.38 for the week.
In Paris, the CAC-40 closed at 2,114.77, up 32.83 for the week.
The DAX index in Frankfurt rose 70.23 for the week to close at 2,203.34.


The View From: New London; A House for the Future Finally Lives Up to Its Billing
THE Winslow Ames house at Connecticut College in New London has a flat roof, a modular plan, factory-made steel frame sections and tidy built-in bookcases.
Erected in the 1930's as a house for the future, it nearly became a thing of the past in the 1980's.
Now it is again a place for the future.
After a careful four-year restoration, the little International Style house is headquarters for the college's Center for Arts and Technology, whose symposiums and other events focus on topics like virtual reality and computer-assisted sculpture.
The center's multidisciplinary research teams have produced such work as the Artificially Intelligent Computer Performer, software that simulates a live accompanist.


Should Preservation Count for Everything?
To the Editor:
Arthur Morgan is right in "Thanks to Lord Elgin" (letter, April 3) that the Turks were responsible for greater damage to the Parthenon than any other occupier of Athens.
Even the Nazis refused to bomb Athens during their invasion of Greece.


A Rail-and-Drive Pass For Eastern Europe
A new rail-and-drive pass for travel in central and eastern Europe has been introduced by Rail Europe, the North American distributor of Eurailpass and other European train packages.
The packages offer visitors the opportunity to travel long distances via train and then use the car for shorter jaunts.
The European East Rail'n Drive ticket provides first-class rail travel for five days and an Avis or Hertz rental car for three days within a 15-day period in Austria, Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.
Each ticket costs $299 a person, based on two people using an economy car.
Extra passengers sharing the rental car purchase only a five-day train pass at $185 (half price for children ages 4 to 11).


Journal; Whitewater Drained
My Whitewater dependency was every bit as out of control as the next guy's, but about 10 days ago I slipped into remission.
Suddenly it was hard to hyperventilate about the story that only recently had tempted me to master cattle futures (to no avail, since I have no broker named "Red" to save me from bum steers).
You needn't consult polls to see that Whitewater has now fallen off a cliff in the public consciousness, to the pitiful point where even Madonna briefly usurped it in dinner conversations.
When James McDougal put sets of his once-coveted Whitewater documents on sale last week, takers were so few he would have been better off titling them "The Bridges of Madison Guaranty."


On Expanding Vernon Resort Area
Like many Sussex Countyans, I was shocked by an incredibly unbalanced front-page article, "Vernon Resort Expansion Plan Meets Criticism," on March 6.
In addition to unjustly damaging the image and accomplishments of Gene Mulvihill, chairman of Great American Recreation, and his many Sussex County enterprises, the article has also slandered our area State Senator, several Vernon Township officials, local business people and, in effect, our county itself.
Granted, Mr.
Mulvihill has been ambitious and aggressive and at times has cut corners.
In my view, however, Mr.
Mulvihill was and is primarily "guilty" of two things: first, the creation of nearly 2,000 full- and part-time jobs in a county where two-thirds of the work force must commute out of county to find work.
Second, his projects (Great Gorge Spa, Golf Course, Action Park, Vernon Valley/Great Gorge and now the Hamburg Mountain wilderness complex) served to open for public recreation areas that heretofore were inaccessible because of lack of infrastructure or simply because they were off-limits state/private lands.


Testing, From the Prosaic to the Exotic
LAST month Al Gengler was a burglar.
A not too successful burglar.
Mr.
Gengler and his partners in temporary crime, Mike Mullally of East Meadow and Wes Schroeppel of Northport, tried to sneak past the motion detector of an alarm system.
They failed.
Which meant the motion detector passed, at least the safety test.
A thievery test would be another matter.
"We really didn't give it any tricky moves," Mr.
Gengler said.
"It was basically a walk-by. We have to test all the alarm systems the exact same way."


Cable TV: The Big Picture
You've read all the stories and heard all the buzzwords about the brave new electronic world out there: interactive cable, video on demand, fiber optics, cable television service over telephone lines, the marriage of video and voice technology.
Where does that leave cable television in New York right now?


Just a Thought
To the Editor:
Having read Janet Maslin's article "Why Some People Aren't Smiling on Oscar Night"  [ March 20 ] , may I suggest a possible reason why two of the top nominees for Best Picture did not win awards: "What's Love Got to Do With It" should have been called "The Piano," and "The Piano" should have been titled "What's Love Got to Do With It."  JEAN WEHRLI  Naperville, Ill.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 10, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
8
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
14
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
3
3
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
4
3
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a killer.
5
3
HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.
6
4
LORD OF RAVEN'S PEAK, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romance and adventure among vikings in 10th-century Britain.
7
2
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Researching his ancestry, an American journalist learns about the history of Mexico.
8
6
WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's cold woods.
9
11
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a small California town vexes a temporary district attorney.
10
2
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to a South Carolina town.
11*
5
THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal of past crimes.
12
8
JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star Wars" saga.
13*
2
CAULDRON, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $6.50.) Economic disaster and nationalist hate groups besiege Europe; America enters World War III.
14*
15
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
15
1
FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) An affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people returning to their hometown.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
13
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
544
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
3
60
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
4
5
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
5*
13
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
6
2
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
7
130
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8*
45
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
9
23
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
10
144
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
11
10
A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine, $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop it.
12*
2
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.) The memoirs of an Irish rebel, wrongly imprisoned in the 1970's and 80's.
13*
143
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
14*
10
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day battle in Vietnam in 1965.
15*
30
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
160
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
2
5
MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Ways to teach children about spending and saving money.
3
167
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
25
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending March 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


THIS EEk; Poet's Corner


Of Autism And Critics
To the Editor:
In his essay "A Few Scary Pictures Can Go a Long Way"  [ March 20 ]  Walter Goodman says the CBS newsmagazine "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung" used "shabby tricks of the trade" in a recent report on the Behavior Research Institute, a controversial treatment center that used punishment along with rewards to control the behavior of extremely troubled children.
In fact, Mr.
Goodman trotted out a few tricks of his own in trying to advance his perennial thesis that newsmagazines sensationalize the news.


When They Were the Fab Five
AS ANYONE WHOSE MEMORY stretches back to 1964 can attest, there were dozens of Fifth Beatles.
Every other American disk jockey who posed for a photo with the Fab Four laid claim to the title, which was also conferred, more legitimately, on George Martin, the group's brilliant record producer, and on Brian Epstein, the businessman who found them performing in a Liverpool cellar and turned them into international icons.
But in 1960 the band was a quintet, and there actually was a Fifth Beatle.
"Backbeat," a film written and directed by Ian Softley, examines the group's quintet days (without benefit of any of the Beatles' own music but with 1950's hits played by members of Nirvana and R.E.M., among others) and draws a portrait of Stu Sutcliffe (played by Stephen Dorff), whose Fifth Beatleness is beyond challenge.


22 Officers and Inmates Injured in a New Melee on Rikers Island
Inmates tried to block correction officers from subduing an unruly inmate in a corridor at Rikers Island yesterday morning, city officials said, causing the second serious disturbance at the jail complex in less than a month.
Nine officers and thirteen inmates were injured, none seriously, in the fighting, which lasted less than ten minutes, said Tom Antenen, a spokesman for the city's Department of Correction.
Early in the afternoon, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the city's new Correction Commissioner, Anthony J. Schembri, visited some of the officers at Booth Memorial Medical Center in Flushing.


Technology; Quietly, Hand-Powered Lawn Mowers Make a Comeback
JUST wait.
The pleasant sounds of spring -- birds chirping, children playing outside after the winter's confinement -- will soon be interrupted by the insistent snarl of unmuffled gasoline engines.
It's almost lawn-mowing season again.
The gasoline-powered rotary mower, which uses a horizontal blade to lop off the top of the grass and blow it into a bag, has become ubiquitous anywhere lawns are bigger than a hammock's shadow.


How a Ruling on Abortion Took On a Life of Its Own
SUPREME Court Justices can usually time their own departures, as Justice Harry A. Blackmun did with grace and good humor last week.
"I know what the numbers are, and it's time," the 85-year-old Justice said in announcing his decision to leave the Court this summer after 24 years.
But Justices have no such control over their legacy, and as Justice Blackmun has long acknowledged, he will always be known by one of the earliest Supreme Court opinions to bear his signature: Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 decision that established the constitutional right to abortion.
With passion and pride, he embraced and defended his handiwork as it came under sustained attack from all sides: from abortion opponents, obviously, but also from critics who, while supporting rights as a matter of policy, viewed the opinion as an example of judicial overreaching, weak in its constitutional theory and mired in detail about the stages of pregnancy and other matters best left to legislatures.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  EVACUATIONS FROM RWANDA BEGIN  Troops from the United States, France and Belgium moved in to start evacuating foreign nationals from Rwanda, where thousands of people have been reported killed in three days of tribal warfare. 1  The U.S.
Ambassador in Rwanda decided on overland evacuation. 6


Shuttle Embarks on High-Tech Scrutiny of Environment
Six astronauts set out today on a space shuttle mission to test an advanced radar technology that may enable people to manage the environment better in the future -- and perhaps catch some tantalizing glimpses of life in the past.
The shuttle Endeavour, carrying a $366 million Space Radar Laboratory in its cargo bay, rocketed into orbit at 7:05 A.M.
Eastern daylight time, as the sun rose over the Atlantic.
The liftoff into a clear blue sky came after a one-day delay caused by high winds.
Operations aboard were normal.


Hotels Aim Their Deals At the Kids
PROBABLY the most pampered young hotel guest in literary history was Eloise, the children's-book heroine whose long-term residency at the Plaza included abundant room service, roller-skating down the halls and valet cleaning for her sneakers.
More recently, Kevin in the film "Home Alone 2" turned his own suite at the same establishment into a veritable video arcade and gourmet dining palace, courtesy of his dad's purloined credit card and his own chutzpah.
Such escapades, of course, were purely imaginary.
But these days, red-carpet treatment for juvenile lodgers at hotels and resorts is more than the stuff of fiction.
As more children travel with their parents -- last summer, over 40 percent of vacationing adults planned to take their children, according to the United States Travel Data Center, a Washington-based research group -- hotel chains and individual properties alike are responding with special perks.
The many chain-sponsored camps and clubs for children include Camp Hyatt (Hyatt Hotels), Ritz Kids (Ritz-Carlton), Kids for All Seasons (the Four Seasons), Westin Kids Clubs (Westin Hotels, beginning in May) and Kidspree Vacation Club (Holiday Inn Sunspree and Crowne Plaza Resorts).
Individual hotels' lures include the opportunity for children to make an "erupting" papier-mache volcano at the Ihilani Resort and Spa on Oahu, Hawaii, and, if the children are game, to ride down a slide into a vat of chocolate pudding at Marriott's Castle Harbour Resort in Bermuda.
Kids can handle exotic birds at the Boca Raton Resort and Club in Florida and literally join the circus (at least for a while) at selected Club Med family villages.


Mark R. Miller and Tonya Yong
Tonya Yong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund Yong of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, was married last evening to Mark Raymond Miller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Miller of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert A. Daum performed the ceremony at the Sherman House, a hotel in San Francisco.
The bride, 26, graduated from the University of California at Davis and received an M.B.A. from the University of San Francisco.
Her father is a lawyer in Kuala Lumpur.


Tribe's Tribute
To the Sports Editor:
I would like to offer some heartening and humanizing facts regarding the history of the Cleveland Indians, in response to Tim Giago's fine article ("Drop the Chop! Indian Nicknames Just Aren't Right," The Times, March 13).
It should be made clear that the Cleveland baseball club chose the name Indians to remember a beloved teammate, Louis Sockalexis, born 1871 in Old Town, Me.
He played for the Cleveland Spiders in the 1897-89 seasons, a career otherwise largely undistinguished except for the fondness generated for him among the organization and fans.


Corrections
Two pictures of birds on March 6, with the column "In the Natural State" -- about species of sparrows found in New Jersey -- were misidentified.
The one at the upper right showed a song sparrow, not a common sparrow.
The one at the lower right showed a house sparrow, formerly called an English sparrow.
A third picture -- of a dusky seaside sparrow -- was printed in error.
The bird, which is extinct, lived only in Florida, not in New Jersey.


April 3-9; At Last, A Chef Who Sees The Light
Ever since Thomas Jefferson showed a preference for French cuisine, more Presidents than not have employed French chefs.
With its announcement of the appointment of an American chef last week, the White House signaled that haute cuisine is no longer an idee fixe in the President's home.
Walter S. Scheib 3d, new executive chef and graduate of the Culinary Institute of America, has spent his entire career in hotels, resorts and health spas, most recently at the Greenbrier resort and spa in White Sulphur Springs, W. Va.


Enter Spring, Dressed Vividly in Yellow
WHAT is it about the color yellow for spring?
The bright sunny blossoms in various tones of gold seem to have a priority on the season.
There are other flowers, of course, in all kinds of colors.
But those with yellow petals dominate.
Think about it.


Operator Trouble?
People are always complaining about directory assistance.
And never more than now.
Or so it seems.
Ask for Silver Rock Stables, for example, and you may have to battle the operator to get the number for Silver Rock Farm.
Get the town wrong, and it may be more than the system can handle.
Not true, according to Nynex (the erstwhile New York Telephone).
Information is better than ever, or will be soon.
What has occurred is that Nynex began to switch data bases in New York starting in 1993.
The company does admit some minor glitches. (The change has now reached as far north as 914.) But Christine Killorin, general manager of operator services, says that Nynex does regular polling of customers, and that customer satisfaction with directory assistance has stayed at more than 90 percent.


THE AGE OF INTIMACY
How is it that after having been friends for 20 or 30 years (and in some cases much longer), we are only now becoming intimate?
We're all older men, but not yet aged.
None of us is feeble, forgetful or limited to shuffleboard; most of us are still tennis players, some of us are skiers or scuba divers and many of us still actively work at our profession or business.


Community Board Meetings in the Bronx
DISTRICT 1: Port Morris, Melrose, Mott Haven.
Last Thursday of month; next meeting is April 28; 6:30 P.M.; Lincoln Hospital, 234 East 149th Street; (718) 585-7117.
Chairman: George Rodriguez  DISTRICT 2: Hunts Point, Longwood; last Wednesday of month; next meeting is April 27; 6 P.M.; 1029 East 163d Street; (718) 328-9125.
Chairman: Roland Lopez


Intimate Chamber Settings
THERE are many superb concert halls in Westchester, their numbers swelled by school auditoriums, churches and temples.
On the other hand, there is nothing quite like the joy of hearing chamber music in the intimate surroundings for which much of it was written, a private home.
Performers of Westchester was organized for that purpose, and its spring season includes 10 recitals at residences countywide.
Refreshments are served after each performance, providing an unhurried opportunity for listeners to meet the artists.


An Incorrigibly Adorable Thief
THE BURGLAR WHO TRADED TED WILLIAMS By Lawrence Block. 258 pp.
New York:  Dutton. $19.95.


Michael S. Shower, Unicef Adviser, 44
Michael S. Shower, a senior adviser at the United Nations Children's Fund, died on Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was AIDS, said his sister, Michelle Proctor.


Making Repairs to a Ceiling Fixture When Its Bulb Falters
CONVENTIONAL ceiling-light fixtures with incandescent bulbs ordinarily function for years without trouble.
But when a ceiling light flickers, emits crackling noises or will not light, repairs can be made.
First check the bulb.
Be sure the fixture is switched off, and then stand on a safe platform like a stepladder and remove the fixture's globe or shade.
Pass it to a helper or set it down before proceeding.
When using a stepladder, climb no higher than the second rung from the top.


Curing Sick Stereotypes
A CHILD falls down a flight of stairs, and is immediately rushed to the hospital emergency room by his or her parents.
But before the child is treated, the parents are questioned extensively about their own drug and alcohol use.


A Bachelor Of Toys Degree
THE CLASSROOM is dominated by three counters, each 6 by 24 feet, that sit atop rows of cubical lockers.
Multiple-outlet extension cords dangle every few feet overhead, and through a connecting door is a workshop equipped with lathes and bandsaws.
But this is not introduction to cabinet-making or automotive engineering.
The blackboard at the front of the room has taped-up sketches of toy locomotives, ambulances and jukeboxes, as well as a dinosaur, and the students are hard at work learning the rudiments of toy-making.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $230,000
161 West 15th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a loft building; 12-ft.-ceilings, exposed-brick walls, live-in superintendent; maintenance $770, 65% tax deductible, listed at $249,000, 10 weeks on market (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate)


Amy Rosenberg, John L. Slafsky
Amy Jill Rosenberg, an associate producer at NBC News, was married yesterday evening to John Lawrence Slafsky, an associate at Satterlee Stephens Burke &amp; Burke, a law firm.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Steven E. Foster officiated at Green Gables Country Club in Denver.
Ms.
Rosenberg, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Tufts University.
She is the daughter of Richard and Marilyn Rosenberg of Denver.
The bride's father is a wage investigator in the auditor's office at Denver International Airport.
Her mother is the director of the home-detention program of the Denver Department of Safety.


U.S. Envoy in Rwanda Decides on Overland Convoy to Evacuate Americans
The decision to evacuate Americans from Rwanda in an overland convoy rather than by military aircraft was made by the United States Ambassador there, who was considered to be the best judge of conditions in the central African country, Administration officials said today.
The decision to send marines to neighboring Burundi to stand by as backup in case "things get ugly," as one official put it, was made by President Clinton on Friday night as he left a town meeting on health care in Minneapolis, the officials said.


All Eyes Are on 'the Show'
Three baseball seasons ago, Manny Ramirez, the pride of Washington Heights, was the best high school player in New York, a first-round pick in the professional draft.
Today, with the new big-league season less than a week old, Manny Ramirez, the pride of Washington Heights, is, as they say, "in the show," the starting right fielder of the Cleveland Indians.
Around his old Dominican neighborhood, the talk in early spring is always about baseball, any kind of baseball.


F.Y.I.
Out of 42, a Mere 6
Q.
All kinds of obscure subjects are commemorated by sculptures in this city -- even a sled dog in Central Park.
But how many statues of United States Presidents are there?


The World; Singapore, the Tiger Whose Teeth Are Not Universally Scorned
FOR the large American community in Singapore, the laughter about this place has suddenly stopped.
There is not much joking these days about Singapore as the city so clean that bubble gum is a controlled substance, so prudish that Cosmopolitan magazine is banned as a threat to common decency, so well planned that a traffic jam is all but unheard of.
Now, the Americans know, Singapore is a nation with laws so tough and unforgiving that an American teen-ager convicted of spray painting cars faces a punishment that human rights organizations consider torture -- a flogging with a rattan cane.
Prisoners subjected to a caning usually go into shock from the intense pain and are left with permanent scars.


Views on Co-op Sublets and Seller Rights
To the Editor:
I would like to take issue with the conclusion in your Q &amp; A column on March 27 that a co-op has the right to reject a purchaser because the owner's selling price is too low.
As a member of a board for decades, I have faced this issue a number of times and have taken the position that is inappropriate if not unethical for a rejection to be based on the selling price.
It is unfair to the owner of the apartment.


Sheri Davidowitz, Peter C. Belafsky
Sheri Ryan Davidowitz, a daughter of Faye Fisher of New York and Dr.
Jay Davidowitz of Woodbury, Conn., was married last evening to Peter Charles Belafsky, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Mark L. Belafsky of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Rabbi Michal Borne officiated at the Elms Mansion in New Orleans.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from Vassar College.
She plans to enter the medical school at Tulane University in June, where her husband is a fourth-year medical student.
He is also studying for a master's degree in public health and a Ph.D. in epidemiology there.


Berlin
Since the Berlin wall came down nearly five years ago, the city has undergone profound changes.
Most obvious is the building boom that has turned many neighborhoods into a maze of cavernous holes and tall yellow cranes.
More profound, however, has been Berlin's opening to the world.
For years, this city was a fortified island, protected, for better or worse, against the influences of the world that surrounded it.
Now, with the wall gone and borders to the east open or nearly open, it is once again central Europe's most cosmopolitan center.
Some of the effects of this change are unpleasant.
Poor refugees beg on the streets, crime has risen (although not nearly to American levels), and some sections of the city, like the area around Zoo Station, a main rail terminus, have become dirty and rundown.
But at the same time, cultural life has exploded.
Foreign influences are everywhere, and Berlin has shed much of the provincialism that reigned here during the cold war years.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a letter from Prof.
Marc Linder last Sunday about the Labor Department's enforcement efforts in the garment industry misstated the writer's views on the misclassification of workers.
Professor Linder quoted Labor officials to the effect that 38 percent of apparel employers had misclassified workers as independent contractors, not that 38 percent of apparel employers had been misclassified as independent contractors.


Threshold for Investor Class Actions
To the Editor:
Most shareholder suits do not arise from legitimately disgruntled investors seeking to prosecute claims as a class action.
Rather, there is a small group of law firms that have pre-existing relationships with an equally small group of investors with relatively minimal holdings in a number of public companies.
These law firms are ready to file class-action suits very soon after a significant decline in a company's stock, using the drop to support an accusation that the company fraudulently misled investors.


Running The Runways
Seventh On Sixth, the nonprofit corporation that organized the current week of fashion shows in Bryant Park and next door at the New York Public Library, isn't even a year old.
But already, having the New York collections in one central location has become as familiar to fashion people as reading Women's Wear Daily with the day's first iced cappuccino.
Putting on a fashion show anywhere is complicated: hundreds of elements must come together just once for 20 to 30 minutes.
It's even more complex when 60 design houses must share four venues -- two tents in the park and two rooms in the library -- moving in and out on a timetable with military precision.
The models, the makeup artists, the hair stylists the dressers, the store buyers, the editors, the camera crews, the celebrities and the clothes must all arrive -- and depart -- on schedule to avert disaster.


The War of All Against All
BLOOD AND BELONGING Journeys Into the New Nationalism.
By Michael Ignatieff.
Illustrated. 263 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.


'Home,' Praising a Life Devoted to the Land
OF course you can go home again, the playwright Samm-Art Williams affirms.
More than that, everything will turn out even better the second time around.
In "Home," a play that can honestly be called heartwarming, Mr.
Williams, in words that sing, wrote the praises of a life devoted to the land.
Attend the tale of Cephus Miles, farmer by calling, who winds up down and out in "a very, very large American city" after five years in prison for draft dodging.


Long Island Q&amp;A: David G. Amaral; What Makes Memory Tick
THE ability to remember the words one is reading or other common daily events depends on the part of the brain called the hippocampus.
It is literally the place that memories are made.
For Dr.
David G. Amaral the study of memory has led to the establishment of a center for brain research at the State University at Stony Brook.
The Center for Behavioral Neuroscience studies functions like memory, attention, emotion and perception.


Japan's Crisis Is Realigning Political Blocs
The maneuvering to choose a successor to Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa took shape today not just as a battle for individual power but also as a broad realignment of Japan's four-decade-old party structure.
"The Liberal Democratic Party is disintegrating, and to some extent the same thing is starting to happen to the Socialists," said Takeshi Sasaki, a professor of politics at Tokyo University and a Government adviser.
Professor Sasaki added that the Prime Minister "had kept them together until yesterday," when he suddenly announced his decision to resign in the face of financial scandals in which he has been implicated.


Liza C. Verreault, Gregory G. Reiss
Liza Christine Verreault, a daughter of Rolland and Sylvia Verreault of Montreal, was married there yesterday to Gregory George Reiss, a son of Paul and Rosemary Reiss of Colchester, Vt.
The Rev.
Eugene O'Brien officiated at Mary Queen of the World Roman Catholic Cathedral.
The bride, 28, graduated from Champlain College in Montreal.
She is an advertising account executive for radio station CJFM in Montreal.
Her father, now retired, was a consulting engineer in Montreal.


In America; Abandoning Democracy
Under violent attack throughout Haiti, the struggling but unsubdued peasant organizations, representing 80 percent of the country's population, are making it clear that they are no longer fooled by the ruses and false promises of the Clinton Administration.
"President Clinton's position on Haiti is one that I would not even say is ambiguous," declared Chavannes Jean-Baptiste, leader of the Peasant Movement of Papay, Haiti's oldest and largest nongovernmental organization.
"His position is very clear. It's consistent with a policy that does not want the restoration of democracy in Haiti. Nor does it want the restoration of Aristide as President."


Modernism: A Love Hate Affair
Asked what they loved - and loathed - about modernism.
Some of the people who should know spoke their minds.
Philip Johnson - architect
It was the exciting time of my life. But then we got glass box-itis.


A Writer Who Sees Humor In the Fear of Commitment
AN INORDINATE PROPORTION OF "Four Weddings and a Funeral" takes place in churches.
But then Richard Curtis, who wrote the screenplay, lives in a church, in the Ladbroke Grove section of London.
It's a converted Baptist chapel, with a full-immersion font, which Mr.
Curtis and his companion, Emma Freud, a London broadcaster, plan to convert into a fish pond.
For now, their only sacrilege is the altarpiece, a giant photograph of Miranda Richardson as Queen Elizabeth I in the wildly popular BBC series "Blackadder," which Mr.
Curtis co-wrote.
He was also a writer for the series "Not the Nine O'Clock News" and "Mr. Bean" before writing his first film, "The Tall Guy," a quirky 1989 comedy starring Jeff Goldblum and Emma Thompson.
Now his witty screenplay for "Four Weddings and a Funeral" has been singled out by American critics, including Janet Maslin, who described it in The New York Times as "full of bona fide repartee." And in the last weekend of March, when the film was still in only limited American release, it was the nation's No. 1 film in earnings per screen.


April 3-9: Two Presidents Die; Peace Talks A Casualty of Tribal War In Rwandan Capital
Last week a plane crash killing two African presidents touched off bloody clashes between tribal factions in the Rwandan capital of Kigali.
Estimates from observers in the capital put the death toll in the thousands.
The crisis began Wednesday when the plane carrying the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi, two tiny countries in central Africa, was shot down at the Kigali airport by unidentified attackers.
The two leaders had been attending peace talks in Tanzania.


Wall Street; When Brokerage Chiefs Bail Out
IF it's true that it pays to hang on to stocks for the long haul, then why have brokerage-firm big shots been bailing out?
Officers and directors of the nation's brokerage firms have been big sellers of their companies' stock this year.
Their reasons are predictable: tax planning or portfolio diversification.
Or for retirement, college bills, the new house, the old wife.


Flying Below The Radar Of Copyrights
NEXT TIME YOU'RE AT A party where a jazz group is swinging standards in a corner, drift away from the chat for a moment and stroll over to the band.
There among the cases and coats, music stands and manuscript paper, you'll surely find a thick ring-bound book with "The Real Book" printed in eccentric letters on a pale tan paper cover.
"The Real Book" is really a "fake book," one of the dozens that professional musicians use to fake their way through pop songs they may never have played before.
Maybe someone just requested "I'm Forever Blowing Bubbles," and the sax player doesn't know it.
Fully written-out sheet music is of little use at a gig; it's too long to be read at a glance, and the stiff piano arrangements, either too simple or too complex, inhibit improvisation.
Plus, who can lug all the sheet music needed to meet every request?


When One Speaks of French, One Speaks of the National Soul; No Retaliation Planned
To the Editor:
The French Ministry of Culture appears, if not downright arrogant, at best antiprogressive in its decision to punish those who would use selected English words or phrases over their French translations (Op-Ed, April 4).


Mail-Order Modern
MODERNIST DESIGN AIMS to make everyday life better.
To that end, it embraces technology, elevates the mass-produced to art and celebrates convenience.
For furnishing a home in the 1990's, what could be more modern than ordering by mail -- or by phone?
The mail-order chairs shown here represent classic shapes of modernism, from the bentwood experiments of Charles and Ray Eames to the whimsical butterfly chair.
And since one good design idea deserves another, the pieces are shown in some of New York's most iconic 20th-century locations, from the proto-modern, industrial-age glass walkways of Grand Central Terminal to the elegantly austere Four Seasons restaurant in the Seagram Building.
Joan Duncan Oliver


Cue The Flute
WHAT: The Mellotron, an early electronic keyboard that's back in vogue, turning up on albums by Elvis Costello, Los Lobos, Suzanne Vega, the Red Hot Chili Peppers, the B-52's, Michael Penn and many other rock musicians in the "alternative" camp.
THE SOUND: Think early Genesis.
Think King Crimson.
Think of the cheesy flutes and violins on Aerosmith's "Dream On."


Helping Way Stations on New York's Greenway Trail
IT'S spring, and an appropriate time for thoughts to turn to the Greenway, the 300-mile system of trails that was supposed to stretch from Westchester to Albany, linking communities on both sides of the Hudson River.
Whatever happened to it?
The idea was proposed about 10 years ago.
Then in 1991, with the passage of the Greenway Act, the state started to designate a model Greenway community in each of the 10 counties along the proposed trail.


Spookspeak: How to Get Witting
Since the arrest of Aldrich H. Ames, the Central Intelligence Agency official accused of being a Soviet mole (a spy within the C.I.A.), agency officials have been reported to be walking the cat back (trying to understand what has happened by working backward from the present).
It's spookspeak.
And it's back in style.
Here's a sampling:
Bigot list: The roster of people allowed to know a particular secret, for instance, the existence of a black program, a military or intelligence project whose existence is not generally acknowledged.


A Catholic Convent Reborn
Since the last nuns left three years ago, the convent of Our Lady of Refuge has sat silent and empty, a 29-room symbol of its church's past and its current fiscal struggles.
Come summer, its pastor hopes, it will ring with children's voices, a symbol of the parish's transformation.
At its peak, the convent, built nearly 40 years ago at 196th Street and Bainbridge Avenue, was home to 20 nuns who taught 500 children at the parish school.
Once the final city approvals come through and the checks are cut, it will become one of 10 new day-care centers -- two in Fordham -- for children of poor families.


Don Simonelli; Clothing Designer, 56
Don Simonelli, a designer of women's clothing who also operated a catering business at one time, died on Friday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
Mr.
Simonelli, who lived in Manhattan and South Salem, N.Y., was 56.
The cause was complications of asthma, said a friend, Liz Rittersporn.


Tunnels, Trestles and the Pullman Porter
To the Editor:
Quite invisible from a passenger car -- let alone the engine cab -- of the Zephyr, there was a sign for motorists, about 30 years ago, where the tracks crossed the main street of Chicago's suburban La Grange.
Approximately: "Warning! The Burlington Zephyr goes through this intersection in 12 seconds whether your car is on the tracks or not."


McGovern Stays Cool As a Masters Rookie
Jim McGovern was skidding.
Bogeys on the 10th and 11th holes today dropped him to one under par for the Masters through 47 holes.
And now he was confronted with the treacherous 155-yard 12th in the winds above Rae's Creek, regarded by many golfers as the toughest par 3 in tournament golf.
His 7-iron tee shot to the right fringe left him about 45 feet from the cup, possible three-putt range for a skidding golfer.
Instead, he holed it for a birdie 2.


JOHN MACK'S ABDUCTEES
John Mack is certainly not the first noted psychologist to investigate reported experiences with aliens.
Carl Jung's monograph "Flying Saucers: A Modern Myth of Things Seen in the Skies" reported on his analysis of the "voluminous dossier" he began accumulating in 1946 ("John Mack's Abductees" by Stephen Rae, March 20).


Ukraine Vote Unlikely to Break Deadlock
After Ukrainians return to the polls on Sunday for final run-off elections, their first post-Soviet Parliament is expected to lack a clear majority and may produce a legislative deadlock on crucial issues.
Taking the first round of elections on March 27 as a guide, Parliament will probably be composed of roughly equal blocs of nationalists in the west and Communists in the east along with a large, unaligned center.


Bookshelf
T-BACKS, T-SHIRTS, COAT, AND SUIT.
By E. L. Konigsburg.
Jean Karl/Atheneum. $13.95. (Ages 9 to 13) It's summertime in this sharp, funny novel, and T-back bathing suits are the issue in the city of Peco, Fla., where Chloe is spending the season.
DUMPLING SOUP.
By Jama Kim Rattigan.
Illustrated by Lillian Hsu-Flanders.
Little, Brown. $15.95. (Ages 4 to 8) On New Year's Eve, Marisa's whole extended Asian-American family, which lives on Oahu, goes to Grandma's for dumpling soup.
Since everyone loves dumplings, they have to make a lot.
The ebullient story won the publisher's New Voices, New World contest.
The text has a glossary of English, Hawaiian, Japanese and Korean words.


Melissa Schorr and David Condo
Melissa Ann Schorr, who was until recently the national sales manager of the Berkley Shirt Company in New York, and David Crittenden Condo, the president of the Hathaway Shirt Company in New York, were married yesterday in Lincoln, Neb.
The Rev.
Otis Young officiated at the First Plymouth Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Condo graduated from the University of Southern California.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul C. Schorr 3d of Lincoln.


Why John Dewey Doesn't Work
THE PROMISE OF PRAGMATISM Modernism and the Crisis of Knowledge and Authority.
By John Patrick Diggins. 515 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $29.95.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL: NONFICTION
MILE HIGH MADNESS  A Year With the Colorado Rockies.
By Bob Kravitz.
Times Books/Random House, $22.


Hodges, Once a Met, Always a Dodger, Should Be in Hall
Now that the former Yankees shortstop Phil Rizzuto and the late Leo Durocher, the manager with 2,010 major league victories in 24 seasons, have entered baseball's Hall of Fame via the recommendation of the Veterans Committee, thoughts arise about those who haven't made it yet.
One player, in particular, comes to mind: Gil Hodges.
Not many major leaguers played the game like Hodges, who starred for the fabled Brooklyn Dodger teams of the late 1940's and 1950's.
And few managers could boast of his achievement with the New York Mets, who went from National League doormats to 1969 World Series champions under his guidance.


Clothes Made For Designers?
To the Editor:
Suzy Menkes's baby clothes column ("Runways," March 27) fails to answer such basic questions as:


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about the killing of a Wall Street banker and her killer's subsequent suicide mislocated the site where the killer's body was found in some editions.
It was on the Brooklyn Heights promenade, not on Columbia Heights.


Making Repairs to a Ceiling Fixture When Its Bulb Falters
CONVENTIONAL ceiling-light fixtures with incandescent bulbs ordinarily function for years without trouble.
But when a ceiling light flickers, emits crackling noises or will not light, repairs can be made.
First check the bulb.
Be sure the fixture is switched off, and then stand on a safe platform like a stepladder and remove the fixture's globe or shade.
Pass it to a helper or set it down before proceeding.
When using a stepladder, climb no higher than the second rung from the top.


The Dog Ate It
THERE'S the dog that decided to chew up the electric bill.
The family that couldn't return its library books because of the children's busy social schedules.
And the man who had no choice but to double-park his car. (He had to go to the bathroom.)
In thousands of conversations around the city each day, a battle of wits is waged between those who owe and those who must collect, between those who pitch excuses and those who decide whether they are telling the truth.


At Work; Searching for Quality in Child Care
EXPERTS, politicians and Rush Limbaugh may debate about family values and what's good for children, but parents who put their kids in day care have a pretty solid set of undebatable expectations.
They want their kids to be in a safe place with a warm, attentive care giver who can communicate with them about their children.
And whatever other differences there are among Americans, their hopes for their children converge.
"There is an amazing consensus on what quality is," said Ellen Galinsky, copresident of the Families and Work Institute in New York and one of the authors of a new study of home-based child care.
"It cuts across all ethnic and income lines."
Ms.
Galinksy and her colleagues, Carollee Howes, Susan Kontos and Marybeth Shinn, studied in-home child care arrangements in communities in Southern California, Texas and North Carolina.
The arrangements included care offered in the homes of nonfamily providers, the most prevalent form of care for children under 5, and care offered by relatives.
A third of families with a working mother use in-home care; 13 percent of in-home providers are related to their charges.


Deal Brings BAM Artists To El Puente
El Puente, the Hispanic organization, has begun a partnership with an arts group that will give performers from the Brooklyn Academy of Music a second stage: a community center in Williamsburg.
The arrangement springs from a joint venture between El Puente, a mainstay in Williamsburg for 12 years, and 651/Kings Majestic Corporation, an arts and humanities association affiliated with the academy's Majestic Theater.
The group has promoted arts in the city for five years.


Judaica Show to Benefit White Plains Synagogue
UNTIL recently, Jews wishing to light an unusual menorah at Hanukkah or sip from a beautifully crafted kiddush cup on Sabbath evenings, would have to travel far and wide to find such artistic religious objects.
But Judaica, or decorative art created for use in Jewish ceremonies, is expanding both in popularity and availability and enlarging its definition as it grows.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Richard Matheson; An Influential Writer Returns to Fantasy
THE author Stephen King has said that Richard Matheson is the one author "who influenced me the most as a writer." Such an accolade is humbly received by Mr.
Matheson, a native of Allendale, but he adds that influencing people is what good writing is all about.
In Mr.
Matheson's 40 years of writing novels and short stories, he has also influenced the likes of Stephen Spielberg -- whose first theatrical film, "Duel," was based on a Matheson short story -- and George A. Romero, best known for his film "Night of the Living Dead."


Merchants Of Ivory
For years jazz has been America's unwanted stepchild, stuck somewhere between commercial culture and the serious arts.
But over the last decade, acceptance of the music has increased radically.
In the early 1980's, one major record label released jazz; now virtually every major label has some sort of a jazz presence.
Jazz is at Lincoln Center and at Carnegie Hall, and regularly covered in the popular press.
There's even money in it, with some young jazz musicians commanding recording fees that are comparable to those offered rock bands.
All of this has encouraged young jazz musicians to step up and be heard.
In the midst of this general jazz renaissance, piano virtuosity is undergoing an extraordinary flowering.
Rarely have there been this many gifted young pianists.
This is a golden age.


Corrections Corrections
April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about two landfills in Brooklyn misstated the date of a community meeting to discuss a city study of possible health risks.
It will be held this Tuesday.


Business Goes To College
TWO afternoons a week, in the middle of her shift, Deborah Westfall sheds her blue work smock and heads for a pre-calculus class.
But the 35-year-old parts inspector at Bailey Controls Company never leaves her Wickliffe, Ohio, workplace.
An instructor from Lakeland Community College in nearby Mentor, a school Ms.
Westfall dropped out of more than a decade ago, meets her and two colleagues at the company training facility.
After the class, for which the company pays the college a flat fee regardless of enrollment, Ms.
Westfall returns to the factory floor.
She can make up the two hours of work at her convenience or forfeit pay.
She is earning five more credits toward her associate in manufacturing degree.
Meeting New Needs
With about 100 corporate clients since its inception six years ago, Lakeland's contract education program, like hundreds of others around the country, has helped businesses meet educational needs stemming from changing regulations or market conditions.


Manager's Profile
Eric E. Ryback  Fund: Lindner Dividend, $1.5 billion in assets.
Manager since 1984. (Sponsor: Ryback Management Corp., St. Louis.)  Born: March 19, 1952; Detroit.


Double Tragedy in Africa
So great is the crisis overload on the world's news circuits that many Americans have been only fleetingly aware of continuing massacres in Burundi.
Since last October, more than 100,000 people have been killed while 700,000 people have fled this central African country.
A civil war between the majority Hutu and minority Tutsi tribes has spilled over into neighboring Rwanda -- and now both countries teeter on anarchy.
Burundi's new President, Cyprien Ntaryamira, and the Rwandan President, Juvenal Habyarimana, were killed Wednesday when their aircraft crashed, possibly downed by a rocket, as they were returning from a peace conference in Tanzania.
This ignited a full-scale massacre in Rwanda that has claimed thousands of civilians, peacekeepers and Burundi's Prime Minister, Agathe Uwilingiyimana.
Trapped in the melee is a U.N. force of 2,500 peacekeepers from a score of nations that has been vainly trying to enforce a cease-fire.


Elizabeth Vila, James E. Rogan
Elizabeth Jean Vila, a lawyer in Atlanta, was married yesterday to James Edward Rogan, an aerospace engineer in Marietta, Ga.
Judge Mary Walton Whiteman, a DeKalb County magistrate in Decatur, Ga., officiated at the couple's home in Atlanta.
Mrs.
Rogan, 34, graduated from the University of Chicago and received her law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Jeanette Vila of Wyckoff, N.J., and the late Alan P. Vila.
Her father was a retired chemical engineer and the director of project engineering at the American Cyanamid Company in Wayne, N.J.


Correction
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about a Ukrainian folk singer misstated her surname.
She is Masha Itkina, not Utkin.


April 3-9; Recalling Colors Of Innocence
Over the years children and their parents have faced a minefield of hazardous toys, flammable pajamas and unsafe cribs.
Last week the list included a symbol of childish innocence -- the crayon.
According to Federal law that took effect in 1990, crayons and other art supplies for children must be toxin free.
But evidence surfaced recently that some crayons imported from China were still being sold in this country, despite having enough lead to poison the children who ate them.


In the Region/Westchester; Amtrak's Reprieve for Downtown New Rochelle
NEW ROCHELLE has received a welcome boost from a decision by Amtrak to continue to use the city's downtown train station and invest $92 million in track, platform and station renovations.
The railroad had been considering building a station elsewhere in the city but eventually yielded to community opposition to its abandoning the downtown.


Political Memo; Clinton Plays the Outsider in Pushing His Health Plan
As Bill Clinton travels the country trying to stir up a groundswell of support for his health care plan, it becomes clear that he has settled on a very definite script.
Casting himself as a small-town outsider who just happens to hold the most powerful job in the world, Mr.
Clinton tells audiences that he is bewildered by the ways of wily Washington and that all he wants is to make America healthy.


U.N. Warns Serbs on Gorazde; Move Could Lead to Air Strikes
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali warned Serbian forces today to pull back from Gorazde, setting in motion a process that could lead to NATO air strikes against the Serbian positions in the eastern Bosnian town, which is a United Nations safe area.
After meeting with the commander of the United Nations peacekeeping force and mediators in Geneva, the Secretary General warned that he was ready to order air strikes.
He called for "a return by the parties, especially the Bosnian Serbs, to the positions they held before the outbreak of the recent fighting," implying that the Serbs must withdraw from the Gorazde area, where they achieved a military advantage on Friday.  [ Page 10. ]


A Town Faces Cuts to School Aid
When Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman announced in her budget address in March that she was cutting state aid to some school districts and holding it steady in others, she told voters to blame their local officials if their property taxes went up.
The suggestion found fertile ground in Woodbridge.
On Thursday night, when school boards across New Jersey voted on their 1994-95 budgets, taxpayers here let it be known that they were pointing the finger at the school board, and not Trenton, for a proposed 10 percent increase in the local tax rate.


Natchez to Remember Its Jewish History
Natchez, Miss., known for its antebellum mansions, will be the setting this spring for a weekend of tours and programs exploring the history of its Jewish community.
"The Natchez Jewish Homecoming," sponsored by the Museum of the Southern Jewish Experience from April 29 to May 1, traces the community from the first settlers, merchants and traders from Holland and Spain in the 1700's, through the height of Jewish settlement at the turn of the century.
In 1906, the congregation at Temple B'nai Israel, a co-sponsor of the weekend, reached 140 families.
Today, the membership has dwindled to 12 congregants, who recently signed an agreement with the museum to preserve the neo-classical temple.
The museum, which is in Utica, Miss., about 50 minutes from Natchez, is part of the Henry S. Jacobs Institute, a conference center and camp for reform Jewish youth operated under the auspices of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations.


The Arts of India
To the Editor: It was with great pleasure that we read Edward A. Gargan's article about Kerala, "Where Monsoons and Sea Rule" (March 6), since it reflected the experiences we had while spending three weeks driving through Southern India in March 1993.
We would like to mention a fascinating performance at the Cochin Cultural Center of Kathakali, a classical dance form more than four centuries old that is unique to Kerala.
Also of interest is the area surrounding Thekkedy, where we hiked through spice fields.


The Quiz
They're ubiquitous!
They pussyfoot and galumph around our/their homes.
And on television they help sell cat and dog food and cat litter and togetherness.
They scare and delight us in the movies and are securely entrenched in our mythology and fairy tales.
So we should know a lot about these furry co-habitants, right?
O.K., go for the quiz and see how canny you are about canis familiaris and felis catus.
Fran Handman The Quiz  1.
When were cats first domesticated? 10,000 B.C.; 3,500 B.C.; 1,500 B.C.
When were dogs domesticated? 28,000 B.C.; 18,000 B.C.; 12,000 B.C.


On Expanding Vernon Resort Area
As a member of the Vernon Township Zoning Board, I read with interest the article abvout Great American Recreation Inc.; its chairman, Eugene Mulvihill, and its development activities in Vernon.
I am disturbed by the statement "Great American and its supporters, which include several members of the Township Committee and the Planning and Zoning Boards . . ." because you failed to name any such member of the Zoning Board.
It is extremely unfair to make such a statement, which impugns the integrity of all board members, including myself.
If Mr.
Mulvihill has "supporters" on the Zoning Board, then name them.


IN SHORT/BASEBALL: FICTION
THE ELEMENTS OF HITTING  By Matthew F. Jones. Hyperion, $22.95.


Friend Did Futures Trades for Hillary Clinton
The White House said today that most of the commodity orders by which Hillary Rodham Clinton turned $1,000 into nearly $100,000 in the 1970's were placed by James B. Blair, a friend and lawyer for the Tyson Foods Company, whose role Clinton Administration officials had previously described as only an adviser to Mrs.
Clinton.
The White House, while continuing to maintain that Mrs.
Clinton, a novice trader, made her own trading decisions after consultations with Mr.
Blair, acknowledged that Mr.
Blair then relayed these decisions to Robert L. Bone, chief broker at the Springdale, Ark., office of Refco Inc.


Devils Rally for a Draw As Panthers Make Point
The Florida Panthers came into tonight's game against the Devils in a desperate frame of mind, battling the surging Islanders for the eighth and final Eastern Conference spot in the National Hockey League playoffs.
For the Devils, who have locked up the third conference slot, the game represented more of a chance to feel good heading into the playoffs.


Mitchell Says He Would 'Enjoy' Court Job but Hasn't Been Asked
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine said today that he would "enjoy being on the Supreme Court" and listed as an essential attribute for any Court nominee the same "experience in nonjudicial areas" that he himself had.
Mr.
Mitchell, the Senate Democratic leader, said he had not thought about whether he would accept a nomination because he had not been approached by the White House.
But he did nothing to squelch the impression that he would be eager to fill the seat being vacated by Justice Harry A. Blackmun Jr., and the Senator received a clear endorsement from his Republican counterpart, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas.


Brocco Fit? Trainer Says Yes, but State Vet Says Maybe
Bring on Brocco, they're shouting in the East.
Bring on Holy Bull, they're crying in the West.
Bring on both of them, they're calling in between.
They will do exactly that on May 7, when East meets West in the 120th Kentucky Derby -- that is, if Brocco did not bruise his right front foot, as a California state veterinarian suspected after the colt won the Santa Anita Derby on Saturday.


Review/Fashion; The Strident and the Serene
By the fourth day of the New York fashion shows for fall, with 11 runway shows scheduled, there was probably not a retailer or journalist who had not come up with some fantasy of making the rituals of fashion easier.
One practical alternative came from X-Girl, a collection by Sonic Youth's Kim Gordon and Daisy von Furth, who took their bubble-gum-colored baseball-shirt dressing to the streets of SoHo, so that editors and buyers leaving the Marc Jacobs show on Saturday had only to walk a few blocks and pause.


Volunteers to Help Counter Perceptions of Crime
While statistics show crime declining in New York City, polls show many people feel the city is as dangerous as ever.
To combat those fears, the Police Department started a campaign over the weekend to improve perceptions about safety at some of New York's landmarks.
Under the Fear Reduction Program, volunteers who normally travel through areas like Central Park or over the Brooklyn Bridge will don conspicuous blue vests and be equipped with cellular phones to report crimes, though they will not be able to interfere physically or verbally in a crime.
The idea is to create a psychological cushion in these areas, which suffer from the idea that they are more dangerous than statistics bear out, said Deputy Chief Michael Julian.


Treasury's Sales Calendar Offers Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.54 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.94 percent.


Anderson's Dribble Rips Opponents Apart
The chase was on as soon as Kenny Anderson crossed midcourt with the ball in his hands.
One of the Nets' forwards, or their center, would drift out near the top of the circle and set a high pick on the Knicks' point guard.
The point guard, Derek Harper or Greg Anthony, would fight through the screen.
The defender guarding the big man, often Charles Oakley or Patrick Ewing, would forget him and run a double-team at the skinny kid with the ball on a string.
"Cut off the head, kill the body," Anderson said of the Knicks' defensive game plan against the Nets that is now 1 for 5, batting .200, when they are 51 for 68 against everyone else.


French Vogue Names Editor
Joan Juliet Buck, a film critic for Vogue who has written about politics, the arts and fashion for magazines in the United States and abroad, has been named editor of French Vogue, effective on June 1.
Ms.
Buck replaces Colombe Pringle as editor.
The selection of Ms.
Buck, who is also a former editor of British Vogue and who has been both London and Rome correspondent for Women Wear's Daily, underscores a decision to modernize the magazine and expand its scope.
French Vogue, owned by Conde Nast Publications, has a circulation of 80,000.


Forget Respect, Nets Happy to Win
It was an ugly day for Knicks fans, but a beautiful one for Nets rooters as New Jersey beat New York again before a sellout crowd of 20,049 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"Oh, they don't really respect us because we're at the bottom of the playoff race, but in the back of their minds they knew they were coming into a hornet's nest and they got stung today," said P. J. Brown, the only Nets starter who did not score in double figures in the 107-88 victory over the Knicks today.
"The only thing that's going to change that is if we bring a championship in here. And even then it might not change right away."


Murder by the State Is Also an Irrational Act
To the Editor:
Since Bob Herbert, in his March 27 column, mentions no other physical characteristics of William Henry Hance, condemned double murderer, or of his victims or the jury, than color, it seems his objection to the imposition of the death penalty in the case is that he believes it was color-biased.
If this was so, it is deplorable.


Cortines to Stay as Chancellor In a Compromise With Giuliani
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines agreed yesterday to continue in his post after he and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani reached a settlement in their confrontation over school management.
In the agreement, which was brokered by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the Mayor dropped his insistence that the Chancellor dismiss two Board of Education officials, and the Chancellor accepted the appointment of a City Hall-based official reporting to the Mayor on school finances.


Reserve Brigade Sounds Taps


Modest Air Operation in Bosnia Crosses a Major Political Frontier
By military standards, the air strikes carried out today against the Serbs in Bosnia were extremely modest.
But the two American F-16C's that attacked Serbian positions outside the besieged town of Gorazde crossed a major political boundary.
The attacks marked the first time that air power has been used against Serbian positions in Bosnia, as well as the first time in the 45-year history of the NATO alliance that it has ever carried out a bombing raid.
It also represents an important milestone for the Clinton Administration.


A campaign for a new telecommunications company tries to burst the 'techno-babble' bubble.
FROM the land of the air kiss comes the air touch.
Beginning today, Air Touch Communications, freshly spun off from the Pacific Telesis Group, the regional Baby Bell telephone company serving California, introduces a humorous campaign intended to give the nascent company a customer-friendly identity.


Lockerbie Trial at Hague Wouldn't Work; What Other Choices?
To the Editor:
"Libya Blinks on Lockerbie" (editorial, March 28), suggesting that the United States and Britain accept Libya's offer of a trial at The Hague of two Libyan agents suspected of bombing Pan Am Flight 103 points to a way out of the impasse and the possibility of achieving some measure of accountability.


Trying to Mute the Whistle-Blowers
Faced with record penalties that followed a worker's blowing the whistle on corporate fraud against the Government, weapons contractors are waging a battle on Capitol Hill to make it harder for whistle-blowers to press their cases and collect eye-popping awards.
In the eight years since Congress revised the whistle-blower law to make awards more lucrative, a growing number of people have filed cases seeking multimillion-dollar awards for revealing fraud by Government contractors, especially weapons manufacturers.
So far, the Government has collected about $750 million and legal experts predict the amount will surpass $1 billion this year as more and larger cases come up.
A whistle-blower is entitled to a minimum 15 percent of what the Government collects in his or her case.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS
The Associated Press intends to start a 24-hour all-news radio network on June 1, aiming to capitalize on the rising popularity of news and talk-radio programming at a time when station owners are seeking inexpensive but profitable formats.
Details about the venture, which will be called A.P.
All News Radio, are expected to be announced tomorrow in Washington by Jim R. Williams, vice president of the A.P. and broadcast director.


A More Forthright Stand by an Embarrassed U.S. Set the Stage for Air Strikes
The NATO air strikes against Serbian positions in Bosnia today came four days after President Clinton's top national security advisers resolved a dispute over the use of force there and eased the way for the United Nations to request the attack, Administration officials said today.
Trying to put an end to the uproar over embarrassing and often conflicting statements by American officials, the Administration decided that the United States would regard a further Serbian advance on the Bosnian Muslim enclave of Gorazde as a threat to United Nations peacekeeping troops there, even though only a handful of them were in place.


Digital Equipment Account in Review
The Digital Equipment Corporation has officially placed its worldwide account in review after four months of speculation in trade publications that it would seek to make changes, possibly including a consolidation, in its agency roster.
The account, with billings estimated at $35 million, is currently handled by five primary agencies in the United States and one in France.
Michelle Hoey, a spokeswoman for Digital in Maynard, Mass., said on Friday that Digital had hired Morgan, Anderson &amp; Company, the advertising and marketing consulting company in New York, to manage the review.
In a statement, Digital said the review was intended "to strengthen its global image and provide a singular corporate voice."


Paris Journal; So It's Not What Doctor Ordered. Herbs Are In.
Presiding over a great assembly of 500 kinds of plants, Michel Pierre has to watch his words.
He cannot call them medicines or use terms like curing or healing.
Yet this herbalist in the old heart of Paris knows exactly where to turn when an ailment needs a remedy.
"Red vine leaves, good for the circulation," he said, beaming.
Navigating among baskets stuffed with leaves and bowls full of seeds, he offered marigold to clear the skin, horsetail to soothe a client's rheumatism and hawthorn to calm the nerves.


Washington Talk; Little Chance for Welfare Change, but Few Say So
It will be remarkable enough if Congress finishes an overhaul of the health care system this year, given the calendar, the status of the legislation and the sheer magnitude of the job.
But many people in the Clinton Administration and on Capitol Hill take the position that, by golly, after completing the biggest piece of domestic legislation since Social Security, and before adjourning for the November elections, Congress will also "end welfare as we know it."


A Fund-Raising Folly
A memo written last year by Senator Frank Lautenberg's chief of staff advises campaign fund raisers to target people who have received the Senator's help.
It is a particular embarrassment for the New Jersey Democrat, a critic of lax Congressional ethics and the author of a strong pending measure banning gifts to legislators.
The memo, written by Eve Lubalin, and disclosed recently in the Capitol Hill newspaper Roll Call, takes an unusually brazen approach to the common political game of soliciting people who have business before a lawmaker's committee.
"Just did something nice that made him very $$," Ms.
Lubalin writes of a potential donor.


Tumultuous Reign as Schools Chief
Ramon C. Cortines's term as Schools Chancellor has been turbulent even by New York City standards.
He took office under a Mayor who wanted someone else for the job, and his relations with the current Mayor deteriorated over the months, culminating with Mr.
Cortines's resignation last Friday and yesterday's reversal of that decision.
AUG. 27, 1993 -- Board of Education selects Mr.
Cortines as Schools Chancellor.
Mayor David N. Dinkins had lobbied for another candidate.


A Magnificent Putt Propels Olazabal
The eagle putt was long, and at that moment it seemed almost as long as the Iberian Peninsula that spawned the man who stood over it at the 15th hole of Augusta National today.
The Masters is won and lost on such putts, and Jose Maria Olazabal added his name to the list of men who have accepted the challenge.
That 30-footer for eagle propelled Olazabal to a two-stroke lead, and despite a bogey at the 17th hole he maintained that margin over Tom Lehman to become the sixth foreign player in the last seven years to win the Masters.
Olazabal, 28 years old, closed with a 69 to defeat Lehman, the third-round leader who shot even-par 72.


Sports of The Times; Lehman Is Accepting A 'Stab in the Heart'
WHEN his 15-foot eagle putt slid by the cup, Tom Lehman spun, dropped to his knees and pounded his hands three times on the 15th green.
"I was so shocked, so focused on making that putt," he would say later.
"When it didn't go in, it was like a stab in the heart."


Encore for Three Tenors
The tenors Jose Carreras, Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti are to give a joint concert on July 16 at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles, with Zubin Mehta conducting the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the Los Angeles Music Center Opera Chorus.
The three men, who last sang together in 1990 at the Baths of Caracalla in Rome, will sing arias and American, Italian and Spanish songs.
Information: (213) 224-1448.


Deaths in Rwanda Fighting Said to Be 20,000 or More
As fighting between rival tribal factions in neighboring Rwanda appeared to slacken today, relief workers in Kigali, the capital, estimated the death toll from four days of ethnic warfare and reprisal killings at more than 20,000.
Even as hundreds of Americans, French and other foreigners were evacuated by land and air from the blood-stained city, the scale of the carnage the Rwandans have inflicted upon one another became clear.
They described streets and alleys lined with corpses, many of them horribly mutilated, in this lush, green city, which had a population of 200,000 before the fighting began..


Is There Hope for Historical Society?
The New-York Historical Society, which was on the verge of signing away control of its library and much of its collection to New York University last month, now seems intent on trying to survive on its own.
The proposed agreement with N.Y.U. foundered on opposition from community and cultural leaders and from elected officials, who saw the deal as a direct violation of a promise made last year by officials of the historical society to keep the institution independent in exchange for an infusion of public funds.
But where does that leave the 190-year-old society, which has teetered on the brink of disaster for years?
Still in limbo.
In fact, it may be more in limbo than ever.
Last week Herbert S. Winokur Jr., a co-chairman of the society, the acting chief executive officer and a prime mover behind the New York University deal, abruptly resigned; the institution is now being run by staff committees under the eye of Wilbur L. Ross Jr., who remains as chairman.
The board is continuing to search for a chief executive; the public galleries remain closed, as they have been for more than a year, and there is no long-term strategic plan for the institution's survival.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13 U.S. JETS HIT SERBIAN TARGETS
Two U.S. fighter-bombers, flying under NATO command, bombed Serbian targets near Gorazde after Serbian forces disregarded U.N. demands to pull back and intensified their attacks on the Bosnian town, heavily populated with refugees.
A1


METRO DIGEST
TURMOIL IN THE SCHOOLS: NEGOTIATING THE CHANCELLOR'S RETURN
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines agreed to continue in his post, shaking hands with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani after the two men announced a settlement that put an end to their confrontation over school management that had become the Mayor's worst crisis and led to Mr.
Cortines's resignation on Friday.
A1.
A TIMELY VICTORY FOR CUOMO
Mario M. Cuomo, who seems to have been the major force in mediating the schools dispute, has long understood the political power of conciliation.
With Mr.
Cuomo trying to overcome dismal approval ratings in his fourth gubernatorial campaign, the timing of his apparently successful efforts to resolve the imediate conflict between Mayor Giuliani and Chancellor Cortines could not have been better for himself.
B6.


Recycling's Old News For American Cars
To the Editor:
Re "Why Junk the Old Car if You Can Recycle It?" (letter, March 23):


Car Pooling
New York City's first car pool lanes will open next Monday morning on the Queensboro Bridge.
"High-occupancy vehicle lanes," or H.O.V.'s, which are rare in the region, are meant to help governments and businesses comply with the Clean Air Act by rewarding commuters who share their cars with others.
The H.O.V. that opened last month on Interstate 80 in New Jersey was expected to be used by about 600 vehicles an hour but so far it is getting more use than that, state transportation officials say.
Vehicle counts for car pool lanes on Interstate 84 in Connecticut were declining -- partly because of the area's weak economy, officials say -- until last year when the rules were relaxed to allow cars with as few as two occupants to take the lane.
The car pool lanes shown are open to vehicles with two or more people, busses and all motorcycles.


Blacks Now Cheer Apartheid's Ex-Enforcers
"Terrorists in uniform," is the way Siphiwe Nyanda remembers the South African Defense Force in its all-too-recent incarnation as the whip hand of apartheid and scourge of black resistance movements.
"Butchers," he adds emphatically, warming to the subject of the army that hunted him in his years as a guerrilla of the anti-apartheid underground called Spear of the Nation.
"Marauders -- people who wreaked havoc in the country and the subcontinent. Assassins. Killers. A ruthless army which had absolutely no legitimacy, hated and vilified by our people."


Jobs Program May Become The Casualty Of Its Success
A federally financed program to provide housing and job training to the homeless has worked so well that the Clinton Administration wants to copy its methods on a larger scale and put it out of business.
Though this could mean more help for the estimated one million homeless Americans, the directors of the smaller, largely autonomous project say that its shoots of hope will be trampled by the big foot of the Federal bureaucracy.


Market Place; The auto industry isn't afraid of higher interest rates, yet.
ARE rising interest rates a threat to automobile sales and auto makers' earnings?
Not yet, in the view of Wall Street analysts, dealers and auto executives.
The increases brought on by the Federal Reserve so far have not deterred buyers, Alexander J. Trotman, the chairman and chief executive of the Ford Motor Company, said at a news conference before the recent New York Auto Show.


Islanders Upstage Broadway Blues
Like cast members of a much-anticipated Broadway show in previews, the Islanders and the Rangers got their act together before a roaring crowd today at the Coliseum.
The Islanders won by 5-4 in the last game of the regular-season series, another fine chapter in a rivalry that might resume as soon as next Sunday in the first game of the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.


The Wild West Makes a Comeback in a New Dell Magazine
Western pulp magazines -- those short-story collections, printed on cheap paper, that paid writers two or three pennies a word -- rode off into the sunset about three decades ago.
Killed off by a profusion of Western paperback novels and Western movies on television, the pulps had been as indigenous to American publishing as the penny press and the dime novel.
But here comes Dell Magazines with its new Louis L'Amour Western Magazine, a glossy publication offered every two months and featuring the works of new Western writers.
Priced at $2.95, it is filled with tall tales of the frontier, historical accounts and interviews with authors.
And the response has even taken its publishers by surprise.


CHRONICLE
It was not your stereotype spur-of-the-moment Las Vegas wedding.
For one thing, the bridegroom, WAYNE NEWTON, the entertainer, met his bride, KATHLEEN McCRONE, three years ago, when Ms.
McCrone, a lawyer from Cleveland, was attending a Las Vegas performance.
Last summer they were engaged, and on Saturday, they were married.
No Elvis chapel for them, either.
The wedding took place at Mr.
Newton's 53-acre ranch, Casa de Shenandoah.
The Associated Press reported that about 200 guests were transported from the parking area to the wedding area by horse-drawn carriage.
Ten musicians provided chamber music.


A Humbled Jordan Learns New Truths
Every morning when he wakes up, Michael Jordan was saying, he sees the face of his dead father, James.
Every morning, as he did this morning when he rose from bed in his hotel room here, he has a conversation with his father, his greatest supporter, his regular companion, his dearest and most trusted friend.
"I talk to him more in the subconscious than actual words," said Jordan today, in front of his locker in the Birmingham Barons' Class AA clubhouse.
" 'Keep doing what you're doing,' he'd tell me," said Jordan.
" 'Keep trying to make it happen. You can't be afraid to fail. Don't give a damn about the media.' Then he'd say something funny -- or recall something about when I was a boy, when we'd be in the backyard playing catch together like we did all the time.


McGovern's Biggest Gallery Has Vantage Point in Hackensack
While Jose Maria Olazabal and Tom Lehman dueled with one another at Augusta this afternoon, the members watching at the Hackensack Golf Club seemed to care as much about their card game.
Except when Jim McGovern was on the television screen.


In Musical Odessa, Playing On for the Love of It
Somehow, they just keep playing.
Despite the poverty and the loss, the bleak future and the burdensome past, the musicians of Odessa refuse to lay down their instruments.
With little state support and even less from private business, orchestras throughout the former Soviet Union are wasting away.
Music schools can no longer afford to pay for electricity, let alone salaries or instruments.


Review/Television; In Archie Bunker's Old House, a New Family Spins Jokes
Norman Lear loves to be provocative.
Back in 1971, he turned a lovable bigot named Archie Bunker and his shrewdly dizzy wife, Edith, into enduring pop-culture icons.
Now he's giving the "All in the Family" format an updated spin in "704 Hauser," making its debut tonight on CBS.
The family currently living in Archie's old house, 704 Hauser Street in Queens, is black.
Bigotry, it seems, has no color boundaries, at least as far as ingrained sitcom shtick is concerned.
The head of the house in this instance is Ernie Cumberbatch, an auto mechanic played by John Amos, the actor whose father character in Mr.
Lear's "Good Times" was summarily dispatched in a 1976 auto accident.
Ernie's wife is Rose (Lynnie Godfrey) who, when not working for an upscale catering service, spends much of her time warning Ernie to have more respect for their church minister.


Clinton and Technology: Some Policies Clash
It would be hard to find a President more enthusiastic about promoting technology than Bill Clinton.
Yet in a striking number of cases, the Administration seems to be picking fights with the very companies that want to build its cherished information superhighway.
Even as some Federal agencies funnel billions of dollars in tax breaks and new spending for research on projects from high-resolution video to high-performance computing, others are taking actions that even some Democrats say could weaken the nation's commercial technology prowess.


A Candle to Remember the Holocaust


Review/Opera; New Rosina and Conductor For the Met's 'Barbiere'
There were two new faces for the Metropolitan Opera's current run of "Il Barbiere di Siviglia" on Thursday night.
Theodora Hanslowe, who substituted in midperformance for Susanne Mentzer two weeks ago, sang the role of Rosina, this time from the beginning.
The young Canadian conductor Yves Abel made his house debut.
Ms.
Hanslowe, an American mezzo-soprano, has an easy grasp of Rossini's music.
The delivery is unruffled, agile and nicely colored.
Her Rosina is no ingenue.
Ms.
Hanslowe gives the part a certain wryness and sophistication, as if Rosina were as much amused by her own follies as by the folly going on around her.


Sanchez Vicario Wins One for Her Father
The crowd was not in her corner.
Her father was in a hospital back home in Spain after suffering a heart attack on Tuesday.
Her opponent was desperate to end a two-year slump without a title.
But none of these troubling predicaments were sufficient to dissuade top-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario from ending her own 11-month drought without a title by putting up a vehement and successful defense of her 1993 Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships.
She saved her most torrid tennis for the most torrid afternoon of a cloudless week on this semitropical island, saved her most energetic topspin and defiant drop shots till last.


U.N. Forces Shelter Thousands In Rwanda
The 2,500 United Nations peacekeepers in Rwanda are providing shelter to thousands of Rwandans as the peace agreement the troops were sent to help enforce collapses, United Nations officials said today.
Jacques-Roger Booh-Booh of Cameroon, the United Nations mediator in Rwanda, reported by cable that the peacekeepers' camps in the capital, Kigali, and other parts of the country have taken in civilians "terrified by the ruthless campaign of ethnic cleansing and terror."


Whitaker Crowned King Of His Own Homecoming
A marching band played as he entered the ring, and the crowd rose to its feet anytime he fired off a flurry.
Pernell Whitaker returned the favors with quite an exhibition.
Whitaker scored a 12-round unanimous decision in front of his hometown fans at the Norfolk Scope Saturday night to retain his welterweight title against Santos Cardona, the World Boxing Council's top-ranked challenger.
Whitaker displayed all the qualities that have earned him a title he values much more highly than his welterweight belt: boxing's best pound-for-pound fighter.


Books of The Times; Who Is Saul Bellow? And Who Isn't Saul Bellow?
It All Adds Up From the Dim Past to the Uncertain Future: A Nonfiction Collection By Saul Bellow 327 pages.
Viking. $23.95.
Saul Bellow's is an unusual literary case, hard to peg or cubbyhole; his ambiguities and contradictions are reflected in the first nonfiction collection by the 1976 Nobel laureate in literature, "It All Adds Up: From the Dim Past to the Uncertain Future."


By Mediating Dispute, Cuomo Gains Dividends
Ever since 1972, when a young lawyer named Mario M. Cuomo was catapulted to prominence after mediating a bitter housing dispute in Forest Hills, Queens, Mr.
Cuomo has come to understand the political power of conciliation.
Twenty-two years later, with Mr.
Cuomo trying to overcome dismal approval ratings in his fourth gubernatorial campaign, the timing of his efforts to mediate the conflict between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines could not have been better for the Governor.


Corrections
A picture in some copies on Saturday showing a new clinic for children in the Bronx carried an erroneous caption written for a picture that did not appear.
Those pictured were a mother and young child, not a 10-year-old boy.


Woman Held in a Killing
A 29-year-old woman was arrested early yesterday on charges she fatally stabbed her male companion, who the police believe had beaten her while throwing her out of their Brooklyn apartment.
The body of the victim, identified as Derrick Pack, 29, the superintendent at 369 Lincoln Place in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section, was found by the police outside his basement apartment about 6:15 A.M.
He had been stabbed in the chest with a steak knife, the police said.
The suspect, Cynthia Jenkins, was treated at Brooklyn Jewish Hospital for facial wounds the police said were caused by a beating and released into police custody.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the stalking and killing of an investment banker in Brooklyn misspelled the name of a law firm where her husband, Reed Auerbach, became a partner.
It is Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.


Max Petitpierre, 95, Swiss Aide Who Modified Neutrality, Dies
Max Petitpierre, a former Foreign Minister and President of Switzerland who helped amend his country's traditional policy of neutrality and did not hide his pro-Western leanings, died on March 25 at his home in Neuchatel.
He was 95.
In announcing his death, the Swiss Government did not disclose its cause.


A Little Nursing Gets Hospital's Computers Up and Running
Monitors were not plugged in.
Printers were not on line.
The names of some discharged patients could not be found in the system.
Some employees, who had somehow not been trained, phoned for help.
But after some debugging, an extra 18 hours of labor and many cups of coffee, St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center's computerized record-keeping network was finally on line just after 7 A.M.
Sunday.


Salt Mine Cave-In Brings Pollution and Jobs Debate
Just two months ago trucks lined up in record numbers at the Akzo salt mine here, hauling away road salt to melt heavy winter snow throughout the Northeast.
But a banner winter for Akzo, the largest salt mine in North America, has been followed by a nightmarish spring.
Since the March 12 collapse of part of the mine roof, millions of gallons of water have been flooding the mine, which covers an area roughly the size of Manhattan some 1,200 feet underground.
No one was injured in the collapse.


France and Belgium Send Troops To Rescue but Not to Intervene
France and Belgium have both insisted that they have no military or political objectives in Rwanda beyond evacuating foreigners, and that they have no intention of trying to restore law and order there, in part because both countries are viewed with suspicion by both sides in the fighting.
While the Rwandan Government allowed French troops to land at Kigali airport early Saturday, a sign of its good relations with Paris, it only permitted eight Belgian troop-carrying planes to land this afternoon after lengthy negotiations with United Nations officials.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; For journalists around the world, new dangers of imprisonment, physical attack and death.
THE news business isn't just another business.
Every now and again, there is a reminder that the news business can be about more important things than profits and losses.


Review/Music; Long Familiarity Can Breed A Good Artistic Marriage
Menahem Pressler, a veteran pianist best known as the last link to the original Beaux-Arts Trio, provided a veritable model for the Masterworks series at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on Friday evening.
Presenting a single work, Brahms's kaleidoscopic Variations and Fugue on a Theme of Handel (Op. 24), Mr.
Pressler, always an informative and entertaining speaker, gave some biographical background to its composition and analyzed it quickly before performing it.
The 10th Variation, he said in his quaintly idiosyncratic English, "could have a sense of humor if he didn't put a drop of bitter in it." And Mr.
Pressler's own lively wit bubbled to the surface when he described the Hungarianisms of the 13th Variation and the Brahmsian boogie-woogie of the 14th.
The punning observation that in Brahms the bass is the bottom line would have been unpardonable if it had seemed intentional.


Review/Pop; Live and Without Regis, Kathie Lee Performs
Few show-business personalities know the rewards of perseverance better than Kathie Lee Gifford.
In the most entertaining section of her Avery Fisher Hall concert on Saturday evening, the star humorously reviewed her 25-year struggle for recognition, which ended when she struck gold with the morning talk show "Live With Regis and Kathie Lee."
Home movies, videotape and slides traced her singing career all the way back to a childhood performance of "Mary Had a Little Lamb." A clip of the 14-year-old singer, looking like a Joan Baez clone, showed her singing "Go Down Moses" as part of a teen-age folk group.
Other clips showed her as "the la-la-la girl" (her description) on "Name That Tune," as a gawky country singer on the sitcom "Hee Haw Honeys" and as a desperately perky interviewer on "Good Morning America."


CALIFORNIA SHOWS SIGNS OF RECOVERY AS JOBS INCREASE
After nearly four years of recession, and well behind the rest of the nation, the economic and political powerhouse that is California is finally showing signs of recovery.
Since January, California has added 29,000 jobs, a three-month spike in employment after a long, painful decline.
That increase is dwarfed by the tens of thousands of aerospace jobs that disappeared in the 1990's, but it nevertheless has economists here trumpeting better things to come.


President to Leave Foote, Cone Direct
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Direct in Chicago said its president, Jim Tennant, would leave to join Selfix Inc., a houseware-products manufacturer in Chicago, effective May 1.


Connecticut Set to Change The Guard
When Connecticut voters go to the polls in November to choose their next governor, the top line on the ballot will belong to A Connecticut Party, the party of the victor in 1990, Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
But now that Mr.
Weicker is leaving office, whether voters are interested in continuing their experiment with an independent governor remains to be seen.


Why Call Somalia a United Nations Blunder?
To the Editor:
"Somalia: An Accounting," your sobering March 26 editorial about what went wrong in Somalia, chides the United Nations for having "blundered into a military confrontation" with Mohammed Farah Aidid.


Smoke in California
In November 1988 Californians voted to save themselves -- and their children -- from a lethal habit.
They did it by approving Proposition 99, which increased the state tax on cigarettes and other tobacco products and called for 20 percent of the new funds to be spent on an anti-smoking advertising and education campaign.
Judging by the result, it was a brilliant use of the ballot box.
Since then the number of smokers in California has declined by an astonishing 27 percent, about three times the national quit rate.


Truck Strike Impact Seen As Limited
The American economy is likely to wiggle through even a lengthy trucking strike by the teamsters' union with minimal disruptions, transportation experts and business executives say.
Since the 75,000 teamsters walked out at 22 trucking companies at midnight Tuesday, there have already been anecdotal reports of shipments canceled, production schedules altered and other dislocations, and experts expect many more, including scattered manufacturing layoffs, if the strike lasts more than a week.
But no one expects a repeat of 1979, when a much broader 10-day teamster strike against 500 companies provided a severe if short-lived economic jolt that forced the Chrysler Corporation, for one, to shut down 9 of its 10 North American auto assembly lines.


Stefan Guse, 54, a Military Aide During Romanian Dictatorship
Col.-Gen.
Stefan Guse of the Romanian Army, who figured in the crisis that ended the Ceausescu dictatorship in 1989, died on March 28 in the military hospital in Bucharest.
He was 54.
The cause was lung cancer, the Reuters news agency reported, citing the Romanian state news agency Rompres.


Abroad at Home; Words and Deeds
At long last the United States and its allies have shown some courage and resolve in the face of brazen Serbian aggression.
The air strikes on Serbian forces attacking Gorazde are late, far too late.
But they could mark an end to the bewildering policy of weakness that followed the Sarajevo ultimatum at the end of February.
Few acts of foreign policy have been as dramatically successful as the U.S.-inspired NATO ultimatum to the besieging Serbs to stop shelling Sarajevo.
The guns were silenced, and a terrorized city returned to something like normal life.


Brooklyn Hospitals on a Shared Mission
For decades they have faced each other in wary proximity across Clarkson Avenue: Kings County Hospital Center, the ancient, overstuffed waiting room of central Brooklyn, and the State University of New York's Health Science Center at Brooklyn, the better equipped and more exclusive teaching hospital.
While Federal and state health planners have tried in vain for years to coax the two independent hospitals to share resources, turf battles and conflicting notions of their medical missions have kept them apart.


Mayor's Drug Strategy: New Plan for Chronic Problem
New York is a city with a chronic drug problem.
It has hundreds of thousands of addicts and so many dealers that almost every neighborhood seems to have at least a few, lounging in the open like scruffy, cold-eyed birds of prey, churning up dark clouds of anger, fear and resentment.
In the toughest sections, the dealers shout out brand names of heroin like hot dog vendors at ball games.
Smugglers work the ports, and buyers from out of town supply markets from Maine to Memphis.


Lockerbie Trial at Hague Wouldn't Work
To the Editor:
As the mother of one of those killed in the bombing of Pan Am 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in December 1988, I was puzzled and alarmed by "Libya Blinks on Lockerbie" (editorial, March 28).
The suggestion that the trial of the Libyan suspects be in the International Court of Justice in The Hague before Scottish judges, is one of a long string of Libyan attempts to create confusion and delay.


More Protection for Firefighters
This month, all 11,500 firefighters in New York City will be fitted for new "bunker gear," clothing to shield them against flames as hot as 1,500 degrees.
The switch in outfit, which will cost $10 million, follows a fire in SoHo last month that killed two firefighters and left a third with severe burns and only a 50-50 chance of survival.
It is not clear that such gear might have spared the firefighters.
But the new coats, pants and boots were designed to avoid a problem with the current uniform that has been cited in lawsuits stemming from burns on the job: a gap between the coat and the boots that they said exposed them to flames.


Cloudy Outlook in Japan; Hosokawa's Resignation Could Sidetrack The Modest Recovery That Was Forecast
The economic news in Japan has been grim for the last year, so it came as a relief when Yasushi Mieno, the governor of the Bank of Japan, cast off his misgivings, stuck out his neck and declared last week that the prospects for a recovery this year were brightening.
Businessmen have waited a long time to hear that, but their joy was short-lived.
Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa's startling announcement on Friday that he was resigning because of a financial scandal has left economists fretting that a sustained period of political turbulence could abort what even optimists expected to be only a fragile recovery.


INSIDE
Fight on Whistle-Blower Law
Weapons manufacturers are pressing for legislation to limit the ability of whistle-blowers in Government fraud cases to collect big awards.
Page D1.
Radiation Doctor Under Fire
Congressional hearings begin on Dr.
Eugene L. Saenger's cold war experiment involving 88 cancer patients at the University of Cincinnati.
Page D9.
Garden of Eden 2
The long-troubled ecology experiment-under-glass, Biosphere 2, faces its greatest crisis in a battle for control over its management.
Page A14.
Green Jacket for Olazabal
Jose Maria Olazabal, a 28-year-old Spaniard, won the Masters with a round of 69 highlighted by an eagle on the 15th hole.
SportsMonday, C1.
A2 Arts


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration often seems to have a contradictory policy on information technology, fighting with the companies that would build its cherished data superhighway.
Yet there is a pattern to the Government's strategy.
When forced to make a choice between promoting commercial technology companies and national security interests, the Administration will usually side with commercial companies.
But when crime or consumer issues are at stake, Clinton officials are less likely to toe the industry line.  [ Page D1. ]


American Evacuees Describe Horrors Faced by Rwandans
Foreign evacuees came out of Kigali, Rwanda, today, bearing horror stories of sweeping civil strife that left their Rwandan friends and neighbors slain or in hiding and fearing for their lives.
Many of the more than 170 Americans and Europeans who traveled in caravans to neighboring Burundi and were then flown here by United States military planes arrived shaken, with few belongings.
But they brought many accounts of the days of bloodshed that began in Rwanda on Wednesday when the Presidents of Rwanda and Burundi were killed when their plane crashed at the Kigali airport, reportedly after being hit by a rocket.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week: MONDAY
Carolina Fght Corp
Phillips Pete Co TUESDAY
AAR Corp
Bank New York Inc
Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp
Helene Curtis Inds
Lubys Cafeterias Inc
Shopko Stores Inc WEDNESDAY
Dreyfus Corp
Puget Sound Pwr&amp;Lt Co
Shelby Williams Inds Inc
Supervalu Inc
Walgreen
WPL Hldgs THURSDAY
Adams Express Co
Bear Stearns Cos
Ford Mtr Co
NWNL Cos
Parker Hannifin Corp
Petroleum &amp; Res Corp
Unifirst Corp Mass
Universal Foods Corp
Wisconsin Pub Svc FRIDAY
Comsat Corp
Flowers Inds
Legg Mason Inc
Twin Disc Inc


People
*
Michael D. Donahue was named to the new position of senior vice president of member services at the American Association of Advertising Agencies, New York.
He was previously an executive vice president and executive management director of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York. *
Gene Jankowski was named to the new position of managing director specializing in electronic media for Veronis, Suhler &amp; Associates, New York.
Mr.
Jankowski, who was chairman at Jankowski Communications Systems Inc., New York, was previously chairman and president of the CBS Broadcast Group, New York.


Why Call Somalia a United Nations Blunder?; Regional Approach
To the Editor:
I agree with the two lessons you describe as learned from the Somalia experience in your March 26 editorial.
I believe, however, there is an even more valuable lesson that has wider- reaching consequences for future United Nations peacekeeping.


Bridge
Identifying the world's biggest bridge club in size would be difficult, but there is little doubt about the world's biggest in activity.
The Beverly Club, at 130 East 57th Street, has about 400 tables in play each week, and 60 tables of players under instruction.
It also has occasional lectures by leading personalities: Zia Mahmood, perhaps the game's most dynamic star, will lecture there Wednesday at 6 P.M.
Perhaps the weirdest deal ever seen at the Beverly occurred late on a hot Saturday night, and the players were somewhat tired and grumpy.
Three of them, as the diagram suggests, were determined to be declarer.
Sitting North with a 10-card diamond suit was Joan Dziekanski, who owns the club with Jim Becker.
She chose to pass with her 10-card diamond suit, awaiting developments, and the bidding then took a peculiar turn -- even more peculiar than the diagram indicates.


Who Owns New York? The New Jersey Nets Do
The Nets believe they can beat the Knicks any time, anywhere.
And today, the Nets did it again, with ease.
They dominated New York, 107-88, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, winning their fourth game in five meetings this season against the Knicks.
There is a distinct possibility that these two teams could meet in the playoffs, which begin in late April.
That could be the Knicks' worst nightmare.


Kirshenbaum Wins Keds Footwear Job
The Keds Corporation of Cambridge, Mass., has selected Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond of New York to handle its sneaker and casual footwear account, which had been at Leonard Monahan Lubars &amp; Kelly of Providence, R.I., until that agency declined to participate in a review.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.
Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond was awarded the account on Friday after a two-month review that began with six agencies and was narrowed to four finalists.
The other three were Arnold Advertising and Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, both of Boston, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York.


Islander Anxiety Gets Puck Rolling
Desperation can make people do amazing things.
Desperation to reach the playoffs brought the Islanders their longest unbeaten streak this season, 4-0-3 in the last seven games, including a 5-4 victory against the league-leading Rangers today at Nassau Colisem.


Bid for Centex Extended
Centex Telemanagement Inc., which two weeks ago rejected a takeover offer of $9 a share from the MFS Communications Company, said yesterday that the two companies had struck a confidentiality agreement and that MFS had extended its offer to May 3.
After the offer on March 16, Centex shares doubled to $10.50, and they have recently traded around that price, closing Friday at $10.375.
Both Centex, of San Francisco, and MFS, of Omaha, sell telecommunications services.
Under the agreement announced yesterday, Centex will provide confidential financial information to MFS, while MFS agreed not to pursue a takeover through a proxy solicitation while talks continue.
Centex said it was also providing information to another potential suitor, which it declined to name.


Dance in Review
Alvin Ailey Repertory Ensemble Marian Anderson Theater Davis Hall
The Alvin Ailey Repertory Ensemble is always worth seeing.
But the program presented by this junior Ailey company on Saturday night was of special interest.


Workers Behind Federal Red Tape Find Its Strands Impeding Retirement
When the clock strikes midnight on Sept. 30 ending the fiscal year, nearly 50,000 Federal workers will retire or take early leave as part of the Clinton Administration's plan to remake the Federal Government.
But leaving is not easy.
In a Kafkaesque turnabout, the makers of so much red tape will themselves now face a maze of forms and briefings before they can leave their jobs.


Review/Rock; Liz Phair in New Round of Songwriting Creativity
Liz Phair puts new ideas in deceptively familiar packages.
Ms.
Phair, a songwriter from Chicago, leads a basic four-piece rock band, strumming and chugging through tunes based in folk-rock and the Rolling Stones.
The melodies and guitar riffs are clear-cut; her voice, a fine-grained alto, is calmly assured, never straining for effect.
Although some of the chords are slightly unusual and some of the songs refuse to settle into verse-chorus-verse structures, Ms.
Phair always delivers a well-made tune.
But at the Academy on Friday night, where Ms.
Phair opened a two-night stand, the audience demanded louder vocals so they could hear Ms.
Phair's words.
Since her last New York shows, Ms.
Phair has learned to rock harder; her band kicked and twanged more than it does on her album, "Exile in Guyville" (Matador/ATLANTIC).
But the fans knew what they were doing.
With her words, Ms.
Phair has created an appealing, determinedly modern persona: a smart, sexually frank woman who tries to learn from her mistakes.


Rape Sounds Alarm on Gangs On Coney Island's Boardwalk
She was a lone figure on a long, dark strip of Coney Island boardwalk, her head down to brace herself from a stiff wind coming off the ocean.
Her attackers appeared so suddenly out of the nighttime shadows, detectives said, it was as if they had landed in front of her out of the sky.
That is how the rape began Thursday evening, officials said, five young men assaulting a 43-year-old woman who was on her first spring jog.
They beat her, kicked her and then chased her under the boardwalk, where, they said, four of the men raped her.


Flash Floods Kill 3 in Missouri and Ohio


A Turner Channel Seeks Carriers
When Ted Turner does something, he likes to do it big.
And so when he starts his new cable channel, Turner Classic Movies, on Thursday, he will do so from that most public of spaces: Times Square.
The channel's first few minutes of programming will be carried on the giant Jumbotron screen above Broadway.
The question is: Besides those gathered in the street, will anyone else be able to see it?


Health Alliances Could Get Very Expensive
To the Editor:
Health care alliances (editorial, March 27) must be approached with care if they are not to degenerate into debacles like the New Jersey Joint Underwriting Association for automobile insurance.
The Joint Underwriting Association ran up a deficit of billions by trying to insure high-risk drivers at low-risk rates.
You state:


Unbillable Hours: Bankruptcy Lawyer's Jazz Quest
The night before Robert M. Miller, a prominent bankruptcy lawyer, met on behalf of Macy's bondholders with Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator in the case, he was up half the night, sweating up a storm.
He was jamming, not cramming.


Sneak Attack on Health Reform
Votes in the House and Senate during the next two months will determine whether Congress passes health care reform before it adjourns for elections.
Several state legislatures are also debating health care reform.
And wherever reform bills lurk, so do powerful vested interests -- from doctors and insurance agents to lawyers, small-business owners and C.E.O.'s of Fortune 500 companies.
Often their footprints are visible, as when Mr.
Clinton built into his health bill a multibillion-dollar giveaway to major manufacturers like the Detroit auto companies.
But much lobbying is subtle, nearly invisible and potentially pernicious.


Searching for Slimy Swamp Creatures


A Dangerous Opening on ABM's
The 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty outlawed the testing and deployment of nationwide defenses against missile attack.
By limiting defenses it made it possible for the United States and Russia to agree to reduce their nuclear arsenals.
The Clinton Administration now wants to test and deploy new anti-missile defenses to give American forces on the battlefield some protection against missiles like the Scud.
And Russia is willing to accept a "clarification" of the ABM treaty to allow the U.S. to test a new heat-seeking interceptor, the Thaad, that could shoot down Scuds.


Patents; Using sensors, microchips and air pillows to make shoes, chairs and beds more comfortable.
TECHNOLOGY that senses the shape of the body can be used to make what people wear, sit in or sleep on more comfortable by inflating air pillows that follow the body's contours.
The Biomechanics Corporation of America in New York has patented a process it calls "intelligent surface technology." It seeks to improve the fit and shock absorption of shoes, and prevent bed sores for hospitalized patients and discomfort for drivers, office workers and people in wheelchairs.


A Name Change For Goodby, Berlin
Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco is changing its name to Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners to reflect the appointments of three additional partners.
"It's about including people that are here now, not excluding people that were here before," Jeff Goodby, co-chairman and creative director, said last week.
The agency opened in 1983 with Mr.
Goodby; Rich Silverstein, co-chairman and creative director, and Andy Berlin, who all came from Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco.
Mr.
Berlin, who was chief executive, left in May 1992, after a falling out with his two partners, to become president of DDB Needham New York.


Probability Experts May Decide Pennsylvania Vote
Fraud, virtually everyone agrees, should not be allowed to decide the election of a public official.
But how is a court to determine whether the fraud was decisive?
How certain must it be to take the extreme step of seating the nominal loser?
That problem faces Judge Clarence Newcomer of Federal District Court in Philadelphia, who will soon decide whether to order a new election in Pennsylvania's Second State Senatorial District in Philadelphia or declare the losing candidate, Bruce Marks, a Republican, to be the winner last November.
To help, Judge Newcomer has hired a consultant from Princeton University who is an expert in the mathematics of probability.


Wearing Rue With a Difference (More)
To the Editor:
Notwithstanding Colin Hugh Buckley's suggestion in "On Wearing Your Rue With a Difference" (letter, March 22) that Ophelia's instruction to Gertrude in "Hamlet" to "wear your rue with a difference" might refer to the plant's reputed contraceptive capabilities, it is more likely Shakespeare drew the allusion from heraldry, not pharmacology.


Review/Music; After a Long Absence, Perahia at Carnegie Hall
This is a music review that begins as a news item in spite of itself.
The musical event was Murray Perahia playing piano music by Beethoven, Brahms and Chopin at Carnegie Hall on Friday night.
The news lay in Mr.
Perahia's return to American concert life after an enforced hiatus caused by damage to his hand.
There was a cut thumb suffered three years ago, a season of playing in pain, then withdrawal.
Surgery followed infection.
Mr.
Perahia resumed his career in Salzburg last August, playing the Schumann Piano Concerto with Claudio Abbado and the Vienna Philharmonic.


Cold War Radiation Test on Humans To Undergo a Congressional Review
In the hottest days of the cold war, when both East and West were planning for the worst, the American military had a frighteningly practical question: in the event of a nuclear explosion, how much radiation could a soldier withstand before becoming disoriented or disabled?
The Pentagon turned to the University of Cincinnati for answers.
There, from 1960 to 1971, an eminent radiologist, Dr.
Eugene L. Saenger, and his colleagues conducted experiments on 88 cancer patients, ages 9 to 84, exposing them to intense doses of radiation and recording their physical and mental responses.
All but one of the patients were terminally ill and, with the exception of that young woman, have been dead for years.
Most were poor; 60 percent were black.


Harvard Crews Win 2 on Coast
Harvard's varsity crews came into this year's 21st annual San Diego Crew Classic an unknown quantity and finished the day painting the town crimson.
Harvard's heavyweight varsity defeated the University of Washington, the favored defending Copley Cup champion.
The Crimson lightweight varsity beat surprising Fordham to win the Secretary of the Navy Cup.
Columbia's women's varsity finished fourth in the Cal-Visitors grand final.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the collision of two small planes near Republic Airport in Farmingdale, L.I., misstated the number of a runway at the airport.
The collision occurred a quarter mile from Runway 19; there is no Runway 9 at the airport.


Israeli Ban on Palestinians May Turn Into a Long One
Government ministers suggested strongly today that a newly imposed ban on Palestinians' entry into Israel could last weeks and perhaps even months, although some senior officials complained that the restrictions would deprive innocent people of their livelihoods.
For most ministers, however, the potentially harmful impact on Palestinians took a distant second place to their main goal of reassuring Israelis about their security after several lethal attacks.


Urging Higher Standards, Badillo Begins Work as Education Overseer
Even though he lost a bid in November to join city government when he ran for comptroller on the same ticket as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Herman Badillo nevertheless is about to become part of the City Hall machinery.
This morning Mr.
Badillo will report to work as a mayoral counsel examining school finances, and will be Mr.
Giuliani's eyes and ears over the finances of the embattled school system.
His appointment came during several days of public feuding between the Mayor and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.


Tokyo Vacuum: U.S. Fears Bureaucrats Will Rule
To understand the enormous frustration of the Clinton Administration as it waits for a Japanese leader with the clout to deal head on with Tokyo's worsening relations with America, just ask the country's fallen Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, about his dining room table and his television set.
Not long after Mr.
Hosokawa took office, he and his wife, Kayoko, were shocked to discover how the Japanese Government expected the leader of the world's second largest industrial economy to live.
In the dingy official residence, the dining room came equipped with a dirty carpet, a single, bare fluorescent lamp, and what Mrs.
Hosokawa described the other day as "a folding table, the kind you would find in a school cafeteria." The TV set was a flickering, 20-year old dinosaur from the pre-remote control era; whenever Mr.
Hosokawa wanted to turn on the talk shows and watch someone attack him, he had to get up and fiddle with the dials.


Review/Fashion; Marc Jacobs, On His Own, Wins the Crowd
Several hundred members of the American fashion establishment trekked to a loft in SoHo at noon on Saturday to witness the debut of Marc Jacobs as the head of his own house.
The verdict: The show was a resounding success.
The Perry Ellis company provided the seed money for the new concern, in exchange for a small percentage of the licensing royalties, said Robert Duffy, Mr.
Jacobs's longtime business associate.
"But we own the business," he said.


Critic's Notebook; Reflections on Cobain's Short Life
Kurt Cobain, a suicide at the age of 27, won't be helped by the inevitable hindsight.
Rumors are swirling that the last straw may have been trouble between Cobain and his wife, Courtney Love, or worries about their child, Frances Bean Cobain.
Yet in retrospect, everyone could have seen it coming.
The songs Mr.
Cobain wrote with Nirvana, heard by millions of fans, testified to rage and confusion, to ambivalence and loneliness, to a torment beyond relief.
All the turmoil was in the way his voice suddenly shifted from a matter-of-fact drawl to an accusatory howl, and in the way his guitar parts jumped from riff to stubborn single notes to squeals of feedback, as if determined to grate.
And it was in the words he wrote and sang.


Excerpts From Remarks By Giuliani and Cortines
Following are excerpts from remarks by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines last night at Gracie Mansion, as recorded by The New York Times:  BY MAYOR GIULIANI
I am very pleased to announce that the Chancellor and I have been able to resolve this.
We'll be able to move forward.
I believe that the resolution of this is a metaphor for our city and how we can resolve differences and problems.


Lawyer Says Rifkin Will Plead Insanity In L.I. Murder Case
Lawyers for Joel Rifkin, a 34-year-old Long Island man who has confessed to killing 17 women, say they will try to convince a jury that he was insane and unable to tell right from wrong when he strangled his victims and disposed of their bodies.
"It won't be the easiest task, but in this case I think the facts support such a defense," said John Lawrence, Mr.
Rifkin's lawyer.
"It will no doubt come down to a debate between experts."


Mets Lose Bonilla As Well As A Game
Bobby Bonilla stood up and walked off the field with the play still in progress, with Andujar Cedeno looking to take third on his double to left field.
In obvious pain, Bonilla walked up the runway, where he kicked a water cooler and stomped on a few stairs and swore to himself.
In what was a third blow to the Mets on this season-opening road trip, Bonilla dislocated his left shoulder while diving for Cedeno's hit in the bottom of the second inning of the Mets' 6-1 loss to Houston in the Astrodome this afternoon.
A partial subluxation of Bonilla's left shoulder was diagnosed by the Astros' physician, Dr.
Tom Mehlhoff, and Bonilla will be re-examined by the Mets' team physician, Dr.
David Altchek, in New York Monday.
The injury is not expected to require surgery, but Bonilla should be out at least four to seven days.


No Headline
"This is a clear expression of the will of NATO and the will of the United Nations. We have said we would act if we were requested to do so. We have now done so and we will do so again if we are requested." -- PRESIDENT CLINTON  [ A1:5. ]


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:


Tigers Take Advantage Of Yankees' Generosity
Giving the Detroit Tigers extra base runners is like giving a Rockefeller extra walking-around money.
It's overkill at its worst and it can lead to baseball at its worst for a too generous pitching staff, as the Yankees found out yesterday.
The Yankees' misplaced generosity came in the form of seven walks in just over seven innings.
Only one of the first five issued resulted in a run, as Yankees starter Melido Perez traversed troubled waters quite well.
However, reliever Sterling Hitchcock opened the seventh inning by walking two of the first three Tigers he faced.
And when both those runners scored, it snapped a tie in what had been a well-pitched game between Perez and David Wells.


Ecological Experiment Becomes Battleground
Scientific experiments have a way of going awry unexpectedly, and the Biosphere 2 experiment under way here in a gigantic terrarium in the Arizona desert proves the rule.
From its inception more than a decade ago, one scientific and management problem after another has beset the privately financed $150 million project that is exploring the ecology of "Biosphere 1," the Earth.


2 NATO JETS BOMB THE SERBS BESIEGING A BOSNIAN HAVEN; U.S. WARNS OF MORE STRIKES
Two American fighter-bombers, flying under NATO command, bombed Serbian targets near Gorazde tonight after Serbian forces disregarded United Nations demands to pull back and advanced toward the city while stepping up their shelling of heavily populated civilian areas.
The bombing was the first time that NATO warplanes had been used to attack Serbian ground positions in the two-year old conflict, and United Nations officials here said it raised questions here on the future course of the battle.


World Economies


Accounts
*
Salov North America Corp., Hackensack, N.J., to Genova Hartwick Juliano, Greenwich, Conn., to handle advertising for its Filippo Berio olive oil brand, previously at Warwick, Baker &amp; Fiore, New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
New York Yankees to Burkhardt &amp; Christy, New York, to handle the team's account, previously at Landis &amp; Dygus, Deer Park, L.I.
Billings were not disclosed.


Essay; The Whitewater Pulse
Every scandal has its pulse.
Whitewater has entered a quiescent stage.
As investigators silently dig deeper, previous revelations sink in:
Let's say I want to make an untraceable investment in a political figure.
How could I launder the donation and even get a tax deduction for it?


CHRONICLE
When Vincent Price, the actor who personified villainy in films, was a 12-year-old boy in St.
Louis, he bought a Rembrandt etching.
"He was walking past a store, saw the etching and asked the man inside how much it was," Mr.
Price's daughter, VICTORIA PRICE, recalled the other day.
"The man said $37.50, and he paid it off over three years with his allowance.
That was the start of a lifelong passion for the actor who collected art, lectured about it and wrote about it in newspaper columns and books.


New Project, Old Fears; A Boost for Queens?
Carmella Gandolfo doesn't need a lot of prodding to tell you how Hunters Point used to be.
She has lived in the neighborhood in Long Island City, Queens, for all of her 89 years.
She remembers how, down by the old power house lot by the East River, people would put their children to sleep on mattresses on hot summer nights, then gab past midnight.
Folks would pay three cents to take the ferry to Manhattan.
In more recent decades, she has seen the neighborhood struggle as a decline in population spelled the end of the public and parochial schools, the movie theater, the Y.M.C.A., and the public library.
Even as these things were lost, she heard repeated schemes and dreams from public and private officials to take advantage of the waterfront location a subway stop away from Grand Central Terminal and give the community a boost.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday Producer Price Index March Wednesday Consumer Price Index March Retail Sales March Thursday Business Inventories Feb.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Industrial Production March


Stress? Doughnuts? Hah! Officers Get Fit to Fight
BECAUSE of the doughnuts, all those doughnuts, and the pizza and cheeseburgers and mounds of french fries, there are police officers out there who can't seem to move with the greatest of ease.
So in a basement space called the Exercise Ingredient, about two dozen members of the Nassau County Police Department were trying out an antidote: exercising up a fog.
They were jumping, marching and playing a kind of musical chairs with hydraulic exercise machines, to the tinny tune of "Sugar, Sugar," at a speed exhausting just to watch.


Review/Dance; An Experiment in Scale With 'Romeo and Juliet'
There are only 21 dancers' names listed on the roster of Indianapolis Ballet Theater.
Nevertheless, on Sunday afternoon at Queensborough Community College in Bayside, the troupe presented a convincing and often touching version of Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet," a work usually associated with large casts.
This is clearly a little company with big ideas.
It was equally ambitious on its previous visit to the college, in 1986, when it offered a "Sleeping Beauty," staged by George Verdak, who founded the troupe in 1973.
Although that production was notable for admirable dancing in the solo variations, "Sleeping Beauty" requires pomp and spectacle to make a memorable impression.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Chess
Gary Kasparov was not in his best form in the elite Linares International Tournament in Spain, which ended on March 14.
He seemed to have unaccustomed difficulty preventing lesser players from drawing with him and he had to struggle to win against players who would normally have gone down without much of a fight.
Yet it was still a formidable task for anyone to beat him.
Two players accomplished the objective: 18-year-old Vladimir Kramnik of Russia and Joel Lautier of France, who became 21 today.
This does not mean that Kasparov is washed up before his 31st birthday tomorrow.
It is just a rare setback in a continuing illustrious career.
But it is a glorious event for his up-and-coming opponents.
They are now bound to daydream about one day confronting him in a match for world supremacy.


Classical Music in Review
Young Polish Virtuosos  The New York Public Library for the Performing Arts Lincoln Center
A monthlong survey of Polish art and artists continued on Saturday afternoon with three young musicians at the Bruno Walter Auditorium.
The securest of them was the pianist Beata Bilinska, who played three big Romantic statements with considerable poise and confidence.
Miss Bilinska gave near letter-perfect performances of the Bach-Busoni Chaconne, Chopin's A-flat Ballade and the Liszt B-minor Sonata, familiar repertory, to be sure, but handled with considerable musical understanding.
This is a pianist with a sure sense of how musical lines bend and expand.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
Greta Garbo was famous for wanting "to be let alone," but nearly four years after her death her wish is still going unfulfilled.
MARK ROESLER, president of the Curtis Management Group, an agency in Indianapolis that represents the families and estates of deceased celebrities, among them Humphrey Bogart, James Dean and Babe Ruth, announced yesterday that he had signed an agreement with Garbo's family.
The actress was survived by a niece, GRAY REISFIELD, who had five children, Mr.
Roesler said.
"We are working with a major fragrance company in Europe that is interested in coming out with a perfume called Garbo," he said.


Researchers Are Accused Of Forgeries
Researchers at the University of Cincinnati who exposed patients to intense doses of radiation in a cold-war-era experiment were accused today of forging the signatures of patients on consent forms and other medical documents.
The accusations, which came in a Congressional hearing held here on the experiment, were made by relatives of several cancer patients who were subjects in the research, which was financed in part by the Pentagon and conducted during the 1960's and early 1970's.


CHRONICLE
Almost since the day it opened its doors in December 1962, La Grenouille, on East 52d Street, has been known not only for its cuisine but also for its lush profusion of flowers.
Now CHARLES MASSON, who until last year was the manager of the restaurant, which was founded by his parents, Charles and Gisele Masson, has written a book, part memoir, part how-to, that divulges some of the secrets of those flowers.


CIT Group Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


On My Mind; Clinton In Wartime
President Clinton, after overriding the publicly stated opinions of his own Secretary of Defense and top military officer, sent U.S. airplanes into action in Bosnia by the decision of a British general.
How often, how hard and how deep will United States planes strike again?


Chinatown Gang Leader to Be Returned to U.S.
Guo Liang Chi, who authorities say was the leader of the Chinatown gang most deeply involved in the smuggling of illegal immigrants from China, agreed in a Hong Kong court yesterday to a request by the United States for his extradition.
Federal investigators acknowledge that they are less interested in prosecuting Mr.
Guo than in hearing what he has to say.
Two law-enforcement officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said yesterday that Mr.
Guo had agreed to an arrangement under which he will provide information about Asian businessmen who run alien-smuggling rings and other organized crime operations.
In exchange, prosecutors are expected to seek leniency for him in court, but the officials said they did not know the details of the agreement.


Media General Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Yale Hires Beckett
TOM BECKETT was appointed yesterday to a five-year term as Yale's director of athletics.
Beckett, 47, will succeed ED WOODSUM, who resigned after serving six years and plans to practice law in Portland, Me.
Beckett had been Stanford's associate director for athletics since 1983.
He was an undergraduate baseball and basketball player at Pittsburgh and a minor league baseball player in the San Francisco Giants organization.


The Regular Season Can't End Soon Enough
The Knicks closed last night, but couldn't finish.
The lost their fourth game of their last five.
They failed, again, to clinch the Atlantic Division.
Atlanta and Chicago are back, really back, in the Eastern Conference home-court playoff race.
Another Knick crisis is upon us, and to explain why, we bring you the following multiple choice:
A) They miss John Starks.


No Headline
"Collectively, we all have to say, 'Enough.' " -- JUDITH E. JONES, director of the National Center for Children in Poverty.  [ A1:3. ]


French Ask If Suicide Was Message To Mitterrand
President Francois Mitterrand traveled to central France today to attend the funeral of an old friend and longtime aide who shot himself in Elysee Palace last week, but the mystery of what prompted Francois de Grossouvre to take his life remains unresolved.
Long known as "The Man of the Shadows" for his links to French defense and intelligence circles and arms sales, the 76-year-old aristocrat left no suicide note.
But his decision to kill himself in the presidential palace has been widely interpreted here as a gesture directed against Mr.
Mitterrand.


Bank Mutual Fund Saless Face Check
In a partial concession to Congressional critics, the Treasury Department announced today that its officials would begin making anonymous visits to banks to determine if bank officials were advising clients about the risks of putting their money into mutual funds.
At the same time, the Treasury, which is trying to maintain bureaucratic authority over the issue despite challenges in Congress, announced a plan that would effectively expand its oversight of bank's sales of such funds.
The alternative would have been to hand this responsibility over to the Securities and Exchange Commission, a step opposed by banks but urged by some members of Congress who consider the S.E.C. better staffed and more independent.


Benefit Funds May Run Out Of Cash Soon, Reports Warn
If Congress takes no action, the Clinton Administration said today, the Medicare trust fund that pays hospital bills for the elderly will run out of money in seven years and a separate trust fund that pays benefits to disabled workers will be exhausted next year.
The estimates were part of reports on Social Security and Medicare finances that have to be submitted to Congress each year.
Such reports are often gloomy, but the figures this year are, in some ways, slightly worse than those of recent years.


Public Libraries Would Love to Do Better, if They Had Money
To the Editor:
Many public library patrons experience the frustration Ruth Schwartz expresses in "Branch Libraries Slight Books That Endure" (letter, April 1).
The effects of an inadequate book budget for New York City's libraries are felt by library patrons who want books on all subjects.


Woman's Nude Body Found in Levittown
The nude body of a woman was discovered by two cable television installers as they were working in the back yard of a house in Levittown late this afternoon, the Nassau County police said today.
The workers found the body behind a garage at 131 Sunrise Lane about 3:20 P.M. and notified the police, said Detective Sgt.
Daniel Severin of the homicide squad.


To Tell the (Playoff) Truth: Will Real Nets Stand Up?
Chuck Daly has a problem.
He doesn't know which Nets team will show up from game to game.
Will it be the one that shoots 34.1 percent against Charlotte and loses by 99-78?
Or will it be the one that comes back two days later and crushes the Knicks by 107-88?
"It's like the stock market," the Nets' coach said after they defeated the Knicks for the fourth time in five meetings on Sunday at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"We're up and down, bears and bulls."


Looking at the Markets; With Future Bright, Stocks and Bonds Fall; Economists Grapple With Contradictions
For more than three years stock and bond prices marched optimistically upward in spite of economic forecasts that varied from murky to guarded.
But once the clouds lifted to reveal a sunny future for the American economy, the securities markets took their worst dive since the recession of 1990.
Economists have a plausible explanation -- fear of inflation -- for this seeming paradox, but they have had a lot more trouble explaining the timing or depth of the mini-crash that jolted public confidence and left traders scrambling for portents of the aftershocks.


Classical Music in Review
Western Wind Vocal Ensemble  Kaye Playhouse
For its 25th anniversary, the Western Wind is having a midlife crisis.
Highly regarded until now for appealing and often enlightening performances of everything from medieval to contemporary vocal works, and for turning up delightful obscurities from all eras, the ensemble has remade itself in the image of the Canadian Brass and the King's Singers.
Listeners who hoped to take in some Machaut, Morley, Gershwin and Glass heard the music filtered through a layer of crossover cuteness.
Averting one's eyes to miss the props and contrived dance steps did not really help; the stage business took a toll on the music making.


Matthew Feldman, 75, Mayor Of Teaneck and State Senator
Matthew Feldman, a New Jersey Democratic legislative leader who served as Mayor of Teaneck and then for 22 years in the State Senate, died yesterday in Holy Name Hospital in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 75.
The Office of the Senate Democrats said he died of natural causes.


By Design; The Empire of the 90's
The fall shows are almost over, and the major trends are clear.
Among them: the high-waisted dress, shown by designers as diverse as Bradley Bayou and Bill Blass.
Happily, the Empire waist was also a trend for spring, so there are already lots of choices in the stores, for day and evening.
Daytime styles at Barneys New York include a gingham check seersucker dress by Elizabeth Wayman ($210) and a gray and white striped cotton/spandex blend by Helios ($108).


Electricity Stalls Power of Wind As a Statewide Source of Energy
With the cost of the technology dropping, windmills could help the Northeast meet its energy needs more cleanly, experts said today at a conference on renewable energy sources.
The catch is that, right now, the region is awash in cheap electricity, so there is little economic incentive to invest in windmills.


Review/Fashion; For Calvin Klein, Suburbia Reigns
White shoes are not a city thing.
They aren't something those walking on filthy streets even consider.
White shoes belong to the suburbs, uncharted fashion territory that this season was right at the heart of Calvin Klein's predominantly white-shod CK collection.
With Mr.
Klein's formidable stamp of approval, there's no doubt that suburban chic is on the rise.


Risks Rise in North Sea as Price of Oil Declines
For oil companies, the North Sea has become a harsh climate in more ways than one.
Twenty-five years after the first big developments in what has become one of the world's most productive and reliable sources of oil, new reserves are harder to find and pump out from undersea reservoirs.
Development and operating costs, always higher here than in most other big oil-producing regions, have become an acute problem in an era of low oil prices, making it all the more difficult to turn a profit and justify investment in future projects.


Companies Assess Psychotherapy by the Numbers
Trying to curb the rising cost of treating workers for mental illness and substance abuse, a growing number of companies are turning to a new way of measuring treatment using computers.
That is reducing expenses, but also bringing an attempt at precision to psychotherapy that worries some therapists.
Companies like Merck, Anheuser-Busch and Sterling Winthrop have already switched to the new system.
The United Healthcare Corporation, one of the largest managed-care companies in the nation, is about to start, and a number of others, including I.B.M., General Motors and Philip Morris, are studying the approach.


Jersey City Scrap Metal Dealer Held in Garbage Truck Thefts
In New York City, it has been said, they'll steal anything.
But garbage trucks?


Would Germans Elect Hitler's Daughter?
To the Editor:
William Safire describes in "2 Climbdowns, 1 Climb-Up" (column, April 4) the fragmentation, if not collapse, of the political centers in Britain, France, Russia and, especially, Italy.
He adds parenthetically:


Polishing Ferrari's Image
Ferrari North America has selected Weiss, Whitten, Stagliano in New York to handle its account, previously at Hank Forssberg Inc. in Hackensack, N.J.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


U.S. PLANES BOMB SERBIAN POSITION FOR A SECOND DAY
For the second straight day, United States warplanes carried out highly limited bombing raids against Serbian nationalist forces that were attacking the United Nations "safe area" of Gorazde today, NATO and United Nations officials said.
The initial Serbian reaction to the raid was defiant, with shelling of the Muslim enclave continuing until the Bosnian Serb commander was warned that a third air strike would be conducted unless the barrage was halted in 10 minutes.


Rangers Roster Grows by 3
The Rangers added another goalie, another Messier and one more Richter to their roster Monday.
They will go into the final week of the regular season with 29 players, although only 18 skaters plus two goalies can dress for every game.
The new faces were called up from Binghamton, which ended its regular season on Sunday.
The goalie is Corey Hirsch, who helped Canada win a silver medal in the Winter Olympics.
After first refusing to report to the minors, Hirsch played in 10 games, going 5-4-1 with a 3.87 goals-against average.


Benefits of Broccoli Confirmed as Chemical Blocks Tumors
Yes, broccoli is as good for you as it's chopped up to be.
Likewise for cauliflower, brussels sprouts, cabbage and other crunchy, tastily bitter members of the cruciferous family of vegetables.
Offering new proof for the protective benefits of chemicals found in many plant foods, scientists have shown that a compound isolated from broccoli, called sulforaphane, blocks the growth of tumors in rats treated with a cancer-causing toxin.


Work Begins on Court Selection
President Clinton began his formal search for a Supreme Court nominee today and immediately began to focus on whether the White House could circumvent a Constitutional prohibition on appointing a lawmaker to a Federal office during a term in which Congress voted to increase the officeholder's pay.
White House officials have said that Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, is the leading contender to replace Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who is retiring, but that Mr.
Clinton is open to other possibilities.


Who Are These Mets? 3 Games Don't Make The Entire Season
A game won in April, goes the baseball maxim, is one less game you have to win in September.
But games won in April can be misleading.
For example, did the three games the Mets won in Chicago last week mean that the Mets were going to be better than everyone thought?
After all, it's not every team that starts a season 3-0 (no, only seven teams besides the Mets this season -- the Yankees, Atlanta, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Boston, Cleveland and Milwaukee).


Latin America May Outpace U.S. in Abortions
THE abortion rate among Latin American women is equal to or higher than the rate among women in the United States, a study has found, even though abortion is illegal in every Latin American country but Cuba.
Researchers estimate that 2.8 million induced abortions take place each year in six major countries, Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Mexico, Peru and the Dominican Republic, all of which are predominantly Roman Catholic.
The estimates were based on analyses of recent fertility surveys and of official government statistics of women hospitalized each year for abortion complications.


President Urges Law Officers To Press for an Anticrime Bill
Hoping to rob the Republicans of an election-year issue, President Clinton urged Congress today to act swiftly to pass an anticrime bill.
Addressing a Justice Department gathering that resembled a political pep rally, Mr.
Clinton told hundreds of local and state police officers that they should press lawmakers to adopt the crime legislation that is before Congress.


Quake-Damaged Freeway Reopening Ahead of Time
Less than three months after an earthquake shut it down and more than two months ahead of schedule, the Santa Monica Freeway, aorta of this city's circulatory system, reopens on Tuesday.
And if every public official claiming credit for the rapid repair stood on them at once, the two newly restored bridges over La Cienega Boulevard and Fairfax Avenue might just collapse again.
On Tuesday morning, Vice President Gore will join Gov.
Pete Wilson; Mayor Richard J. Riordan; the Federal Secretary of Transportation, Federico Pena; Rodney Slater, the Administrator of the Federal Highway Administration, and other officials for the reopening.
"Every politician west of the Pecos and a few east of it will be in attendance," said Sean Walsh, a spokesman for Mr.
Wilson.


Yankees Wonder What Spells Relief
Xavier Hernandez shook his head the other day, playfully acted worried before any questions were even uttered and then laughingly told a reporter to proceed with the interrogation.
A few days into the season, he already knew the routine.
He knew the probing would concern the Yankee bullpen.
What Hernandez and no other relievers know is when, if ever, those questions will cease.
The doubts and the questions will linger until the Yankees develop some cohesion in the bullpen and Hernandez proves he can be a full-time closer, Bob Wickman displays an affinity for the critical setup role, Steve Howe shows that his 93-mile-an-hour fastball will keep percolating, Sterling Hitchcock and Scott Kamieniecki adapt to being in the bullpen and Jeff Reardon and Don Pall deliver sturdy outings.


Market Place; The choices are few for investing in software aimed at children.
SOFTWARE and hardware companies alike are going full bore after the home and family computing market, but there are precious few choices for investors who want to do the same.
While 27 percent of homes in the United States now have personal computers, up from 20 percent a year ago, and many of these homes contain children, the number of publicly traded companies pursuing this market has been shrinking.


Washington at Work; Ron Brown Re-emerges in Halls of Power, and Thrives
During a breakfast meeting at which the Secretary of Commerce was communing with his senior staff last week, the topic drifted from Russia to Japan to China and then hovered, briefly, over his recent visit to the great state of Iowa.
The Secretary, Ronald Harmon Brown, a study of nervous energy even in repose, took a long, slow sip of coffee, brushed a wayward bit of doughnut from his elegant blue suit and then fixed his gaze on the woman who had arranged the trip.


Allow Nanny Employers More for Child Care
To the Editor:
In "Addressing Nannygate" (editorial, March 30), you suggest that Congress will have gone a long way toward solving the problem of failure to pay Social Security taxes for domestic workers by increasing to $620 the minimum one must pay a domestic employee before having to file Social Security tax forms.


METRO DIGEST
NEWCOMERS ON WELFARE DOWN SHARPLY
In the late 1980's, according to fresh census findings, the flow of welfare applicants into New York City all but dried up.
In stark contrast to the experience of a decade earlier, New York City appears to have become a net exporter of welfare families.
It appears that the city's severe recession of recent years prompted poor families to seek opportunities elsewhere.
A1.


Women's Game Has Low Costs, No Checks
It is an upscale activity for college women, no cousin of mud wrestling and nothing like a slam-bang National Hockey League contest.
Women's hockey has arrived.
Should the United States team win the third International Ice Hockey Federation's women's world championships that began last night at Lake Placid with the Americans routing Switzerland, 6-0, in a game that was not as close as the score, the impact would hardly be comparable to the United States men's team capturing the Olympic gold on the same rink 14 years ago.
But the sport has had astonishing growth in the past five years, growth certain to continue.


Bonner Rested After Accident
Anthony Bonner missed last night's Knicks-Magic game after sustaining bruises to his left arm in a car accident Sunday night.
Knicks Coach Pat Riley said that Bonner was alone when the single-car crash occurred.
John Cirillo, the Knicks' vice president for media relations, said that a tire blew on Bonner's car, causing the accident.
The Knicks said they believed it occurred on the Hutchison River Parkway.
Bonner was examined by Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician, yesterday morning, and although Bonner's injuries were not serious, a decision was made to keep him out of last night's game.


From Y.&amp; R. to TBS, Without Complaints
Steven J. Heyer, an executive vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York and president and chief operating officer of its Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising subsidiary, has left to become president of Turner Broadcasting Sales in New York and corporate vice president for broadcasting sales, sales marketing and development at its parent, Turner Broadcasting System.
Mr.
Heyer, 41, who becomes TBS's top-ranking advertising sales executive, succeeds John Barbera, who unexpectedly resigned in January.
Mr.
Barbera has since purchased a small radio company with Randy Booth, former chief financial officer at TBS, called Satellite Radio Service.


Zhirinovsky Clashes With French Jews


Mercantile Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Irish Return Man Gone?
MICHAEL MILLER, whose punt returns sparked Notre Dame to two key victories last season, may be finished with the Fighting Irish.
Miller, who will be a senior next season, did not play in Notre Dame's scrimmage Saturday, and Coach LOU HOLTZ said after the workout that Miller and defensive back TRACY GRAHAM no longer were on the team.


Observer; Been Away Too Long
It's lovely to be back in New York after long absence.
"The only real city," somebody said to me long ago, and he was not a New Yorker.
Well, we don't have to be chauvinistic about it.
Betty Comden and Adolph Green put it well enough in words for Leonard Bernstein's music to sing: "The Bronx is up, but the Battery's down, and people ride in a hole in the ground; New York, New York, it's a helluva town!" That's good enough.
Speaking of that hole in the ground, riding around in it impresses you with the extraordinary politeness of New Yorkers.
They are supposed to be rude, crude, coarse, pushy, nasty, but they're not.
Tigers they may be at the shop, but as urban social creatures they are the souls of civilization.


Synoptics Communications Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Mom Was Right
Scientists have joined mothers in singing the praises of broccoli, cauliflower and cabbage.
Now a new study shows that when a key compound in these cruciferous vegetables is isolated it helps to prevent the formation of tumors in animals as successfully as it did in the test tube.
Article, Science Times, Page C11.


Citizens Bancorp (Md.) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Scientist Ousted From Cancer Study Declines to Testify to House Panel
In a surprising development, Dr.
Bernard Fisher, the University of Pittsburgh scientist who for more than three decades directed a group of studies that helped change the way breast cancer is treated, will not appear before a Congressional subcommittee on Wednesday.
Dr.
Fisher was expected to address questions about delays in detecting and reporting falsified data that were used in his studies, which showed that lumpectomy was as effective as removing the entire breast for preventing recurrence in many women with early cancer.
Two weeks ago, Federal officials at the National Cancer Institute, which has paid for Dr.
Fisher's studies since 1958, ordered his removal as team leader for failing to adhere to his own guidelines.


Commerce Bancorp Inc. (N.J.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cal's Murray Joins Kidd On the Path to the Pros
LAMOND MURRAY, who became California's career leading scorer in three seasons at the school, announced yesterday that he would pass up his final year and enter the National Basketball Association draft.
Murray joins JASON KIDD in leaving Cal early to enter the pros.
A small forward, Murray said Kidd's decision had no bearing on his.


Viacom Said to Weigh Sales of Teams
Viacom Inc. is considering the sale of Madison Square Garden and the New York Knicks and Rangers sports teams, a person with knowledge of Viacom said yesterday.
But he added that no decision had been made.
Speculation that Viacom will sell parts of its entertainment empire now that it has absorbed Paramount Communications has increased in recent weeks as it appears increasingly likely that Blockbuster shareholders will not approve a merger with Viacom.


Reviews/Dance; Created by Villella By Way of Balanchine
George Balanchine's spiritual heirs have spread out across the United States to head ballet troupes that are in some measure a response to what they received from this great choreographer and company director.
Each troupe is different, colored by particulars of locale and personality.
The Miami City Ballet, which danced this afternoon at the Performing Arts Center of the State University College here, was created in 1986 by Edward Villella.
Mr.
Villella was the gutsy, firebrand star of the New York City Ballet in the 1960's and 70's.
And so unsurprisingly enough, the Miami company is filled with young firebrand dancers, many of them from Latin America.
It dances with a Hispanic verve.
That bright energy was most happily apparent in two ballets by Jimmy Gamonet De Los Heros, the company's resident choreographer.
At first, Mr.
De Los Heros's new "D Symphonies," danced to music by C. P. E. Bach and J. C. Bach, looks like a jaunty, not very subtle parody of Balanchine.
Phalanxes of women dressed in black leotards raise and lower their arms in spiky, robotic unison and move through phrases of dance in canonic increments.


Scientists to Test State's Vulnerability to Earthquakes
Sometime this month, a team of state geologists equipped with steel plates, sledge hammers and listening devices will fan out through Columbia County to determine its vulnerability to earthquakes.
Certain that New York State will be hit by a damaging earthquake some day, the geologists are embarking on a project to measure how soils throughout the state react to shock waves.


Bear, Stearns Hires Former Fed Governor
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the Wall Street investment bank, said yesterday that it was appointing Wayne D. Angell, a former Federal Reserve governor and inflation hawk, as its chief economist.
Mr.
Angell, 63, resigned from the Fed in early February after completing an eight-year term that included the stock market crash of 1987 as well as the beginning of the bond market meltdown of 1994.
A fourth-generation Kansas wheat farmer, former banker and longtime economics professor at Ottawa University, a Baptist college in Ottawa, Kan., Mr.
Angell is well known on Wall Street and in financial circles around the world.


Review/Theater; Making Conversation in the Abstract
On a bare stage at the Kampo Cultural Center, eight people take their places on chairs arranged in a semicircle.
They could be choral singers or members of a therapy group.
But no, they are the actors in Edward Albee's newest work, "Fragments." They begin by exchanging proverbs, move on to more extended stories and reflections, then finish off the evening by going back to the proverbs.
The final offering in the Signature Theater Company's season devoted entirely to Albee dramas, "Fragments" is one of the playwright's abstract explorations and should be filed alongside "Listening" and "Box," both of which were performed earlier by the company.
It tells no story and obeys no conventional emotional logic.
If the characters, who bear the same names as the performers, interact with one another, it is generally to ask for a clarification or to provide a footnote to the subject at hand.


Hillary Clinton Didn't Report $6,498 Profit In Commodities Account, White House Says
The White House said today that Hillary Rodham Clinton made $6,498 in a commodities-trading venture in 1980 and never reported the profit to the Internal Revenue Service.
The disclosure was the latest in a series of revised explanations about the Clintons' real-estate ventures and commodities investments beginning in the late 70's.
Mrs.
Clinton had previously said through her lawyers and aides that she invested $5,000 in the account, lost $1,000 and withdrew from additional trading shortly after the birth of her daughter, Chelsea, in 1980.


Mets Single-Handedly Spoil Their Opening Day at Shea
It was supposed to be a new product.
The Mets put fresh faces on the field and they put fresh paint on the walls and they hoped that on this opening day at Shea Stadium things would look appealing and different and people would get excited about the 1994 Mets.
Somehow, though, it ended up looking all too much like 1993.
After a promising road trip to open the season, the Mets returned home to Shea Stadium yesterday afternoon and found themselves hearing the all too familiar boos from the home crowd by the time the game reached the third inning.


At Masters, a Wacky Course of Events
When golfers in the 58th Masters arrived at the fourth tee Friday during the second round, some of them thought they were hallucinating.
There in front of them, 205 yards away on the fourth green, was a pin position that looked like something out of a roadside goony golf club.
The hole was cut on a tiny tongue of green that juts between two cavernous bunkers on either side.
With a gusting wind in their faces, they were being asked to hit a long iron into a target area of roughly five yards.
This wasn't just difficult; it was borderline bizarre.


Struck Trucking Company Closes Business
One of the 22 trucking companies that the teamsters union struck last week went out of business today, leaving more than 2,000 employees, most of them teamsters, unemployed.
"The economic impact of the strike and the economic impact of increased costs once the strike is settled led us to the decision that we could not operate," said Kenneth F. Churchill, president of Churchill Truck Lines Inc. of Chillicothe, Mo.


Gooden Tosses, Bonilla Sits
Dwight Gooden threw on the side and Bobby Bonilla sat in uniform on the bench.
But the Mets were without the services of their top two marquee players for yesterday's home opener against the Cubs.
Gooden, who missed his scheduled start yesterday afternoon with a sore big right toe, pitched for 12 to 15 minutes in the bullpen with minor discomfort and hopes to return to the rotation Saturday afternoon at home against Houston.


Refugee Missionaries From Rwanda Speak of Their Terror, Grief and Guilt
The worst part, says Phil Van Lanen, was not the constant crackle of gunfire around the house, or the trucks piled with corpses, or even the gangs of wild-eyed young men who were always outside, somewhere, waving clubs and machetes and looking for someone to kill.
The worst part, said Mr.
Van Lanen, a relief worker with the Seventh-day Adventist Church mission in Rwanda, was fleeing Kigali, and leaving behind African friends and co-workers.


Yes, You Do Have to Be A Brain Surgeon to Get More Speed Cheaply
WHAT clown, facing multiple deadlines, would have the Frankensteinian nerve to delve into his primary computer, pluck out its brain and try to install a speedier, smarter model?
In the age of the Pentium and PowerPC, admitting that one's main machine is a torpid state-of-1989's-art 25 megahertz 386DX model can elicit rude guffaws.
But high-performance computers carry high-performance price tags, and better machines at lower prices are always just around the corner.


Enzyme May Offer Target In Tumors
THROUGHOUT fiction and mythology, seekers of eternal youth pay a heavy price for finding it, as life refuses to be anything but finite.
Cells that aspire to immortality face a desperate end as well: they become cancerous, replicating without ceasing until they kill their host.
Now scientists have confirmed the presence of an "immortalizing enzyme" in tumor cells, and they hope it may offer a pre-eminent target for anticancer drugs.
Most drugs in the chemotherapeutic arsenal work by killing all rapidly dividing cells, indiscriminately destroying the healthy along with the malignant, and thereby causing side effects which ultimately limit their use.
So a target unique to cancer cells has long been sought.


Accounts
*
Gold's Gym, Venice, Calif., to Fattal &amp; Collins, Marina del Rey, Calif., to handle its account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $9 million. *
Janovic Plaza, New York, to AC&amp; R Advertising and its Cason Wenman Nightingale unit, both New York, to handle the home decorating retailer's account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


South Africa Tries to Prepare Those It Long Denied Ballot
There was a pastoral sweetness in the room as the once-fantastic idea of voting freely in South Africa was explained at the Soweto Home for the Aged to 50 black people who had suffered the longest across decades of racist white oligarchy.
"You have lived long and can give us a great legacy," Zweli Nkosi, a voting organizer, explained amid the grand metamorphosis now sweeping this nation toward the approaching election.
"Mark your stamp on life. Give us your final gift: Vote."


Mayor Enters Hostile Zone On Henry St.
Faced with two competing camps of protesters at a town hall meeting on the Lower East Side last night, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was met with heckling so raucous that he and the neighborhood residents seeking to ask questions could barely be heard.
Some protesters were objecting to a vote by the Board of Community School District 1 not to renew the contract of its superintendent, William E. Ubinas.
The other, even louder group consisted of about 50 members of the AIDS awareness group, Act Up, who were angered by reports that the Giuliani administration is considering cutting or eliminating the city's Department of AIDS Services.


Professional Jurors?
To the Editor:
As a citizen occasionally caught up in the New York State jury system, I welcome Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye's initiative to remove some of the pain from the process.
But I despair of any success.
The lawyers who own and run the courts know a good thing when they see one, and their labor union is as unlikely to welcome change as the teamsters.


CHRONICLE
The singer ELLA FITZGERALD had both her legs amputated below the knee in separate operations last year because of complications from diabetes, her spokeswoman, Mary Jane Outwater, announced yesterday in Beverly Hills.
Ms.
Outwater told The Associated Press that she did not know why the operations were not disclosed when they were performed but that she would release no further details.
"It's been done a long time ago and, of course, she's fine and she's at home," she said.
"She is in really good shape and good spirits."


Dr. Jerome Lejeune Dies at 67; Found Cause of Down Syndrome
Jerome Lejeune, a French geneticist who discovered the chromosome abnormality in humans that causes Down syndrome, a common form of mental retardation, died on April 3 in Paris.
He was 67 and lived in Paris.
The cause was lung cancer, Agence France-Presse reported, citing unidentified sources.
He was a heavy smoker.


New Top Officer at Intuit Is Former Apple Executive
Intuit Inc., the fast-growing personal finances software company, said today that it had named William V. Campbell, a former executive of Apple Computer Inc., as its president and chief executive.
Mr.
Campbell, 53, succeeds Scott D. Cook, 41, Intuit's founder, who continues as the company's chairman.
Mr.
Cook remains the largest shareholder in Intuit, which went public last year.
Intuit shares closed today at $32.75, up 87.5 cents, in Nasdaq trading; the company made its announcement after the market's close.


Hanoi Journal; In This Author's Book, Villains Are Vietnamese
It is one thing for Duong Thu Huong to attack the Vietnamese Communist Party for what she considers to be its corruption, its incompetence and its frequent indifference to the misery of Vietnam's poor.
But it is something altogether different -- and for many of the party faithful, far more worrisome -- for one of Vietnam's most popular novelists and most influential dissidents to single them out as such hypocritical fools.


Avia Group Puts Up Account for Review
Avia Group International said yesterday that it placed its account in review after two and a half years at Citron Haligman Bedecarre in San Francisco.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $5 million.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  NATO HITS SERBS AGAIN  NATO conducted its second air strike against the Bosnian Serbs in two days after they failed to stop shelling the town of Gorazde, and the attacks finally stopped.
A1  RESTRAINT IN BOSNIA ATTACKS  The United States portrayed the bombing of Serb positions in Bosnia as a demonstration of its resolve to stop their attacks, but the NATO military operation was actually modest and restrained.
A10  News analysis: The West is hoping that the Serbs bow to force.
A10  SOUTH AFRICA, IN THE HUSTINGS  South Africa has undertaken a vigorous voter education campaign leading up to its first all-race election, appealing to people's sense of historic duty and opportunity.
A1  Troops have not halted Zulu violence in South Africa.
A8  Henry Kissinger will help mediate in South Africa.
A8  WILDLIFE TRADE PUNISHED  The Clinton Administration said it was imposing trade sanctions on Taiwan for refusing to halt the sale of tiger and rhinoceros parts.
D1  RWANDA REFUGEES LOOK BACK  Westerners evacuated from Rwanda, many of them church workers, spoke with anguish of the fate of friends they had left behind and looked to the day when they would be able to return.
A6  RWANDA REBELS CLOSE IN  Rebels were closing in on the capital of Rwanda as Western nations struggled to complete the evacuation of their nationals.
Reports said fighting continued both inside and outside the capital, Kigali.
A6  The deadline for Palestinian self-rule will change.
A7  Citing violence, the Pope has canceled a Lebanon visit.
A7  NO SHOO-IN FOR MEXICO  While the ruling party's presidential candidate is expected to win in Mexico, voter dissatisfaction and party infighting are expected to make the race a difficult challenge.
A3  A former East German official was sentenced in a bombing.
A11  A suicide was troubling for France's President.
A11  Hanoi Journal: Fiction with a dissident's sting.
A4  National A12-15  BLEAK VIEW OF CHILDREN  A wide-ranging three-year study found a bleak picture for millions of American children: disintegrating families, poverty, child abuse and poor health care threatening their chances of growing to become whole adults.
A1  CORPORATE-PAID THERAPY  To curb costs of treating workers for mental illness and substance abuse, companies are measuring treatment in a way that cuts expenses but also tries to apply a precision to psychotherapy that worries therapists.
A1  FREEWAY SUCCESS STORY  The Santa Monica Freeway, a vital artery Southern California's road system, is reopening two months earlier than officials expected after repairs of its severe earthquake damage.
A12  MEDICARE FUNDS IN PERIL  The Medicare trust fund that pays hospital bills for the elderly will run out of money in seven years and a separate trust fund that pays benefits to disabled workers will be exhausted next year if Congress does not act.
A12  INQUIRY IN AIR FORCE CRASH  An especially volatile type of jet fuel is being investigated as a possible contributing factor to the high death toll in a crash at Pope Air Force Base last month.
A13  RON BROWN IN ACTION  Washington at Work: Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown was temporarily detoured from the Washington fast track, but now he is back, and doings things Democrats could scarcely have imagined: building alliances with business.
A14  SELLING THE CRIME BILL  President Clinton urged local and state law officers at a Justice Department rally to put pressure on members of Congress to pass anticrime legislation.
A14  A CLINTON CORRECTION  The White House said a 1980 profit of $6,498 for Hillary Rodham Clinton in commodities trades was not reported to the I.R.S., and the Clintons have paid more that $14,000 in back Federal and state taxes.
A15  A trucking company closed, leaving striking Teamsters jobless.
A12  Accusations of forged signatures in radiation experiments.
A15  Metro Digest B1  SIDE EFFECTS OF MAYOR'S VICTORY  Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani emerged from his weekend confrontation with the Schools Chancellor largely with what he wanted: a mayoral appointee to look into school finances.
But his confrontational style may have used up some of the good will he needs for his long-term agenda.
A1  WELFARE LURE SHIFTS  The view of New York City as a place attracting waves of poor people with relatively generous welfare benefits, if ever true, exists no more, fresh census findings reveal.
Instead, in the late 1980's, New York City appears to have become a net exporter of welfare families.
A1  Obituaries B10  Dr.
Jerome Lejeune, geneticist.
Matthew Feldman, New Jersey Democratic legislative leader.
Science Times C1-14  The secret underground world of the naked mole rat.
C1  Hopes of restoring full weather satellite coverage.
C1  A cancer researcher won't explain data problems to Congress.
C1  Putting a dollar value on urban trees.
C4  Cells' 'everlasting life' chemical opens way to attack cancer.
C10  Broccoli is good for you, just as your mother said.
C11  Peripherals C9  Q&amp;A C11  Personal Computers C14  Fashion Pages B8-9  Fashion reviews: Calvin Klein.
B8  Michael Kors and Betsey Johnson.
B8  Geoffrey Beene, Carolina Herrera, Mary McFadden.
B9  Business Digest D1  Arts/Entertainment C15-24  Eastern Europe loses art to thieves for the West.
C15  A battle over "Showboat." C15  Theater: Film as subject.
C15  "Fragments" by Albee.
C16  Music: Classical reviews.
C16  Dance: Miami City Ballet.
C19  Small 'Romeo and Juliet.' C19  Books: "The Birthday Boys," by Beryl Bainbridge.
C24  Television: "AIDS Research: The Story So Far." C24  A life of Sid Caesar.
C24  Sports B11-17  Baseball: Mets revert to '93 form in home opener.
B11  Kruk comes back from cancer.
B12  Yanks bullpen still unsettled.
B14  Columns: Vecsey on Mets.
B11  TV Sports.
B13  On Baseball.
B13  Basketball: Knicks lose fourth game in last five.
B11  Hockey: It's for women, too.
B15  Sports People B14  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  Necessary air strikes in Bosnia.
A cease-fire on schools.
The Jordan effect.
Letters  Russell Baker: Been away too long.
A.
M.
Rosenthal: Clinton in wartime.
Robert I. Friedman: 25,000 saboteurs of peace.
Brandon del Pozo: Everybody's corps.
Chronicle B2 Chess C6 Crossword C16


Review/Fashion; From the Masterly Beene, Surprises
Clothes should look beautiful and move gracefully.
By paying attention to these basic tenets, Geoffrey Beene secured his position as this country's most respected designer.
He also won thunderous applause, shouts of "Bravo!" and a standing ovation yesterday morning, when he introduced his fall collection in the theater of the Equitable Building.
Of course, there was more to it.
His cuts were adventurous and his styling distinctive.
He showed his clothes on 12 models and also on 12 dancers trained by Doug Varone, who heads his own modern dance group.
The dancers really moved across the stage, even when they were wearing coats, and the models sustained the mood.
It was a brilliant example of how to transcend the normal boundaries of a fashion show.


Edison Ready To Reopen Gas Pipeline
Town officials and the owners of a natural gas pipeline that burst apart in a terrifying fireball here on March 23 agreed today to reopen the now-repaired line on Wednesday evening, three weeks after the rupture.
After negotiations that started by telephone about 10 P.M. on Sunday and continued for much of today, the two sides agreed on a number of conditions that Mayor George A. Spadoro said left him "quite confident" that the rebuilt 36-inch pipeline is sound.
The two sides agreed on operating pressures for the pipeline, and other issues such as future inspections of the line and access to the pipeline's past operating records. 'A Good Development'
"Everything that can be done is being done to insure the safety of individuals who live along the line," the Mayor said as he announced the agreement with the Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation this afternoon.
"It's a good development for the people in this region, and it speaks highly of the pipeline company."


American Freightways Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Weather Satellite To Boost Ailing Fleet With Better Imagery
The nation's teetering system of weather satellites, for years held together by luck and borrowed equipment, hopes to receive new vitality on Wednesday with the launching of the most advanced weather sentinel ever placed above Earth.
The satellite, the first of a planned series of five that are to be the eyes of weather forecasters into the next century, is an ambitious attempt to create a new generation of instruments for predicting weather and averting natural disasters.


New Bosnia Debate: How Much Force?
The Clinton Administration tried today to portray NATO's two days of air strikes as a demonstration of its resolve to halt a Serbian offensive in eastern Bosnia.
But the Pentagon described an extremely modest military operation that appeared to have been designed as much to avoid angering the Serbs as to stop their attacks on the besieged Muslim enclave of Gorazde.
Pentagon officials said that two American F-16's dropped only three unguided bombs in attack on Sunday, the first bombing run in NATO history.
The target, a Serbian command post, was described by the Pentagon today as consisting of a group of tents and vehicles.


Now You Can Dump Your Wallet Into a Database
AT the end of a full week, which included a trip to the thriving Silicon Valley metropolis of Milpitas, Calif., you have collected a stack of business cards.
All those valuable names, addresses, phone and fax numbers, with comments, must be entered into a database or contact manager.
Once, you would have saved the cards themselves, or entered the information into address book pages or Rolodex inserts.
Now, you can type it into a specialized program.
Though the process is time-consuming, boring and error-prone, the software can find data long after details of the business trip blur.
Can't recall Fred's last name?
Search for all the Freds to find the one who orders model railroad track by the carload.
Want to send a letter to all the likely buyers of gas barbecues who live in a prosperous suburban ZIP code?
Bring them, and them only, up on the screen.


Kissinger Will Help Mediate Dispute Over Zulu Homeland
After 17 years on the diplomatic sidelines, former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger has agreed, along with Lord Carrington, the former British Foreign Secretary, to help mediate the fierce dispute in South Africa between the African National Congress and Zulus who want an autonomous homeland.
Mr.
Kissinger, who served as Secretary of State and national security adviser in the Nixon and Ford Administrations, will fly to South Africa this week in what some experts call a long-shot effort to end the strife that threatens to undermine that country's first all-race elections, from April 26-28.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Placed Mackey Sasser, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Darren Bragg, outfielder, from Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
Designated Chris Howard, catcher, for assignment.


Caray and Kiner: Still Giving Spring Its Voice
Half an hour before game-time yesterday at Shea Stadium, Ha-REEE Ca-RAAAAY had not appeared in the Chicago Cubs' WGN-TV broadcast booth.
That gave WGN staffers time for some heavy lifting without Harry in their hair.
"I need your help before Harry pushes the monitor out the window!" one station staffer said to another as he rushed out of the booth.


Sports of The Times; Mets-Cubs In Baseball Time Warp
GORGEOUS day for the home opener.
Bright sunshine and hearty memories on the message board.
Up there, good old Al Weis was sliding into second.
Good old Ron Swoboda was running down good old Bud Harrelson in short left field, and that's why they called him Rocky.
And there was good old Ernie Banks striking out.
The Cubs were the major protagonist 25 years ago and they were the only protagonist for the home opener yesterday.
This time-warp effect is what makes baseball so special.
The swells who own the clubs monkey with the product, but it still somehow looks like baseball.


Rabbi Schneerson's Condition Worsens
The spiritual leader of the world's Lubavitch Hasidic Jews, who has been hospitalized since suffering a stroke a month ago, took a turn for the worse yesterday.
A recorded message prepared by Beth Israel Medical Center, said that at 1:24 P.M., "there was a discernible worsening" in the condition of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, who is 91 years old.


Allow Nanny Employers More for Child Care; Lessening the Burden
To the Editor:
"Addressing Nannygate" (editorial, March 30) shows concern that "hundreds of thousands, maybe millions" of "cleaners, cooks, baby sitters and the like" are not receiving the benefits of employer-matched Social Security.
The majority of in-home workers not only do not participate in Social Security, but also, by not being registered for Social Security, they avoid paying income taxes.


Algerian Leader's Efforts Merit Support
To the Editor:
"Algeria: Descent Into the Abyss" (editorial, April 5), on Algeria's political crisis, misconstrues and misinforms.
You assert that "hundreds of thousands" of people have been imprisoned since 1992, a grossly exaggerated figure, which sets the tone for the rest.
An accurate figure would be about 10,000 detainees.
Most of them were released, and some have turned up again in armed operations.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.44
3.36
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.63
3.54
2.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.03
3.94
2.96
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.90
6.91
5.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.23
7.25
6.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.06
8.10
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.40
5.95
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
To curb the rising cost of treating workers for mental illness and substance abuse, companies like Merck, Anheuser-Busch and Sterling Winthrop are using a new way to measure treatment.
The method is reducing expenses, but it also seeks to apply a precision to psychotherapy that worries many therapists.  [ Page A1. ]


Sports Playoffs Oust Circus
The Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus performances at Madison Square Garden scheduled for April 17 at 1 and 5:50 P.M. and May 1 at 10:30 A.M., 2 P.M. and 7:30 P.M. have been canceled because of the first-round playoff games of the New York Rangers and the New York Knicks.
Tickets purchased at the Garden may be exchanged or refunded at the box office; tickets purchased at Ticketmaster remote outlets may be exchanged or refunded at the Garden box office or at the point of purchase; tickets charged by phone may be exchanged or refunded at the Garden box office or by calling Ticketmaster at (212) 307-7171; tickets purchased through Group Sales should be exchanged or refunded through Group Sales, (212) 465-6080.


Deregulating Higher Education; Colleges Hail an Agency's Demise
Frank P. Merlo, a college education professor, sent a list of 20 money-saving ideas to Gov.
Jim Florio in 1991, and nothing happened.
Three years later Mr.
Merlo sent the same list to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
The next thing he knew the Governor was taking one of his suggestions and abolishing the State Department of Higher Education.
Her aides even called to ask if they could use his name in announcing the plan.
"I thought that was a nice touch," Mr. Merlo said.


Pharmacists Create Plan To Compete
Seeking a share of a business dominated by pharmaceutical giants, chain and independent pharmacists have created a company to compete for prescription drug programs offered by corporate health care plans.
The company, called Pharmacy Direct Network, was established under the auspices of the National Association of Chain Drug Stores.


Study Confirms Some Fears on U.S. Children
A wide-ranging, three-year study of young American children to be released today confirms some of society's worst fears: millions of infants and toddlers are so deprived of medical care, loving supervision and intellectual stimulation that their growth into healthy and responsible adults is threatened.
The plight of the nation's youngest and most vulnerable children, the report says, is a result of many parents' being overwhelmed by poverty, teen-age pregnancy, divorce or work.


Fred Reinglas, Stage Manager, 58
Fred Reinglas, a stage manager for Broadway and Off Broadway shows for the last 30 years, died on March 31 at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 58 and lived in Greenwich Village.
The cause was lymphoma, said Joe Regan Jr., a friend.


Patterns
Welcoming the World
Much of the audience had seen the collection, but the surprise when Prada showed in the big tent in Bryant Park on Saturday night was how much more impressive the collection looked here than it did in Milan.


Lawrence Anderson; Architect and Dean At M.I.T. Was 87
Prof.
Lawrence B. Anderson, an architect and former dean of the School of Architecture and Planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, died on Wednesday at Emerson Hospital in Concord, Mass.
He was 87 and lived in Lincoln, Mass.
The cause was heart and kidney failure, his family said.


Mayor Wins, But at a Price; Battle With Cortines May Be Costly Victory
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani emerged from his weekend confrontation with the Schools Chancellor largely with what he wanted: a mayoral appointee empowered to look into the inner workings and finances of the Board of Education.
But with a confrontational style that briefly produced the resignation of Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, the Mayor, a Republican, irritated many of the city's other political leaders and used up some of the good will he needs to push through his long-term agenda in a predominantly Democratic city.


Eastern Europe Being Robbed Of Much of Its Artistic Legacy
With the opening of Eastern Europe's borders, its little-visited museums and poorly guarded churches are being stripped of paintings, manuscripts and religious objects by thieves.
Some of the stolen art has surfaced in the Western art market.
But many pieces, like nearly 200 artifacts stolen from the Budapest Jewish Museum in December, are so rare and so recognizable that selling them would be virtually impossible, art experts said.


Rapid Return of Vital Freeway


Israelis Set New Deadline With P.L.O.
Palestinian officials conceded today that Wednesday's deadline for an Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho could not be met, but accepted a proposal by Israel's Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, to set a new target date for the end of the month.
"If Mr. Peres says he is willing to respect the new target date, the date at the end of the month, fine with us," said Nabil Shaath, the chief Palestinian negotiator.
It was the first time the Palestinians publicly accepted a delay in meeting the deadline for the Israeli withdrawal.


Bracing for New Data, Stocks Quietly Rise
The stock market rallied slightly in modest trading yesterday as the bond market was encouraged by signs that rises in commodity prices, and therefore inflation, were subsiding.
Stock traders were really bracing for the release today of the Producer Price Index, which may give the market its first unassailable evidence that inflation is in check.


Mexican Candidate Visits Dubious Hometown
In another Mexico, it might have been a comforting political set piece: the governing party's new presidential candidate back to see his humble roots, the smiling neighbors, the church where he was an altar boy.
But when Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon had come and gone in a pack of cameramen and a cloud of dust, his visit only reminded Felipe Ballesteros of the Government's stale promise to pave the street in front of his house, of the hope that people felt last year and how the last of it seemed to dry up after Mr.
Zedillo's predecessor was killed two weeks ago.


A Pianist's New York Debut
Amir Katz, the first-prize winner in the 1993 Robert Casadesus International Piano Competition, is to make his New York debut on Monday at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
On the program are the New York premiere of Tzvi Avni's "On the Verge of Time," Liszt's "Reminiscences of Don Juan" and works by Bach and Scriabin.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Jury Selection Begins in Accused Killer's Trial


A Cease-Fire on Schools
The compromise between Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines that resulted in the withdrawal of Mr.
Cortines's threat to resign defuses the most serious crisis of Mr.
Giuliani's young administration.
The settlement is a welcome outcome for New York City's 1.1 million schoolchildren and for the two combatants.
Though both men could claim some measure of victory on specific issues, their larger triumph was to find a face-saving solution to a potentially disruptive brawl.
For his part, Mr.
Cortines allowed Herman Badillo to become a fiscal watchdog over the Board of Education.
Mr.
Giuliani, meanwhile, retreated from bullying tactics that backfired badly when he tried them against an official whose constituency was much stronger than the Mayor had imagined.


Russia Faults NATO Step
President Boris N. Yeltsin complained bitterly today that Moscow had not been consulted in advance on Sunday as NATO bombers prepared the first air strikes against Bosnian Serb positions near the besieged town of Gorazde.
Speaking to reporters as he left Moscow for an official visit to Spain, Mr.
Yeltsin said he had registered his objections in a telephone conversation early this morning with President Clinton.


Supervalu Inc. reports earnings for 12wks to Feb 26


Critic's Notebook; Two Playwrights Take On Film As (a) Dangerous; (b) Liberating
The American theater has never had a party line on how to deal with its richer, younger cousin, the movies.
But at least since the advent of sound in cinema, when the talent drain from Broadway to Los Angeles really started to flow, it has felt compelled to address the subject.
At its testiest, the theater has aimed at the soul-warping nature of the film industry in corrosive satires that date back to Kaufman and Hart and continue with plays from Mamet and Shanley.
Another line of attack, represented by the works produced by Cameron Mackintosh and the forthcoming Disney stage version of "Beauty and the Beast," is the "if you can't lick 'em, join 'em" approach, in which plays are stocked with technological special effects that emulate the fun-house thrills of a Spielberg spectacle.


Premier Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Jordan Effect
Weeks before anyone knew that a 31-year-old retired basketball player named Michael Jordan would be playing right field, the minor league Birmingham Barons, as is their annual custom, distributed 46,000 free tickets to local schoolchildren for a baseball game last Sunday night.
Based on past experience, they figured about 2,000 kids would show up.
When Mr.
Jordan was added to the team's roster, panic set in.
Fearing that all 46,000 kids would descend at once on a stadium built for 10,000, the Barons tried frantically to recall the tickets.
When that failed, they announced that none of the tickets would be honored.


First Virginia Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hilltoppers Hire Coach
Jacksonville basketball coach MATT KILCULLEN, whose Dolphins improved to 17-11 this season after going 5-22 a year ago, was named coach at Western Kentucky yesterday.
Kilcullen, 39, will bring two assistants -- GLYNN CYPRIN and BILL POPE -- with him to the Hilltoppers.


Malakhov Remains Man of Mystery
Game to game, period to period, shift to shift, the Islanders never know exactly what they will get from Vladimir Malakhov, their second-year defenseman from Russia.
He might produce an effort that seems lethargic, with a few turnovers in the offensive zone or a few attackers skating by him in the defensive end.
Or, he might display a full-throttle attack in which he launches a barrage of shots and dances joyfully in the spotlight, as he did Sunday afternoon when he scored twice to help beat the Rangers by 5-4 at the Coliseum.


Classical Music in Review
'Desert of Roses' An Opera By Robert Moran TriBeCa Performing Arts Center
At the first moments of Robert Moran's "Desert of Roses," Christopher Schumann arrives onstage in gas mask and Wehrmacht raincoat.
On gauzy sheets beneath his feet play projections of starving Africans, the chimneys of atomic energy plants, you know the rest.
The heart sinks, not to rise again until several hours later when this presumptuous claptrap has the goodness to go away.


Brendle's Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 29


Last Victim of Train Shooting Leaves Hospital


Books of The Times; Stiff Upper Lip Turns Into a Grimace
The Birthday Boys  By Beryl Bainbridge 189 pages. Carroll &amp; Graf. $18.95.
Although Beryl Bainbridge's novels and short stories all share certain recognizable themes and motifs -- characters disappointed in love and life, a preoccupation with violent and alarming deaths, a mood of weariness and menace -- they have ranged all over the map in subject matter.
"The Secret Glass" (1974) portrayed a postwar romance between a young Lancashire girl and an American soldier.
"Young Adolf" (1979) depicted a visit by the young Hitler to prewar England.
"Winter Garden" ( 1981) chronicled the adventures of a group of artists invited to tour the Soviet Union.
And "An Awfully Big Adventure" (1991) conjured up the backstage antics of an amateur theater troupe in Liverpool.


Review/Television; What Is Being Done About AIDS
As AIDS threatens tens of millions of people around the world, the pressure on researchers to come up with a vaccine like the ones that did away with polio and smallpox becomes ever more urgent.
But as "AIDS Research: The Story So Far" cautions, hopes are not high, because, in one scientist's words, "This virus is not like anything we've seen before."
Tonight's lucid report explains what makes the AIDS virus different.
The evening's favored metaphor is of an invader that finds its way into the chromosome of a critical white-blood cell in the body's immune system and spreads to infect other such cells.
As the immune system is weakened, the body becomes vulnerable to infectious diseases and to certain cancers.


IMC Fertilizer Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Now Pitching: No. 99
WAYNE GRETZKY wanted to play baseball more than hockey when he was growing up.
Yesterday, Gretzky, wearing an Angels uniform jersey bearing his familiar No. 99, threw out the first pitch at their home opener.
His pitch to Angels catcher GREG MYERS sailed to the right of home plate.


Last Train Shooting Victim Leaves Hospital
When Kevin McCarthy arrived at North Shore University Hospital on Dec. 7, one of the more than two dozen victims of a gunman on a Long Island Rail Road train, there did not seem much to hope for.
The bullet that struck the 26-year-old broker passed through his right hand and into his right temple, shattering his skull and leading doctors to estimate his chances of survival about 1 in 10.
But Mr.
McCarthy, whose father, Dennis, was one of the six who died on the train, confounded the experts.
He not only survived, but with the encouragement of his family and friends, and particularly his mother, also embarked on what doctors and therapists say has been a remarkable recovery.


Review/Fashion; Kors Soothes, But Never Johnson
Talk about culture shock.
Imagine the fashion retailers and members of the press who went straight to the Michael Kors show, with its totally unadorned classicism, immediately after Betsey Johnson's exhibitionism yesterday afternoon.
It would have been like a soothing iced tea on a sizzling summer day, except that the Johnson show in Bryant Park ran late, delaying for nearly an hour the start of the Kors show in a loft with no air-conditioning on West 31st Street near 10th Avenue.
The well-planned Seventh on Sixth fashion shows organized by the Council of Fashion Designers briefly broke down.
Keeping it Neutral
Michael Kors is at his best when he sticks to designing uncomplicated clothes in soothing neutral colors, and that's what he has done for fall.
The basic color scheme was camel, gray, chocolate brown and black, with welcome shots of lilac, mint green and coral for cashmere sweaters worn under neatly tailored jackets.


Ex-East German Agent Guilty in Terror Bombing
A former officer in the East German secret police was sentenced today to four years in prison for his role in the fatal 1983 bombing of a French cultural center in West Berlin.
The judge in the case also strongly criticized Syria for protecting the terrorist who is believed to have planned and directed the attack.


INSIDE
Mrs. Clinton's Profit
Hillary Rodham Clinton made an unreported profit of more than $6,000, and the Clintons are paying $14,615 in back taxes and interest.
Page A15.
Wildlife Trade Punished
The U.S. said it was imposing trade sanctions on Taiwan for refusing to halt the sale of tiger bones and rhinoceros horns.
Page D1.
Eastern Europe Losing Art
With borders open, little-visited museums and poorly guarded churches are being stripped of art and artifacts by thieves from the west.
Page C15.
Peril in a Jet Fuel?
A volatile jet fuel, eschewed by the Navy and airlines, is being investigated as a possible factor in the loss of life in an Air Force crash.
Page A13.


For a Hot Mutual Fund, Hard Issues
Thomas H. Bailey, the iconoclastic founder and chairman of the Janus Capital Corporation, a hot stock-picking mutual fund boutique, leads an enviable life.
Three days a week, he works out of his Aspen office, right near the ski slopes.
As the stock market began its nail-biting slide just before Easter, Mr.
Bailey, a trim 56-year-old, was out-of-pocket on a sailboat in the Caribbean.
Oh yes, and last year, he took home more than $9 million in salary and dividends.
But behind this seemingly effortless approach to money-making, lies a mutual fund company that after years of living a charmed life now faces some hard issues.
The eye-popping returns of its flagship funds, particularly the $9.5 billion Janus Fund, have turned dismal of late.
The rush of money that came into Janus chasing these returns has slowed.
And where Janus and its top executives were once touted on the cover of investment publications, the $22 billion fund group is coming under criticism for growing too far too fast.


New York City Drawing Fewer In Need of Aid
In the late 1980's, according to fresh census findings, the flow of welfare applicants into New York City all but dried up.
In stark contrast to the experience of a decade earlier, New York City appears to have become a net exporter of welfare families.
Between 1985 and 1990, an analysis of newly released census results shows, more families left New York and signed up for public assistance elsewhere than arrived in the city and joined the welfare rolls.


Phils' Kruk Makes Triumphant Return
Forget his three hits, and, for that matter, the Phillies' loss to the Colorado Rockies.
John Kruk was the hero of yesterday's home opener in Philadelphia just by showing up.
Kruk was making his first major league appearance since undergoing surgery last month for removal of a cancerous testicle.
That Kruk has survived the ordeal became obvious when he got up yesterday, stopped by a hospital for a round of radiation treatment, then headed to Veterans Stadium, where he promptly lined a double into the right field alley to drive in the first of the Phillies' seven runs in his first time at bat.


Through the Snow
To the Editor:
Apparently, Jamie Lincoln Kitman, author of "Pull Over, Urban Cowboys" (Op-Ed, March 30), was not forced to commute in the Northeast during the snowy, icy winter of 1993-94.
Had he seen the fender benders, multiple-vehicle collisions and spinouts that I saw last winter, he might conclude, as I do, that four-wheel-drive vehicles prevent accidents and save lives.
SYL MARKOSIAN  Montclair, N.J., April 1, 1994


Siberian Oil Venture by 4 Companies
Texaco Inc. said yesterday that it and three other oil companies had formed a company to explore for and possibly develop oilfields in a remote area in Siberia.
Situated above the Arctic Circle on the Pechora Sea, the 2,847-square-mile area is in the Timan Pechora Basin, where temperatures can reach 70 below zero.
The area is estimated to have reserves of about two billion barrels, about one-fifth the reserves of the Prudhoe Bay area of Alaska.


U.S. Puts Sanctions On Taiwan
The Clinton Administration said today that it was imposing trade sanctions on Taiwan for refusing to halt the sale of tiger bones and rhinoceros horns, the first time that Washington has deployed trade sanctions to protect the environment.
While trade sanctions have often been used by the United States as a lever to promote human rights or to lower trade barriers imposed by other countries, they have never been used to protect endangered wildlife.


Knicks Keep Skidding Straight Toward Playoffs
At a time when they expected to peak, the Knicks have hit another slump.
Suffering their third consecutive loss, and their fourth loss in five games, the Knicks were handled at home last night by the Orlando Magic, 108-100.
Orlando did it from long distance, setting a Madison Square Garden record for 3-pointers made (11) and attempted (24).
The teams combined for a National Basketball Association record of 47 3-point attempts.


Badillo Joins Chorus of Fiscal Oversight
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to appoint Herman Badillo as a special counsel to scrutinize the school budget adds a sixth observer of the financial management of the New York City Board of Education.
Already the school system's finances are watched by the State Comptroller, the City Comptroller, the state Financial Control Board, the Deputy Mayor for Education, and, perhaps most important, a special task force set up under former Mayor David N. Dinkins that meets monthly to go over the board's books in detail.


Non-Smokers Cry Foul At a Sign at Shea


Allow Nanny Employers More for Child Care; Let Workers Pay In
To the Editor:
Re your March 30 Nannygate editorial: I don't believe that the United States Government (despite the many wonderful people who work for it) is really deeply concerned about Social Security and the future of domestic workers and baby sitters.
I think the Government is concerned about all the potentially undeclared income that may go untaxed.


The Strange Dark World of the Naked Mole Rat
IN complex burrows under the bricklike soil of East African deserts there lives a mammal more peculiar perhaps than any other on earth.
More peculiar, in fact, than the creatures that have emerged from the wild imaginings of Maurice Sendak or the conjurers of otherworldly visitors.
They are known as naked mole rats -- though they are neither moles nor rats -- and they are challenging scientists to rethink the evolution of a highly structured, cooperative way of life called eusociality, once thought to be limited to group-living insects like bees and ants.
The habits of these small, fetal-looking colonial rodents, one of nine species of mole rat, are more insectlike than any vertebrate yet discovered.
They are, perhaps, the best living example of what biologists call convergent evolution: the development of nearly identical characteristics in completely unrelated species.


Q&amp;A
Cat Allergy
Q.  My new spouse is allergic to my old cat. Can I keep both?


NATO's Balkan Gamble: Using Force Is the Best Way of Achieving Peace
In twice bombing Serbian positions around the Muslim enclave of Gorazde, the United States and its Western allies have wagered that force will bring the Serbs back to the negotiating table because force is the one thing Serbian soldiers in Bosnia understand.
It is a big gamble.
Ever since the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milosevic, began whipping up Serbian nationalist sentiment in 1987 as a means to consolidate his power, Serbs have been fed an unrelenting diet of myth and history in which their warrior attributes, heroic struggles against the Ottoman Turks and the Nazis, and their capacity for martyrdom have been a constant theme.


SOCCER
African Nations Cup
Nigeria sent a strong message on Sunday to Argentina, Greece and Bulgaria, its first-round opponents in the World Cup.


Bandag Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mets' Early Gait Helps at Gate, But Can't Deliver a Shea Sellout
Those three quick Met victories opening the season last week did more than buoy the morale of the players and their long-frustrated fans.
They also touched off a surge in ticket sales that had club financial officials almost smiling.
"We sold 45,000 tickets this week compared to 20,000 last year," Billy Ianniciello, the Mets' vice president for ticket sales, said Friday evening.
"That's quite a pickup."


Crackdown by Pretoria Barely Felt in Zulu Area
Almost two weeks after the South African Government sent troops to the Zulu heartland to stem factional violence and protect voters in the country's first nonracial elections, an increasingly insecure populace here views the crackdown has having done little.
More than 150 people have been killed in the last week, an unusually high toll even for Natal province, where politically motivated violence is commonplace.
With elections scheduled for April 26 through 28, this month's toll could match or surpass the record of 311 politically related deaths reported in March.


Money Growing on Trees? No, but Study Finds Next Best Thing
PLANTING trees in cities and suburbs can reap millions of dollars in long-term savings by making it less costly to heat and cool buildings, by absorbing air pollution and by conferring a range of other environmental benefits, according to a study by the United States Forest Service.
The three-year study focused on metropolitan Chicago, and the researchers estimated that planting 95,000 trees in Cook and DuPage counties would result in a net benefit of $38 million over 30 years.


Review/Television; How a Gift For Accents Flowered Into Genius
It all started at a working-class diner in Yonkers, where the boss's son quickly absorbed the French, German or Italian accents and language rhythms of the customers.
One day somebody left behind a saxophone.
That would become young Sidney's meal ticket into show business.
The upshot is encapsulated in the title of tonight's "Biography" edition on A&amp;E: "Sid Caesar: Television's Comedy Genius."
Even as a saxophonist working the Catskill circuit, Mr.
Caesar discovered he could make people laugh when one night he unexpectedly found himself doing deadpan battle with a roving spotlight.
Then, in the 1940's, he joined the Coast Guard.
Stationed in Brooklyn, he eventually wound up in a wartime musical called "Tars and Spars." There he met Max Liebman, the producer who would loom large in the rest of his career.


Hibernia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Thomson at Bat
BOBBY THOMSON will be the master of ceremonies at Carnegie Hall in Manhattan on Friday night for a program titled "Baseball Blues."
Thomson, famous for his "shot heard 'round the world" that brought the Giants the 1951 pennant, will introduce the performers, who will include the jazz pianist DAVE FRISHBERG, the Persuasions and the Polka Family Band.


Coats Are Off and Ballplayers Are Back


Treasury Prices Mixed Ahead of Inflation Data
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday in moderate trading, as investors awaited new inflation data today and tomorrow.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond was up 8/32 , to 884/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from prices, was 7.23 percent, down from 7.25 percent on Friday.
Ahead of reports on producer and consumer prices investors and dealers sharply reduce their trading.


Baryshnikov to Perform
Mikhail Baryshnikov is to dance with the New York City Ballet in Jerome Robbins's "Suite of Dances" on May 10, 13 and 27 at 8 P.M. and on May 29 at 1 P.M. at the New York State Theater.
The ballet, a solo set to excerpts from Bach's Suites for Solo Cello, was presented in March by Mr.
Baryshnikov's White Oak Dance Project.
City Ballet's spring season opens on April 28.
Tickets are $10 to $57; $11 to $62 for performances of "The Sleeping Beauty." Information: (212) 870-5570.


Test Shows Fertilizers Can Help to Speed Oil Cleanups
THE notion that fertilizers could help clean up beaches fouled by oil spills was suggested more than 20 years ago, but the effectiveness of such efforts has been hard to demonstrate outside the laboratory.
Now scientists studying the 1989 spill of 10 million gallons of crude oil from the tanker Exxon Valdez into Prince William Sound in Alaska say they have developed a reliable measurement technique proving that the method works.


Centura Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


El Paso Electric Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Ninth Whaler Arrested
BRYAN MARCHMENT, a defenseman with the Hartford Whalers, was arrested on a drunken driving charge on his way home from a charity event, a team official said on Sunday.
He is the ninth member of the Whalers to be arrested on alcohol-related charges in the last three weeks.
Marchment, 24, of Canton, Conn., was arrested Friday night by the Farmington police while driving home from the Whalers' Wives First Casino Night in Hartford, the director of player personnel, KEVIN MAXWELL, said.


SHL Systemhouse (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


COMPANY NEWS
IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES P.L.C., London, said it had bought Decatrend Paints, a California-based unit of Total Compagnie Francaise des Petroles, Paris, for an undisclosed sum.
I.C.H.
CORP., Louisville, Ky., will ask shareholders this spring to change its name to Southwestern Life Corp.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Promoting Disney's dwarfs, builders of the franchise, for the home-video audience.
LISTEN carefully to that sound wafting through the San Francisco office of Hal Riney &amp; Partners.
Is it employees singing, "Heigh-ho, heigh-ho, it's off to work we go?"
O.K., so maybe the hallways aren't alive with the sound of music.
But certainly the arrival of an assignment from the Walt Disney Company to promote the long-awaited release on home video of its classic animated film, "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," is being ebulliently greeted there.


Necessary Air Strikes in Bosnia
The Clinton Administration has been rightly cautious about approving any direct American military involvement in the war in Bosnia.
But the dispatch of U.S. planes for NATO air strikes against Serbian tanks and command positions around Gorazde Sunday and again yesterday seems a risk emphatically worth taking.
Serbian military pressure against the mostly Muslim city threatens to unravel the most promising international effort yet to end this murderous conflict.
This was a NATO, not a U.S., operation, carried out under an old United Nations Security Council resolution establishing seven safe havens, including Gorazde.
Technically, NATO had no option to refuse a direct request for air strikes from U.N. authorities.


French Leader's Trip To China Criticized
Returning home from a four-day trip to China to seek business opportunities for French companies, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur came under strong attack here today for not speaking out against China's human rights record.
Mr.
Balladur's decision to handle the issue "discreetly," as he put it, proved even more embarrassing because six Chinese dissidents were detained during his visit.


Student Loan Marketing Assn. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Battle of the Big-Time Musicals: A Lively Overture
Half a year before their scheduled arrival on Broadway, next fall's two big musicals are already elbowing each other for attention.
Last month, "Sunset Boulevard," the $12 million Andrew Lloyd Webber extravaganza, which isn't to open until Nov. 17, began a blitz of radio and newspaper ads.
The radio spots featured the show's star, Glenn Close, saying, "And now, Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up."
Weeks before that, a three-page advertisement in The New York Times had announced telephone ticket sales for "Show Boat," the Harold Prince revival of the 1927 Jerome Kern-Oscar Hammerstein classic, which is to open on Oct. 2.
That ad was accompanied by an eruption of television and radio spots narrated by James Earl Jones.
Group-sales and theater-party executives were flown to Toronto, where the musical opened last October, and a 10-minute video and a 12-page glossy color brochure were sent to ticket-buying groups.
Last week, "Show Boat" answered the "Sunset" campaign with a second major burst of advertising, on radio and television.


H &amp; R Block
The share price of H &amp; R Block, the tax preparer, has languished recently despite a busy tax-filing season.
It reported a large loss for the third quarter ended Jan. 31, mainly from sluggish revenue in its tax preparation business, but it saw strong earnings from its electronic filing division.
Yesterday, it closed up 50 cents, to $44.625, in light trading.


Inquiry Asks if Continued Use of a Fuel Worsened Toll in Fiery Air Base Crash
The Air Force is investigating whether its continued use of a particularly volatile jet fuel, long ago abandoned by the Navy and commercial airlines, may have increased the death toll in the plane crash and explosion that killed 23 soldiers at Pope Air Force Base last month.
Air Force safety experts have contended for years that the fuel has been responsible for numerous fatal explosions and accidents involving Air Force jets.
The fuel is only now being eliminated by the Air Force, even though its dangers have been identified since the Vietnam War and alternatives have been widely available since the mid-1970's.


A Similar Case in 1976: Mr. Fit
LAST month's revelation of falsification of data in breast cancer studies, through an article in The Chicago Tribune, reminded some of a similar revelation about a heart disease study almost two decades ago.
In 1976, The St.
Louis Globe-Democrat reported that data about blood pressure and cholesterol had been falsified to make 27 patients eligible for the Mr.
Fit (for Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial) study, which determined the effect of modifying risk factors for heart disease.
The falsifications involved one participating center in St.
Louis and escaped detection by the study's audit system until a disgruntled worker told the newspaper.
The newspaper's inquiry led scientists to report the falsifications to the National Institutes of Health.
The principal investigator resigned.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Penguins Clinch Division Title  Tom Barrasso stopped 32 shots in Ottawa last night as the Pittsburgh Penguins clinched the Northeast Division title with a 4-0 victory over the Senators.
The Penguins finished the regular season with a 44-27-13 record and will be the No. 2 playoff seed in the Eastern Conference behind the Atlantic Division champion Rangers, who are 51-24-7 with 2 games left. (AP)


Havoc in Rwanda


Rwandan Rebels Reported Closing In on Capital
Rebel soldiers closed in on Rwanda's capital today, and French and Belgian military units raced to complete the evacuation of their nationals still inside the embattled central African country.
French military officials in the Rwandan capital, Kigali, said the rebels, who are mostly of the minority Tutsi tribe, are within a mile and a half of the center of the city.
Late tonight, seven truckloads of Government soldiers, most of whom belong to the majority Hutu tribe, were fortifying heavy gun positions inside the abandoned Belgian Embassy.


Rains Swell Rivers in the Midwest


AT LUNCH WITH: Ellen DeGeneres; Dialed God (Pause). He Laughed.
AT one point, Ellen DeGeneres was the Funniest Person in America.
It was very early in her career as a stand-up comic; only one year in, to be exact.
The cable channel Showtime, in need of programming, went looking for someone on whom to bestow the title Funniest Person in America.
They found Ms.
DeGeneres, working as an emcee at a comedy club in New Orleans, her hometown.
She was young and smart on stage, relying on offbeat storytelling, strategic pauses and dramatic facial expressions that reminded some people of Bob Newhart.
But her material was, as she now admits, a bit thin: "I didn't have many minutes."


Shawmut Picks Houston Effler
The Shawmut National Corporation in Boston and Hartford said yesterday that it had selected Houston Effler &amp; Partners in Boston to handle its account, with billings estimated at $12 million.
Ketchum Advertising New York had handled the account for the last five years until resigning in February.


INSIDE
Serbs Quiet, but Defiant
The Serbs ceased most of their shelling of a Bosnia enclave, but they rejected a negotiating session with a United Nations official.
Page A14.
Israel Talks Make Progress
Israel and the P.L.O. resolved the thorny issue of a police force for the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
Page A3.
Small Rise in Producer Prices
Producer prices rose a modest two-tenths of 1 percent in March as energy costs steadied after steep advances earlier in the year.
Page D1.
Free-for-All in Japan
Japan's effort to find a new Prime Minister is realigning longstanding political alliances.
Page A13.


Off the Menu
Le Cirque, 1974
This week at Le Cirque, the penny pinchers did better than the calorie counters.
To mark the 20th anniversary of his restaurant, Sirio Maccioni offered special prix-fixe lunches at the 1974 price of $12.75, with 1974 food to match.
Customers indulged in pasta primavera bathed in cream, spinach salad with chunks of bacon, crepes enclosing rich seafood, salmon quenelles in cream sauce, buttery flounder meuniere, fruit tarts layered with custard and the inevitable creme brulee.


Bystander Dies as Stone-Throwers Draw Israeli's Fire
A Jewish settler shot and killed a pregnant Palestinian woman cleaning her house today when he opened fire after his van was stoned as he drove through this village.
The incident posed fresh questions about the behavior of armed settlers in the occupied territories, an issue raised with full force by the massacre by a settler of at least 29 Muslim worshipers in Hebron on Feb. 25.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Traded Shawn Boskie, pitcher, to the Philadelphia Phillies for Kevin Foster, pitcher.
Called up Chuck Crim, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.


U.S. and U.N. Consider Heavier Attacks on Serbs
The Clinton Administration and the United Nations Secretariat are examining the possibility of asking NATO to conduct more aggressive air strikes against the Serbs if they refuse to end their attack on the Muslim "safe area" of Gorazde, American and United Nations officials say.
If the limited air strikes against Serbian positions on Sunday and Monday fail to persuade the Serbs to retreat from Gorazde and return to negotiations, then the idea under consideration is for NATO to apply some variant of the action it used to force the Serbs to pull back their guns from the hills around the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, in February.


Black Smokers' Higher Risk Of Cancer May Be Genetic
Researchers investigating why black men who smoke are 48 percent more likely to develop lung cancer than white male smokers have found a possible explanation: It may be genetic.
Dr.
John Richie, a biochemist at the American Health Foundation in Valhalla, N.Y., has found that a disproportionate number of blacks have a less efficient enzyme for detoxifying NKK, a particularly virulent cancer-causing chemical in tobacco smoke.


Laughter at Film Brings Spielberg Visit
On Jan. 17, Martin Luther King Jr.
Day, school was closed and a science teacher offered to take 70 high school students to see the Holocaust movie "Schindler's List," although they begged to see "House Party 3." When a trip to the ice-skating rink was thrown in to sweeten the deal, they accepted.
But the field trip ended abruptly when theater patrons complained that some of the Castlemont High School students, most of whom are black, had laughed at a scene in which a Nazi soldier casually shoots a Jewish woman.
The theater owner stopped the projector, turned on the lights and told the students to leave.


A Volunteer and Proud
To the Editor:
A news article April 7 about Sheldon Silver, the new Speaker of the New York State Assembly, discusses his fight against integrating heavily Jewish cooperative buildings on Grand Street in his Lower East Side district, an integration I support.
You quote him calling me "a person who gets paid to make sure there is controversy." For the last 50 years, I have never held any position as an activist for affordable housing that paid me one penny.


GATT Signing Nears With Some Matters Unsettled


Salvador Election Made Tammany Look Pure
To the Editor:
As two Americans unaffiliated with any delegation who witnessed the March 20 elections in El Salvador and who spoke with voters during and after the election, we wonder if others would herald the results as an "achievement," as Maurice Sonnenberg does (letter, March 30), if they had seen and heard what we did.


It's Serious Spring Planting


Review/Film; A Mutant Tom Thumb Born Outside Time
Though "The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb" and "Food" have titles that are soothingly general, it's hard to get more specialized than this program of two stop-action animated works opening today at Film Forum.
Both use clay figures and live actors to achieve an eerie effect, as if the actors were mannequins come to life.
But the technique, which takes still photographs and runs them together as in cartoon animation, is only as good as the stories it tells.
This program is more likely to appeal to animation fans than to movie lovers.
The hourlong "Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb" is a bizarre revision of the classic tale, one definitely not for children.
This Tom is a mutant product of genetic engineering.
A tiny clay figure with wide blue eyes, he looks like a cross between E.T. and a fetus, and is quite an endearing and vulnerable character.


Faulk to Meet With Parcells
MARSHALL FAULK, the top-rated running back in the National Football League draft who could be the No. 1 pick over all on April 24, will meet tomorrow with BILL PARCELLS, the Patriots' coach.
If drafted by New England, which has the fourth pick, Faulk, 5 foot 11 inches and 200 pounds, would complement the power runner, LEONARD RUSSELL.
"He is very impressive," said CHARLEY ARMEY, New England's director of player personnel.
"I was in San Diego and he ran the 40 in a 4.3."


Common Denominator; Rep. Lowey Builds Bridges Between the City and the Suburbs
Nita M. Lowey's Congressional district stretches like a long-necked swan from the emerald lawns of Harrison in central Westchester, down a working-class sliver of the Bronx and through an immigrant corridor in Flushing to the tidy homes of southern Queens -- a distance of 25 miles and at least as many sociological somersaults.
While that may seem a tortured piece of gerrymandering, it fits Mrs.
Lowey as snugly as her own life.
She grew up five blocks from Yankee Stadium, raised her children and met her political mentor, Mario M. Cuomo, in Queens and moved up to Harrison, where she began a successful bid for Congress just six years ago.


Theater in Review
Madonna  Village Theater Company 133 West 22d Street Chelsea Through May 1 By Don Nigro; directed by Gigi Rivkin; lighting by Douglas O'Flaherty; set by Michael Blau; costumes by Alyson Hui; sound by James Harrington; production stage manager, Jennifer Creighton; scenic artist, Meta Witkowski; assistant stage manager, Keith Modeste.
Presented by the Village Theater Company.
WITH: Pam Bennett, Jill Chamberlain, Elizabeth Daly, Marj Feenan, Mark Foley, Peter Husovsky, Craig Little, Lisa Littlewood, Christopher Marino, J. B. McLendon, Roger Michelson, Michael Pinney, Melanie Summerfield and Brenda Warren.


Firefighter's Status Worse After Surgery
Capt.
John Drennan, the firefighter who was severely burned in a SoHo fire that killed two of his colleagues last month, struggled to stay alive yesterday after undergoing 11 hours of surgery to remove infected tissue that caused him to suffer from septic shock.


Books of The Times; On the Boy Who Grew To Be James Baldwin
James Baldwin
A Biography
By David Leeming
Illustrated. 439 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
You are the ugliest boy I have ever seen, his stepfather used to say.
You have frog eyes.
But they were his mother's eyes, so the insult hurt twice over.
The boy called her to the window one day, pointed out a drunken old woman and cried: "You see? You see? She's uglier than you, Mama! She's uglier than me!"


Graf Pullout Riles Italian Open Organizers
STEFFI GRAF has pulled out of the Italian Open, angering organizers.
Organizers said Graf made demands they were unable to meet.
FRANCO BARTONI, the tournament director, refused to say what Graf sought.
"I will only say that this tournament doesn't pay guarantees," he said.
The Women's Tennis Association added MARTINA NAVRATILOVA as a replacement for Graf. (AP)


Sculptor of Stars Had an Amusing Son
To the Editor:
The monument depicting Ethel Barrymore, Marilyn Miller, Mary Pickford and Rosa Ponselle described in an April 1 letter is by Alexander Stirling Calder.
He is also represented by the statue of George Washington on the northern face of the arch at Washington Square.


Food Notes
A Traveling Sharpener
The sign on the maroon van reads, "Knives sharpened, 201-945-7609." The New Jersey license plate reads BE SHARP .
And so Fred DeCarlo roams New York City and New Jersey, making house calls to keep cutlery keen.
Mr.
DeCarlo, whose father once sharpened knives from a pushcart, has been in the business more than 30 years.
Though his services are not cheap -- prices start at $4.75 for a paring knife and climb to $9.75 for a big chef's knife -- he is both scientist and artist, taking each knife through five progressively finer sharpenings to restore the blade.
"When you sharpen a knife, you are realigning the molecules and it has to be done gradually," he said.


Robert L. Leopold; Psychiatry Professor, 71
Dr.
Robert L. Leopold, a retired professor of psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania, died on Saturday at Bryn Mawr Hospital near Philadelphia.
Dr.
Leopold, who lived in Haverford, Pa., was 71.
The cause was cancer, his wife, Edith, said.


Wine Talk
NEW YORK'S first wine auction under a recently enacted state law is to be held on April 30 at the Pierre Hotel.
On the block will be some 900 lots of wines, ranging from 1815 vintage port and an 1878 Bordeaux to valuable California wines from vintages as recent as 1989.
The auction will be sponsored by Morrell &amp; Company, a prominent Manhattan wine retailer.
David Molyneux-Berry, a founder and former director of the wine department at Sotheby's, the London auction house, will be the auctioneer.


Market Off in Restrained Trading; Technology Stocks Hit
The stock market fell slightly in restrained trading yesterday.
But a sweeping number of technology stocks suffered severe price drops at the hands of traders who had bet that Motorola would produce a dazzling first-quarter profit report but delivered only a stunning one.
After the market closed Monday, Motorola reported a first-quarter earnings gain of more than 45 percent, or $1.03 a share, to $298 million.
But analysts had been expecting at least one cent a share more.


Alvin Ward Vogtle Jr., 75, Dies; Led Big Power Supplier in South
Alvin Ward Vogtle Jr., a former president and chairman of the Atlanta-based Southern Company, parent of one of the country's largest electric grids, died on Sunday at Rockdale Hospital in Conyers, Ga.
He was 75 and had lived in Reddick, Fla., since his retirement in 1983.
The cause was apparently heart failure, the company said.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday, with an article about the performance of Janus mutual funds, misstated the cumulative total return for the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index in some editions.
The return was 16.56 percent in 1988; 31.63 percent in 1989; minus 3.11 percent in 1990; 30.4 percent in 1991; 7.61 percent in 1992; 10.06 percent in 1993; and minus 3.79 percent in the first quarter of 1994.


Silver Asks Giuliani's Aid In Pressuring Republicans
With the state budget now 12 days late, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver has asked New York City Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to help break the impasse by pressuring Republican lawmakers into supporting Democratic proposals that would increase state aid to the city.
In a letter to Mr.
Giuliani made public today, Mr.
Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, implored the Republican mayor to lobby on behalf of two Democratic budget measures: one to increase the city's share of state aid to schools and another to begin a process of reducing county governments' Medicaid costs.


A Treat Blooms in Manhattan
A good garden show propagates feelings of envy and discontent.
One can read unspoken soliloquies on faces of weekend gardeners: "How do they do it? I have exactly the same plants -- foxgloves, delphiniums, clematis -- and they never look like that."
But in this case, otherwise negative passions lead to bursts of creative energy, especially in April, the month of earnest resolution for plantspeople of every age and income.


Police Weighing Conversion To Hollow-Point Ammunition
In the latest effort to increase officers' firepower, the New York City Police Department is considering switching to hollow-point bullets that expand on contact with human flesh to inflict more damage than traditional ammunition.
Police officials said they like the bullet because it almost always stops a criminal before he can fire his own weapon.
The hollow-point bullets, which would be fitted for the department's newly distributed 9-millimeter handguns, also provide more safety for passers-by, officials said, because they lose velocity on impact.


METRO DIGEST
CHEMICAL LINK IN BREAST CANCER DATA
Women who once lived near large chemical plants on Long Island ran a greater risk of developing breast cancer after menopause, the New York State Health Department said.
The risk is about equal to that of having a family history of breast cancer, the department said.
Scientists called the report the first credible study outside a laboratory to suggest a link between breast cancer and industrial pollution.
A1.
Fearful of chemicals, Karen Pearsall has been drinking bottled water for decades.
B6.
NEW YORK CITY  MAYOR AND CORTINES SHARE SCHOOL FORUM
After a highly publicized feud, Mayor Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines visited a Brooklyn middle school yesterday to demonstrate their reconciliation to students, as well as to 40 or so reporters who trailed along.
For about an hour, the Mayor and the Chancellor perched uncomfortably on high stools and fielded questions from an eighth-grade history class on topics ranging from Mr.
Giuliani's handling of AIDS protests on Monday to New York City's murder rate.
B3.
STUDENTS SEE A BATTLE OVER TURF
Having watched the Mayor and the Chancellor slug it out and then shake hands, the students at Edward R. Murrow High School in Brooklyn had no trouble relating to what was going on.
"It was like watching two guys fight who both knew they were wrong but didn't know how to get out of it," said John Mattera, a 15-year-old sophomore.
About New York.
B3.
BABY IS BORN ON A SUBWAY PLATFORM
About 80 women go into labor in New York City's subway stations or trains every year -- a figure the Transit Authority says rivals the delivery rate at some small hospitals.
In a handful of cases, babies are born right on the platforms.
That is what happened during the morning rush hour at Eighth Avenue and 42d Street.
B3.
POLICE STUDY HOLLOW-POINT BULLETS
In the latest effort to increase officers' firepower, the New York City Police Department is considering switching to hollow-point bullets that expand on contact with human flesh to inflict more damage than traditional ammunition.
Police officials said they like the bullet because it almost always stops a criminal before he can fire his own weapon.
B4.
REGION  GIULIANI IS ASKED TO PRESS G.O.P.
With the state budget still undecided, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver has asked Mayor Giuliani to help break the impasse by pressuring Republican lawmakers into supporting Democratic proposals that would increase the city's share of state aid to schools and begin a process of reducing county governments' Medicaid costs.
B5.
FORMER BROOKHAVEN OFFICIALS INDICTED
Four former officials of the Town of Brookhaven have been charged in a Federal indictment with accepting bribes of as much as $250,000 to support a prominent developer's real-estate projects.
B5.
RENTAL FIRMS WARNED ON DISCRIMINATION
Resuming a 10-year, on-again, off-again battle about the meaning of a New York State law governing rental car companies, G. Oliver Koppell, the Attorney General, said that he has warned nine national companies that they must rent to drivers as young as 18.
B6.


The Pulitzer Prizes
ARTS
Fiction -- "The Shipping News," by E. Annie Proulx.
Drama -- "Three Tall Women," by Edward Albee.
History -- no award.
Biography -- "W.E.B. Du Bois: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919," by David Levering.
Poetry -- "Neon Vernacular," by Yusef Komunyakaa.
General nonfiction -- "Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire," by David Remnick.
Music -- "Of Reminiscences and Reflections," by Gunther Schuller.
JOURNALISM
Public service -- The Beacon Journal of Akron, Ohio.
Spot news reporting -- The New York Times staff.
Investigative reporting -- The Providence (R.I.) Journal-Bulletin staff.
Explanatory journalism -- Ronald Kotulak of the Chicago Tribune.
Beat reporting -- Eric Freedman and Jim Mitzelfeld of The Detroit News.
National reporting -- Eileen Welsome of The Albuquerque (N.M.) Tribune.
International reporting -- The Dallas Morning News team.
Feature writing -- Isabel Wilkerson of The New York Times.
Commentary -- William Raspberry of The Washington Post.
Criticism -- Lloyd Schwartz of The Boston Phoenix.
Editorial writing -- R. Bruce Dold of the Chicago Tribune.
Editorial cartooning -- Michael P. Ramirez of The Commercial Appeal, Memphis, Tenn.
Spot news photography -- Paul Watson of The Toronto Star.
Feature photography -- Kevin Carter, free-lancer, The New York Times.
Articles, page B7.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Idle Red Wings Clinch Title in Central  Dirk Graham's two goals and Ed Belfour's strong goaltending led the Chicago Blackhawks to a 4-3 victory in Toronto and ended the Maple Leafs' hopes of winning the Central Division title.
Toronto's loss clinched first place in the division for the idle Detroit Red Wings. (AP) N.B.A.
Cavaliers Capture a Berth in Playoffs  The Cleveland Cavaliers clinched a playoff spot for the sixth time in seven seasons, beating the Milwaukee Bucks, 119-91, at home last night behind 22 points each from Bobby Phills and Terrell Brandon.
Cleveland became the fifth Eastern Conference team to qualify for the playoffs, joining the Knicks, Atlanta, Chicago and Orlando.
If the playoffs began today, the Cavs would be the No. 5 team and would open at Orlando. (AP) TENNIS Washington Loses to Practice Partner  Top-seeded MaliVai Washington lost to his frequent practice partner, David Witt, 7-5, 6-4, in the first round of the $288,750 Eddleman United States Clay Court Championships in Birmingham, Ala.
Witt is ranked No. 189. (AP) Edberg and Courier Advance: Stefan Edberg and Jim Courier led five seeded players through the opening round of the Nice Open.
The top-seeded Edberg bounced back to beat Davide Sanguinetti of Italy, 4-6, 6-2, 6-4.
The second-seeded Courier defeated Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia, 6-3, 6-2. (AP) SOCCER  Milan and Salzburg in a European Final  Dennis Bergkamp scored one goal and assisted on two others as Internazionale of Milan beat Cagliari, 3-0, last night and advanced to the final of the Union of European Football Associations Cup.
Milan will play Austria Salzburg, which advanced with a 1-1 tie against Karlsruhe SC.
Arsenal beat Paris-St.
Germain, 1-0, on Kevin Campbell's goal in the sixth minute and advanced to the final of the Cup Winners Cup.
Arsenal will play the winner of today's game between the defending champion, Parma, and Benfica of Lisbon. (AP) WOMEN'S HOCKEY United States Routs Germany  The United States defeated Germany, 16-0, in an opening-round game of the women's world championship in Lake Placid, N.Y.
Karen Bye and Elizabeth Brown each scored three times. (AP)


Radioactivity Experiment and the Human Aftermath Wins a Pulitzer
The stack of documents was almost entirely about animal experiments conducted by the Government, but one footnote caught Eileen Welsome's eye: 18 unwitting hospital patients had been injected with radioactive plutonium.
Ms.
Welsome, a reporter for The Albuquerque Tribune, spent more than six years tracking down those victims, whose names had long been classified top secret.
Yesterday she won the Pulitzer Prize for national reporting for her series telling how they had lived out their lives.


BBDO and Deutsch Win Honors
For the first time since 1978, the trade publication Advertising Age has selected two agencies to share its "Agency of the Year" honors.
In a special issue due out today, BBDO Worldwide and Deutsch Inc., both in New York, were honored for their accomplishments during 1993.
"Naming just one agency doesn't do justice to the talent that's out there now," said Fred Danzig, Advertising Age's editor in New York, adding that the dual selection "may well become an annual necessity." In 1978, two other agencies based in New York, Ayer Inc. and Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., shared the honor.


Book Notes
A Long-Neglected Novel
When Heinrich Boll finished his first novel, "The Silent Angel," in 1950, he was destitute, dispirited and unknown.
He had already published a slightly noticed novella, but had to face the unwelcome news that his new book, about the aftermath of World War II in a ravaged Cologne, was hardly the sort of thing that could establish a fledgling literary reputation in 1950's Germany.
His publisher refused to issue it, saying it wasn't good enough but meaning, it is now clear, that the subject matter was just too depressing and dark for the beaten and war-weary country to cope with.
The rejection almost caused Boll -- who had repeatedly been forced to stop work on "The Silent Angel" to churn out short stories to pay the rent and help support his three small sons -- to give up writing altogether.
Instead, the author, who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1972, ended up incorporating many of the themes and characters from "The Silent Angel" into subsequent works.
The protagonist, Hans Schnitzler, is seen by Boll scholars as the precursor to Hans Schnier in Boll's 1963 novel "The Clown." But Boll died in 1985 with "The Silent Angel" still unpublished.


Women Campaign for New Plan To Curb the World's Population
For decades, when population planners talked about the world's poorest women, they concentrated on how to keep them from having more babies.
Vast programs in Asia, Africa and Latin America were geared to sterilizing women, implanting them with IUD's, handing out contraceptives and imposing quotas on family size.
Despite the success achieved by family planning programs in India, Thailand, Kenya and other countries in curbing population growth, women's groups argue that these traditional methods are demeaning and coercive, and that a dramatic shift is needed.


No Headline


Rangers' Victory Is 'Easy' As 1-2-3
The Rangers hurtled toward 1940 last night with a splurge of will in the final period.
On the surface, it mattered little that they produced a 3-2 victory over the Buffalo Sabres at Madison Square Garden in their next-to-last game of the regular season.
After all, the Rangers have already guaranteed themselves the best record in the National Hockey League.
The victory, though, was significant if they meet the Sabres down the road in the Stanley Cup playoffs for they beat Dominik Hasek, the goalie with the league's lowest goals-against average.


Johnson Leaning Toward Not Returning
MAGIC JOHNSON, wondering whether the constant travel of the National Basketball Association has placed too many demands on his life, is leaning against returning as coach of the Los Angeles Lakers, The Los Angeles Times reported yesterday.
Johnson was quoted as saying he discussed the situation with his wife, COOKIE.
"I talked to Cookie a little bit last night after I flew in," he told The Times.
"I'm in it all the way or I'm out of it all the way. Like I've told her, 'We've got to think about our lives. Our life has been great. We've settled in to me being retired, we've settled in to me being around home. And now we've got to give all that up again?' " Before last night's home game against Golden State, Johnson said: "The challenge is to bring this team back." (AP)


Ferry Service Makes Ready To Broaden In the Region
After seven years of gradual expansion, ferry service in the New York region is about to branch out in a big way with several new routes to serve commuters -- and two designed especially for baseball fans.
Arthur E. Imperatore, who already operates ferries across the Hudson River, will announce plans today for a new service, beginning in May, between a dock just south of Newport Center in Jersey City and Battery Park City in lower Manhattan.
In June, he said, service will begin between a barge just south of 35th Street in the East River and another in Hunters Point, Queens.


Reviews/Fashion; Lauren Takes an English Holiday
RALPH LAUREN took his audience on a romp through Merrie Olde England yesterday morning, starting with the Celts, moving through Camelot and the Elizabethans and ending with the crisp tailoring and comfortable-looking tweeds with which he has long been infatuated.
It was a good-humored, pleasant journey through more than a thousand years of fashion, but with a strong contemporary look.
Now, a starchy Elizabethan ruff may not seem a likely alternative to a turtleneck, but it is not obligatory.
Mr.
Lauren provides a lot of soft, cuddly styles like mohair sweaters and even mohair kilts that look cozy enough to snuggle into.


Russia Drops Players From Cup Roster
Several of Russia's top soccer players were dropped from the preliminary World Cup roster announced yesterday because they say they won't play for Coach PAVEL SADYRIN.
Included were ANDREI KANCHELSKIS of Manchester United in England, SERGEI KIRYAKOV of Karlsruhe in Germany, IGOR SHALIMOV of Internazionale of Milan in Italy, IGOR DOBROVOLSKY of Dynamo Moscow, IGOR KOLYVANOV of Foggia in Italy, VALERY KARPIN of Spartak Moscow and VASILY KULKOV of Benfica of Lisbon in Portugal. (AP)


CBS INC.
CBS Inc. said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings rose by 27.9 percent, to $69.3 million, or $4.23 a share, compared with $54.2 million, or $3.50 a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
Sales jumped by 41.9 percent, to almost $1.25 billion.
Without the 120 hours of coverage of the Winter Olympics, revenues would have increased by only 6 percent.
Operating income before interest and taxes rose to $102.2 million from $62.5 million.


Theater in Review
Colette  Theater for the New City 155 First Avenue, at 10th Street East Village Through Sunday By Rebecca Chace; directed by Jonathan Rosenberg; set by Erika Belsey; costumes by Christopher Del Coro; lighting by Tommy Wong; technical director, Paul Ferri; stage manager, Tim Pettolina.
Presented by Theater for the New City and Bartenieff/Field.
WITH: Sarah Buff, Ms.
Chace, Nina Hellman, Donna LaBrecque and Jane Welch.


Asbury to Coach Kansas State
TOM ASBURY, whose Pepperdine team took Michigan to overtime in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, was hired as basketball coach at Kansas State.
He succeeds DANA ALTMAN, who will coach at Creighton. (AP)


Definitions of Financial Terms Involved
Hedge Fund: A flexible investment fund for rich people and institutions.
The minimum investment is typically $1 million and the manager usually receives 20 percent of the profits.
Hedge funds can use virtually any investment technique including short-selling -- borrowing shares and selling them in hopes of benefiting from a decline in prices -- and heavy borrowing, or leverage, neither of which is allowed for mutual funds.
Short-Selling: A way to bet that the price of a stock, or other security, will go down.
A hedge fund would borrow the stock from a brokerage firm and sell it in the market, hoping to buy it back for a lower price and return it to its owner.
Stocks bought the normal way are said to be owned "long."


Clinton Is Faulted on Political Choices for Envoy Posts
Despite promises to name ambassadors on the basis of qualifications that go beyond the size of their campaign contributions, President Clinton has found himself awarding many jobs to some big political donors who seem to lack much experience in international affairs.
Some of his political appointees are experienced and well respected, like former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, who is the Ambassador to Japan.
But some seem to have been appointed primarily for the size of their campaign gifts, like M. Larry Lawrence, a California hotel operator who was named Ambassador to Switzerland after donating $196,000 to Democratic coffers in recent years.


In America; Giuliani the Bully
One of Rudolph Giuliani's favorite stories in last year's mayoral campaign went approximately as follows:
When he was just 2 years old, his parents would dress little Rudy in a New York Yankees baseball uniform and send him outside to play, whereupon other neighborhood children, presumably Dodger fans, would promptly pounce on him, rough him up and throw him in the mud.


John J. Powers Jr., Executive, 81, Dies
John J. Powers Jr., retired head of Pfizer Inc. in New York, died yesterday at the Good Samaritan Medical Center in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Powers, who lived in North Palm Beach, was 81.
The cause was cancer, the company said.


Theater in Review
Panorama  Theater Row Theater 424 West 42d Street Clinton Through April 24 By Pieter-Dirk Uys; directed by George Ferencz; set by Bill Stabile; costumes by Sally Lesser; lighting by Jeff Tapper; sound by Genji Ito; stage manager, Jessica Hall.
Presented by the Africa Arts Theater Company.
WITH: Bill Christ, Jacqueline Pennington, Margie Rynn and Kim Tooks.


COLLEGE LACROSSE
Loyola
The Greyhounds from Baltimore are king and queen of the hill this week.
Both men's and women's teams are undefeated and ranked first in the Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association polls, an accomplishment without precedent in this sport.


In School
When Bennett Brown graduated from M.I.T. two years ago with an A average, he could have worked anywhere.
He'd done research on cancer and artificial intelligence and was published as a sophomore. ("At one point I was interested in growing neurons," he said.) He scored perfect 800's on the G.R.E.'s.
But Mr.
Brown was also interested in science education.
His thesis was on how to build an oscilliscope for classroom use for $20 from an old Sony Watchman TV ("Yeah, I did it," he said, yanking it from a drawer. "It'd cost $3,000 to buy one new.")


When 'Bad' Cholesterol Is Good
JUST when you thought you finally understood the relationship between HDL and LDL cholesterol and the risk of heart disease, confusing new findings have sprung up.
Despite the widely recognized designation of HDL as the "good" cholesterol and LDL as "bad," there are apparently some notable exceptions.
For example, the Pima Indians of the American Southwest seem to have a form of LDL, or low-density lipoprotein, that behaves like a cooperative partner with HDL, or high-density lipoprotein.


Trudeau Inquires About the Jets' Backup Job
The Jets played host yesterday to Jack Trudeau, another in a line of veteran free-agent quarterbacks the team has brought through in hopes of finding an experienced backup to Boomer Esiason next season.
Trudeau, a nine-year veteran cut by the Indianapolis Colts last week, was in Miami Monday and spent Tuesday at the Jets' training center talking to coaches and looking the place over.
Trudeau's presence is an indication that the Jets are not going to wait forever for quarterback Steve DeBerg to make up his mind whether he is going to accept their offer of a one-year, $500,000 contract.
The Jets made the offer more than two weeks ago.


Russia and Belarus to Unify Monetary Systems
In a move bound to increase concern in the West about Russian neo-imperialism, the Prime Ministers of Russia and Belarus signed a treaty today to unify their monetary systems and lift customs barriers.
In a set of agreements that will be carried out in stages, Belarus will give up the right to control its money supply, handing over all monetary and credit controls to the Russian Central Bank.
Russia will also receive a free lease on military bases for its troops.


Another Plan For Macy By Creditors
Senior creditors of R. H. Macy &amp; Company submitted their proposal for reorganizing the retailer yesterday to Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator overseeing negotiations to get the company out of bankruptcy.
In their plan, the senior creditors propose valuing the company at $3.45 billion, higher than the $3.2 billion they discussed earlier but lower than the $3.6 billion plan of reorganization that Macy presented to its creditors on March 23.
The old valuation was based on the assumption that Macy would emerge from bankruptcy in July, while the new proposal expects it to come out next January, according to secured creditors who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Seeking Allies
The plan deliberately does not specify how that value would be allotted, in an effort to win as many allies as possible, senior creditors said.
But Fidelity Investments, the giant mutual fund company that is a powerful Macy creditor, would end up with most of the company's equity.


As April 15th Nears, the Clouds Darken


No Headline
"It's the first credible report of its kind. This doesn't establish a link between the chemicals and breast cancer, but it casts suspicion in that direction, and that has to be followed up with more research." PROFESSOR MARY S. WOLFF of Mt.
Sinai Medical Center.  [ A12:3. ]


Streaking Bulls Stall Nets' Drive To Playoffs
Now that Michael Jordan has given up basketball for the life of a minor league baseball player, everybody knows what it's going to take to keep the Chicago Bulls from a fourth National Basketball Association Championship.
Nets Coach Chuck Daly found it out again tonight as New Jersey lost a 111-105 decision to the Bulls in Chicago Stadium that wasn't nearly as close as the final score.
It was only 10 unanswered points by the Nets in the last 1 minute 3 seconds that gave that illusion.
"Our No. 1 problem was that we had no answer for Scottie Pippen," said Daly.
"He took us off the dribble inside and out. His pride really showed. He was scoring, stealing and rebounding. They were just a step quicker at every position all night. They just dominated us tonight."


Critical Winds Shift for Albee, A Master of the Steady Course
For Edward Albee, the long exile is over.
Hailed more than 30 years ago for 'Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?' but dismissed in the 1970's and 80's for what was perceived as his increasingly abstract style, he won a third Pulitzer Prize yesterday, for 'Three Tall Women,' and reclaimed his position as one of America's leading dramatists.


Reviews/Fashion; Dresses That Could Make Dietrich Look Demure
THERE is a little-read canto in Dante's "Divine Comedy" that designers should know about: the one set in Purgatory where dressmakers are forced to wear their own inventions and walk along the streets of New York.
That's just a fantasy, of course.
But when Liza Bruce came out on the runway to take a bow, wearing a beautiful black fuzzy sweater with sheer sleeves, a long skirt slit demurely up the back and classic pumps, it was fun to imagine her striding out instead in the sheer yellow vinyl dress with yellow bikini underwear beneath and the stiletto strap sandals she had just presented for fall '94.


The Concept: Woes of the Film Industry
Hollywood is a tough game.
The profit margins are too slim, the price of talent is too high, the bottom-line mentality is pervasive.
Joel Silver, the producer, loves it.
The prospect of 500-channel cable does not make him flinch.
He greets with open arms the opportunity to open a film on pay-per-view television.
"If you can find a way to make $100 million in one night, with virtually no advertising and no distribution costs, that's great," he said enthusiastically yesterday, on a film panel at the Pierre Hotel organized by the investment banking company Wertheim Schroder and Variety, the trade publication.
"And believe me, everyone at this table would be lining up to sign on the dotted line to be part of it."


Critical Winds Shift for Albee, A Master of the Steady Course
For Edward Albee, the long exile is over.
Hailed more than 30 years ago for 'Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?' but dismissed in the 1970's and 80's for what was perceived as his increasingly abstract style, he won a third Pulitzer Prize yesterday, for 'Three Tall Women,' and reclaimed his position as one of America's leading dramatists.


Opponents of Policy On Haiti Begin Fast
Randall Robinson, chairman of the Trans- Africa lobby, began a fast today to persuade the Clinton Administration to change its policy of returning refugees to Haiti.
Mr.
Robinson, who is joined in his hunger strike by a group of celebrities including the director Jonathan Demme and the actor Danny Glover, hopes to appeal to the conscience of the nation with the fast.


Accounts
*
Nabisco Biscuit Co., East Hanover, N.J., to Mendoza, Dillon &amp; Asociados, Newport Beach, Calif., as the first agency to handle advertising aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers.
Billings were not disclosed.


P.&amp; G. Bet On Rates Turns Sour
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company said yesterday that it would take a $102 million after-tax charge against its third-quarter earnings as a result of having been "badly burned" in two derivatives contracts.
The contracts, which soured as interest rates rose, were entered in hopes of "managing" its interest rate exposures, said Erik G. Nelson, senior vice president and chief financial officer at P.&amp; G.


Commerce Comes to the Internet
The global computer network known as the Internet has long been viewed as a refuge for academics, researchers and hackers.
But today the network took a significant step toward becoming a national electronic marketplace with the announcement of a new high-speed business-to-business network, backed by a broad coalition of Silicon Valley's largest companies including Apple Computer, Amdahl, Sun Microsystems, Intel and National Semiconductor.
The network, Commercenet, which has $12 million in Federal Government and industry financing, will permit companies and individuals who are connected to the Internet to buy and sell goods, look up and exchange information and collaborate on engineering and other projects.
Enhanced Software
It is one of the first significant efforts to bolster the Internet by providing more robust software that has the security features needed for electronic commercial transactions.


Reviews/Fashion; Collection by Sui Spans the Decades
ANNA SUI revved up the fashion crowd in her fall show on Monday evening by sending models strutting down the runway in outrageous mixes of vinyl, fake fur, nylon, wool, rubber and shearling.
It combined a bit of 60's Courreges, 70's disco and 90's Paris.
She divided her fast-paced show into segments with names like "Cheerleaders," "Motorcycle Girls," "Apres Ski" and "Fake Fur and Tuxedo." What the models wore wasn't always what you might expect.


The House Tackles Crime
Now it is the House's turn to debate a crime bill that foolishly creates a slew of new Federal crimes and death penalties to display "toughness" but also extends a badly needed Federal hand -- and dollar -- to anxious states and localities for crime control programs.
Starting with the Senate-approved $22 billion for more police and prisons, the House embarks today on several days of debate over how to spend that money and otherwise make Washington's voice heard.
Senators posturing for the anti-crime vote have passed a bill with dozens of new death penalties, new Federal jurisdiction for crimes long deemed local, and orders to restructure their sentencing laws to suit Washington's preference.
The task before the House is to improve upon, or at least not worsen, the Senate's 900-page version.


Clintons Used Trade Profits To Cut Taxes
The White House said today that the Clintons used some of the profits from Hillary Rodham Clinton's lucrative commodity trades to make large interest payments on a real estate venture in the late 1970's as a way to reduce their income taxes.
Confirming parts of an account provided earlier in the day by James B. McDougal, the Clintons' business partner in the real estate venture, the Whitewater Development Company, the White House said the Clintons had pre-paid interest on the venture to lower their tax bill.


Corrections
The Mutual Funds Quarterly Review in Business Day on April 4 included incorrect data from Morningstar Inc. for three funds.
The SBC Short-Term World Income Fund had a return of minus 2.48 percent for the quarter and a positive return of 2.91 percent for the 12 months ended March 31.
The return for the SBC World Growth Fund was minus 3.53 percent for the quarter and a positive 18.89 percent for the 12 months.
The Aquila Narragansett Insured Tax Free Fund was down 7.00 percent for the quarter and up 1.36 percent for the 12 months.
The data errors resulted in erroneous listings for the Aquila municipal bond fund and the SNC short-term fund.
They were not among the worst-performing funds in their respective categories.


Inquiry Challenges Doctors On Ordering Diagnostic Tests
Doctors order many more diagnostic tests when they have a financial interest in the equipment and clinics that perform the tests, Congressional investigators said today.
The General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, said that doctors were three to five times as likely to order CAT scans, magnetic resonance imaging, ultrasound procedures and other diagnostic imaging services when the equipment was owned by the doctors themselves or by groups with which they were affiliated.


Knicks Seeking a Way Back From Their Early April Swoon
The momentum the Knicks built in March has vanished.
Their lead over the Atlanta Hawks has disappeared.
And the Chicago Bulls are back in the race for best record in the Eastern Conference.
So with seven games left in the regular season, the Knicks' most urgent task is to regroup before the playoffs.
New York (52-23), tied with Atlanta atop the East, has lost three consecutive games and four of its last five.
Although the Knicks were unbeaten in March, they have not played like a championship team in April.


Car-Rental Companies Warned Over Age-Based Discrimination
Resuming an on-again, off-again battle about the meaning of a New York State law governing car-rental companies, G. Oliver Koppell, the Attorney General, said yesterday that he had warned nine national companies that turn away drivers under the age of 25 that they must rent to drivers as young as 18.
But rental companies cite a clause in the state law that allows them to deny rentals to young drivers if the companies are unable to buy liability insurance for them.


Government Approves New Drug to Assist in Liver Transplants
The Food and Drug Administration said today that it had approved the marketing of a new drug to help prevent rejection of transplanted livers.
It became the third immunosuppressant drug licensed for organ transplant surgery in this country.
The new drug, called FK-506 during its investigational stages, is now known as tacrolimus.
Its manufacturer, Fujisawa U.S.A.
Inc. of Deerfield, Ill., will sell it as Prograf.


Cutting Too Deeply
The House is poised to vote on a motion that would cut the Federal budget to damagingly low levels.
The motion would reduce discretionary spending over the next five years by $26 billion below the stringent levels set by last year's deficit-reduction package.
The Senate has already approved the cut; the House motion will instruct House conferees to accept that decision.
The vote will appear bloodless because the motion backs the idea of cuts without naming victims.
But if the cuts become law, they would force Congress to gut President Clinton's investment program, diminish its own crime initiative or reduce defense spending.


Review/Dance; How Cast Changes at the Joffrey Can Color the Works
Multiple casting is a way of life in dance, as the Joffrey Ballet showed again with debuts and cast changes on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
The program's opening work was Gerald Arpino's "Italian Suite," with Meg Gurin new as Daniel Baudendistel's love interest.
Small, with a firmly shaped classical style and impressive technique, Ms.
Gurin poured considerable emotion into her pas de deux, bringing out an equivalent romantic air from her excellent partner.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Hedge funds have been vilified as the junk bonds of the 90's: they are being blamed for many of the recent traumatic events in world financial markets and their managers, like George Soros, have come under fire.
But hedge funds -- funds for rich people and institutions that typically borrow huge amounts of money for their investments -- continue to attract investors.  [ Page A1. ]


Personal Health
JUST as all roads once led to Rome, all blood vessels in the human body ultimately empty into the heart.
But only one, the aorta, leaves the heart's main pumping chamber, the left ventricle, to deliver life-sustaining oxygen-rich blood to the entire body.
Hundreds of thousands of unsuspecting people are walking around with what amounts to a time bomb in the aorta: a weakened portion, or aneurysm, that may rupture and kill them.
Studies by doctors at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., found that aortic aneurysms in the abdomen have become three times more common in the last 40 years.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article in Business Day yesterday about a shareholder lawsuit accusing executives of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. of insider trading referred incorrectly in some editions to individuals arrested on fraud charges.
They were employees of the Paradigm Group, an investment banking company founded by Peter T. Caserta, who is on leave as Spectrum's president.
They are not officers of Spectrum.


RWANDAN REBELS PUSH INTO CAPITAL
Rebel soldiers have broken through Government defenses and entered the Rwandan capital, Kigali, United Nations officials reported tonight.
With the final battle for the city appearing imminent, there are reports that Cabinet ministers fled the capital earlier today for a provincial city.
As the last groups of foreigners were being assembled to be airlifted from Rwanda aboard French and Belgian aircraft, a spokesman for the Rwanda Patriotic Front said rebel troops were only waiting for the evacuation to be completed before launching an all-out assault on Kigali.


At City Hall, Schools And AIDS Draw Protests


Panthers Fading Fast in East
The Florida Panthers tonight all but conceded the Islanders the final Eastern Conference spot in the National Hockey League playoffs.
Florida looked tentative and its goalie, John Vanbiesbrouck, was benched midway through the second period in a 5-2 loss to the hapless Quebec Nordiques before 14,700 at Miami Arena.
The loss left the Panthers with 81 points, 1 behind the Islanders, who can clinch the playoff berth with a victory or tie at Tampa Bay Wednesday night or, failing that, a victory or tie here on Thursday.


The Joy of Rush-Hour Traffic? With the Freeway Back, Yes!
Rush-hour traffic moved as usual today -- at a crawl -- as the Santa Monica Freeway opened for business for the first time since the Jan. 17 earthquake toppled two of its bridges.
But even as politicians celebrated the reconstruction of the nation's busiest freeway, questions arose about the adequacy of the repairs.
Gov.
Pete Wilson, Mayor Richard J. Riordan of Los Angeles and Federico F. Pena, the Federal Secretary of Transportation, were among those on the roadway late Monday night, when a phalanx of police officers on motorcycles, followed by rows of merry-making drivers, inaugurated the rebuilt road.
At opening ceremonies this morning, Vice President Al Gore praised the quick repairs and said jubilantly, "The rubber is meeting the road today."


The Kentucky Waltz Has Begun in Earnest
It was chilly and rainy at Aqueduct yesterday morning, but the New York road to the Kentucky Derby was crowded with horses working out for the $500,000 Wood Memorial on Saturday.
And another cluster of candidates for the Derby crowded the track at Keeneland in Lexington, Ky., where the $500,000 Blue Grass Stakes will attract an even more imposing field the same day with heavy hitters such as Holy Bull and Valiant nature.
In California, the countdown to the Derby received an extra dash of intrigue when a special workout was scheduled for the star colt Brocco, who won the Breeders' Cup Juvenile this past November and the Santa Anita Derby this past Saturday.


Free-for-All In Tokyo Is Shattering Party Lineup
The battle to choose a successor to Morihiro Hosokawa, the departing Prime Minister, has broken out into an opportunistic free-for-all that is shattering the country's once rigid party divisions.
With Mr.
Hosokawa's seven-party coalition of conservatives and Socialists feuding, and the once dominant Liberal Democratic Party on the verge of what could become a three-way split, just about every party, except the Communists, seems to have a shot at joining the coalition that will eventually assume power.


CHRONICLE
A merger of art and architecture: PAIGE RENSE, the editor in chief of Architectural Digest, and KENNETH NOLAND, the painter, were married on Sunday in Mr.
Noland's studio in North Bennington, Vt.
The couple, who have known each other for 10 years, had intended to keep the guest list small.
"Like many weddings, it started out to be just a few friends, but somehow it grew and ended up close to 60 people," Ms.
Rense said yesterday.


Pentagon Plea: Let an Admiral Keep His Stars
Three top Pentagon officials went to Capitol Hill today in an extraordinary step to argue that the Navy's chief admiral deserved to retire with his four stars intact, despite his role in the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal.
Not in recent memory has the Senate Armed Services Committee held a hearing like today's, to discuss whether Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, should end his 38-year career with only two stars.
And not in recent memory has the Senate denied a retiring chief of a military branch his four stars.


Mitchell Moves Into Position for Top Baseball Job
In removing himself from consideration for the United States Supreme Court, Senator George J. Mitchell put himself in position yesterday to be named the next baseball commissioner.
Baseball officials would not say that Mitchell was their man for the job, which has been unfilled for the last 19 months.
But people familiar with their thinking said they were prepared to move quickly to get him before someone else did.


Giuliani and Cortines Share School Forum
After a highly publicized feud, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines visited a Brooklyn middle school yesterday to demonstrate their reconciliation to students, as well as to 40 or so reporters who trailed along.
For about an hour, the Mayor and the Chancellor perched uncomfortably on high stools in front of a blackboard in the library of the Charles D. Dewey Middle School in Sunset Park.
They fielded questions from an eighth-grade history class on topics ranging from Mr.
Giuliani's handling of AIDS protests on Monday to New York City's murder rate.


Corrections
An article yesterday about two major Broadway musicals in the fall misstated the availability of tickets for "Sunset Boulevard." Mail orders are being accepted for the show, which opens Nov. 17; the box office at the Minskoff Theater does not open until Sept. 12.


New Arrival Is Too Impatient to Wait for Subway
About 80 women go into labor in New York City's subway stations or trains every year -- a figure the Transit Authority says rivals the delivery rate at some small hospitals.
More often than not, women are rushed to hospitals just in time to give birth.
But in a handful of cases, babies are born right on the platforms.


Time to Assert American Values
Singapore's founding leader, Lee Kuan Yew, returned to a favorite theme yesterday in defending the threatened caning of Michael Fay, an 18-year-old American found guilty of vandalism.
Western countries value the individual above society; in Asia, he said, the good of society is deemed more important than individual liberties.
This comfortable bit of sophistry helps governments from China to Indonesia rationalize abuses and marginalize courageous people who campaign for causes like due process and freedom from torture.
Western nations, it is asserted, have no right to impose their values on countries that govern themselves successfully according to their own values.
So, the argument goes, when Americans express outrage over a punishment that causes permanent scarring -- in this case, caning -- they are committing an act of cultural arrogance, assuming that American values are intrinsically superior to those of another culture.


Delta and Virgin Airways in Accord
Struggling to find its footing amid the cutthroat competition across the Atlantic, Delta Air Lines has reached an agreement with Virgin Atlantic Airways that will give Delta its first toehold at London's Heathrow Airport, Europe's busiest.
Delta and Virgin Atlantic announced yesterday that Delta would buy seats on Virgin Atlantic flights to London and that the two carriers would share frequent-flier benefits.


Reviews/Television; The Price of a Perpetual Revolution
"The Mao Years, 1949-1976" takes no position on whether Mao Zedong was a case history of power corrupting or of ideology running amok or of the psychopathology of dictatorship, but it leaves little doubt that whatever the diagnosis, the consequences fell heavily on the Chinese people.
The absorbing two-hour program tonight on Channel 13 carries forward the story begun in "China in Revolution, 1911-1949," also produced, written and directed by Sue Williams.
The remarkable pictures of upheaval and suppression and the testimony of Mao's followers and victims create a chronicle of achievement, misadventure, cruelty and havoc.
It is an unsparing yet not unfair account of a regime that for long found admirers in America.


A Campaign to Put Biblical Values in the Public Schools
When the school board here voted last week to study using the Bible for grammar, history and literature lessons, the uproar caused officials to abandon the plan almost immediately.
But the proposal itself was unusual only in the frankness of its stated intent, civil libertarians say.
"This is an extreme example of the greatly increased activity we have seen in this area in the last two years," said Robert S. Peck, legislative counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union, which opposes such Bible study in public schools.
"There are more student Bible clubs and more groups trying to get into the schools to proselytize."


Washington Dining: A Deficit No More
Michel Richard, the chef and owner of Citrus in Los Angeles, is ensconced in Georgetown.
Patrick Clark, who made his mark at Metro in New York, is cooking at the Hay-Adams Hotel, across from the White House.
Dean &amp; Deluca and Les Halles, both offshoots of New York operations, are drawing crowds.


Students See War Over Turf
HAVING watched the Mayor and the Chancellor slug it out and then shake hands, the students at Edward R. Murrow High School in Brooklyn had no trouble relating to what was going on.
"It was like watching two guys fight who both knew they were wrong but didn't know how to get out of it," said John Mattera, a 15-year-old sophomore, who had joined in a discussion with a dozen other student experts on adolescent behavior in the principal's office.


4 Former Brookhaven Officials Indicted in Bribe Scheme
Four former officials of the Town of Brookhaven have been charged in a Federal indictment with accepting bribes of as much as $250,000 to support a prominent developer's real-estate projects.
The indictment, unsealed today, grew out of statements made in September 1992 in Federal court by John McNamara, a car dealer and Long Island developer who pleaded guilty at that time to bilking General Motors out of $436 million in loans by faking the export of tens of thousands of vans.


Evans, 6-7 Forward, Picks Manhattan
HESHIMU EVANS, a 6-foot-7-inch forward, announced yesterday that he will attend Manhattan College this fall.


Review/Film: Serial Mom; The Case for Terminal Prejudice
If you're going to build a career on bad taste, sooner or later you'll have to tackle the most sacred icon of all, motherhood.
John Waters is just the man to do it, for he sends up only what he deeply adores.
In "Serial Mom" he takes to heart the idea that being the All-American mother is enough to drive a woman crazy.
What could be more sympathetic?
Kathleen Turner leaps into the most delicious role she has had in years as Beverly Sutphin.
She is a Baltimore housewife with perfectly bobbed hair, a sparkling clean kitchen, a dentist husband (Sam Waterston) and two teen-age children with names that seem lifted from "Ozzie and Harriet": Chip and Misty.
But the strain of being a perfect mom is showing, for Beverly has developed a tendency to murder anyone who gets on her nerves.


Market Place; As other brokerage stocks sink, Salomon's shares are buoyant.
WITH the bond market reeling, this has been a bad year for brokerage stocks.
But Salomon Inc. has bucked the trend, rising nicely despite the fact that its second-largest holder turned tail and dumped its entire holdings.
The performance of Salomon stock, which is up 9 percent this year while its competitors are down, is a testament to the confidence holders have in Warren E. Buffett, who helped turn around Salomon after its Treasury bidding scandal in 1991 and whose Berkshire Hathaway Inc. has been a major buyer of Salomon stock.
But it also reflects faith in the ability of Salomon to trade successfully for its own account in even the harshest of markets.


Israel and P.L.O. in Accord on Palestinian Police Force
Israeli and P.L.O. negotiators, meeting to work out details of the self-rule agreement signed last September, settled the thorny issue of the deployment of Palestinian police in Gaza and the West Bank town of Jericho today and agreed to the release of 5,000 prisoners now in Israeli jails.
Israel's chief negotiator, Gen.
Amnon Shahak, and the chief Palestinian negotiator, Dr.
Nabil Shaath, told reporters that the two sides had reached agreement on the deployment of a 9,000-strong police force in Gaza and Jericho before beginning a four-day recess in the talks on carrying out the self-rule accord.


The Pop Life
Where God Wants Him
Forget his deep-throated delivery of what have become rhythm-and-blues classics.
Forget his smooth moves and legendary high-energy shows, a tribute to motion and stamina.
James Brown -- also known as the hardest-working man in show business and the Godfather of Soul -- says his legacy is "that you can make it if you try."
"I came from nothing and I made something out of myself," he said on Monday from his office in Augusta, Ga., where as a child he was no stranger to poverty and delinquency.
"I dance and I sing and I make it happen. I've made people feel better.  I want people to be happy.' "


On the Road to Commemorate Cesar Chavez


Mussolini's Italy Withheld Jews From the Nazis; Ban on 'Schindler'
To the Editor:
The refusal by Islamic countries to allow screenings of "Schindler's List," Steven Spielberg's Holocaust drama (Arts pages, April 7), should not come as a surprise.
In the 1950's, the Soviet film-exporting agency offered Arab cinemas "The Eternal Jew," a 1940 anti-Semitic production created by the Nazi Germany government to justify genocide.
Nowhere else in the postwar world was that atrocious film commercially released.
PHIL HALL  Bronx, April 7, 1994


Henry Horowitz, Book Printer, 76
Henry Horowitz, a printer and binder of specialty books for more than 50 years, died on Monday at St.
Mary's Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Mr.
Horowitz, who maintained homes in Palm Beach and Clifton, N.J., was 76.
The cause was complications after surgery for a ruptured appendix, said his daughter, Linda Rosier.


Critical Winds Shift for Albee, A Master of the Steady Course
For Edward Albee, the long exile is over.
Hailed more than 30 years ago for "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" but dismissed in the 1970's and 80's for what was perceived as his increasingly abstract style, he won a third Pulitzer Prize yesterday, for "Three Tall Women," and reclaimed his position as one of America's leading dramatists.


The Canadian Triangle Where High Tech Reigns
Thirteen years after starting a company here in Canada's high-tech hub, a Waterloo University professor, J. Wesley Graham, and his 50 backers are some $100 million richer.
As head of the university's Computer Systems Group, Professor Graham founded the Watcom International Corporation to produce software he developed that makes it easier to learn computer programming.
The software has been used by more than one million students worldwide.


Mussolini's Italy Withheld Jews From the Nazis
To the Editor:
"Leader of Italian Neo-Fascists Praises Mussolini" (news article, April 2) reports remarks by Gianfranco Fini, one of the partners in the right-wing alliance that was elected in Italy late last month.
You write of Mussolini as an anti-Semite, responsible for "deportation of thousands of Italian Jews to Nazi death camps in World War II."


Dallas Businessman Wins Senate Nomination
Richard W. Fisher, a wealthy Dallas investor and former adviser to Ross Perot who has never held public office, defeated a 21-year veteran of Texas politics tonight to capture the Democratic nomination for a seat in the United States Senate.
The 45-year-old Mr.
Fisher overcame accusations by his opponent, Jim Mattox, a former Congressman and state Attorney General, that he was a closet Republican and won their bitter run-off fight after finishing second to Mr.
Mattox in the March primary.


It's Nicklaus-Palmer One More Time; It's Still Magic
For several golden moments today, there was no such thing as time.
It could have been 1962.
Or maybe 1972 or 1982.
No one really cared.
On the tee at Pinehurst No. 2 were Jack and Arnie.
Arnie and Jack.
The greatest golfer in history and the game's most popular champion, they came to record for posterity one final head-to-head competition.
The occasion was a taping of the revival of Shell's "Wonderful World of Golf," the popular television series that ran from 1961 to 1970.
A made-for-TV sporting event -- it will be broadcast on April 30 on ABC -- generally doesn't do much to stir the senses.
But something about these two men and the seamless old Donald Ross golf course on which they stood made the mind's eye drift back, back to Oakmont and the 1962 United States Open, when Nicklaus, the 22-year-old kid from Columbus, Ohio, beat the reigning Masters champion in a Monday playoff that altered the balance of power in golf.


Bank of New York's Income Rose 33% in First Quarter
The Bank of New York Company served up several pleasant surprises to Wall Street yesterday, announcing strong earnings, a stock buyback and an increase in its quarterly dividend.
First-quarter earnings rose by 33 percent, compared with the comparable period a year ago, helped in part by an after-tax gain of $14 million from the sale of part of its interest in a Hong Kong bank.
But the healthy quarter was also the result of strong fee income from securities processing and growth in the bank's credit card business.


Kent Goes On a Tear But Mum's The Word
Jeff Kent will not talk about the numbers.
He does not want to discuss his potential at the plate -- be it home runs, runs batted in or batting average -- and he won't even venture a guess as to why he has been so proficient this spring.
In his mind, talk would somehow belittle the effort.


Ukraine Election Outcome Hints at Deadlock
Ukraine's first post-Soviet elections have produced a Parliament deeply divided between Moscow-leaning leftists, Western-oriented nationalists and independents.
The result will most likely be legislative deadlock on reforming the country's economy and reaching a national consensus on regional and ideological differences.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-15  POPULATION FOCUS SHIFTING  Many groups are arguing that traditional means of population control are not effective enough and that a dramatic shift is needed to women's rights and improving education and health care.
A1  IN SOUTH AFRICA, MEMENTOS  An African National Congress bow tie?
A Nelson Mandela wall clock?
As South Africa prepares for change, the nation has found that it can laugh at itself and has spawned an industry of liberation collectibles.
A1


Easier Arms-Maker Mergers Asked
A Federal panel of defense and antitrust experts recommended today that the Government reduce procedural obstacles to mergers of defense contractors, but did not propose the partial exemption from antitrust rules that some companies had sought.
The outcome represented a compromise between the Justice Department, which has opposed giving special consideration to armament builders, and the Defense Department, which has become increasingly interested in helping weapons makers cope with a steep drop in orders.
The panel included a lawyer from each agency, as well as military-industry executives and academics.


I.B.M. Effort In Schools
Big Blue and Big Bird, teaming up to create a multimedia curriculum for teaching science to children in kindergarten through second grade, introduced two programs yesterday that will be marketed to elementary schools around the country.
The project, which began years ago, is a partnership between the Eduquest division of the International Business Machines Corporation and Children's Television Workshop, the creator of the television show "Sesame Street."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Honors come to an art director who operates from his parents' California living room.
A BANGKOK-BORN art director, Sakol Mongkolkasetarin, who started his own agency in the living room of his parents' Fountain Valley, Calif., home, has remarkably reversed a turn of bad luck.
Along the way, his brand of visual humor has helped a tiny packaged goods company and his own career opportunities.


A Bet Gone Wrong for P.&amp; G.
Procter &amp; Gamble, as a result of losses on investments that bet on interest rates, plans to take a $102 million charge.
Page D1.


We're Here Live . . . Crunch!
The National Football League has agreed to let ABC, NBC, Fox, TNT and ESPN use field reporters to enhance the broadcasts of games.
The reporters will be able to position themselves from the 20-yard line to the end zone on each side of the field.
But even that limited access, away from the team benches, is an improvement on the past practice of reporters lingering in stadium tunnels.


Islanders Aiming to Make It on Their Own
They sunned themselves at poolside.
They explored the local fairways.
They even squeezed in a practice session at a nearby rink.
But the Islanders, despite being surrounded by all manner of tropical distractions, spent this afternoon mostly at the mercy of one nagging detail: All 11th-hour hoopla to the contrary in this springtime of signature surges, they had not yet actually made the playoffs.


Radioactivity Experiment and the Human Aftermath Wins a Pulitzer
GENERAL NONFICTION  DAVID REMNICK "Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire"
In "Lenin's Tomb," David Remnick, a former Moscow correspondent for The Washington Post, describes the last days of the Soviet empire in the words of past and present leaders and victims of the Soviet regime.
The high point of Mr.
Remnick's vivid account is the transition of power from Mikhail S. Gorbachev to Boris N. Yeltsin.
In addition to talks with the major personalities in the Politburo, the author, a staff writer for The New Yorker, includes interviews with historical figures or their widows and children who survived the Stalinist purges.
MUSIC  GUNTHER SCHULLER "Of Reminiscences and Reflections"
Gunther Schuller, a 68-year-old composer who lives in Newton Center, Mass., won for a 22-minute single-movement orchestral work commissioned by the Louisville Orchestra and performed by that ensemble, with Mr.
Schuller conducting, on Dec. 4.
The work, which Mr.
Schuller described as "basically a lyrical, reflective piece," is one of several recent works he composed in memory of his wife, Marjorie, who died in November 1992.
"My wife was a musician, a singer and pianist," he said yesterday, "and in this piece I allude subtly to our musical life together and even to some specific occasions; but as in Elgar's 'Enigma' Variations, they shall not be named."


Review/Television; No Pat Answers, as in Life
A black boy is accidentally killed in New York City by a hit-and-run driver who happens to be Jewish.
The man ends up with a suspended driver's license and 100 hours of community service.
Enraged blacks riot.
A white man is dragged from his car and beaten to death in front of his horrified wife.
A black youth is charged with murder but is given sanctuary in the church of an angry minister.
The city's racial tensions are at the breaking point.
Once again, tonight at 10, NBC's "Law and Order" pulls a provocative fictional script from echoes of real headlines, in this instance those connected with the riots in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, and in Los Angeles after the Rodney King case.
Tough questions are raised in blunt language, and once again the series offers no pat answers.


Phillips Stevens, 80; For 23 Years Led Williston Academy
Phillips Stevens, who was headmaster of Williston Academy in Easthampton, Mass., for 23 years until retiring in 1972, died on Monday at Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla.
He was 80 and lived in Jensen Beach, Fla., and Old Saybrook, Conn.
The cause was a stroke, said Sarah Stevens, his wife of 54 years.


Public &amp; Private; Playing Perfect Pattycake
Why in the world am I sitting here trying to recall how many hours my children spent playing with blocks when they were small?
Why am I trying to tote up the time I spent reading "Pat the Bunny" versus that I spent wheeling them around supermarket aisles talking to myself?
Because I am looking at the study just released from the Families and Work Institute, that's why, a study that shows some day care is not as good as we might have imagined.


New York City Tops State In School Staff
While hundreds of parents, teachers, and politicians rose to the defense of Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines in his public battles with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, almost no one offered a defense of the proximate cause of the war -- the school bureaucracy.
They are at least 8,400 strong in New York, and like school administrators everywhere, they hire the teachers, train the security guards, assign bus routes, administer standardized tests, plan construction projects.
To Mr.
Giuliani they also include "useless bureaucrats" and "bloated overhead."


Eating Well
AS soon as the early-morning bullet train from Tokyo to Kyoto pulled out of the station, Japanese children pulled out their breakfasts: deep-fried chicken nuggets, pork cutlet sandwiches, hot dogs and soft drinks.
There may be poetic justice here.


Ovitz Riddle Roils Hollywood
The question "What does Michael Ovitz want?" has been asked repeatedly here in the last few months.
Mr.
Ovitz, the 47-year-old co-founder and chairman of the Creative Artists Agency, which represents numerous stars and directors, is not only one of the most powerful men in the entertainment industry, but also one of the most enigmatic.
Wherever he walks, his footprints linger.
And he has left some deep footprints.


Corrections
A report in the Off the Menu column of The Living Section last Wednesday about the settlement of a lawsuit involving the Brasserie des Theatres and the Paramount Hotel, off Times Square, misstated the terms.
In exchange for the Brasserie space and fixtures, the owner of the hotel will no longer pursue monetary claims against the restaurant owners.
No outright payments are involved.


Bristol Journal; For New Age Travelers, the End of the Road?
Nancy Robinson, 33 years old and mother of Sam, 5, stood in a torn brown windbreaker with a soiled bandanna holding down her hair and surveyed her encampment on the banks of the Avon.
She looked like Mother Courage.
Ms.
Robinson took to the road seven years ago in the midst of a complicated personal crisis that involved "disillusionment" with politics and "society's established structures." She is one of thousands of ragtag nomads called New Age Travelers who have crisscrossed the British countryside for more than a decade, evoking howls of outrage from farmers and villagers up and down the land.


To Justify Flogging, Singapore Cites 'Chaos' on U.S. Streets
Defending the decision to flog an American teen-ager for vandalism, the Senior Minister of Singapore suggested in a television interview broadcast today that tough criminal laws had saved this wealthy, authoritarian city-state from the "chaos" found in the streets of the United States.
"The American society is the richest and most prosperous in the world, but it is hardly safe and peaceful," the official, Lee Kuan Yew, told an interviewer for the Government-controlled Singapore Broadcasting Corporation.
"If you like it that way, that is your problem. But that is not the path we choose. They always talk about human rights. I think it is just a convenient slogan."


Coke Plans 'Red Hot Summer'
The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that it would team with the Fox Broadcasting Company, the Ford Motor Company and more than 250 radio stations across the country for its largest promotion ever, called "Red Hot Summer."


A Primer on Hedge Funds: Hush-Hush and for the Rich
If investment bankers and junk bond dealers were the popular Wall Street villains of the 1980's -- living lavishly on hundreds of millions of dollars of earnings -- managers of hedge funds are being cast as the suspicious characters of the 1990's.
There is almost no way that hedge funds would not arouse suspicion.
They are, by law, secretive investment partnerships of rich people seeking to make a lot of money selling stocks short, using complex financial techniques and borrowing huge amounts of money for their investments -- things not usually available to ordinary investors.
They tend to be managed by strong-willed, often-reclusive trading impresarios.


German Developer Vanishes And Leaves Billions in Debt
Stocks fell and many construction sites all over Germany shut down today after the country's biggest real estate developer disappeared, leaving his company and its creditors in the dark and possibly holding the bag for billions of dollars worth of debts.
The developer, Jurgen Schneider, 59, was last seen before Easter, according to a statement made Monday night by officials of his company, Dr.
Jurgen Schneider A.G.
The company, based in Konigstein, owns prime commercial real estate in Frankfurt, Baden-Baden, Wiesbaden and Hamburg and has been developing 11 sites in the eastern city of Leipzig.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CABLE &amp; WIRELESS P.L.C., London, announced that it would cut its headquarters' staff by 40 percent this year.


Study Finds More News About, and by, Women
News about women and reported by women is on the increase, but men continue to receive more attention from the country's news organizations, according to a study made public here today.
The study found, for example, that women were quoted or mentioned on the front pages of American newspapers during a month this year more than twice as often as they were in a similar period in 1989.


Radioactivity Experiment and the Human Aftermath Wins a Pulitzer
The stack of documents was almost entirely about animal experiments conducted by the Government, but one footnote caught Eileen Welsome's eye: 18 unwitting hospital patients had been injected with radioactive plutonium.
Ms.
Welsome, a reporter for The Albuquerque Tribune, spent more than six years tracking down those victims, whose names had long been classified top secret.
Yesterday she won the Pulitzer Prize for national reporting for her series telling how they had lived out their lives.


Yanks' Bats Can't Save Mulholland This Time
There were walks, there were bloops, there were bullets, there were five different White Sox breezing past Mike Stanley when they touched the plate and there was concern filtering throughout the Yankees dugout.
It was the fourth inning and Terry Mulholland was already ambling off the mound, his head down, his earned run average up and his night over.
When Mulholland finally reached a safe seat in the dugout, lifted his head and stared at the scoreboard, he saw the extensive damage the White Sox had levied upon him and realized why his second start with the Yanks was an abomination.


Yawn, So When Do the Playoffs Start?
Since their loss to the Rangers with six games left in the regular season thwarted their challenge for first place, the Devils have been playing with diminished intensity.
With the third ranking in the Eastern Conference locked up for more than a week, the Devils have had little reason to impress anyone but their coaches, chiefly for ice time in the playoffs.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption on Thursday about New York City's new police crackdown on truancy referred incorrectly to one student whom the police took into custody at a video arcade in midtown Manhattan.
The police later learned that he was on Easter vacation from a Roman Catholic school; he was not one of the 216 truants picked up that day.


MITCHELL REJECTS PRESIDENT'S OFFER OF SEAT ON COURT
Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine today turned down what amounted to an offer from President Clinton to step up to the Supreme Court.
Mr.
Clinton told Senator Mitchell on Monday evening that he wanted to nominate him to the Court, both men said today.
But Mr.
Mitchell said he told the President that he had reluctantly concluded that he could not ably serve as both a nominee and the chief champion of Mr.
Clinton's proposal to overhaul the health care system.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 8
Apr. 1
Apr. 9
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
6.8
7.1
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
213.8
214.4
225.8
Distillate stocks
100.1
101.7
99.9
Crude imports, daily
6.9
6.8
6.8
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.0
1.9
Crude stocks
337.1
337.0
355.2
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.6
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
88.9
87.7
86.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


15 Nations Offer Troops For U.N. Force of 54,000
More than 15 countries have pledged at least 54,000 troops and other specialists toward the creation of a United Nations inventory of peacekeepers and equipment for future operations, a United Nations official said today.
The United States is not among the 15, but the official, Col.
Gerard Gambiez of France, said the Clinton Administration is considering his request for transport planes and ships, communications equipment, medical assistance and map reproduction.


Sports of The Times; The Old, The New, The Knicks
IN the first half of a Knicks game several weeks ago, John Starks found himself twisted around in the lane and in the air with his back to the basket.
He couldn't pass, he couldn't shoot and he couldn't come down with the ball.
He could either remain in that position like a hummingbird, or release the ball.
So he shot -- flinging the ball over his head without looking at the basket.
And the ball went in!
On their halftime television show, the announcer Al Trautwig asked Walt Frazier, the former Knick star guard and now an analyst, "Clyde, did you ever make a shot like that?"


L.I. BREAST CANCER IS POSSIBLY LINKED TO CHEMICAL SITES
Women who once lived near large chemical plants on Long Island ran a greater risk of developing breast cancer after menopause, the New York State Health Department said today.
The risk is about equal to that of having a family history of breast cancer, the department said.
Scientists called the report the first credible study outside a laboratory to suggest a possible link between breast cancer and industrial pollution.
But they said that the study, which has yet to be reviewed by other experts, did not establish a cause-and-effect relationship between chemical pollution and cancer.


Shelling Of Gorazde Declines
The United Nations "safe area" of Gorazde was relatively calm today as besieging Serbian nationalist forces heeded United Nations warnings of further air strikes unless their guns were silenced.
But hopes that the Serbs would return to the negotiating table were frustrated when the leader of Bosnia's Serbian nationalists snubbed the United Nations' highest-ranking diplomat in the region.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.41
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.56
3.63
2.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.96
4.03
2.96
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.86
6.90
5.91
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.20
7.23
6.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.03
8.06
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.40
5.95
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


In Virtual Reality, Tools for the Disabled
Strapped securely into an electric wheelchair with one hand around the joystick and a headset in place, Christopher Cobbs, 5, from Grants Pass, Ore., is negotiating challenging terrain: grassy fields, pools of mud, long panes of ice.
To make it a bit more interesting, the landscape he is exploring is dotted with crazy, surreal sculptures of swirling pyramids and orbs.
Christopher, who has cerebral palsy, is learning to operate a motorized wheelchair at the Oregon Research Institute in Eugene by using virtual reality -- a looking-glass technology that transports the user into an imaginary, three-dimensional universe created with software.


Gun Organization Is Pushing for New Prisons, But Some Say Foes in Congress Are the Target
As the House of Representatives prepares to debate anti-crime legislation, the National Rifle Association has begun a nationwide campaign to urge the building of more prisons.
But critics say the campaign is really aimed at lawmakers who support gun-control measures.
The first target of the campaign is Representative Charles E. Schumer, the Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the House subcommittee on crime and the chief sponsor of the crime package pending in the House.
He is also sponsoring several gun-control measures.


Study of Nuclear Workers Finds High Cancer Rates
Workers at an atomic weapons factory making uranium for nuclear bombs died at significantly younger ages and suffered a higher incidence of lung, intestinal and blood cancers than the American population as a whole, according to an analysis of their medical records that was made public today.
The mortality study of more than 1,000 workers at the weapons factory, the Feed Materials Production Center, in Fernald, Ohio, 18 miles northwest of here, was done by Dr.
Peter S. Gartside, a professor of biostatistics at the University of Cincinnati.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
As the author of "The Last 10 Pounds," a newly published diet book, I frequently drop into one bookstore or another to see how it's selling.
One recent afternoon I was in the Doubleday on Fifth Avenue at 57th Street and, as usual, I headed straight for the diet section.
As I anxiously scanned the shelves for my magnum opus, I noticed a petite, slightly plump woman trying to make heads or tails of a complicated-looking fat-gram chart in some other diet book.


Health Debate Splinters After Initial Consensus
"Too high premiums and not enough health care." That was how a clerk in Fargo, N.D., answered last month when asked what was the nation's biggest health care problem.
Her reply was a singular moment of clarity in the current debate.


Executive Changes
HONEYWELL INC., Minneapolis, appointed Brian McGourty president of its home- and building-control business.
MBF USA INC., Fort Lee, N.J., a marketer of medical examination gloves, appointed William C. Willis Jr. president and chief operating officer.


Review/Music; Quick Studies in Defying Expectations the Elegant Way
For all its quietness and brevity, Gyorgy Kurtag's art is a theatrical one.
The directness of his countryman Bela Bartok, the act of one private soul touching another, is interrupted in Mr.
Kurtag's music.
Artifice becomes an art in itself.
Like most accomplished dramatists, he toys with expectations, is amused by leading us on then cutting us off without warning.
Indeed, so much of the chamber, vocal and piano-solo music played by Continuum at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday evening appeared as a series of blackouts, elegant little musical skits over with almost before they began.
They traded as much in surprise as in beauty.


Nelson Mandela on a Mug? It's the Rage in South Africa
It has not yet come to F. W. de Klerk soap-on-a-rope, or Nelson and Winnie salt and pepper shakers.
But it has come to this: the 4-foot-high Nelson Mandela wall clock; gummy candies in the shape of leading political figures; "Oppression," the board game, the Winnie Mandela jigsaw puzzle.
And much more.


Salvador Election Made Tammany Look Pure; Clean It Up for Runoff
To the Editor:
As a member of a United States observer team in Chaletenango City during the March 20 elections in El Salvador -- our credentials were arranged through the United States-El Salvador sister cities network -- I take issue with Maurice Sonnenberg's March 30 letter.
Unlike the "official Presidential delegation" he quotes, we found instances of intimidation and fraud.
Some examples:


AIDS Services Decision Ignites City Hall Protests
Two dozen AIDS advocates were arrested at City Hall, taken away on stretchers yesterday afternoon after locking arms and blocking a hallway just yards from the Mayor's office, capping a day of turmoil over the Giuliani administration's proposal to cut back or eliminate the Division of AIDS Services.
The arrests of the protesters, members of an AIDS-awareness group, Act Up, came at the end of a day in which two groups attempted to conduct what they considered routine press conferences on the steps of City Hall, only to find out they were denied access by security officials.


SUNY Has Ended Complicity With Military Discrimination
To the Editor:
In "Governor Shouldn't Have Power to Bar Recruiters from SUNY" (letter, April 6), Assemblyman Charles H. Nesbitt condemns the New York State University's decision to ban military recruitment on campuses.
He leaves out enough information to distort the issues considerably.


Cancer Study Renews Old Concerns
Karen Pearsall, a 39-year-old mother of three, has been drinking bottled water for almost two decades, fearful that Glen Cove's water may be contaminated by cancer-causing chemicals.
"I know they say the water from the tap is safe, but how can I be sure," said Mrs.
Pearsall as she stopped with two friends at Henry's restaurant here on Glen Street.
"I don't need Government reports to convince me that I could get cancer from strange chemicals."


Not Your Average Rice
A MENU featuring salmon, tuna or swordfish with a rice dish flavored with dried cherries and banana, and accompanied by a salad of endive and Gorgonzola, is a treat for any family dinner or for last-minute company on a weekday.
It takes a half-hour.
The meal is full of enticing elements, and the salad dressing is a triumph of taste and healthful eating.


Lauren takes a journey in Olde England: C12


Producer Prices Up a Modest 0.2% in March
Prices paid to American producers increased a modest two-tenths of 1 percent in March as energy costs steadied after steep advances earlier in the year, the Labor Department reported today.
But while the eagerly awaited figures were seen by economists as fairly reassuring -- and did not unhinge the bond or stock markets -- analysts predicted that they would do little to dissuade the Federal Reserve Board from raising interest rates further to keep inflation in check.


Sund Pays the Price for Dallas's Record
RICK SUND, who helped build the Dallas Mavericks into a model franchise in the 1980's before the team crashed in the 1990's, was fired yesterday as vice president after 14 seasons with the club.
"Let's just say it has to do with a new course that we've got to be on," said DONALD CARTER, the team's owner.
Dallas is 9-66. (AP)


CHRONICLE
CONSTANTINE XII, the deposed King of Greece, attacked the Greek Government yesterday for moves to revoke his passport and those of his family and to confiscate his remaining properties in Greece.
Breaking a self-imposed ban on making provocative comments on Greek affairs, the 53-year-old deposed monarch, who has lived in exile in London since 1967, said that the Socialist Government of Prime Minister ANDREAS PAPANDREOU was taking steps against him to "shift the attention from problems that have not been solved," including a worsening economy.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  SUICIDE ATTACKER HITS ISRAELI BUS  A Palestinian suicide bomber blew up an Israeli bus, killing 5 Israelis and wounding 30.
Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, condemned the attack, in contrast to his silence after a similar suicide bomb killed 7 Israelis a week ago.
A1


Review/Dance; A Piece That Never Ends, or Never Seems to End
"La Chambre Blanche," presented by O Vertigo Danse on Tuesday night at the start of a weeklong season at the Joyce Theater, takes place in a confined space no one seems to leave.
The only sensation of claustrophobia, however, is of being trapped in a small, dark theater space with a dance that may never end.
That open-endedness may be part of the point of this theater-dance piece, choreographed by Ginette Laurin and performed by her Montreal-based company to a wide-ranging, all-purpose score by Michel Drapeau.
Lives seem to unfold completely in that handsome, formal room, which looks like the entry hall to an old bathhouse, beyond which is a view of a chamber with a small fountain at the back of the stage.
The set, by Stephane Roy, is rich in possibilities.
Axel Morgenthaler's lighting suggests the passage of time and a beckoning but unreachable world beyond.


Journal; Far From Nirvana
Only hours after Kurt Cobain's corpse was found in his Seattle home last Friday, he was buried in a media avalanche of generalities.
The myth-making machinery that cranks up after every show-biz death busily turned a troublesome rock musician into a recognizable, easy-to-digest archetype.
Headline after headline assured us that the 27-year-old Mr.
Cobain, the mainspring of the band Nirvana, was the voice of a generation. (Douglas Coupland, the author of "Generation X," even published a weepy open letter to "Kurt" to claim ownership.) Mr.
Cobain was also irresistibly likened to the self-immolating rock trinity of Jim Morrison, Jimi Hendrix and Janis Joplin, who all vanished into their own drug hazes at age 27.


Prof. Holtzman's Memorial
A memorial service for Eric Holtzman, professor and chairman of biological sciences at Columbia University, who died on April 6, will be held on April 27 at 3 P.M. in St.
Paul's Chapel on the university's Morningside Heights campus, at 116th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.


Broccoli the Beautiful
When a former President of the United States, George Bush, announced his dislike of broccoli several years ago, he bruised not only a foodstuff but the people who love it.
Like cauliflower, brussels sprouts and cabbage, broccoli is the vegetable equivalent of the runt of the litter and as such inspires the protective instinct.
Crowd-pleasers like sweet corn and tomatoes need no defenders.
Broccoli -- often tough in the stalk and bitter in the bud -- needs all it can get.
Now broccoli and its cruciferous kin have new supporters: researchers at Johns Hopkins University.
A compound isolated from broccoli called sulforaphane, they report in Tuesday's issue of The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, blocks the growth of tumors in rats treated with a cancer-causing toxin.
Eventually the compound may be tested in people at high risk for cancer.


Books of The Times; Plumbing the Recesses of Psyche and Cyberspace
Virtual Love  By Avodah Offit  317 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
The problem that opens Avodah Offit's fascinating first novel, "Virtual Love," concerns one Tonita Yei, or Toni, a prostitute who might be described as a whore with a mind of steel.


Market Place; Compaq Computer wins respect in a volatile industry.
WITH investors suddenly skittish about technology stocks, a personal computer company whose share price has more than doubled in eight months would look ripe for a fall.
And the Compaq Computer Corporation's stock has retreated from its 52-week high of $105.625 reached last Friday to $98.25, down $2.625, yesterday.
Yet analysts are surprisingly optimistic about the prospects for Compaq over the next year, an eternity in the personal computer industry, where corporate fortunes can reverse overnight.
Analysts, including Lucianne Painter of Salomon Brothers and David Wu of S. G. Warburg, say Compaq's share price may well reach $120 or so over the next 6 to 12 months.


'81 Tobacco Study Discussed Raising Levels of Nicotine
A 1981 study by two tobacco company researchers discussed techniques for raising or lowering the amount of nicotine in cigarettes, a Congressman who is a strong opponent of the tobacco industry disclosed today.
The Congressman, Representative Henry A. Waxman, a California Democrat who is chairman of a House subcommittee on health and the environment, said at a news conference that the study was evidence that the tobacco companies had lied about whether they manipulated the amount of nicotine in cigarettes.


Calendar: Exhibitions And Tours


Economic Scene; China's approach seems a winner, but the test isn't over.
IS "shock therapy" necessary, or even useful, for curing what ails the failed socialist economies?
Boris N. Yeltsin's Russia, until recently advised by Western economists and institutions identified with the get-it-done-yesterday school of reform, has yet to take off.
Meanwhile, China, which took the seemingly conservative route of grafting a free market economy onto the established planned economy, has, in the words of the economist Stanley Fischer enjoyed "the greatest increase in economic well-being within a 15-year period in all of history."


Heinz Reportedly on Brink Of Acquiring a Borden Unit
The H. J. Heinz Company is expected to acquire Borden Inc.'s food-service unit in the next few weeks, industry analysts said yesterday.
The sale of the unit, which had $270 million in revenue last year, would be the first deal struck by Borden since January, when it put up for sale 20 percent of its operations that produced $1.25 billion in revenue.


Polish Exchange Eases Limits on Price Declines
Although the Polish stock market has already lost about 50 percent of its value in less than a month, officials at the Warsaw Stock Exchange are lifting a trading restriction that has limited daily declines so far.
Market officials announced today a three-day suspension of rules that halt trading in individual stocks after a daily decline of 10 percent.
The hope is that the temporary removal of trading limits will allow share prices to bottom out and set the stage for a rebound.


'Many Punks Could Gain From Six of the Best'
To the Editor:
What a tempest in a teapot about the young punk who vandalized cars in Singapore.
He should take his medicine and think twice about such acts in the future.
I speak with a voice of experience as one of a generation who attended British "public" schools at a time (the 1930's) when corporal punishment was widely used on unruly boys.


Consumer Spending Eases a Bit; Prices Rise 0.3%
Despite an early Easter, consumers spent carefully in March, Commerce Department figures showed today, strengthening a general belief that economic growth has slowed significantly this year from the unsustainable pace that prevailed in late 1993.
The rise of four-tenths of a percent in retail sales last month, to $182.26 billion, meant that sales in March were slightly lower than those of December, after adjusting for inflation.


Gun Supporters Fail to Defeat Lawmaker
In what was widely seen as a referendum on gun control, voters in the San Fernando Valley soundly defeated the National Rifle Association's effort to recall a state senator who had helped pass California's ban on assault weapons.
The Democratic Senator, David A. Roberti, won 59 percent of the vote in the Tuesday balloting.


Anthem Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Slaying Puts Russian Underworld on Parade
From the attic of the building that houses Kindergarten No. 392, there is a clear line of fire to the parking lot of the Krasnopresnensky Baths, 200 yards away.
At 5:45 P.M. on April 5, Otari V. Kvantrishvili, keeping to routine, left the red-brick bathhouse surrounded by bodyguards.
Sportsman, philanthropist, businessman, politician -- loved and admired by many for his support of war veterans, orphans and elderly athletes -- Mr.
Kvantrishvili was also, as everyone seemed to know, a gangster, one of the most powerful bosses in Russia.
At 46, he was a "thief in law," as the Russian phrase goes, a Godfather, one of the untouchables whom many Russians think are the country's real leaders.


Vina Vow: 'I'm Not Going Back'
Fernando Vina stood behind the Mets' batting cage on opening day and looked at the scoreboard, and the people filing into the stands, and at his teammates in the field and he made a decision.
"I'm not going back," Vina said, referring to the minors.
"I'm not going to do anything while I'm here that would let them send me down."


CHRONICLE
GERALDINE A. FERRARO has aspired to higher office more than once: she has served in the House of Representatives, has run for the Senate and the Vice Presidency and is now the United States representative to the United Nations Human Rights Commission.
But never has she been nominated for a post as lofty as the one she will fill tonight: that of God in the Varsity Show at Columbia University.
It was an irresistible opportunity, Ms.
Ferraro said this week, reading passages of the letter she received from the producer of the student show.
"It's a small part line-wise, but monumentally important in the grand scheme of things," RITA PIETROPINTO, the producer, wrote.
"God sets the whole shebang in motion, sending our human heroes out on extraordinary adventures. God gets the funniest lines, too."


Swim Teacher of Infants Is Slain on St. Thomas
A well-known San Diego swimming instructor became the latest casualty of crime against tourists in the United States Virgin Islands on Sunday when he was fatally shot by a mugger in St.
Thomas.
The instructor, Murray Callan, 69, and two friends were walking to a video store about a quarter of a mile from their hotel, the Bluebeard Castle, when they were jumped from behind by two men whose faces were covered by nylon stockings, the friends said.


Suit Over Police Beating Goes to Los Angeles Jury
The nation's most scrutinized police beating -- 81 seconds of violence followed by a lifetime of disability -- is worth $15 million to its victim, Rodney G. King, his lawyer said today as arguments concluded in Mr.
King's civil suit against the City of Los Angeles.
The case went to the jury this afternoon after three weeks of testimony that minutely examined Mr.
King's injuries and their effects, as well as the audio part of the amateur videotape of Mr.
King's beating by Los Angeles police officers.


Vandals Again Hit A Jewish Cemetery
For the second time in 10 days, vandals have struck a Jewish cemetery in Queens, scrawling anti-Semitic remarks on tombs, the police said.
Someone used black felt-tip pens to deface four mausoleums at Bayside Cemetery in Ozone Park either Tuesday night or early yesterday morning, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.


Steve Allen, the Father of All Talk-Show Hosts
Before Dave or Jay or even Johnny there was Steve Allen.
Much of what is now called talk television can be directly traced to the man who created the "Tonight" show on NBC in 1954.
And anyone who doubts it need only to drop by the Museum of Television and Radio anytime in the next five months.
Today the museum begins a retrospective of Mr.
Allen's broadcasting career, which has spanned more than four decades.
The volume of Mr.
Allen's work is extraordinary, and so is the impression it leaves on those who plumb it, said the museum's television curator, David Bushman.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Clintons' finances misattributed a statement that they had used profits from Hillary Rodham Clinton's commodities trades to make interest payments on the Whitewater real estate venture.
That information was provided by Clinton aides who spoke on condition of anonymity, not by the White House on an official basis.


Doubt Nibbles at C.I.A. Official's Reputation
Milton A. Bearden, the C.I.A.'s station chief in Bonn, is a tall, jovial, blond Texan who in 30 years with the agency has worked in intelligence in Hong Kong, on the border of Afghanistan after the Russian invasion, in Africa, and in Washington, where he was deputy director and later head of the Soviet-East European division during the cold war.
That might turn out to have been his most dangerous post.
One of the employees he supervised was Aldrich H. Ames, who was arrested in February and charged with betraying vital secrets -- and an unknown number of agents -- to Moscow.


Best Buy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Corrections
A chart yesterday with an article about controlling world population omitted a source of the information.
Population Action International developed the female education index and the comparison with infant mortality and fertility rates; the original data were from the United Nations.


Was Silence Better For Steve Carlton?
Steve Carlton is in his 50th year of life.
Come next Dec. 22, he will have been of this earth half a century.
But don't bother the man himself with such nonsense.
"He doesn't celebrate birthdays anymore because he believes if you don't, you don't age," Tim McCarver said.
"He doesn't celebrate Christmas anymore either because all of these dates lend themselves to aging and he doesn't want to age."


Vikings Near On a Deal To Acquire Oilers' Moon
With the National Football League's new salary cap squeezing teams, with its unrestricted free agency allowing some players to change teams and with the college draft 10 days from now, quarterback movement revved up yesterday with these developments:
*The Houston Oilers and the Minnesota Vikings reached an agreement in principle to send Warren Moon to the Vikings and solve a major problem for each team.


After Car Accident, Bonner Is Day to Day
Anthony Bonner did not practice with the Knicks today.
But he was here, which was good enough for him.
"I had an accident and I'm fortunate enough to be telling you I lived through it," said Bonner in his first public comments about the mishap early Monday morning that left his leased Mercedes badly damaged and his left arm bruised.
"If anything, it will make me more careful."


Again Led by Pippen, Bulls Beat Heat
Bulls 96, Heat 90
Scottie Pippen scored 27 points and made a crucial defensive play last night to help the visiting Chicago Bulls beat the Miami Heat, 96-90, for the Bulls' ninth consecutive victory.
The three-time defending National Basketball Association champions began the night trailing Atlanta and the idle Knicks by one-half game in the race for the best record in the Eastern Conference.
The Hawks won at home against Cleveland.


Fleet Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tokyo Stocks Soar as Hata Moves Ahead
The Tokyo stock market soared Wednesday amid rising expectations that Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata will be selected as Japan's next Prime Minister.
The market's performance reflected investors' hopes that Mr.
Hata, a moderate conservative, can stabilize the country's fractured political order and help pull the economy out of recession.
Share prices bobbed nervously throughout the day today because of the political uncertainty but generally held their gains.


5 Youths Arrested in Rape of Coney Island Jogger
Five teen-agers, who the police said could not resist talking about their crime, were arrested yesterday in the rape and beating of a woman attacked as she jogged on a desolate stretch of the Coney Island boardwalk a week ago.
The youths, 14 to 17 years old, had gone to the boardwalk early last Thursday evening in a fitful search for someone to rob, investigators said.
Along came their unwitting prey, a 43-year-old Russian immigrant, and they pounced.
One law-enforcement official called it a crime of "opportunistic rage."


Geon Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A.F.L.-C.I.O. Leader Urges End To China's Current Trade Status
Lane Kirkland, the leader of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., said today that China was fattening its military coffers by setting up factories run by the Chinese Army and the police to do business with American corporations like Kmart and Wal-Mart.
Mr.
Kirkland said the factories, which channel their profits back into the Chinese military system, are one reason that Beijing should be denied an extension of its most-favored-nation trading status.
He vowed to oppose such an extention, which he said would continue to drain jobs from the United States.
Malaysia and Thailand Cited
Mr.
Kirkland also criticized countries like Malaysia and Thailand that undercut American labor by producing cheaper products through lower wages.


Mutant Gene Is Identified As a Suspect In Cancers
Researchers have found a cancer gene that may be at the root of many major types of cancer.
The aberrant gene turns up in a wide variety of tumors, and, when it is inherited within a family, it can cause melanoma, the deadly skin cancer.
In addition, researchers say, they know how this gene works.
A nonmalignant version of the gene had been found before by biologists studying the normal mechanisms that control the cycle of cell growth and division.
When the gene is deranged by a mutation, a disturbance in its chemical sequence, the mutation leads to disruption of these controls, allowing cells to break lose and proliferate wildly.


Woolworth Will Restate Some Results
Though its own investigation into accounting irregularities is still incomplete, the Woolworth Corporation said yesterday that it would restate its quarterly results for last year, but that its auditors were otherwise standing by the annual figures it reported for 1992 and 1993.
Woolworth also said it would maintain its 29-cents-a-quarter dividend, contrary to speculation that the board would cut the dividend at its regularly scheduled meeting yesterday.
At that rate, the company is giving investors a rich 89 cents of every dollar it is estimated to earn this year.


Mercedes Powers Penskes
ROGER PENSKE, the most successful owner in the history of IndyCar racing, announced yesterday that he will use a new Mercedes-Benz engine to power his cars in this year's Indianapolis 500, on May 29.


Sanford Schwarz; Publisher, 74
Sanford Schwarz, who had been publisher of Sterling's Magazines and was an active advocate for the use of living wills, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
Mr.
Schwarz, who lived in Manhattan, was 74.
The cause was leukemia, said his wife, Charlotte.


IN THE STUDIO WITH: Eric Carle; For Children, Very Simple Stories With Very Vibrant Art
MOST of Eric Carle's "readers" are too young to read and probably don't know him by name.
But mention the word caterpillar, and the recognition is instant.
Mr.
Carle's "Very Hungry Caterpillar" (Philomel Books), one of the most successful children's books ever published, has become a childhood staple.
This deceptively simple tale, about a tiny caterpillar that eats and grows and turns into a beautiful butterfly, has sold 10 million copies around the world since it was first published 25 years ago.


Top Plumbing Company Cited in Tax Evasion Case
In most corruption cases, the first clue investigators seek is evidence of bribes.
But strangely enough, investigators say it was an absence of payoffs that led yesterday to the indictments of 10 officials of a major New York City plumbing construction company and a Westchester County accounting firm.


Daniel Levinson, 73, Who Wrote of Men Reacting to Midlife
Dr.
Daniel J. Levinson, a professor of psychology at Yale University who popularized the notion that men as well as women go through what he termed a midlife crisis, died on Tuesday while playing racquetball in New Haven.
Dr.
Levinson, who lived in Hamden, Conn., was 73.
The cause has yet to be determined, said his son, Douglas Levinson.


Never Hired a Designer? Guess Who'd Like to Change That
COULDN'T go to the furniture show in Milan, Italy, this year?
You can still learn about the latest in interior design ideas during a weeklong series of free seminars and design clinics in New York with such professional designers as Vicente Wolf, Bebe Winkler, Michael Love, Noel Jeffrey, Juan Montoya, Robert Metzger, Melvin Dwork and Michael De Santis.
The events, during New York Interior Design Week, will be held May 6 to 14 at various locations in Manhattan.
"This is a consumer-oriented program, to show people the value of interior design," said Jane Victor, president of the New York Metropolitan Chapter of the American Society of Interior Designers, which planned the week with seven other interior design organizations.


Sometimes a Town Must Be Evacuated
To the Editor:
Since November 1991, the United Nations has sought to assist and protect displaced and besieged populations in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, with a view not only to providing relief, but also to averting further internal displacement and the need to seek refuge abroad.


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Illinois Central Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dow Off 20.22 as Low Volume Continues
In the fourth straight session of unusually low trading volume, the stock market fell sharply yesterday, with many technology issues declining for the second consecutive day.
Stock traders got all the economic news that they wished for, but still refused to believe that inflation is in check and economic growth is moderate.


New Job for Sanderson
WIMP SANDERSON, the former Alabama coach who made plaid jackets a fashion statement in college basketball, was hired yesterday as coach of Arkansas-Little Rock.
He replaces JIM PLATT, who was reassigned last week after completing his fourth season as coach with a 13-15 record.


Reviews/Music; Another Young Mezzo Joins the Parade
This season has become a festival of promising young mezzo-sopranos, all nipping at the heels of Cecilia Bartoli, who is already an established star though she is not yet 30.
Whether the opera circuit can accommodate so many deserving mezzos (recent newcomers include Jennifer Larmore and Olga Borodina) remains to be seen.
But perhaps the more pressing question, since opera cannot run on mezzos alone, is when we will see a corresponding explosion of sopranos and tenors of similar caliber.
The scales were unbalanced further on Monday evening, when Monica Groop, a Finnish mezzo, made her New York debut at Weill Recital Hall.
Ms.
Groop has lately been attracting attention in Europe, both in opera houses and with orchestras and period-instrument bands, and in her recital she proved herself an eloquent interpreter of art songs by Brahms, Sibelius, Strauss and Grieg.


Menem Gains in Bid for New Term in Argentina
President Carlos Saul Menem has taken a big step forward in his quest to serve a second consecutive term, with a victory by his Peronist party in an election for an assembly that will rewrite the country's Constitution.
With the help of allied provincial parties, Mr.
Menem is assured enough votes to approve amendments to the Constitution that will permit a sitting President to run for immediate re-election.


Leventhal to Head Citizens Union
Nathan Leventhal, the president of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, has been chosen as chairman of Citizens Union, the civic organization formed nearly a century ago.
He succeeds Robert F. Wagner Jr., who died last November.
The 51-year-old Mr.
Leventhal, who will remain as president of Lincoln Center, was chief of staff to Mayor John V. Lindsay, deputy mayor for operations under Mayor Edward I. Koch and transition chairman for Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Hall at Tanglewood Named for Ozawa
The Boston Symphony announced yesterday that its new 1,180-seat concert hall on the grounds of the Tanglewood Festival in Lenox, Mass., would be named after Seiji Ozawa, the orchestra's music director.
The hall will be inaugurated on July 7 at a concert featuring such longtime Tanglewood artists as John Williams, Yo-Yo Ma, Peter Serkin and Jessye Norman.
The Seiji Ozawa Hall, which was designed by William Rawn Associates of Boston at a cost of $9.7 million, becomes Tanglewood's secondary venue after the Shed, which houses major orchestra concerts.
The new space will house more intimate concerts, student presentations and rehearsals, and may also serve as a recording studio.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a subheading yesterday about ferries in the New York region described plans for expanded service incorrectly.
A new ferry route is planned to connect an East River barge with a dock 1,500 feet west of Yankee Stadium in the Bronx; there was no announcement about service to Shea Stadium.


Reviews/Fashion; Fireworks and the Finale
THE pace of the fashion action inevitably quickens toward the end of each period of shows.
Major designers jockey for the last position on the schedule, whether the city is Milan, Paris, London or New York, because it is considered to be the most prestigious.
The acceleration for the fall shows here began with Isaac Mizrahi on Tuesday night, picked up steam with Calvin Klein's prophetic show on Wednesday morning, calmed down a bit with Arnold Scaasi's collection of evening clothes -- if you consider metallic embroidery and classic, curvy shapes calming -- and came to a thoughtful conclusion with Donna Karan's eclectic collection last night.


CHRONICLE
LINDA BIEHL, the mother of Amy Biehl, the Fulbright scholar who was stabbed to death in South Africa in August, would not want the tragedy to deter a single student or advocate for a humanitarian cause from going abroad, and she will convey that message tonight to students and educators at the United Nations.
She will attend the Fulbright Awards Dinner of Metro International, an organization that conducts programs for Fulbright scholars and other international students in the New York area.


Dallas Investor Wins Senate Nomination
Richard W. Fisher, a wealthy Dallas investor and former adviser to Ross Perot who has never held public office, defeated a 21-year veteran of Texas politics on Tuesday night to capture the Democratic nomination for a seat in the United States Senate.
The 45-year-old Mr.
Fisher overcame accusations by his opponent, Jim Mattox, a former Congressman and state Attorney General, that he was a closet Republican.
He won their bitter run-off fight after finishing second to Mr.
Mattox in the March primary.


METRO DIGEST
DIGGING SIGNS PONDERED AS LINE REOPENS
Three weeks after it exploded, a gas pipeline was reopened in Edison, N.J., as investigators said they had found new evidence of digging around the pipeline.
While excavations have not revealed who inflicted the nicks on the pipeline that ultimately caused it to fail in a frightening fireball, the investigation has uncovered a veritable junkyard of metal and other debris, including the remains of a stolen truck.
A1.
The Dizzine family vowed that if the pipeline were turned on again, they would flee.
B6.


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A London Visitor Is Made to Feel At Home


8 Nonpartisan Election Workers Mutilated and Killed in Natal
The bodies of eight men who were distributing nonpartisan voter education pamphlets were found mutilated and decapitated here in Natal province, the authorities said today.
The incident, which occurred Monday afternoon at a primary school in a remote area of the province, was perhaps the grisliest since the Government imposed a state of emergency almost two weeks ago in an effort to control the storm of violence that has engulfed the region.


Santo Domingo Journal; A Dominican's 2 Burdens: Haiti and Balaguer
After a late-night rally that followed days of campaigning, Jose Francisco Pena Gomez is up early, immaculately dressed but hoarse of voice, for a round of interviews that precede another long day on the stump.
No matter how the conversation begins, Mr.
Pena Gomez, 57, seems to wait, braced almost wearily for the question that has regularly sprung forth at crucial turns in a political career of more than 30 years: "What do you say to those who brand you as a Haitian?"


In Today's Athletics Confrontation Comes First
To the Editor:
Having coached high school soccer for the last 10 years I'm not surprised that some school districts are banning post-game handshakes as a measure to curb player violence (news article, April 9).
But the powerful lure of big-league contracts and college scholarships can only marginally be blamed for the precipitous decline in sportsmanship among student athletes across the country.
Indeed, only a small fraction of high school students expect to participate in professional or college athletics.


A Hard Day (Whew!) in a Play Center
IN just 90 dizzying minutes one morning, JoJo O'Rourke of West 70th Street took in the skyline of Manhattan, explored a pristine beach strewn with treasures, navigated a boat through crowded waters, commandeered a treehouse, escaped through a tunnel and got into a brawl -- and he's only 2 years old.
Just after 10 A.M. on March 31, Rosalinde O'Rourke had walked into a long corridor off Broadway with JoJo, who was eating a banana.
After walking to the rear and leaving their shoes, they climbed a flight of stairs.
At the top, JoJo's eyes lit up and his jaw dropped as he caught sight of hundreds of enticing toys and things to do in Playspace, a vast new indoor playground for children 6 and under.


Encore Computer
Unlike other technology stocks, Encore Computer, a computer-systems developer, has seen its shares rise.
On Monday, a money manager said on Dan Dorfman's program on the CNBC cable channel that Encore's shares could triple in price in 12 months.
But until recently Encore had traded at less than $4 because of continuing losses.


It's Showdown Time for Globex
It is showdown time at Globex, the world's first international, round-the-clock electronic marketplace for futures and options traders.
The partnership agreement under which Reuters P.L.C., the British news and market information company, has developed the computer-based network for the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the world's two largest futures exchanges, is certain to be officially dissolved in two weeks.
And the Board of Trade may decide as early as tomorrow whether to pull its contracts off the two-year-old system, which has 342 computer terminals, mostly in Europe and America.


Transactions
Football  National Football League
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Bernie Kosar, quarterback, to a two-year contract.
WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Waived Mark Rypien, quarterback. Hockey  National Hockey League
ST.
LOUIS BLUES -- Agreed to terms with David Roberts, forward, on a multiyear contract.
Recalled Tony Hrkac, center, from Peoria of the International Hockey League.
Horse racing
THOROUGHBRED RACING ASSOCIATIONS -- Named Jeff Parrott manager and coordinator of the National Best Seven, TRA's weekly national wager.
College
COLUMBIA -- Named Willy Wood men's track and field and cross country coach and Karen Reardon interim women's track and field and cross country coach.
KEAN -- Named Patty Delehanty women's basketball coach.
PITTSBURGH -- Named Tom Crean men's assistant basketball coach.
SETON HALL -- Announced the resignation Sue Parler, softball coach, effective at the end of the season.
Named Dena Hendrickson softball coach.
SYRACUSE -- Declared Erica O'Neill and Jana Strnadova ineligible from the tennis team for possible NCAA rules violations.
WILLIAM PATERSON -- Named Paul Darragh defensive coordinator.


Accounts
*
Hertz Claim Management Corp., Park Ridge, N.J., to Synergy Marketing Solutions, Rocky Hill, Conn., to handle the property and casualty insurance claims administrator's marketing communications account, previously at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Caremark Acts to Catch Drug Rival
Seeking to catch up with Merck &amp; Company in the $12 billion-a-year managed-care market for prescription drugs, Caremark International announced yesterday that it had signed drug-distribution agreements with three of Merck's largest competitors.
Pfizer Inc. and Rhone-Poulenc Rorer said yesterday that they had joined the Caremark alliance.
Bristol-Myers Squibb, which declined to comment, is the third company, drug industry executives said.


States' Eagerness to Experiment On Welfare Jars Administration
California is fingerprinting people on welfare.
Massachusetts wants to enroll them in a work program within two months.
New Hampshire wants to straighten their teeth, on the theory that better looks will lead to better jobs.
With a record 15 million Americans on welfare, more than 30 states have asked the Federal Government for waivers allowing them to run welfare experiments.
The requests have prompted an unusual debate: do the programs represent responsible social science or a backdoor war on the poor?


Edison's Pipeline Reopens As Mystery of Blast Remains
It has been three weeks since a gas pipeline exploded here.
Since then, many of the residents of the neighboring apartment complex have returned and tonight the pipeline was reopened.
But what no one is yet able to answer is the central mystery of the blast: who inflicted the gouge on the pipeline that ultimately may have caused it to fail and explode in a frightening fireball.


New York City Can't Pinch Pennies on Saving Abused Children
To the Editor:
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani argues that when it comes to the fiscal year 1995 New York City deficit and the uniformed services, the prevailing ethic must be safety first, since lives are at stake.


Avis Signs On With Baseball TV
Avis Rent a Car System yesterday became the newest sponsor to enlist with The Baseball Network, the television and marketing joint venture of major league baseball, NBC and ABC.
The estimated $6.5 million sponsorship includes advertising on TBN's regular-season and post-season games, designation as the official car-rental company of baseball and sponsorship of the Arizona Fall League, a development league entering its third season.


Bridge
A major figure in the history of New York bridge is Sol Seidman, who won numerous titles and served in many administrative capacities.
He is now 84 and retired from play, but a relatively new competition is named for him.
The Sol Seidman Double Knockout Teams is for players with fewer than 1,500 master points, and entries for the 1994 event will close at the end of April.
For information, call Jon Levine, (212) 685-8573.
The 1993-94 event ended last month, and the winners were John Gillette, Barry Schilit, Irving Walsey, Lee Izakson and Patrick Lilly, all of Manhattan.
Their home club is the Culbertson, at 24 Fifth Avenue, where they won the final by 13 imps over a group headed by Otto Adamec.
The diagramed deal played a major role.


IBP Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Time Warner Stake Raised
The Seagram Company increased its holdings in Time Warner Inc. to 14.2 percent from 13.1 percent of the company's stock between March 1 and April 12, according to filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Seagram bought 4.6 million shares at $36.75 a share to $38 a share during the period, the filings indicated.
Seagram now holds 53.85 million shares of Time Warner stock.


Review/Theater; A Gathering Place For Hope and Despair
Cadence counts for a lot in the world of "Bailey's Cafe," Gloria Naylor's adaptation of her novel of the same title at the Hartford Stage; it may even offer a path to personal salvation.
With dazzlingly ambitious intent, Ms.
Naylor has sought to present a dramatic equivalent of the great American musical form, the blues, and to explore, through the way her characters speak, the healing value of their finding the rhythms in the pain of their lives.
The inspired ideas behind "Bailey's Cafe," which has been directed by Novella Nelson, hover luminously over a work that is still struggling hard to give them graceful theatrical form.
Its allegorical elements, which were woven more slyly into the fabric of the novel, have been expanded and exaggerated here, and the play simply can't sustain their full weight.
And whereas the novel was a series of discrete first-person narratives, the play brings its characters into dramatic interaction in ways that often seem forced.


Clinton Offers Praise To Lillehammer's Best
PRESIDENT CLINTON welcomed 200 members of the United States Olympics team to the White House yesterday, honoring well-known medalists as well as the disabled athletes who competed in Lillehammer, Norway.
The team members, wearing tricolored jackets while posing on risers in the East Room after the event was forced indoors by rain, applauded the President, the First Lady, HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, and Vice President AL GORE.
"I experienced the Olympics primarily as a citizen," Clinton said.
"As a matter of fact, I may have endangered the national security because I stayed up every night until you went off the air. I saw every last event, I saw every last interview, I heard 'The Star-Spangled Banner' played every time it was played."


German Developer's Disappearance Stuns Leipzig
As creditors scrambled today to salvage what they could in the wake of the spectacular collapse of one of the country's biggest real estate empires, construction crews on its projects here began to shut down their work sites.
There was no news of the whereabouts of Jurgen Schneider, who founded and presided over the empire.
He vanished over the weekend, leaving behind dozens of unfinished projects, billions of dollars in debts and thousands of stunned employees, subcontractors and laborers.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CITICORP, New York, has agreed to sell its DeAnza Holding Corp. unit to closely held Superior Holdings Inc. of Arizona, subject to regulatory approval.
The terms were not disclosed.
PRIDE PETROLEUM SERVICES INC., Houston, an oil-well service company, won a $40 million contract to build and operate two rigs in Venezuela, from the state-owned oil company Petroleos de Venezuela S.A.


Zimerman Cancels Recital
The pianist Krystian Zimerman has canceled his Sunday evening recital at Avery Fisher Hall because of illness.
Garrick Ohlsson will substitute, playing Beethoven's Sonata No. 31 in A flat, Schubert's "Wanderer" Fantasy, Haydn's F-minor Variations and Barber's Sonata.
The recital begins at 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 875-5030.


Huntington Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


James W. Becker; Bridge Expert, 57, Founded Major Club
James W. Becker, one of the country's leading tournament bridge players, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 57 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, said Joan Dziekanski, his business partner at the Beverly Bridge Club in Manhattan, which he founded.


Red Wings Wrap Up West
Red Wings 9, Canadiens 0
Ray Sheppard, Keith Primeau and Shawn Burr all scored twice and Bob Essensa made 24 saves as the Detroit Red Wings beat the Montreal Canadiens, 9-0, at home last night to clinch the Western Conference championship.
The nine-goal margin equaled the worst loss in Montreal's 77-year history.
The Canadiens lost by 10-1 to the Blackhawks in 1940 and by 9-0 to the Rangers in 1949.


Grieving Firefighters Say Thanks


Allin Proudfoot, 65, Fund-Raising Agent
Allin Whitfield Proudfoot, who headed an agency that specialized in nonprofit fund raising and foundation management, died on Tuesday at a nursing center in Dunedin, Fla.
He was 65 and lived in Oldsmar, Fla.
The cause was a brain tumor, his family said.


Court Rebuffs Coach
A Supreme Court justice refused yesterday to order the University of Southern California to reinstate its former women's basketball coach while she pursues a sex-bias lawsuit over being paid less than the men's coach.


Early Report By ABC News Is Criticized
Violating a longstanding informal agreement, ABC News broke a news embargo on Tuesday night to report the results of a new cancer study a day early.
The network's action was immediately condemned by The New England Journal of Medicine, which published the study, and by journalists at other news organizations.
"I'm beside myself," said Dr.
Jerome Kassirer, the editor of The Journal.
"It just astonishes me."


Health Officials Apologize for Problems With Falsified Data in Cancer Study
Two top Government health officials voiced contrition at a Congressional hearing today about delays in sorting out problems in federally financed breast cancer studies.
The officials, Dr.
Harold Varmus, the head of the National Institutes of Health, and Dr.
Samuel Broder, the head of the National Cancer Institute, faulted their own procedures in dealing with data that were falsified by scientists at two Canadian hospitals.
The data were part of breast cancer studies coordinated by the University of Pittsburgh.


Fleet Mortgage Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Congress held hearings on hedge funds, as legislators sought information about the funds' increasing influence on global markets.
But the funds are so complex that even the lawmakers who oversee the banks that lend money to the funds were not sure how they worked and whether they needed special regulation.  [ Page D1. ]  Procter &amp; Gamble is only one of a growing number of industrial companies that have acknowledged losses due to poor trading moves.
News Analysis.  [ D6. ]
Consumers spent carefully in March, Commerce Department figures showed, strengthening the belief that economic growth has slowed.
Separately, the Government said prices paid by consumers for all goods and services rose for the second straight month.  [ D1. ]


How Do Fanatics Grow?
WHAT'S your obsession?
Geraniums or goose berries?
Wildflowers or waterlilies?
Or maybe begonias.
Name your plant passion and there is sure to be a society of like-minded souls out there, meeting, trading seeds and discussing -- and just as often arguing -- the merits of this hybrid or that, organics versus chemicals, or how to pronounce the latest unpronounceable Latin name change.
What else can plantaholics do for their addiction but join a society?
While no one knows for sure exactly how many members belong to such societies coast to coast, conservative estimates range in the hundreds of thousands.
But rather than help them kick their habit, their gatherings seem to make the afflictions worse.


Reviews/Fashion; Manolo's Ode to Brooklyn Bridge
WHAT is lost when fashion aligns itself with a tent pole is what was gained by Manolo yesterday, when he showed beneath the Romanesque arches of the stone Universalist Church on Central Park West.
The soaring structural details and cavernous grandeur of the 100-year-old church echoed the site that inspired Manolo for this collection: the Brooklyn Bridge.
It somehow seems fitting that a designer from another country -- Cuba, in this case -- is the one to embrace a landmark that has inspired painters (Georgia O'Keeffe and Joseph Stella among them) but hasn't before had a fashion collection dedicated to it.


First Alabama Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clinton Bristles at Skepticism Over Deals
The White House's continuing frustration over the Whitewater affair came to the surface today when President Clinton bristled at a questioner who compared the shifting accounts of the Clintons' financial investments to his daughter's excuses for not doing her homework.
Responding with sarcasm to the question by John Simpson, international editor of USA Today at a convention of newspaper editors, Mr.
Clinton said his duties as President had kept him from fully revisiting tax returns and other financial records from years ago.


French Lawyers Assert Man Tied to Jews' Death Was Nazi
As the first trial of a Frenchman for crimes against humanity nears its end, lawyers for victims of Nazi persecution are arguing that the defendant, Paul Touvier, ordered the execution of seven Jews in 1944 because he was himself a convinced Nazi.
"This trial has revealed the true face of Touvier, that of a French Nazi," Alain Levy, a lawyer for one of the civil plaintiffs, told the nine-member jury.
"The word is not too strong. Masks have fallen away. Touvier cannot fool you."


Clayton Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cancer Gene Discovered


'93 World Champion Looking for a Repeat
One photographer was up a ladder with a camera and another was walking around with a light meter, calling out numbers as he scanned members of the Motorola bicycle team.
They were posed in front of an abandoned roadside chapel in Tuscany.
Last year, the team photograph was taken in a warehouse for a high-tech look and so, yin and yang, this year the goal was something picturesque, even touristic.
"But elegant," one of the photographers explained.
Center front among the 18 riders, the four team officials, four or five bicycles and a team car stood Lance Armstrong.


Review/Concert; Relating Architecture And Music
In a grand sense, visions were undoubtedly broadened by the "Perspectives in Music and Art" program on Tuesday evening in St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
Architecture fans heard some good American tunes, and classical-music buffs, a notoriously focused (not to say narrow) lot, learned much about Frank Lloyd Wright's concept of the prairie home.
But exactly what light Terence Riley's lecture on Wright's prairie period and the concert of works by Roy Harris, Aaron Copland and others were supposed to shed on each other was far from clear.
Mr.
Riley, a curator at the Museum of Modern art, declined to make connections beyond noting Wright's own musical proclivities and wish to see the arts allied.


Bigger Than Expected Budget Surplus Sets Off Fiscal Debate
Setting off renewed fighting over how much money the state can spend this year, the New York State Comptroller's office released a report today showing that the state finished the fiscal year that ended March 31 with a surplus of $1.5 billion.
The report also rekindled a debate over the strength of the state's economic recovery, and could further delay final agreement on the budget, now set at $33 billion, which is already 13 days late.


'Many Punks Could Gain From Six of the Best'; Right Here at Home
To the Editor:
Many Americans expressing shock at court-authorized caning in Singapore (editorial, April 2) would be surprised to learn the extent to which corporal punishment continues as a disciplinary option at schools in the United States.


Reviews/Music; Introducing Hasid Rock
Add another cross-cultural fusion to rock's inventory: Israeli psychedelia, or maybe Hasid rock.
Yossi Piamenta, an Israeli guitarist, played for a jubilant crowd at the Knitting Factory on Sunday night, backed by the band Hassidic New Wave.
The group played not-quite-traditionalist tunes, zigzagging melodies in rhythms like the hora; one piece alternated between a modal hora melody and a strutting, major-key section with a New Orleans beat.
Mr.
Piamenta, Frank London on trumpet and Greg Wall on tenor and soprano saxophone ran through the melodies in unison, repeating them as any dance band would.
Mr.
Piamenta often used his guitar like an electric oud, with a nasal tone and stuttering ornaments.
But when each tune reached a certain plateau, the guitarist let loose a solo.


Judge Orders Abduction Trial In Dispute Over Jewish Youth
Saying that only 12 impartial people on a jury could disentangle the emotionally and politically charged saga, a Brooklyn judge yesterday ordered an ultra-Orthodox rabbi, his wife and a third defendant to stand trial on charges that they kidnapped a Jewish teen-ager from his parents.
In the latest twist in a passionate battle over the boy's body and soul, Justice Thaddeus E. Owens rejected a plea deal granting probation to the accused rabbi -- a deal the judge had already accepted last month -- after hearing yesterday from the boy, his divorced parents, the rabbi and some of the lawyers in the case in an hourlong session in a packed courtroom.


Hasbro Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Levi Strauss Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


2 Railroads See Steep Increases in Ridership
During one of the worst winters in memory, the Metro-North Commuter Railroad and the Long Island Rail Road recorded steep increases in ridership in the first quarter of 1994, the railroads said yesterday.
Ticket sales rose 7.8 percent for Metro-North and 5.8 percent for the Long Island Rail Road, compared with the same period last year.


Reviews/Music; Dimitrova in New 'Aida' Role
Entering the cast of "Aida" on Tuesday night, Ghena Dimitrova dominated the stage with her first Met portrayal of Amneris.
She showed restraint in Act I, even seeming underpowered, signaling that she had her sometimes strident tone under control.
A metallic upper edge suited Amneris's smoldering moods, and a successful stretch into the deep lower range (not so much chest tone as stomach tone) added another layer of menace.
She made the character dramatically vivid, tracing grand gestures that fell comfortably short of melodrama.
Miss Dimitrova was the bright spot in a fairly bleak evening.
Whatever dramatic momentum she incited ran up against the crushing dullness of Lando Bartolini's Radames.
Mr.
Bartolini presents the facsimile of a classic Italian tenor: tonal heft in all registers, a brilliant tessitura.
But the notes are batted unfeelingly into the air, with no natural motion between them or musical understanding below.
Add to this a below-the-pitch "Celeste Aida," wild rhythmic fluctuations in Act III and grade-school theatrics throughout (no rapport whatsoever with Sharon Sweet's Aida), and you have a performance of standard-setting mediocrity.


Pre-Waugh Azanians
To the Editor:
Henry Louis Gates Jr. writes in "A Liberalism of Heart and Spine" (Op-Ed, March 27) that the Azanian People's Liberation Army "borrows its name from an invented place of barbarism in Evelyn Waugh's satiric novel 'Black Mischief.' "


Paul Gardner, 85, Smithsonian Curator And Expert on Glass
Paul V. Gardner, an international expert on ceramics and glass who for almost 30 years was the curator of those fields at the Smithsonian Institution, died on Friday.
Mr.
Gardner, who lived in Washington, was 85.
He collapsed while attending Good Friday services at the Washington National Cathedral, to which he was a consultant on stained glass.
He died at the Georgetown University Hospital.


A Worthy Life
To The Home Section:
As the mother of two young children whose ages are very close to those of Dr.
Yeou-Cheng Ma ("The Hidden Melody," March 10), I know how very demanding their care can be.
That Dr.
Ma is deeply involved in directing the Children's Orchestra Society and maintaining a pediatric practice, seeking to touch the spirits of many children in addition to her own two, is an indication of a life that is worthy of admiration, even love.


Decisions on Banning of Events On City Hall Steps Are Faulted
A day after two groups were denied access to the steps of City Hall, security officials allowed several organizations to conduct news conferences there yesterday, and several public officials asserted that the Giuliani administration was seeking to limit criticism.
Police officials allowed three news conferences, the largest by a group of nearly 50 elderly people protesting potential cuts in services for the aged.
The other news conferences were held by the New York Public Interest Research Group and some Con Ed employees.
On Tuesday a group representing organizations that represent parents of public-school children and another of people protesting the potential elimination of the Division of AIDS Services were turned away when they approached City Hall to hold news conferences on the steps.


Venezuela Bars Sale
Heinz said Venezuela's antitrust agency had blocked its proposed acquisition of Yukery de Alimentos C.A., a company that makes baby food, which would have given the combined companies a virtual monopoly over Venezuela's baby food and ketchup markets.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about James L. Lyons, founder of the Monterey Jazz Festival, misspelled the names of the California community where he lived and the one in which he died.
He lived in Morro Bay and died in San Luis Obispo.


Guggenheim Fellows To Share $4 Million
The John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation has chosen 147 artists, scholars and scientists for 1994 fellowship awards totaling $4,070,000.
Joel Conarroe, the president of the foundation, said its seven-member Committee of Selection chose the recipients from among 3,157 applicants for the 69th annual competition.
He said Guggenheim Fellows were appointed on the basis of distinguished achievement and exceptional promise in their fields.


Offer of Aid On Coliseum Is Withdrawn
The Giuliani administration proposed -- and then abruptly withdrew yesterday -- an offer to give the Metropolitan Transportation Authority $50 million in capital funds if the transit agency would revise a real estate deal that has put Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the developer, in a financial squeeze.
The deal calls for Mr.
Zuckerman, who also owns The Daily News, to build a large office and apartment complex on the site of the Coliseum at Columbus Circle.
Mr.
Zuckerman says the project he agreed to build in 1985 is now too big to be financially successful.
But if he does not go ahead with it, he will lose a $38 million deposit.


Reviews/Fashion; A Soothing Palette From Richard Tyler
AFTER a week of fall collections dominated by charcoal gray and neon orange, it was a treat for tired eyes to see Richard Tyler's use of color yesterday.
Paprika, mocha, cinnamon, face-powder pink, buttercup yellow, teal, cranberry, black and red-hot red were used with the sureness of an artist for clothes that would be at home in a Turner landscape.
Mr.
Tyler is known for his jackets, and this time he concentrated on riding jackets and frock coats, which were longer in back and either pleated or vented (the better to sit on a horse).


Coltec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


INSIDE
Clinton's Frustration Shows
The President bristled when an editor likened shifting accounts of the Whitewater affair to a child's excuses for not doing homework.
Page A24.
Data Show Slowing Economy
Small gains in retail sales and consumer prices for March showed economic growth slowing and inflation remaining steady.
Page D1.
A Lesson on Hedge Funds
Concerned about hedge funds' influence on markets, Congress held a hearing on the funds that featured a tutorial from George Soros.
Page D1.
Politics Fuels Tokyo Market
Tokyo's stock market soared amid expectations that Tsutomu Hata, a moderate conservative, will be Japan's new Prime Minister.
Page A7. 5 Youths Held in Rape
Five teen-agers who the police said talked openly about the crime with friends were arrested in the rape of a woman in Coney Island.
Page B1.
Maneuvering at the Coliseum
City Hall withdrew an offer to give the Metropolitan Transportation Authority $50 million to revise the Coliseum real-estate deal.
Page B1.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Edberg Breezes  Stefan Edberg breezed into the quarterfinals with a 6-0, 6-3 victory over the Spanish qualifier Emilio Alvarez yesterday in the $300,000 Nice Open. (AP) An Upset in Thailand: An Austrian, Barbara Paulus, upset the sixth-seeded Linda Harvey-Wild, 4-6, 7-5, 6-1, in the second round of the Volvo Women's Open in Bangkok, Thailand. (AP)


Black Composers Of Classical Music: Striving for More
"We are the invisible people in music," said Kevin Scott, a 37-year-old composer, echoing Ralph Ellison's phrase about the black man in society.
He is part of a small but dedicated group, a minority within a minority: black musicians who compose for the concert hall.
In less formal venues, black Americans have been at the heart of musical life, the originators of ragtime, jazz, blues, gospel, soul, disco and hip-hop.
But in the concert hall, black composers have been marginal.
Their impact on the evolution of art music has been minimal.


Dr. Paul E. Spangler, 95, Dies; Took Up Fitness Running at 67
Paul E. Spangler, a retired Navy surgeon who took up running at the age of 67 to prolong his life, died on March 29, providing evidence that his theory on longevity was correct.
Dr.
Spangler, whose family said he died while on one of the seven-mile runs he made three times a week near his home in San Luis Obispo, Calif., was 95.
In the 28 years since he began running, Dr.
Spangler claimed 85 national age group records at various distances.
In his last competition, in February, he won several gold medals at a senior Olympics meet in Palm Springs, Calif.
Served in World War I
By the time he began running, in 1966, Dr.
Spangler had lived what many would consider a long, full life.
A native of Oregon, he had served with the Navy in World War I. He had been graduated from the University of Oregon and from the Harvard Medical College.
He had taken up flying, becoming the first doctor, according to his family, to obtain a pilot's license.
He had formed barbershop quartets all over the world, and had given long service to his country.


Reviews/Music; Band Defined by a Word: 'Hostile'
A rumble, a grind, a barrage, a stomp, a guttural growl: that's the sound of Pantera, the Texas band that played its first of two sold-out shows on Tuesday night at Roseland.
The audience was a mosh pit, active in slower songs and hyperactive in fast ones, with hundreds of colliding bodies in every song and voices raised to shout catch phrases.
Onstage Philip Anselmo, Pantera's shaven-headed lead singer, hunched and glowered and jumped around like an irate orangutan, stripped down to his baggy shorts and his tattoos; the long-haired Dimebag Darrell on guitar, Rex on bass and Vinnie Paul on drums toiled over their instruments, united in one percussive assault.
As the haircuts suggest, Pantera merges the fits and starts of hard-core rock with the brute force of heavy metal, and for the moment it is as vociferous as any band around.


Exabyte Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


People
*
Gilberto Guasp, vice president and general manager at Lintas Puerto Rico, San Juan, was promoted to the additional new position of president.


Congress Loath to Finance GATT Treaty's Tariff Losses
After seven years of negotiations, a new global trade agreement will finally be signed Friday in Morocco.
The treaty weighs 385 pounds and runs to more than 22,000 pages.
It eliminates or freezes so many tariffs around the world that it is expected to stimulate some $5 trillion in new trade by the year 2005.
There's a problem with it, though: It may not be ratified by the United States Congress anytime soon.
Why? No one can figure out how to pay for it.


Name Change Seen At Backer Spielvogel
Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide Inc. is considering a new "global branding" under which its corporate name would be simplified to some version of Bates or Bates Worldwide, advertising executives who spoke on condition of anonymity said yesterday.
They added that there had been no final decision on a name for the agency's American unit, now called Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc.
The renaming, expected to be announced later this month, has been in the works for a year, and trade publications have speculated that any new name would play up the agency's Bates heritage.
Ted Bates Worldwide and Backer &amp; Spielvogel were merged in 1987 by their owner, the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company P.L.C., to form Backer Spielvogel Bates; Bates was named after Ted Bates, who specialized in hard-selling campaigns that stressed the "unique selling propositions" of products.


Giuliani Names 2 To U.N. Liaison
Bruce S. Gelb and Livia Sylva were appointed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday as members of the New York City Commission for the United Nations and Consular Corps.
The commission acts as the official liaison between the mayor and the United Nations and consular diplomats.


Officer Is Injured In Fight at Rikers
For the third time in a month, inmates attacked correction officers yesterday at Rikers Island, the city Department of Correction said.
One officer was hospitalized.
At about 5:30 P.M., an inmate punched a guard in the head after the inmate was seen dropping a razor blade, said Thomas M. Antenen, a Department of Correction spokesman.
He said the officer's head may have hit the floor.


After Brawl, Martinez Loses No-Hit Bid
Expos 3, Reds 2
Pedro Martinez made it through an eighth-inning brawl with a no-hitter, then gave up a leadoff single to Brian Dorsett in the ninth as the Montreal Expos beat the Cincinnati Reds, 3-2, last night in Montreal.
Martinez, 0-4 in four previous big league starts, was trying to become the second pitcher in a week to throw a no-hitter in his first complete game.
Kent Mercker of the Atlanta Braves did it against Los Angeles last Friday night.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in some editions of Business Day on Saturday, about Pegasus Technologies, misstated the family background of the company's chairwoman, E. Anne Eisenhower.
She is not a granddaughter of President Dwight D. Eisenhower, but is the widow of a nephew of the former President.


Major Suspect Charged in Immigrants' Fatal Voyage
A new suspect was arrested yesterday in the Golden Venture case, and law-enforcement officials described him as the highest-ranking suspect taken into custody so far.
Prosecutors said the suspect, Weng Yuhui, was in charge of shore-to-ship radio communications in the weeks before the freighter, carrying nearly 300 illegal immigrants from China, was beached off the Rockaway Peninsula last June.
Ten passengers died trying to swim ashore.


Review/Dance; Trois Cuts In on Pas de Deux
The love triangle, a mainstay of fiction, film and theater, has been less dominant in ballet, where the pas de deux has long held sway as a romantic metaphor.
But as the Joffrey Ballet suggested on Tuesday night, contemporary choreographers are increasingly interested in the psychological tensions that can be induced by a love trio, as opposed to a love duet.
By chance, and perhaps even by design, two of the pieces on this third and last program in the Joffrey season (which ends on Sunday night at the New York State Theater) were about a woman torn between two men.
The fascinating aspect was the wide difference in sensibility and idiom between the pieces, "The Garden of Villandry," by Martha Clarke, and "A Tri-Fling," by Randy Duncan, a young choreographer from Chicago.


Tortilla Chips And Taxes, Too
For years, Excedrin headache remedy has cornered the market on gimmicky promotions centering on the April 15 tax deadline.
Now, Frito-Lay Inc. is introducing a television commercial for its Tostitos tortilla chips and salsa that is paired with a public service announcement featuring Margaret Milner Richardson, the Commissioner of Internal Revenue.
In the spot, created by BBDO New York, the comedian Chris Elliott is shown undergoing an audit, trying to justify an "entertainment expenses" deduction of $84,000; he contends it is legitimate because parties break out whenever he eats his favorite snack.
Wayne Newton makes a cameo appearance at the end.
The 45-second commercial, which carries the theme "Prepare to party," is immediately followed by a 15-second spot created by the I.R.S. and produced by the Tostitos production company, Robert Chang Productions in New York.
It offers a friendly reminder that tax day is nigh.


South Africa's Whites at Crossroads
"It's all right to be white!" the life style story proclaims breathlessly, accepting the approaching electoral ascension of South Africa's long-oppressed black majority with a touch of fatalistic glitz.
"A new attitude is taking root among the Pale Natives who make up 18 percent of the population," says the article in Style, a magazine otherwise devoted to the usual glossy objects of materialism and aerobic intimations of immortality.
"Suddenly after years of angst, guilt and introspection, it's O.K. to be who you are. Just one problem. Who are we?"


Library of Congress to Publish a Magazine for Members
As part of its first membership drive, the Library of Congress said yesterday that it would publish a magazine called Civilization.
The magazine, which has been planned since 1989, is to appear every other month, starting in November.
It will draw on the 14 million documents, pictures, movies, music compositions, manuscripts, books, newspapers and magazines in the Library's enormous collection.


SERBS WILL HALT, RUSSIAN ASSERTS
A Russian special envoy indicated today that Bosnian Serb leaders had assured him they would cease their offensive against the United Nations-declared "safe area" of Gorazde, the Muslim enclave where NATO aircraft bombed Serbian forces earlier this week.
"I think I've got a commitment from the Serbs that it is not their intention to resume fighting," the Russian envoy, Vitaly Churkin, said.
"I may be able to introduce some new elements in the situation to reinforce the effective cease-fire that is there now."


Bad Day for South Africa Democracy: Mandela's Group Chases Off Its Foes
Frustrated by the large number of partisan strongholds where rival candidates dare not campaign, the trustees of South Africa's first all-race elections came up with a novel idea: gather candidates from various parties in a mini-van, take them into hostile areas with a military escort, and let them speak.
Voila! Mobile democracy!


Anarchy Rules Rwanda's Capital And Drunken Soldiers Roam City
Food had run out, drinking water was scarce and the streets of this capital city, empty of residents, was a terrifying obstacle course today of drunken soldiers and marauding gangs of looters dressed in a patchwork of uniforms, armed with machetes, spears, bows and arrows and automatic weapons.
Children carried hand grenades, and open-back trucks, loaded with angry men waving weapons at passing cars, sped through the city.
As night fell, screams could be heard coming from a church compound where more than 2,000 Rwandans had taken refuge.
A short time later, after the sound of machine-gun fire, the screaming stopped.


No Time for Bear-Baiting
Last December's elections showed the political strength of Russian nationalists.
Ever since, Boris Yeltsin's Government has made a point of asserting Russian national interests.
Republican Senators like John McCain and Mitch McConnell, and Democrats like Zbigniew Brzezinski, still thinking in cold-war categories, see this assertiveness as a sure sign that the Imperial Russian bear is back.
They call for the U.S. to quit coddling Moscow and start confronting it.
Specifically, they urge extending NATO's security guarantees to Eastern Europe and bristle at renewal of Moscow's ties to former Soviet republics.


Review/Film: Thirty-Two Short Films About Glenn Gould; A Musical Eccentric's Quirks And Talent
In the control room of a recording studio, the engineers discuss the merits of taking cream in their coffee, only half-noticing the enraptured figure behind the soundproof glass.
There, Glenn Gould (Colm Feore) begins by casually testing his blood pressure, then listens to a playback of his recording of Bach.
To the sounds of the English Suite No. 2, he begins swaying and floating in the throes of esthetic ecstasy, his white shirt billowing in gravity-defying slow motion.
Far removed from the engineers' prosaic talk, he seems truly to have passed into another dimension.
The audience for "Thirty-Two Short Films About Glenn Gould," a brilliant and transfixing cinematic portrait by Francois Girard, can look forward to enjoying much the same sensation.
For an hour and a half, without repeating himself or resorting to tactics that are even slightly familiar, Mr.
Girard, whose film opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, thoughtfully holds the viewer in thrall.


FIRST CHICAGO CORP. (N)
The First Chicago Corporation said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings rose by 8 percent, to $193.8 million, as it offset trading losses with venture capital gains, continued strong performance from its credit card business and one-time gains.
The company's earnings of $2.05 a share, up from $1.97 in the comparable period a year ago, were in line with Wall Street's estimates.


High Design for the Lowly? Milan Dares
Those who think that Milan is waning as the trend-setting center of the design world were obviously not around at the opening of the Salone Internazionale del Mobile, the giant annual furniture, lighting and accessories show that began its weeklong run on Monday.
They were also not part of the stylish crush of people who had to be first inside the dozens of showrooms, shops and galleries that have become an integral part of the fair itself.
The weakening lira, which has fallen about 50 percent since the fall of 1992, was one factor drawing foreign furniture buyers to the most influential marketplace of its kind in the world.


Two Stars Are Plenty
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton had it right the first time.
Last year he urged the removal of Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d as Chief of Naval Operations for failing to show proper leadership during Tailhook '91 -- the infamous reunion of aviators featuring a gantlet of drunken gropers that female guests, among them 15 officers, were forced to run.
This week, however, Mr.
Dalton joined Defense Secretary William Perry and Gen.
John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in asking that the Senate retire Admiral Kelso at his four-star rank.
Two stars, which rank the admiral will automatically revert to unless the Senate says otherwise, are enough.


A Peek at New Directions at United
Gerald Greenwald, the chairman-in-waiting for United Airlines, said he first developed an interest in labor relations during one of his early summer jobs organizing for the garment workers' union in St.
Louis.
He studied the subject at Princeton and worked briefly in human resources during his many years in the auto industry.
"There's never been a problem I don't like solving, and I like working with human nuance," he said.


Calendar: Exhibitions and Tours
Prints of Old New York
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672.
"Modern Metropolis," an exhibition of woodcut, silk-screen, lithograph and linoleum-cut prints made between 1910 and 1940, starts on Saturday and continues through Oct. 18.
The show includes images of the Flat-iron Building and Central Park.


John A. Hill, 87, Insurance Executive And Hospital Chief
John Alexander Hill, who was a leading executive at two large insurance agencies and a health care concern, died on Tuesday at Parkview Hospital in Nashville.
He was 87 and a resident of Nashville.
The cause was a heart attack, said his secretary, Saralee Vaughn.


Small Stage For Bowe, Big Name
When Michael Jordan went to the minor leagues, it was in another sport.
But imagine if Jordan were demoted to the Continental Basketball Association after a bad playoff game.
That, essentially, is what has happened to Riddick Bowe, the onetime heavyweight champion with the manager who alienated people who can now retaliate.


Islanders Forge 'Battle of New York' With Clincher
The Islanders, a gang that couldn't shoot straight in February and waited until late last month to find their rapport with the puck and each other, secured the eighth and final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference tonight with a 2-0 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning at the ThunderDome.
Not only that, but they also confirmed a first-round appointment with the rival Rangers in a four-of-seven series that opens at Madison Square Garden on Sunday afternoon.
The Rangers had the best overall record in the National Hockey League this season, but the Islanders won their season series.


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


This weekend, a business expo will show the breadth of new interest in gay consumers.
THE thousands of trade shows held every year are among the most mundane of marketing tools.
People wearing name tags, peering at exhibits and booths, accepting product samples, stuffing giveaway items like pens and key chains into their pockets -- all that is rarely associated with ground-breaking change.
But a trade show this weekend might well prove different.
The exhibition, at the Meadowlands Convention Center in Secaucus, N.J., is being billed as the First National Gay and Lesbian Business Expo.
It is another indication of one of the least expected business trends of the 1990's: the growing efforts by many mainstream marketers to reach consumers who are homosexuals.


Consolidated Papers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"When you negotiate with people with machetes, how can you make them understand about humanitarian neutrality?" -- PHILIPPE GAILLARD, head of the Red Cross in Rwanda.  [ A1:4. ]


Paradise Amid the Combat
To The Home Section:
Your story about the shutting down and dismantling of the Loew's Paradise Theater ("And This Once Was Paradise," March 17) had special meaning for me.


A Recital by Sherrill Milnes
The baritone Sherrill Milnes is to sing arias and songs by Lully, Gretry, Schubert, Massenet, Ravel, Vaughan Williams and Barber in a recital on April 24 at 3 P.M. at the Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College, 68th Street between Park and Lexington Avenues.
Tickets are $30 and $36.
Information: (212) 772-4448.


Europe Acting Against Greece on Macedonia
The European Union announced today that it was taking legal action against Greece because of its refusal to lift its two-month-old trade blockade of its neighbor, the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
The highly unusual move, which involves bringing Greece before the European Court of Justice, reflects the frustrations of other European Union members, which have tried for weeks to get Greece to permit Macedonian trade through Salonika, the Greek port that is the traditional access route for Macedonian goods.


Today's Reviews
ISAAC MIZRAHI, CALVIN KLEIN, ARNOLD SCAASI, DONNA KARAN by Bernadine Morris.
RICHARD TYLER by Anne-Marie Schiro.
MANOLO by Amy M. Spindler.


Sports of The Times; The No-Hit Pitcher On Hold
USUALLY a no-hit pitcher is lauded and applauded, then he takes his turn in his team's starting rotation as an instant celebrity.
But not Kent Mercker, who doesn't have a turn, who pitched a no-hitter against the Dodgers in Los Angeles last Friday night but who has now been put on hold until Saturday afternoon when the Atlanta Braves play the Cubs at Wrigley Field.


Crime Bill Is Beaten Back


House Panel Given a Lesson in Hedge Funds
George Soros, the global high-roller whose billion-dollar currency bets have moved markets from Tokyo to New York, came to Congress today to deliver a tutorial on hedge funds to lawmakers.
Members of the House Banking Committee seemed to alternate between awe at being schooled by the man with the Midas touch and immense curiosity about the secretive world of hedge funds -- the partnerships of wealthy investors that scour the globe for often-exotic investments in currencies, bonds and stocks.
The mystique of the funds seems to have been burnished -- rather than tarnished -- by tales of the wide swings they experience, including Mr.
Soros's loss of $600 million in one recent currency deal.


A Bad Bet For P.&amp; G.
It is eye catching, of course, when speculators like George Soros, or banks like Bankers Trust, acknowledge that they have lost millions of dollars by trading in the bond and currency markets, but that is the business they are in.
In many ways, it was far more surprising that the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the nation's premier maker of soap and diapers, confessed on Tuesday that it would take a charge of $102 million because of financial-market positions that backfired when American and German interest rates rose sharply.


Craft in Orbit; A Major Gain For Forecasts
The world's most advanced weather satellite, a robot craft that forecasters believe will revolutionize their ability to predict and track storms, was launched into orbit today.
The satellite was launched from Cape Canaveral, Fla., aboard an Atlas Centaur rocket at 2:04 A.M. by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The craft went into an initial orbit with a high point 26,500 miles above Earth and deployed its solar power array, agency spokesmen said.


Maybelline Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


King World Productions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Carjacking Leaves Officer Shot in Chest
An off-duty Mount Vernon police officer was shot in the chest Tuesday night after he went to his wife's aid during an attempted carjacking, the police said today.
The officer, George McClendon, 28, was in stable condition today after two and a half hours of surgery at Mount Vernon Hospital.
His wife, Anita, was not hurt in the exchange of gunfire, the police said.


Don't Starve Inner City Schools for Funds
To the Editor:
Re "In Michigan School-Tax Shift, the Poor Lose" (letter, April 1):


GARDEN Q.&amp;A.
More Witches'-Brooms
My answer last month to a query about witches'-brooms -- the abnormal cluster of small twigs on shrubs and trees -- inspired a note from Priscilla Twombly, a nursery owner in Monroe, Conn.


Turning Around Troubled Students, Intensively; L.I. Program Succeeds Without Trendy Theories, Just Costly, Home-Style Attention
When Jameka Harris enrolled as a freshman at Roosevelt Junior-Senior High School four years ago, she was not exactly on the track to college.
Angry and unhappy, with a history of bad grades and behavior problems, she was the kind of student teachers dreaded and fellow students feared.
"I used to fight a lot," she said in a soft voice. "I came to school to cause trouble."


WNCN's LP Collection To Go on Public Sale
Once WNCN was well and truly dead and it was clear that its vast library was of no use to WAXQ, the hard-rock station that took over its offices and airwaves, both the new station's managers and WNCN's old listeners began wondering what would happen to the classical station's tens of thousands of CD's, LP's and tapes.
The CD's have already been disposed of: a quarter of the collection went to St.
Augustine School of the Arts in the Bronx, a quarter went to the Boys Choir of Harlem, and half went to Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, Conn.
A collection of reel-to-reel tapes has been more widely dispersed.
Live recordings from Carnegie Hall, for example, have gone to the hall's own archive.


'Many Punks Could Gain From Six of the Best'; Introduced by Britain
To the Editor:
"A Flogging in Singapore" (editorial, April 2) says that the brutality of the caning sentence against Michael Fay will be felt all over the globe and redound to Singapore's shame.
Singapore is not ashamed because tough laws, enforced strictly and impartially, have kept Singapore safe and relatively crime-free.


As Gas Moves Again, A Family Moves Out
A U-Haul truck was parked in front of apartment 6G at the Durham Woods complex this afternoon, and every so often, two middle-aged brothers poured furniture and boxes and picture frames into it.
Their elderly parents stood nearby, watching their home being disemboweled.
The brothers worked so fast that they barely noticed the pounding rain.
A few hours before a natural gas pipeline that exploded last month was reopened, the Dizzine family was getting out.


Hilton Hotels Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Albany's Big Secret: The Budget
New York State's budget for the new fiscal year is two weeks late -- so far.
Alas, the lateness is not uncommon.
Albany has produced only one on-time budget since 1984.
"Albany" is the Governor, still Mario Cuomo, and the leaders of the Assembly, still run by Democrats, and the Senate, still run by Republicans.
In good years and bad, they haggle -- and so secretly that no one outside their circle gets a peek, or a chance to comment, until the deed is done.
That is outrageously unfair to the citizens they supposedly serve, which seems to embarrass neither the Governor nor the legislators.


The big week wraps up


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $112 million of notes due in 1997 priced at 100 to yield 6.1 percent through First Tennessee Bank and Norwest Investment Services Inc.
The issue is callable in a year.
It is also selling $76 million of notes due in 1999 priced at 100 to yield 6.835 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The issue is callable in a year. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $300 million of medium-term notes due in 2001 priced at 100 to yield 7.19 percent through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.
The issue is callable in three years.


Calendar: Exhibitions and Tours
Prints of Old New York
Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672.
"Modern Metropolis," an exhibition of woodcut, silk-screen, lithograph and linoleum-cut prints made between 1910 and 1940, starts on Saturday and continues through Oct. 18.
The show includes images of the Flat-iron Building and Central Park.


Moth, Probably Brought by Storm, Imperils Florida Citrus Crop
A tiny insect that apparently hitched a ride to Florida from West Africa aboard Hurricane Andrew in 1992 has suddenly begun infesting citrus groves throughout the state, sucking the life from orange, grapefruit, lemon and lime leaves and drying up profits for the beleaguered $8 billion-a-year citrus industry.
The pest, a moth called the citrus leaf miner that is only one-tenth of an inch long at maturity, was first spotted last spring in a few lime groves south of Miami.
But with another growing season getting under way, it has become clear that millions of moth larvae have burrowed into leaves in every citrus-growing county in the state, disrupting the process of photosynthesis vital to the health and growth of young trees.


5 KILLED IN ISRAEL AS SECOND BOMBER BLOWS UP A BUS
In the second such attack in a week, a Palestinian suicide bomber blew himself up today in an assault on an Israeli commuter bus, killing five Israelis and wounding 30 others at the main bus station in this working-class town in the country's heartland.
Most of the survivors had minor wounds, but they told of a scene of blood and terror, of bodies ripped apart and of people too stunned in the first moments even to scream.


IN THE STUDIO WITH: Eric Carle


Essay; Anniversary Waltz
Anniversaries of great occasions are news events that can be covered with care.
Assignment editors, who rarely have the luxury of dealing with the expected, are rubbing their hands at 1994's summer of commemoration.
First: June 3, 1994, is the fifth anniversary of the bloody suppression of the peaceful demonstration in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.


Treasury Yields Higher Despite Favorable News
Yields of Treasury securities turned higher yesterday, despite favorable inflation news for the second consecutive day.
Traders said the Consumer Price Index for March, which rose three-tenths of 1 percent, and last month's retail sales, which were up just four-tenths of 1 percent, were about what people had expected.
And bonds posted modest gains early in the session on the well-behaved data.


Vitamin Supplements Are Seen As No Guard Against Diseases
A large and careful study to see if vitamins can protect against cancer and heart disease has found no evidence of any such benefit and even hints at actual harm.
The finding is surprising because many earlier studies had suggested a benefit from these supplements, vitamin E and beta-carotene.
Experts involved in the study say it is possible a benefit may emerge as the study continues.
They also say that the advice to eat a lot of fresh fruit and vegetables still stands, since the benefit seen in earlier studies may have come from something other than the vitamins.
But the experts acknowledge that the case for vitamin supplements should be considered unproved for now.


School Panel Approves Fiscal Equity Plan
In yet another effort to resolve New Jersey's chronic school financing problem, a special study commission today approved a plan that would guarantee New Jersey's poorest school districts financial equity with wealthier systems and would significantly increase the portion of educational costs borne by the state.
At the heart of the proposed solution is the same thinking that drove the highly controversial 1990 Quality Education Act: that to equalize spending among districts, the state must wean aid from wealthy systems and give more to the poor ones.


F.A.A. Is Threatening to Cancel New Air Traffic System
The head of the Federal Aviation Administration told Congress today that the agency may cancel a $7 billion program to modernize the air traffic control system because of long delays and a projected $2.7 billion cost overrun.
Called before an exasperated Congressional panel to assess the progress of the project, the agency's Administrator, David R. Hinson, acknowledged its troubles and said the agency had authorized a comprehensive review.


A la Carte Prices Get Support in Cable Poll
Fifty-two percent of consumers who do not already subscribe to cable television say they would sign up if they could order the programming on a network-by-network, a la carte basis, according to a study conducted for Warren Publishing Inc. in Washington.
The study, called "Cable a la Carte Pricing," canvassed 15,000 consumers in December.
It was inspired by proposals that local cable systems separate, or unbundle, the packages of services they now sell.


Manhattan Fund-Raiser Adds to Cuomo Tally
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said he expected to collect an estimated $1.5 million from a Manhattan fund-raiser last night, and his aides said the success of the event reflected both Mr.
Cuomo's perceived vulnerability and the disarray in the Republican gubernatorial race.
The Cuomo campaign had set a goal of $1 million for the dinner at the Sheraton New York Hotel.
But campaign officials said they would far exceed that target on the strength of heavy giving by longtime Cuomo loyalists, including trade union members, and by new contributors who sat out the Governor's last two re-election campaigns.


Italian Media Magnate Moves Closer to Forming a Cabinet
With two days to go before Italy's new Parliament convenes, the media magnate Silvio Berlusconi seemed virtually certain to be asked to form a government, after his most unpredictable ally agreed to support the effort.
The announcement Sunday by Umberto Bossi, the leader of the Northern League, that his party would support a government, though subject to strict conditions, appeared to pave the way for President Oscar Luigi Scalfaro to pick Mr.
Berlusconi, though most politicians agree that assembling a cabinet and getting parliamentary approval will be arduous.


An Ace-in-Progress: Chicago's Bere Blows Away Yanks
What the Yankees desperately needed tonight was a stellar start from Jim Abbott.
They wanted to feel better about themselves, and wanted to continue to feel optimistic about Abbott.
They wanted to prove their mettle to the White Sox and end their nagging losing streak.
What the Yankees wanted and needed contrasted starkly with what actually happened tonight at Comiskey Park.
Abbott's start was decent for six innings, but it was not impressive enough on a night when Jason Bere was almost unhittable in marching Chicago to a 5-0 victory.
Bere upstaged Abbott with his own stellar -- make that scintillating -- start.


Excerpts From Soros Testimony
Following are excerpts from the testimony today of the investment manager George Soros to the House Banking Committee, as recorded by Federal News Service.
The generally accepted theory is that financial markets tend toward equilibrium and, on the whole, discount the future correctly.


Newman's Clock-Beater Gives Nets Playoff Fever
It seemed that not even the news from Miami that the Chicago Bulls had given the Nets a leg up on their playoff hopes by beating the Miami Heat could inspire New Jersey tonight against the lowly Milwaukee Bucks.
It took a 14-foot jumper by Johnny Newman with 1.3 seconds remaining to give the Nets a 107-105 victory in the Bradley Center.
New Jersey leads eighth-place Indiana by one game in the Eastern Conference playoff race.


Corrections
A report in the Book Notes column yesterday about the popularity of books with spiritual themes misspelled the name of the associate publisher and editor in chief of HarperCollins's adult-trade division.
She is Susan Moldow.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.31
3.24
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.53
3.56
2.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.97
3.96
2.93
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.92
6.86
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.26
7.20
6.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.07
8.03
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.31
5.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Global Media Group Is Started by Ogilvy
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide said yesterday that it had formed a worldwide media services division, called the Global Media Group, to serve existing accounts like American Express and A.T.&amp; T. and, eventually, new clients.


Editors Look At Themselves In Response To Criticism
Under attack for the ethics and emphasis of their publications, American newspaper editors are indulging in something of a group worry session at their annual convention here.
Whether the speaker at the lectern is President Clinton, as it was today, or an experienced newspaper editor, many conversations at the meeting of the American Society of Newspaper Editors seem to lead to the same question: Is the press too mean?


Review/Photography; VanDerZee Reveals Harlem in Its Heyday
One of photography's most basic and powerful traits is its ability to give substance to memory, to present precise visual details of a time gone by.
That capability is vividly apparent in the absorbing show of images by James VanDerZee now at the Howard Greenberg Gallery in SoHo.
On display is nothing less than the living fabric of black society in New York in the first decades of this century.
VanDerZee, who died in 1983 at the age of 96, was the leading photographer in Harlem during its heyday, from World War I until the 1940's.


Ford Sets 12.5% Rise In Dividend
Casting a strong vote of confidence in the automobile industry's strengthening recovery, the Ford Motor Company plans to increase its dividend for the first time since 1989 and to split its stock 2 for 1.
At a meeting today, Ford's directors signed off on an increase in the quarterly cash dividend of 12.5 percent, to 45 cents a share from 40 cents, or 22.5 cents once the stock splits.
In 1991, Ford, the nation's No. 2 auto maker, cut the dividend to its current level of 40 cents a quarter from 75 cents.


MBNA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fire Captain Improves
A fire captain who was badly burned in a SoHo blaze that killed two firefighters took a slight turn for the better yesterday, a hospital official said.


Reviews/ Film; Chevy Chase, Wishing for Danger
In "Cops and Robbersons," Chevy Chase has an unfortunate chance to prove that there's something even more unfunny than his disastrous talk show.
In this, a Chase vehicle with four flat tires, he plays a sad-sack suburbanite who secretly yearns to live dangerously, having watched too many police dramas on television.
He gets his chance when a surveillance team in his squeaky-clean neighborhood takes over the house next door.
Jack Palance, as the policeman in charge of the operation, has the film's only fun when gazing appreciatively at the pitiful Norman Robberson (Mr. Chase).
"He's an idiot," Mr.
Palance says happily.


A Shirtsleeve Day


New Careers for Cold War Relics
Hoping to find a peaceful, commercial use for relics of the cold war, the White House is considering recycling dozens of nuclear-warhead missiles and selling them to American industry for launching commercial satellites.
The rockets, coming from the ranks of Minuteman, Poseidon and Trident intercontinental ballistic missiles that the Pentagon in pulling out of service as part of the nuclear-arms reduction pact negotiated with Russia, would meet a growing demand from American satellite makers.
Now they are scurrying overseas to find launching vehicles.


Golden West Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve is signaling that it will again raise short-term interest rates even though it sees no signs of accelerating inflation.
Fed officials believe that low short-term rates have already encouraged too much lending.  [ Page A1. ]


Stadium Gets a New Carpet Of Not-Yet-Green Grass
The artificial turf that wrecks the knees of running backs, separates the shoulders of wide receivers and leaves quarterbacks with bell-ringing concussions is being overlaid at Giants Stadium with a cushiony layer of natural grass for this summer's World Cup.
By Saturday afternoon, the $1 million carpet of Bermuda sod should cover the entire floor of the stadium.
Once the grass is in place, the next project will be coaxing it to grow.


L.I. INQUIRY FINDS ERRORS, NOT SNOW, STOPPED RAILROAD
The Long Island Rail Road's collapse of Feb. 11, which stranded tens of thousands of riders at their jobs in New York or on cold railroad platforms in Queens, was not caused by the 12-inch snowfall, but by shabby management, the Inspector General of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said in an unusually blunt report released yesterday.
The report lists a cascading series of errors by management, dereliction of duty by low-level workers and a generally lackadaisical response by the railroad's two top executives.


U.S. Moves on Two Fronts To Reshape Logging Rules
The Clinton Administration moved on two fronts today to reshape the way the Government manages logging in the nation's remaining ancient forests.
In Seattle, the Administration asked a Federal judge to restore some logging in the old forests of the Pacific Northwest, where for five years the courts have all but eliminated logging on public land to protect the northern spotted owl.


Market Place; An oil spill may cause more headaches for Unocal's investors.
INVESTORS in the Unocal Corporation had a rough March and may be in for more unpleasant news arising from a little-publicized oil spill on the central California coast that ranks as one of the largest in the nation.
Last month, Unocal, the big oil company based in Los Angeles, announced that it would take a charge of $25 million against its first-quarter earnings to cover the immediate cleanup costs and eventual closing of the four-square-mile Guadalupe field, in the foothills 20 miles south of San Luis Obispo.


Pulitzer Publishing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shirley M. Sills; Publishing Executive, 64
Shirley M. Sills, the executive vice president of PTN Publishing Company in Melville, L.I., died yesterday in her home in Manhasset, L.I.
She was 64.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, Stanley S. Sills.


Potvin Calls Islanders 'a Real Contender'
Denis Potvin, a Hall of Famer who played in six "Battles of New York," suspects the Rangers didn't react with glee when they realized they would be facing their archrivals in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
"You're introducing a level of emotion into a series that you don't particularly want to have in the first round," Potvin, the Panthers' television analyst, said tonight before Florida's 4-1 victory over the Islanders.
"Whoever wins, it will be physically and emotionally draining. Then there are three rounds to go to get to the finals."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ayer wins the struggle to land the industry's 'most wanted man.'
THE envelope, please. And the Dworin goes to -- Ayer Inc.!
There is no Dworin Award.
Not yet, anyway.
But along Madison Avenue, the feverish speculation about where Steve Dworin -- a k a "the most wanted man in advertising" -- would land had all the intensity of Hollywood's annual Oscar guess-fests.


Vikes Have Themselves A Quarterback in Moon
WARREN MOON joined the Minnesota Vikings yesterday, becoming the most prominent quarterback the team has had since FRAN TARKENTON retired in 1978.
The trade with the Houston Oilers, all but set on Wednesday, was finally completed yesterday.
The Vikings said Moon agreed to a two-year contract with an option year.
The club would not release contract details, but JEFF DIAMOND, the Vikings' vice president, described as "in the ball park" an earlier report that said Moon would be paid $3.4 million in 1994 -- a $1.8 million salary and a $1.6 million signing bonus.
Houston reportedly will receive two draft picks from Minnesota -- a fourth-rounder this year and a conditional third-rounder in 1995.
The Vikings would only say yesterday that they will give up undisclosed draft choices.


Art in Review
Elizabeth Murray
Paula Cooper Gallery  149 Wooster Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through April 23
Elizabeth Murray's faith in the complete malleability of paint and painting continues unabated in this small, impressive show.
Over the course of only five canvases, she puts her art through its paces, going from flat to shaped surfaces and shifting her semi-abstract narratives from human to animal to architecture, all without missing a beat.


Louisiana Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Top Dayton Hudson Officer Retiring
In an announcement that was greeted with a shrug on Wall Street, Kenneth A. Macke, the Dayton Hudson Corporation's chairman and chief executive for the last decade, said yesterday that he intends to retire in July.
Robert J. Ulrich, chairman and chief executive of Target, Dayton Hudson's largest operating division, was named by the retailing company's board to succeed Mr.
Macke.


Kent, Not the Mets' Bullpen, Gets Credit for the Save
Jeff Kent knew the pitch was a mistake the minute Dan Plesac released the ball.
He saw Plesac's facial expression, he saw the grimace, and in one quick flash he knew he had the opportunity to fix this ball game.
The count was 1-2, Kent having swung through two sliders, and his hands crept ever so slightly up the bat in anticipation of a third slider.
This time, though, Plesac threw a fastball -- a pitch Kent wanted desperately -- and that pitch cost the Chicago Cubs what would have been an incredible comeback victory yesterday at Shea Stadium.


Clinton Is Telling Serbs That NATO and U.N. Are Neutral
Having intervened to help the Bosnian Muslims in Gorazde, President Clinton sought today to persuade the Serbs that NATO and the United Nations remained neutral parties in the Bosnian civil war.
Even as Serb forces took retaliatory steps against United Nations forces, Mr.
Clinton went out of his way to insist that NATO's limited air attacks against the Serbs this week reflected only the determination of the United States and its allies to enforce United Nations rules.


Time That We Curb Lawmakers for Sale
o the Editor:
An addendum to "So You Think PAC's Buy Politicians" (letter, March 31) by Ellen S. Miller, who points out the corrupting role by individual contributors to members of Congress as surpassing the role of political action committees:


I.B.M. Agrees to Make Chips Designed by Cyrix
In a serious challenge to the Intel Corporation's dominance of the market for microprocessors, the chips that are the brains of personal computers, I.B.M. said today that it would manufacture the Cyrix Corporation's Intel-compatible chips.
In addition to supplying the microprocessors to Cyrix, I.B.M. has the right to make an equivalent amount for use internally or to sell on the open market.


Rwanda Will Need Its Civil Servants
To the Editor:
I am horrified about the situation in Rwanda and Burundi.
As a World Bank project officer in East Africa, I worked about six months a year for five years in Rwanda in the 1980's.
The challenges are enormous: Huge population, minuscule family plots, mountainous terrain that makes for backbreaking, primitive tilling, extreme poverty, low literacy, high infant mortality.
Government efforts, and our projects, were focused on helping this population survive.


Mustaf Cousin Indicted
LeVONNIE WOOTEN of Landover, Md., a cousin of Phoenix Suns forward JERROD MUSTAF, was indicted yesterday in the July 22 slaying of a woman who told her family she was carrying the player's unborn child.
Before she was shot to death in her apartment in Glendale, Ariz., Althea Hayes, 28, also claimed Mustaf had offered her $5,000 to have an abortion and she had refused.


Parish Priest Is Sentenced In Sexual Assault of Boys
A Roman Catholic priest who pleaded guilty to having sex with members of parish boys' clubs from 1983 to 1991 told a Federal judge today that he had been a sex addict for 20 years who, with God's help, has overcome his affliction.
But the judge gave little credence to those claims, sentencing the priest, the Rev.
Edward A. Pipala, to eight years in prison, the maximum sentence allowed under a plea agreement worked out with the United States Attorney's office.


Review/Film; Ismail Merchant Directs First Feature
Lying on his side in a narrow bed is a corpulent, aging Indian poet named Nur.
He is a curiously imposing figure, even with his back to the camera, and provides what may be the greatest role in the long career of Shashi Kapoor.
Almost 30 years ago, Mr.
Kapoor was the slender, handsome youth in the early Merchant-Ivory film "Shakespeare Wallah," and more recently the outraged father in Stephen Frears's "Sammy and Rosie Get Laid." In Ismail Merchant's rich and enticing "In Custody," Mr.
Kapoor turns Nur into a present-day Balzac: fierce and wise, yet with all the signs of having lived a little too well.
The visitor who has awakened him at midday is a meek college teacher named Deven (Om Puri), honored at the very thought of interviewing one of India's greatest poets.
By the end of the day, Deven will see this idol surrounded by drunken admirers, scolded by his shrewish young wife, collapsed on the floor in his own vomit.
Yet Nur retains his greatness and Deven his justified hero worship.
And Mr.
Merchant, known as the producing half of the Merchant-Ivory partnership (with James Ivory directing instant classics like "Howards End" and "The Remains of the Day"), shows himself to be a passionate, accomplished director.


Giuliani Extending Severance Deadline
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that New York City would give workers at least an extra week to apply for the voluntary severance packages that he hopes will reduce the city's work force by 7,600.
He said he would also delay his budget proposal until May 10 to see how many employees accept the severance offer, which originally was to expire at the end of next week.


Orr Leaves Coaching
JOHNNY ORR, the coach at Iowa State for 14 years, announced yesterday that he would not return for a 15th season.
Orr, 66, will remain at Iowa State, in Ames, as associate athletic director to fulfill the last year of his contract.
Orr's career record while coaching at Massachusetts, Michigan and Iowa State is 466-346.(AP)


Fortaleza Journal; Bouquets for a State as Brazil's Dust Bowl Flowers
"Fortaleza: Brazil's Miami," a Rio newspaper gushed recently, describing a beachfront city of European tourists, foreign investors, imported cars, a thriving fashion industry, a new international yacht marina and steel-and-glass shopping centers with theaters showing Hollywood's latest films.
Ten years ago there was little to envy in Fortaleza, the capital of Ceara State.
This northeastern dust bowl seemed condemned eternally to export its population, hat in hand, to work in Brazil's developed south.


Art in Review
Ellen Auerbach
Robert Mann Gallery  42 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through May 7
Ellen Auerbach, now 87 and living on the Upper East Side, has lived several lives as a photographer.
Early commercial work that she produced in Berlin in the 1930's as a partner in the Ringl &amp; Pit studio is included in the Guggenheim Museum's current survey of work by female photographers, and a selection of those Bauhaus-influenced images is on view at the Mann Gallery.


Cuomo Urges Schools For Gifted Students
It is an idea long familiar to New York City residents: Take the best and brightest high-school students and place them among their peers in separate schools, places like Stuyvesant, Bronx Science and Brooklyn Tech.
Now, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo wants to do the same for unusually talented math and science students throughout the state by creating what he calls Excelsior Schools: tuition-free, taxpayer-financed boarding schools on state university campuses, with classes taught by college professors.


Conner Peripherals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Diner's Journal
New Chef at an Old Stand
Most days you'll find Jerry Kretchmer at the door of his new Judson Grill in Manhattan.
But exciting things are also happening in another corner of the Kretchmer empire.
After trying out a couple of different chefs, One Fifth has settled in with Gary Robins, a talented 28-year-old who is turning out really impressive food.
Anybody who likes raw shellfish should try his enormous plateau de fruits de mer, a delicious tangle of large shrimps, clams, oysters, crayfish, Dungeness crabs and delicate pink scallops presented on a bed of ice.
His cooked food is extremely cross-cultural: the menu offers foie gras (with pears, celery root and walnuts), ceviche (made with snapper, avocados and cilantro), caviar (with corn blini and creme fraiche), steamed red snapper (with black beans, ginger and shiitake mushrooms) and a Thai-accented green curry with giant prawns and clams.
Reading through this menu is like taking a culinary trip around the world.


The Verdict Not Guilty, the Defendant Not Satisfied
The legal pipeline is full of complaints filed by criminal defendants who contend that they did not get a fair trial.
The improbable thing is that Howard L. Haupt is among them.
Mr.
Haupt is the rarest of plaintiffs.
Found not guilty of murdering a 7-year-old boy, he has nonetheless sued on the ground that his trial denied him due process.


Leading Pickets, the Teamster Chief's Future May Also Be on the Line
Three years ago, Ron Carey, a bodyguard at his side, drove an old Chevrolet to teamster locals around the nation in a grass-roots campaign for the presidency of an institution that had became a national symbol of corruption and brass knuckles.
Mr.
Carey, chief of a Queens local, barely won, with just under half the votes in a three-man race in which less than half the members voted.
Mr.
Carey is running hard again, this time to save face and win something big for a union that still does not quite accept him.


Smith (A.O.) Corp.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


National Westminster Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Announced the retirment of Bill Bergesch, senior advisor, effective May 1.


Review/Film; A New York Comedy With Heart and Barbs
In directing his first feature, "Naked in New York," about how hard it is to be an aspiring young playwright, Dan Algrant manages to make film making look wonderfully easy.
Mr.
Algrant's agile, self-deprecating wit and his flair for ensemble comedy make "Naked in New York" as knowing and clever as it is charming.
Although the film maker is a protege of Martin Scorsese (Mr. Scorsese served as executive producer), his dry, offbeat style recalls someone else.
"Naked in New York" is descended, in the most funny and refreshing way, from "Annie Hall."
The resemblance goes well beyond the fact that this film's hero, Jake Briggs (Eric Stoltz), is a bespectacled, red-haired fellow who tends to worry a lot.
Or that his girlfriend, Joanne White (Mary-Louise Parker), is a sly, winsome neurotic who never fully says what's on her mind.
"Naked in New York" also ponders the problems of trying to combine love and work, the lure of ambition and the terrors posed by any prospect of permanent commitment.
And none of it is made to look easy.
When Jake is a little boy, he is seen coaching his mother (Jill Clayburgh) with the phrase, "I am the master of my emotions," which turns out to be a hearty joke for them both.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about an impromptu lunchtime football game in Manhattan misidentified the park in which the game was played.
It was Madison Square Park, not Union Square.


No Headline
"Regardless of how much electronic equipment you have, it all comes down to the human factor. If human beings make a mistake, you are left with a tragedy." ROBERT GASKIN, a retired Air Force officer.  [ A12:5. ]


Anthem Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.N. in Rwanda Says It Is Powerless to Halt the Violence
As battling armies pounded the capital with mortar fire today, the United Nations command here said that it could do little to stop the fighting or prevent the massacre of civilians and that an attempt to hold peace talks had failed.
Marauding groups of looters and soldiers remained in control of the otherwise deserted streets, as reports of mass killings filtered out to the thousands of Rwandans still stranded in churches, schools and stadiums with no armed protection.
In the main hotels, which were filled with refugees, the mood was one of doom.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the New York City school bureaucracy misstated Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines's count of school administrators in the central headquarters and the local school districts.
It is the equivalent of 8,025 full-time jobs, not 8,400.
The article also misstated the cost of the 6,300 full-time jobs at headquarters; it is $245.6 million, not $328 million.


Hospital Chain Said to Settle Fraud Case for $300 Million
In what would be the largest settlement ever between the Federal Government and a health care provider, National Medical Enterprises Inc., the embattled hospital chain, was said by lawyers and company employees today to have agreed to pay more than $300 million to settle charges of health insurance fraud and patient abuse.
National Medical, based in Santa Monica, Calif., would not disclose the amount of the settlement.
But the company said that under a preliminary agreement, which had not been made final, the Justice Department and Department of Health and Human Services would drop their criminal and civil investigations.
And in an announcement today about its quarterly results, the company said it was setting aside $375 million to cover the costs of a settlement.


Binks Manufacturing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mandela and de Klerk Square Off on TV
The last white President and the man likely to be the first black President of South Africa met tonight in the first public debate of their uneasy, four-year partnership, an event that was less the highlight of an election campaign than a glimpse of the next Government.
President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela bickered over economic philosophy and the blame for the country's violence, but both men seemed more concerned with assuring their anxious country that the world will not end in 12 days when blacks go to the polls for the first time.


Sports of The Times; Here Come Fearsome Islanders
THESE are nervous times in the world's most famous arena, an arena known in all corners of this land.
In the concrete and steel bunkers of Madison Square Garden, the besieged workers can surely hear the thundering sounds of vandals on the march.
Vandals in corporate boardrooms.
Vandals in New Jersey.
Vandals on Long Island.
All of them stomping around, making plans to attack, threatening to eat Madison Square Garden's lunch.


Serbian Troops Step Up Pressure on U.N.
Serbian nationalists intensified their campaign against the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Bosnia today, bringing a tank within eight miles of Sarajevo in an attempt to force the United Nations to surrender heavy weapons impounded in the area, United Nations officials here said.
NATO jets this afternoon roared over the surrounded weapons-collection point at Krivoglavci, a village about eight miles northwest of the capital, after the Serbs pressed their demand for an unspecified number of artillery pieces guarded inside, the officials said.


Japan Welcomes Foreign Companies
To the Editor:
I would like to provide some perspective on Japan-United States trade as discussed by Stephen Lee in "Japan Makes It Tough to Do Business There" (letter, March 30).


A Jury Clears Pan Am in a 1986 Hijacking
Blocking the way for victims of a 1986 hijacking to seek millions of dollars in damages, a Federal jury yesterday found that Pan American World Airways was not guilty of "willful misconduct" that led to the hijacking, which left 21 people dead and more than 100 injured.
The verdict by the jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan, if upheld, limits the airline's liability to $75,000 a person under the Warsaw Convention, a treaty on international travel that sets that ceiling for compensatory damages unless "willful misconduct" on the part of the carrier is shown.


Bruins and Sabres Lose Finales That Really Aren't Final Word
Whalers 3, Bruins 2
Jocelyn Lemieux scored twice and visiting Hartford survived a Boston rally to secure a 3-2 season-ending victory last night.


Mislabeling Of Phones Is Charged
New Yorkers are being defrauded by mislabeled pay telephones that say they provide long-distance service by A.T.&amp; T. or other big companies but actually use small long-distance companies that charge up to four times as much, a state consumer official said yesterday.
The official, Richard M. Kessel, executive director of the New York State Consumer Protection Board, said the mislabeling -- commonly known in the telephone industry as "slamming" -- involved 40,000 pay telephones in New York, a third of the state's total.


Listen to the Voice of the Projects
To the Editor:
"A Fight for Peace on Chicago's Streets" (news article, April 4) does not even mention one of the principal causes of renewed violence in Chicago's public housing there: the American Civil Liberties Union's victorious legal battle against the residents over what is good for the residents.


In Surprise Move, Germans Cut Both Key Interest Rates
The German central bank, in an effort to help calm turbulent financial markets, cut its two key interest rates today and set off a round of similar small cuts across Europe.
The Bundesbank also held out the prospect of further gradual reductions if inflation continued to decline.
The bank has a reputation for keeping its focus on only Germany and its fear of inflation, as was the case in a crisis in 1992 that led to a rupture of the European Monetary System.
So it was a little surprising for the Bundesbank president, Hans Tietmeyer, to point out that the interest-rate cuts were made with a view beyond the improvement in Germany's inflation outlook.


Critic's Notebook; Jazz With Pizazz: A New Generation of Clubs
THE gods of bankruptcy rub their hands together and smack their lips at the sight of a new jazz club, all lighted up and ready to go.
Like the Titanic, new jazz clubs are launched with great intentions.
And like the Titanic, they tend to sink.
Indigo Blues, Condon's, Cameo's, Fortune Garden Pavilion and Yardbird Suite have all gone the way of the great auk.
At the moment, new jazz spots are brightening Manhattan's landscape.
The gods of bankruptcy must be smiling.
But they may be deprived of their pleasure.
The new clubs seem better established -- that means capitalized -- and a bit more willing to go the distance it takes to succeed.
In addition, the managers are realizing that there's a huge pool of young musicians to draw on, cheaply, and that a new awareness of the music might just result in a larger audience.
The number of clubs depends on the environment for jazz; the signs suggest this is a fertile era.


Art in Review
Doris Salcedo
Brooke Alexander Gallery  59 Wooster Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through May 7
The Colombian artist Doris Salcedo's spare and lovely first New York solo show consists of just two sculptures, each titled "La Casa Viuda" ("The Widowed House").
The phrase refers to homes from which residents have disappeared as a result of political violence, and Ms.
Salcedo seems intent upon distilling the physical emptiness and psychological desolation that results.


Luria (L.) &amp; Sons Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


National Medical Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Accused of Abuse, School Official Retires
A Queens public school administrator retired abruptly on Wednesday after Board of Education investigators concluded that he had molested a 12-year-old student at Public School 21 in Flushing, Queens, while he was a teacher there 23 years ago.
Edward F. Stancik, Special Commissioner of Investigation for the New York City school district, said that in conversations taped by the victim, the administrator, Robert Roxenberg, 55, repeatedly acknowledged that he had sexually abused his former student, Russell Newman, who is now 35 years old.
Mr.
Newman approached Mr.
Stancik's office with his accusations last fall, more than two years after he began having flashbacks of the abuse.


The Voices and Faces of Crown Heights
LISTEN to the voices of Crown Heights, raised in exhibitions that opened this week at three Brooklyn cultural institutions.
From a Jamaican resident: "The media hasn't helped. Both communities are hurting, and if you have two hurting people, they need to be together to heal their hurt, outside the media's realm."


Endorsing Growing Practice, Vatican Approves Altar Girls
The Vatican has granted permission for priests to have girls assist them at Mass, a task traditionally performed by boys and officially restricted to males.
The action approves a practice that has become increasingly common in Roman Catholic parishes, particularly in the United States, but has also stirred fierce emotions among many Catholics.
For proponents of expanding women's roles in the church, the approval of altar girls was a small but symbolically sweet victory; for those who fear departures from long-established church practices, it was a bitter defeat.


U.S. Warns Iraqis Not to Attack Military Convoys in the North
The United States, Britain and France have warned President Saddam Hussein that he faces "serious consequences" if his forces fire at, or otherwise harass, military reconnaissance convoys they plan to resume in the Kurdish safe haven they created in northern Iraq.
These reconnaissance convoys were suspended on Dec. 21 after Iraqi forces fired at one near the northern town of Faydah.
The decision to resume them again was communicated on Wednesday to the Iraqi representative to the United Nations, Nizar Hamdoon, diplomats say.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
3.43
3.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.56
3.53
2.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.98
3.97
2.93
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.95
6.92
5.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.28
7.26
6.72
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.11
8.07
7.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.30
5.91
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


G.M. Settles Suit Over Plant Closing
The General Motors Corporation has tentatively settled a lawsuit filed by a Michigan township and county over the closing of an autombile assembly plant last year.
Ypsilanti Township and Washtenaw County sued the auto maker after it announced that it would close the plant, known as Willow Run, because of flagging sales of its Chevrolet Caprice and other large rear-wheel-drive cars.


First of America Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


More Officers Facing Arrest In Corruption
Two police officers were arrested at a Harlem station house last night and law enforcement officials said that about 10 more would be arrested today on charges that they protected or shook down drug dealers.
The officials said the arrests represented the largest single sweep of police officers since the Mollen Commission began its corruption investigation.
The arrests are part of a string of corruption cases that senior police officials say is only beginning, and is likely to touch as many as 10 of the city's 75 precincts.


Where Sultan Swatted, Team of Dreams Is Born
At the same park where Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig and Ted Williams played in exhibition games in the 1930's, and where George Bush played first base in the 40's, professional baseball today made its debut at 66-year-old Yale Field.
Before a near-capacity crowd of about 6,000, the New Haven Ravens brought minor league baseball back to West Haven.
In the 1970's, Ron Guidry, Willie McGee and Buck Showalter of the West Haven Yankees sometimes performed in front of fewer than 100 people at rickety Quigley Stadium less than two miles away.


Long Island Savings Bank FSB reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


METRO DIGEST
BLUNDERS FROZE RAILROAD, REPORT SAYS
The Long Island Rail Road's collapse of Feb. 11, which stranded tens of thousands of riders, was not caused by the 12-inch snowfall but by shabby management, the Inspector General of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said in an unusually blunt report.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  COLISEUM'S FATE CAUGHT UP IN BATTLE
Nine years after Mortimer B. Zuckerman won the right to build a giant retail, residential and office complex to replace the New York Coliseum, the fate of the site is now tangled in a complicated three-way battle involving the developer, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the Giuliani administration.
B3.
A RAPE SUSPECT KNOWN AS MUNCHKIN
To his family and friends in Coney Island, 14-year-old Larry Harris is "Munchkin," the small, sweet-faced boy who could win anyone over with his playful charm.
But some said that they saw trouble looming because no one was watching out for him.
Now he is a rape suspect.
B3.
SECURITY TIGHTENED AT RIKERS ISLAND
After two recent attacks on correction officers by inmates, the new jail commissioner has changed the command structure in the maximum-security section of Rikers Island.
B3.
LONG-DISTANCE MISLABELED, OFFICIAL SAYS
New Yorkers are being defrauded by mislabeled pay telephones that say they provide long-distance service by A.T.&amp; T. or other big companies but actually use small long-distance companies that charge up to four times as much, a state consumer official said.
B3.
Former Mayor Dinkins returned to City Hall for the first time since his defeat.
B2.
REGION  BLAST EXPOSES A LEGAL LIMBO
The explosion of a natural gas pipeline in Edison, N.J., has exposed a murky legal limbo over the responsibility for regulating excavation along the line.
B5.
PRIEST SENTENCED IN SEX ASSAULT OF BOYS
A Roman Catholic priest who pleaded guilty to having sex with members of parish boys' clubs from 1983 to 1991 was sentenced to eight years in prison, the maximum allowed under a plea agreement worked out with the United States Attorney's office.
B5.
SUIT SEEKS TO HALT TAKEOVER OF SCHOOLS
A civil lawsuit aimed at blocking a state takeover of Newark's school system was filed in Federal court, not because the plaintiffs believe the schools are improving but because they argue that a takeover would deny minority residents their right to vote for the school board.
B5.
LAWYER SAYS TROOPERS KNEW OF FAKING
Nelson E. Roth, who resigned as the special prosecutor looking into evidence-tampering by the New York State police, said he thinks more troopers knew about the faking of fingerprint evidence than have come forward.
B5.
CUOMO URGES SPECIAL SCHOOLS FOR GIFTED
Governor Cuomo wants to take the best and the brightest high-school math and science students and place them among their peers in tuition-free boarding schools on state university campuses, with classes taught by college professors.
B4.
Recreational boaters will be subject to tolls on the state's canal system for the first time.
B2.
Chronicle B4


Holy Bull Draws Rail As Choice in Blue Grass
Holy Bull, the favorite in the Blue Grass Stakes this Saturday and maybe in the Kentucky Derby three weeks later, stepped regally outside Barn 14 at Keeneland Race Course this morning.
No horse has ever run in front of him in the early stages of his seven races, and he won six of them leading almost every step of the way.
He is "the speed." He rockets to the front, and seems to be saying: "Catch me if you can."


Talks Allowed in Macy Case
After meeting with representatives of Federated Department Stores yesterday, Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator in the bankruptcy case of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, allowed Federated to talk with the creditors of its retailing rival about a reorganization proposal.
Mr.
Vance had asked Federated, which bought a large share of Macy's secured debt in January in hopes of merging with Macy, not to discuss proposals with other creditors until he had met with company officials.


Review/Film; Half Dog and Half Wolf, But All Hero and Lover
In the time-honored tradition of heroic Hollywood canines, the title character of "White Fang 2: Myth of the White Wolf" is an infallible judge of character.
Half dog, half wolf, White Fang can be as plaintively devoted a helpmate as Lassie.
But when scenting evil, he becomes as relentlessly ferocious as Charles Bronson settling a score.
In the most spectacular of the movie's several rescue scenes, White Fang leaps from a cliff onto a speeding horse-drawn wagon to save an Indian princess from being spirited away by a slave-driving gold miner.
The story is set in Alaska in 1906, and White Fang shares a log cabin with Henry Casey (Scott Bairstow), an ingenuous young prospector with carefully styled hair and the gee-whiz manner of the younger Robbie Benson.
After Henry is rescued from drowning by Lily (Charmaine Craig), a beautiful Indian woman from the peaceful Haida tribe, he is persuaded to fulfill a prophecy that was given to the tribal chief, Moses (Al Harrington), in a dream.
During a ceremony in which he dons a wolf mask, Henry is dubbed White Wolf.
His mission, undertaken with the assistance of Lily, Moses' son Peter (Anthony Michael Ruivivar) and his trusty wolf-dog, is to locate a mysteriously vanished caribou herd that once served as the tribe's food supply.


'Munchkin,' 14 and Playful, Is Now Held as Rape Suspect
He is "Munchkin" to his family and friends in Coney Island, the small, sweet-faced boy who could win anyone over with his playful charm.
Some think they see a blossoming cartoonist in the 14-year-old boy, others a potential comic.
But some said yesterday that they saw trouble looming in his life because no one was watching out for him.
Yesterday, those who know Larry Harris were adjusting to a new portrait of him.
He is an eighth grader at Intermediate School 303 and now he is a rape suspect.


House Talks Tough on Capital Punishment as It Begins Debate on Crime Bill
The House of Representatives began its much-delayed debate on the $15 billion crime bill today, passing half a dozen amendments that reaffirmed its support for the death penalty before the chamber dissolved into confusion over a procedural maneuver.
Giving its members a chance to boast of their own contributions to the 386-page bill, the House passed an assortment of 47 amendments to the crime package in a single vote without debate.


PRUDENTIAL LOSES ITS TOP CREDIT RATING
Because of problems with its Prudential Securities subsidiary, the Prudential Insurance Company of America has lost its top-notch credit rating, the A. M. Best Company, an insurance rating firm, announced yesterday.
In cutting Prudential's rating to A+, the second highest of 15 ratings, from A++, officials at A. M. Best said a lower rating was justified by Prudential's exposure to losses arising from improper marketing at Prudential Securities and fraud claims levied against a real estate fund run by the insurance company.
Those problems "will continue to have an adverse influence on the competitive positioning" of Prudential, A. M. Best said.
Martin Pfinsgraff, Prudential's treasurer, said publicity about the problems at Prudential Securities did not prevent the company from continuing to grow.
Prudential remained profitable last year with earnings of $4.6 billion before paying dividends to policyholders and has nearly $11 billion of capital to absorb unexpected losses.


Warhol Estate Was Undervalued, Judge Rules
The art in the estate of Andy Warhol is worth more than four times what the artist's foundation claims, a Manhattan judge ruled yesterday.
The decision, part of a bitter legal battle that pitted a former lawyer for the estate against the Andy Warhol Foundation of the Visual Arts, is nominally over the size of the lawyer's fee.
But during a two-month trial that ended in January, much attention focused on the standards and methods of placing dollar values on works of art, and especially on the role of Christie's, the Park Avenue auction house, which the Warhol Foundation hired as its appraiser.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about violence in Rwanda misstated the tribe of its Prime Minister, Agathe Uwilingiyimana, who was one of those killed.
She was a member of the Hutu tribe, not the rival Tutsis.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-12  AMERICAN JETS DOWN U.S.
COPTERS  American jets shot down two Army helicopters carrying allied officials over the Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq after the aircraft were mistaken for Iraqi helicopters.
Twenty-six people were killed.
A1  THE HORROR OF 'FRIENDLY FIRE'  News analysis: In one sense, the accident over Iraq was just one more chapter in a long, tragic story.
"Friendly fire," the military calls it -- an oxymoronic phrase designed to dull the pain.
A1


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31





Corrections
An article on March 22 about a change in New York City's rent regulations misstated the amount by which landlords are allowed to raise rents each year in occupied rent-stabilized apartments.
It is 5 percent at the end of a two-year lease and 3 percent at the end of a one-year lease, not 5 percent a year.


ALL 26 ON BOARD ARE KILLED; Trigger Fingers
In one sense, the horrific accident today over northern Iraq, in which American fighter planes shot American helicopters from the sky, was just one more chapter in a long, tragic story.
"Friendly fire," the military calls it -- an oxymoronic phrase that serves perhaps to dull the pain.
But in the past, such incidents have usually taken place in wartime.
This one occurred in peacetime.
Peace in the Middle East is a fragile thing, of course, and the accident follows a real shooting war, but there has been no recent pattern of clashes or provocations to make trigger fingers itchy.


Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Dinkins Wins Praise As Foe of Apartheid At City Hall Reunion
More than three months after leaving office, former Mayor David N. Dinkins returned to Gracie Mansion for the first time last night as the guest of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, his rival in two bitterly contested mayoral elections.
Mr.
Dinkins attended a reception for managers of various businesses in South Africa who are participating in a work-study program, developed during the Dinkins administration and sponsored by 12 corporations in New York.


Thorn Apple Valley (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 4


Midlantic Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Devils Keeping Secrets Before the Playoffs
The success of the Devils this season has been unquestioned.
Even without their 4-1 victory over the Ottawa Senators tonight, they had the second highest total of points, 106, in the National Hockey League.
They set all kinds of franchise records.
They will go into the playoffs on Sunday against Buffalo with the home advantage and as favorites, even though the Sabres have the league's best goaltender in Dominik Hasek.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Restaurants
Whenever my mother appeared at the breakfast table with her eyes sparkling and her nails polished, we knew she was going to lunch with her oldest friend.
My father called him the Thin Man because he was the most sophisticated person any of us had ever met.
He went everywhere, knew everyone and lived a life that seemed straight out of a 30's movie.
My mother always came home from lunch seeming glamorous and full of secrets.
I finally understand why.


Study Finds Promise in Regimen for Treatment of Bone Disease
A study released today supports the idea that a careful regimen of fluoride and calcium supplements appears to prevent new spinal fractures in patients with a major form of osteoporosis while helping to rebuild bone loss.
Experts on osteoporosis, the debilitating bone-thinning condition that afflicts millions of elderly Americans, said that if the findings stood up, the treatment would be the first to restore bone mass lost to the disease.


Westfall, Ex-Islander, Has an Ax to Grind
Game 1 of the Islanders-Rangers playoff series on Sunday should be a happy occasion for Ed Westfall, SportsChannel's Islander analyst.
After all, he hardly knew until the Islanders' recent spurt and the Florida Panthers' collapse that he would be calling a playoff series.
But beneath the former Islander's cheerful demeanor lurks a man with a serious question: Why can't I call that game?
Even though MSG and SportsChannel will show most of the series, ABC will broadcast Game 1 and will also show playoff games on the next two Sundays.
Gary Thorne and Bill Clement, ESPN's No. 1 team, will call Sunday's game, which means Westfall won't be working and won't be paid.


Gore Insists Environment Is a Trade Issue
Looking beyond a sweeping global trade agreement that will be signed here Friday, the United States said today that future trade negotiations should include discussion of environmental and labor questions, despite the opposition of many developing countries.
In an address to the closing meeting of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Vice President Al Gore said that the effect of expanded trade on the global environment and the well-being of workers could be debated for the first time when GATT's successor, the World Trade Organization, is created next year.


Club Car Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Philip Fox, 80, Dies; Officiated in N.B.A.
Philip Fox, a former basketball and soccer official who refereed in the first National Basketball Association season in 1946 and later toured with the Harlem Globetrotters, died on Wednesday at the Metropolitan Jewish Geriatric Center in Brooklyn.
He was 80.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, his family said.


Preparing for the Worst in New York Harbor


Hofstra Hires Coach
JAY WRIGHT, an assistant to ROLLIE MASSIMINO at Nevada-Las Vegas, was appointed head basketball coach at Hofstra yesterday to succeed 71-year-old BUTCH VAN BREDA KOLFF, who has retired.
Wright, 32, a Bucknell alumnus, had spent seven seasons with Massimino, five years at Villanova and the last two at Las Vegas.


Federal and New Jersey Agencies Dispute Jurisdiction in Excavation Near Pipeline
The explosion of a natural gas pipeline in Edison, N.J., has exposed a murky legal limbo over the responsibility for regulating excavation along the line.
Such digging does not appear to be banned by Federal or state law or by Edison's land-use ordinances.
New Jersey has laws against knowingly causing explosions, recklessly causing widespread injury and damage, and creating the risk of injury or damage.
Theoretically, state legal officials say, these laws could be invoked if Federal investigators find that damage from digging caused the 36-inch pipeline to rupture and explode in Edison on March 23.


Extension for O'Brien
JIM O'BRIEN, whose job was reportedly in jeopardy until Boston College made it to the regional finals of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, has agreed to a multiyear contract extension.
Terms of the deal were not released.


Beirut Holds 2 Iraqis In Slaying of a Third
A wealthy Iraqi dissident who was assassinated here late Tuesday was apparently killed on the orders of the Iraqi Government, Lebanese officials said today.
The officials said that they were holding two Iraqi diplomats in connection with the of killing Taleb al-Suhail and were seeking a third who was reportedly in the Iraqi Embassy..


Ex-President of Paramount Sues Over Stock Options
At least one Paramount Communications shareholder is not happy with the purchase of the company by Viacom Inc.
Stanley R. Jaffe, Paramount's former president and chief operating officer, filed suit in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday, charging Viacom and Paramount with violating his stock option agreement and depriving him of $20 million in potential profits.
Mr.
Jaffe charged that he was prevented from exercising 466,668 stock options to which he was legally entitled.
He argued that the option plan and his employment contract stipulated that Paramount had to accelerate those options in the event of his dismissal, any reduction in his duties or any change of control at Paramount.
Mr.
Jaffe's complaint said that the sale of Paramount had set off all three events, but that the company had kept him from exercising his options, which are rights to buy stock in the future at a specified price.


CHRONICLE
Some 300 scholars and writers are to assemble today at the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York to commemorate the accomplishments of Irving Howe, the literary and political critic who died last May at age 72.
In addition to organizing panels and rounding up speakers, there was an added challenge for MORRIS DICKSTEIN, the conference coordinator: making sure that speakers do not talk directly about Mr.
Howe, who was also the founder of Dissent magazine.
Mr.
Howe also taught English at the university's Graduate School for many years.


Operating Profit Down For Morgan
The first report is in on how turbulent world markets have affected big banks, and it shows that the first quarter of 1994 might not have been as bad as originally feared.
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company, the country's fifth-largest banking concern and a major player in world bond and currency markets, said a 24 percent drop in trading revenue caused its operating profit to fall 20 percent, to $345 million, compared with the corresponding quarter a year ago.


MACHINISTS' UNION NAMES REPRESENTATIVE TO UAL BOARD
The International Association of Machinists has appointed John F. Peterpaul, a general vice president for the union, to represent its members on the board of the UAL Corporation, the parent of United Airlines, if United's employees succeed in gaining a majority stake in the carrier.
The appointment was disclosed on a telephone recording for members of the Air Line Pilots Association, but union officials were unavailable to confirm the appointment yesterday.
Mr.
Peterpaul was among the primary supporters of the buyout effort at United.
With Mr.
Peterpaul's appointment, 10 of 12 members of the proposed board have been named.
The two remaining seats will be filled by a representative of the pilots' union and most likely the president of the restructured company.


Review/Art; With Old Persian Poems, Images of Wit and War
This little charmer of a show, tucked away deep within the Metropolitan Museum of Art's superb and little trafficked Islamic collection, is just the kind of thing the Met should be doing lots of.
"Illustrated Poetry and Epic Images" highlights small-scale, easy-to-overlook art from the museum's own collection, displays it in an appropriately intimate setting, and demonstrates a bit of scholarly sleuthing in action.
On view are 50-odd illustrated pages, derived for the most part from two 14th-century Persian manuscripts.
One, which the museum owns, is a "Book of Kings," the national epic of Persia originally written around A.D. 1000.
The second is a portion of a poetry anthology titled "The Free Men's Companion to the Subtleties of Poems." A single chapter of the book has been reconstructed for the exhibition with two pages drawn from the Met's collection and one each from the Harvard, Princeton and Cleveland museums.
Together, they constitute the earliest surviving manuscript of illustrated poetry known from the Islamic world.


Valmont Industries(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Norwest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


City Opera and Orchestra Settle Contract
The New York City Opera and its orchestra have reached an agreement on a labor contract, spokesmen for both sides announced yesterday.
The agreement, which was ratified by the musicians on Wednesday, is to take effect on June 1 and will run through May 31, 1997.
The season is to open on Sept. 8.
It is the first time since the mid-1950's that the company and its musicians have settled a contract well in advance of opening night; in fact, spokesmen for both sides noted that with the exception of the 1986 contract, which was settled 20 hours before the first performance, most negotiations have involved strikes or lockouts.
During the last run of negotiations, in 1989, a strike led to the cancellation of the company's fall season.


Mark Isaacson Memorial
A memorial service for Mark A. Isaacson, an expert on 20th-century decorative arts who died in August at the age of 38, is to take place on April 23 at 1 P.M. at St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, Second Avenue at 10th Street, East Village.
A reception is to follow in the church's parish hall.


ALL 26 ON BOARD ARE KILLED
In a deadly military blunder, American fighter planes shot down two United States Army helicopters today as they were carrying a team of officials from four allied nations over the Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq.
The shootdown, which killed all 26 people on board the two craft, occurred after two F-15C jets enforcing the no-flight zone over northern Iraq mistook the aircraft for Iraqi helicopters after flying near them to identify them visually.


Riggs National Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Where's Yankee Offense? O'Neill Finds It
Forget the sweep, forget being humiliated by the finest rotation in the league for another day and forget turning the initial trip of the season into an excursion to the dangerous land of last place.
The Yankees could forget all these dreary possibilities today because Paul O'Neill unveiled a performance that the White Sox want to quickly forget.
After being mesmerized by Chicago's precocious pitchers during two straight games, the Yankees punched back against Jack McDowell and a cast of relievers today, and O'Neill displayed the most devastating jab.


Treasury Securities' Yields Rise
The bond market, which has focused solely on domestic issues of late, was reminded of global uncertainties yesterday as yields of Treasury securities rose to their highest levels in two weeks.
Reports that two United States Army helicopters had been shot down over northern Iraq caused bond prices to tumble and oil prices to jump at the start of trading yesterday.
The market calmed down a bit after the State Department confirmed that it had been American fighters that mistakenly shot down the helicopters, and not Iraqi forces.


Adolf J. Snow, 100; Was Sears Executive
Adolf J. Snow, who was an executive at Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company when Gen.
Robert E. Wood built it into the world's biggest merchandising enterprise, died on Wednesday.
He was 100 and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
The cause was kidney failure, his family said.


Clean Harbors Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Inflation: Myth and Reality
Fears of accelerating inflation have haunted the financial markets just at the time when the economy has turned in its best inflation performance in decades.
In 1993, the core indexes of consumer and producer prices (which exclude food and energy) registered their smallest gains in 20 years.
Favorable trends are continuing this year: the annualized increase in the core Consumer Price Index over the past three months was 2.9 percent, the same as over the 12 months beginning in March 1993.


Dole Food Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Review/Film; A Fifth Beatle Who Abandoned Rock for High Art
In the realm of Beatles lore, Stu Sutcliffe is the man who got away.
He was the Liverpool art student who exerted a strong stylistic influence over his best friend, John Lennon, and turned his back on Lennon's band just as that band reached the threshold of fame.
Sutcliffe preferred to pursue a career as an Abstract Expressionist painter and to live in Hamburg with his German girlfriend, Astrid Kirchherr.
Ms.
Kirchherr, then celebrated for her bohemian style, is now the guiding force behind "Backbeat," an evocative new Sutcliffe-centric account of the Beatles' early history.
"Backbeat," directed by Iain Softley, is lively, galvanizing and unexpectedly well made, a far cry from the Madame Tussaud approach often used to enshrine contemporary celebrities.
But it also has the whiff of the authorized version, which brings it more than a touch of smugness.
After all, it's possible to view Sutcliffe's drifting away from the Beatles as an act of extremely shortsighted folly.
But "Backbeat" celebrates his lofty rejection of rock music in favor of more serious art.
It also sees a grand act of abdication in Sutcliffe's decision to be with the woman he loved.


Big Telescope Finds New Clues to 'Big Bang'
In one of the first observations by the Keck Telescope in Hawaii, the largest telescope in the world, astronomers have found new evidence supporting the Big Bang theory of the creation of the universe.
The findings also suggest that even more of the universe's mass than previously thought must consist of some strange, unseen matter that is yet to be discovered.
Scientists said the findings, if confirmed by further observations, could be of fundamental significance to cosmology, the study of the origin, evolution and fate of the universe.


The I.R.S. Wants You -- by Midnight
America's taxpayers are less rebellious nowadays than they were 200 years ago -- a bit cranky perhaps, but not universally surly.
Only 20 of them, all certified tax delinquents, assaulted Federal tax personnel physically last year.
That represents improvement; the number has recently been as high as 40.
Meanwhile, nearly all taxpayers cough up what they owe -- or what they say they owe -- without raising a public fuss or tossing tea into Boston Harbor. (They may toss a few fits over Form 1040 and its appendices, but they do it in private.) The Government expects that some 110 million people will have filed by midnight tonight, the deadline for 1993 returns and, for some, the moment of awakening to painful changes in the 1993 tax law.


After Melee, Security Is Tightened at Rikers Island
After two recent attacks on correction officers by inmates, New York City's new jail commissioner has changed the command structure in the maximum-security section of Rikers Island.
Department of Correction Commissioner Anthony J. Schembri said he had replaced the warden of the James Thomas Center, the 1,100-bed maximum-security jail on the island, and had upgraded security in all 15 jails in the city by requiring that a deputy warden work the 4 P.M.-to-midnight shift, when most violent incidents occur.
Until now, the highest-ranking officer on the shift was an assistant deputy warden.


Enron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
The mutual funds tables in Business Day on Wednesday included incorrect data from Morningstar Inc. for the AIM Summit Fund.
The fund's actual net asset value that day was $9.46, and the percentage returns to shareholders were minus 1.8 percent for the day, minus 2.5 percent for the year to date, plus 4.5 percent for one year and an annualized figure of plus 9.5 percent for three years.
Because of the data errors, the fund was erroneously listed as the worst performing growth fund in the last year.


Well-Practiced in Evacuation


In One Home, a Chance to Take Part
The display of history was in living black and white, appropriately enough, on the old television set of the family of Michael Breedekamp and his wife, Elizabeth.
And beyond the merits of the political debate itself, their hearth glowed with the sheer fun of taking part in a tableau of democracy that had eluded the bias-bedeviled people of South Africa until tonight.
"You can learn a lot of things this way," said Mrs.
Breedekamp, a pixie-like woman smiling as she watched the nation's two leading authority figures clashing openly and imploring the Breedekamps and all new voters to listen closely for the truth.


On My Mind; Flog Asians Only
Americans keep talking about how clever the people of Asia are but keep acting as if they were dolts.
In the controversy about the caning of a young man from Ohio, somehow it does not occur to American business executives, journalists and politicians that Asians will ask why they close their eyes, mouths and hearts when the same canes scar the flesh of Asians.


Smart &amp; Final Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Inspector General Finds 'Domino Effect'
Following are excerpts from the report issued yesterday by the Inspector General of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority on the Feb. 11 shutdown of the Long Island Rail Road:
A "domino effect" developed whereby, for example, the failure to keep abreast of changing weather forecasts contributed to the failure to accurately approximate the start of the homeward rush of commuters which, in turn, led to overcrowding at Penn and Jamaica Stations.
What will become obvious is that these failures share a common basis: a lack of preparation, judgment and ability to adapt to rapidly changing developments on the part of key L.I.R.R. employees.


Plea Bargaining Can Often Protect the Victim
To the Editor:
I believe the public is ill served by perpetuation of the myth that plea bargaining is a copout by the criminal justice system that provides cover for lazy judges, prosecutors and defense counsel alike.


Schwab (Charles) Corp.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Another Ionesco Joke
To the Editor:
Your obituary of Eugene Ionesco (front page, March 29) notes that "The Bald Soprano" was inspired by Ionesco's "own attempts to learn English by using an English-French conversational manual.' "


Ex-Prosecutor in Trooper Case Says More Were Involved
Nelson E. Roth, who resigned last week as the special prosecutor looking into evidence-tampering by the New York State police, said he thinks more troopers knew about the faking of fingerprint evidence than have come forward.
And he said his successor should have additional resources, as well as the power to expand the inquiry to all 11 of the department's barracks, not just the 2 he was instructed to focus on.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "WRITTEN AND SEALED," Puerto Rican Traveling Theater, 304 West 47th Street, Clinton.
A drama by Isaac Chocron about a meeting between two old friends, a Jewish college professor and a Roman Catholic priest.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8 (in English); Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 and 6:30 P.M. (in Spanish).
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 354-1293.


Stocks Drift on Low Volume, With Dow Climbing by 1.78
In the fifth straight session of unusually low trading volume, the stock market drifted yesterday, with technology stocks curtailing some losses from earlier in the week.
Meanwhile, Merrill Lynch, the nation's largest stock brokerage company, predicted in a report released this week that slower corporate earnings growth may lead to a stock market "correction" of 15 percent later this year.


Art in Review
Isamu Noguchi
Cooper Union Humanities Gallery  51 Astor Place  East Village  Through April 29
In 1949 the sculptor Isamu Noguchi proposed a book on the "meaning of form in relation to man and space"; over the next few years he made photographs for the project on trips to India, Japan, Cambodia, Bali and elsewhere.
This small show, organized by Dore Ashton, assembles some of Noguchi's images from those journeys, along with others taken during a 1982 trip to the ruined city of Machu Picchu in Peru.


A Deluxe Bit Of Europe In Manhattan
QUIETLY and discreetly, the Sherry-Netherland has begun advertising in the Hollywood trade papers, read by moguls, movie stars, agents and even more normal types.
In the competitive New York City hotel market, it is seeking out visitors from California (only the wealthy or those with hefty expense accounts need apply).
Yet it's not, perhaps, visitors from the West Coast who would feel the most comfortable at the Sherry-Netherland.
It's those from Europe.
Not that there's too much to grumble about at the 37-floor building on the northeast corner of 59th Street and Fifth Avenue, overlooking Central Park. (Getting a room overlooking the park is another matter.) What largely gives the recently renovated hotel its personality and, perhaps, its appeal, is that the majority of its rooms are co-op apartments for permanent residents.
This gives the Sherry-Netherland its unhurried, private, low-key style, which may -- or may not -- be suitable for tourists on the run or business executives who need round-the-clock coffee and fax machines. (Of its 400 rooms, 120 are reserved for hotel guests.)


General Instrument Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Makers of Laws and Cigarettes Joust
America boasts no grander generals in public-opinion wars than its politicians, who make people like them against long odds, and its tobacco company executives, who make people like a product that science says can kill them.
For years, they were allies.
But for seven hours today, the two traded bitter oratorical fire on Capitol Hill in what often looked and sounded like the start of a death struggle over the future of cigarettes.
Billed as an oversight hearing of Representative Henry A. Waxman's Commerce subcommittee on health, it was in fact a battle staged by both sides entirely for television, and particularly for the 60-second snapshot of the event that the news programs broadcast tonight.


Continental Insurance Plans Sale of 2 Units
The Continental Corporation, a New York insurance company, said yesterday that it planned to sell two major subsidiaries and reorganize its remaining property insurance businesses to eliminate 680 jobs, or about 5.5 percent of its work force.
The insurer plans to sell Continental Canada, the third-largest insurer of business property in that country, and Casualty Insurance, the leading workers' compensation insurer in Illinois.


First Commerce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Federal Reserve Is Signaling A New Increase in Interest Rates
Federal Reserve officials say they see no signs of accelerating inflation, but the nation's central bank is signaling anew that it will raise short-term interest rates again anyway.
The reason: the officials believe that low short-term rates have already encouraged too much lending, giving stimulus to an economy that no longer needs it.
The goal of the Federal Reserve, according to its papers, Congressional testimony and interviews over the last two weeks, is a so-called neutral policy rather than a stimulative one.
But the Federal Reserve's definition of neutral is likely to feel like a tap on the brakes to most Americans, slowing growth as companies and individuals pay more interest on their loans and mortgages.


Commerce Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Yet Another Shift For Grand Marnier
The Grand Marnier liqueur account, which was due to switch agencies because of a change in liquor distribution rights, will be heading to yet another agency because of another change in distribution rights.
Marnier-Lapostolle, a family-owned and-operated company in France, said yesterday that effective in January it would move the American distribution rights for Grand Marnier, one of the world's best-selling liqueurs, to Schieffelin &amp; Somerset in New York from Carillon Importers Ltd. in Teaneck, N.J.
The brand's top market is the United States, where almost 400,000 cases a year are sold, out of a worldwide total of 1.3 million.


'You Can Call Me Cy': Maddux Stifles Giants
Braves 6, Giants 1
Greg Maddux pitched a three-hitter as the Atlanta Braves beat the visiting San Francisco Giants, 6-1, last night for their ninth victory in 10 games.


Review/Film; Crying Out for Love Where Only Money Talks
Peter (Vitus Zeplichal), a fanatically hard-working construction worker who bows and scrapes his way through Rainer Werner Fassbinder's sadly compelling "I Only Want You to Love Me," is one of the more poignant social casualties to be examined in the films of the great German director.
A caricature of a dutiful son and model employee, he regards the world with frightened rabbity eyes that plead for a love he is incapable of demanding out loud.
Instead of verbalizing his needs, Peter tries to buy with gifts the love he craves so desperately but doesn't believe he deserves.
In one scene after another, he is shown standing on a doorstep, a silent supplicant holding a wrapped bouquet of flowers.


Gypsies Gather in Washington


On Stage, and Off
Confusion Over the Pulitzer
The Pulitzer Prize in drama, awarded this week to Edward Albee for "Three Tall Women," was a narrow victory indeed.
Of the five nominating jurors, Lawrence DeVine, the theater critic of The Detroit Free Press, and Judith Green of The San Jose Mercury News preferred "Keely and Du," Jane Martin's play about abortion, to the winner, and a third, the nominating committee's chairman, William A. Henry 3d of Time magazine, said he changed his mind midway through the deliberations.
He, too, had planned to vote for the pseudonymous Ms.
Martin.
"In the course of discussing the merits and demerits of the plays, I talked myself into thinking the Albee play was a deeper and more poetic work," Mr.
Henry said, referring to the March 7 jury meeting.


Home Video
More From PBS
The scant supply of PBS videos in stores is scheduled for an infusion in the fall.
This week, PBS announced an agreement with Turner Home Entertainment to distribute some PBS programs on cassette.
The first will be "Baseball," a new 19-hour historical biography of the game by the producer and director Ken Burns.


The Cruelest Day of the Cruelest Month; A Question for an April Day: After Taxes, How Bad Could Death Be?
Kevin Peters has put off buying the $80,000 Mercedes-Benz he's had his eye on, and not because he doesn't like the leather upholstery: money is on his mind.
"I paid significantly more than usual" in taxes this year, said Mr.
Peters, a vice president at a Wall Street brokerage house.
"Tens of thousands of dollars more."
Here it is April 15, and no matter what bracket they fall into, taxpayers are screaming.
Yvonne Tuchalski, a single mother from Eatontown, N.J., and part-time worker at a fast-food restaurant, made $15,000 last year, including child support and Social Security payments.
Fortunately, she said, those payments are not taxable.
"If they were," she said, "then I'd be over." Ready, Set, Rant
Maybe not everyone is leaning out the window like the Peter Finch character in the movie "Network," yelling, "I'm mad as hell and I'm not going to take it anymore."


Corrections
An article yesterday about the reopening of a natural gas pipeline that exploded last month in Edison, N.J., misstated the number of the 63 apartment buildings at Durham Woods that were left standing after the explosion.
It was 55.


Firms for Gay Clients Dot the Legal Landscape
There are the corporate-backed Gay Games, a plethora of slick new gay magazines, and Ikea and American Express advertisements that are pitched at gay consumers.
And, in perhaps the ultimate sign of homosexuals' substantial and lucrative share of the consumer market, there is also a recent emergence of gay-services law firms.
The latest, in Washington, is Thompson &amp; Wheatley, whose principals have combined their backgrounds, in financial planning and litigation, to form a practice aimed squarely at the distinct legal needs of homosexuals.


Endangered Children
America's youngest children are in serious trouble, according to a panel of experts brought together by the Carnegie Corporation.
So many children are growing up without adequate medical and nutritional care, intellectual stimulation or emotional security that the nation's ability to produce healthy workers and citizens is in jeopardy.
The Carnegie panel focuses again on two longstanding problems: the need for better health care and the problems of teen-age mothers.
While many of its recommendations are not aimed specifically at the Clinton Administration, the panel's report, released this week, can help shape the debate as the Administration and Congress tackle health care and welfare reform.


Nuclear Agency Chief Warns of Need for Access to North Korea
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency has warned that even if the Clinton Administration succeeded in its efforts to get North Korea to allow minimal nuclear inspections, his agency would probably need far broader access to the sealed-off country to fully measure the scope of its nuclear activities.
In an interview on Wednesday, the official, Hans Blix, said that the negotiations that the United States was now attempting to revive "is the easy part of the inspection problem." He repeatedly said that his agency, an arm of the United Nations, would only begin to know the true scope of the north's nuclear program after it got access to two suspected nuclear waste dumps that might provide evidence of past nuclear work.


Federal Paper Board Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


No Giveaway on the Coliseum
New York City has an undeniable interest in getting the old Coliseum site at Columbus Circle developed after years of delay and neglect -- but not at the expense of the public good.
That is what makes the behavior of City Hall's chief negotiator, Deputy Mayor John Dyson, so regrettable.
He sounds more like an agent for Mortimer Zuckerman, the developer, than a public servant.
Even if Mr.
Dyson is motivated only by his zeal to encourage development, and not by any desire to reward a political ally, he has so mishandled the negotiations that they are tainted.
How could Mr.
Dyson propose that the city -- through hidden tax abatements and backdoor capital budget maneuvers -- subsidize a real estate developer at a time when the Mayor is demanding sacrifice from nearly every city agency and worker?


DPL Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  2 Share Heritage Lead  Fred Funk and Bob Estes battled differing conditions to the same result yesterday in Hilton Head Island, S.C., sharing the lead in the opening round of the Heritage Classic.
Funk took advantage of a tame Harbour Town layout devoid of its menacing winds.
Estes played through gustier conditions in the afternoon.
Both were at six-under 65, one stroke in front of the Masters runner-up, Tom Lehman, and Barry Jaeckel.
The favorite, Greg Norman, led a group of six at 67 in the $1.25 million event.
Eight of the top 11 teed off before noon, when soft greens and sunny skies had players zoning in on the pins.
The greens dried out by afternoon and shots that landed nicely for birdie tries earlier were skidding off.
Only 9 of the 32 golfers who shot sub-70 rounds began in the afternoon. (AP)


At the Bar; And just what is the state of the bar exam? Why, Pennsylvania, of course.
WASHINGTON
In the town whose lawyers penned the internal revenue code and perfected the plea bargain, it's only fitting that the seminal document in the careers of many of them -- the bar examination they took -- boast a loophole of its own.
Now, at long last, regulators are about to knot it tight.
That they have found reason to do so raises some intriguing questions about the licensing of lawyers.


Rypien In Blue? Price High, Talk Cheap
Although the Giants think quarterback Phil Simms is recovering well from the shoulder surgery he had several months ago, the team is nonetheless taking steps to protect itself.
The Giants have talked to the former Washington Redskins quarterback Mark Rypien about becoming a backup -- and insurance policy -- for Simms.


Maine and Vermont Restrict Dairies' Use of a Growth Hormone
Responding to consumer concern about what is in their milk, two New England states have moved to limit the use of a genetically engineered growth hormone used by dairy farmers.
In Vermont, Gov.
Howard Dean, a Democrat, signed a bill on Wednesday requiring food companies to put an identification label on any dairy product made with milk that comes from cows treated with the genetically engineered growth hormone.


John W. Seigle, 64, Sikorsky Executive And Retired General
John William Seigle, a retired major general and vice president of Sikorsky Aircraft of Stratford, Conn., died on April 3 at St.
Raphael's Hospital in New Haven.
He was 64 and lived in Woodbridge, Conn.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


Bush Industries reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 2


For Children
Children's Concert
Riverside Church  490 Riverside Drive, at 120th Street  Morningside Heights  (212) 222-5900, extension 220  Recommended ages: 4 and up  Tomorrow
It's easy to imagine a bassoon as a person: tall, thin, reedy, a basso voice, the mouthpiece jutting out like an eerie index finger.
At this concert of American and Greek folk music, the bassoon will be the centerpiece and Kim Laskowski, a professional bassoonist, is to play the instrument, which corresponds in range to the cello of the violin family.


Tobacco Chiefs Say Cigarettes Aren't Addictive
The top executives of the seven largest American tobacco companies testified in Congress today that they did not believe that cigarettes were addictive, but that they would rather their own children did not smoke.
The executives, sitting side by side at a conference table in what seemed to many a counterpoint to the growing antismoking sentiment in Congress, faced more than six hours of sharp questioning by members of the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Health and the Environment.


Alex Brown Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


For West, Rwanda Is Not Worth the Political Candle
The disintegration of Rwanda into chaos and anarchy has evoked expressions of horror and sympathy from the international community -- and a firm pledge to stay away.
Although the large powers have in the past become involved in civil strife within the emerging nations of Africa, it was usually within the geopolitical struggles of the cold war, and those reasons have evaporated.


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Film; Did She or Didn't She? Commit Murder, That Is
"Two Small Bodies" is a sharply focused, intense drama about a woman whose young son and daughter are missing, and the detective who thinks she may have murdered them.
There aren't many actors able to carry a two-character film, but Suzy Amis and Fred Ward are among the few who can.
Eileen Maloney and Lieutenant Brann engage in a stylized dance that is antagonistic, sexual and unsettling as it reveals the dark impulses beneath their obvious social roles.
Most of the film takes place in Eileen's drab suburban home, which Brann goes to at all hours, day after day.
Eileen is a hostess in a strip club, which makes her a scarlet woman and, both she and Brann agree, more likely to be accused of murder.
Brann is another sort of stereotype, the macho detective modeled on B-movie heros.
He wears a trench coat and a slouch hat and seems to have no other cases to bother about.


Clinton Policy Toward Haiti Comes Under Growing Fire
The Clinton Administration's unsuccessful effort to restore Haiti's exiled President to power suddenly faced an avalanche of criticism this week, including a call by a prominent Congressman today to invade Haiti and oust its military leaders.
Showing a growing impatience among the President's supporters with the Administration's Haiti policy, Representative David R. Obey, a normally cautious Wisconsin Democrat, stunned a Congressional hearing today when he called for a United States invasion to restore democracy in the beleaguered country.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CELESTIAL SEASONINGS INC., Boulder, Colo., the herbal tea company, and Warner-Lambert Co., Morris Plains, N.J., the health care and consumer products company, have agreed to enter into a licensing arrangement by which Warner-Lambert will produce a line of Celestial Seasonings specialty herbal products.
NEXTEL COMMUNICATIONS INC., Rutherford, N.J., a wireless communications company, said it would invest $5 million for a 20 percent stake in closely held Saber Communications Inc., Mobile, Ala., an operator of mobile radio networks.


Inside Art
A Matisse No More
Some fakes can fool even the most seasoned experts.
Sotheby's had a surprise recently when it began researching paintings from the estate of the New York collector Harriet Weiner Goodstein, which the auction house is selling next month.
"Woman in an Interior," a 1943 still life of a woman in an ornately patterned room, had been attributed to Matisse ever since Mrs.
Goodstein and her first husband, Leon Mnuchin, bought the painting in 1956 with Eugene V. Thaw acting as the agent.


Ties to Lawyer Are Explained By Prosecutor
Responding to questions from Congress about his objectivity, the special prosecutor investigating the Whitewater affair has detailed what he said was a professional, not personal, relationship with the former White House counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum.
The special prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., a New York City lawyer and former Federal prosecutor, acknowledged in a letter this month that Mr.
Nussbaum had consulted him on last year's appointment of Louis D. Freeh as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In his years as United States Attorney in Manhattan, Mr.
Fiske had worked closely with Mr.
Freeh.


New Product Honors For Nabisco Foods
The Nabisco Foods Group in Parsippany, N.J., was the big winner last night at the eighth annual Edison New Product Awards competition sponsored by the American Marketing Association.
At a dinner in New York, Nabisco was awarded the Grand Edison New Product Marketer of the Year award, as well as winning three golds, three silvers and a bronze for its products including Snackwell's cookies and crackers, Oreo ice cream cones and Planters P. B. Crisps.


Books of The Times; Troubled Life and Times On This Side of Paradise
Scott Fitzgerald
A Biography
By Jeffrey Meyers
Illustrated. 400 pages. HarperCollins. $27.50.
Though F. Scott Fitzgerald and Ernest Hemingway disagreed on practically everything, from their philosophy of life to their philosophy of art, the two men had more in common than they liked to admit.
Both grew up in the Middle West, both became expatriates in Paris, both achieved early glittering success.
Both wrote novels destined to become American classics, and both spent their last years in a sorry state of decline.
Now, they have something else in common: a decidedly unsympathetic biographer in the person of Jeffrey Meyers.


Hiring of Minority Journalists Has Slowed, Industry Survey Says
Hiring of minority reporters and editors appears to be slowing after years of increases, according to a new report by the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
The annual report on minority hiring is closely watched because the editors group, which is holding its annual convention here, set an industrywide goal in 1978: that by the year 2000 American newsrooms should be as racially diverse as the American population.
The national work force is now more than a quarter minority and is expected to be about 30 percent minority by the turn of the century.


TV Weekend; Jane Seymour as a Model Of the Noble Southerner
Jane Seymour is that peculiar creature called a television star, a performer who can almost miraculously transcend mediocre material.
Long before "Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman," her current series on CBS, she was collecting assorted and deserved awards for her television work in "East of Eden," "Jamaica Inn," "The Woman He Loved," "The Phantom of the Opera" and "War and Remembrance." The vehicles may sometimes sag noticeably, but Ms.
Seymour's energy and determination are constantly in motion.
Just watch her breathe life into the almost moribund "A Passion for Justice" on ABC on Sunday.
Here is yet another television exercise that "although fictionalized," viewers learn, is based on real people and events.
Among the real people is Hazel Brannon Smith (Ms. Seymour), who in 1964 became the first woman to win a Pulitzer Prize for editorial writing.
This movie, set in Mississippi in 1954 (but actually filmed in Georgia), fills in the background.
We find the vivacious Hazel returning from a European tour with a new husband, a Yankee named Walter Smith (D. W. Moffett).
Smitty is six years younger than Hazel, who is described by one friend as having "been in more laps than a napkin."


Philip Morris Considers Spinoff of Tobacco Unit
As the siege against the tobacco industry continued yesterday in Congress, where tobacco executives denied that cigarette smoking was addictive, the industry leader, the Philip Morris Companies, said it was studying the possibility of splitting its tobacco business from its food and beer operations.
In a brief statement issued late in the day in New York, the company said that in the course of its periodic review of alternatives to enhance business, the board was investigating such a separation, among other ideas.
No company executive was available for further comment, and a spokesman declined to elaborate.


Knicks Gain a Crown but Not a Lot of Confidence
Clinching the Atlantic Division took longer than the Knicks expected.
Beating the Washington Bullets was harder than the Knicks expected.
But with Rolando Blackman making two baskets in the final 61 seconds, the Knicks accomplished both tonight with a 111-106 victory at the USAir Arena.
Not only did they clinch their second consecutive division title and beat the Bullets for the eighth consecutive time, but the Knicks, at 53-23, also moved into a tie with the Atlanta Hawks atop the Eastern Conference with six games left in the regular season.
New York and Atlanta are half a game ahead of the Chicago Bulls.


Dauphin Deposit Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Senate Panel Says Admiral in Scandal Merits Full Pension
The Senate Armed Services Committee recommended today that the Navy's top admiral be retired at the four-star rank despite his role in the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal.
After a highly unusual hearing on what is normally a routine procedure, the panel voted 20 to 2 to allow the admiral, Frank B. Kelso 2d, the chief of naval operations, to be retired at his full rank later this month.


CHRONICLE
CHRISTIE BRINKLEY and BILLY JOEL, who were married nine years ago in one of the first supermodel-rock star unions, are calling it quits.
A statement issued on Wednesday on behalf of the couple by Mr.
Joel's publicity agent, Elaine Schock, said this:
"Although we have been separated since Thanksgiving, we felt it was best to keep the situation private while we were resolving the details. This was out of our enormous love and concern for our daughter and our desire to protect our friendship, which is one of great affection and respect. We have been there to support each other during critical times and expect to be there for each other in the future."


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling through Paine Webber Inc. $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1996 and priced at 100 to yield 5.64 percent.
The issue is callable in one year.
*
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. $25 million of multi-step-up notes due in 1997 and priced at 100 to yield 5.55 percent.
The issue is callable on Oct. 29, 1994.


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
More Officers Facing Charges of Corruption
About a dozen police officers in Harlem are expected to be arrested on charges of protecting or shaking down drug dealers, officials said.
The arrests would represent the largest single sweep of officers since the Mollen Commission began its corruption investigation.
Page B1.
Serbs Raise Stakes in Bosnia
The Serbs intensified their campaign against peacekeepers as they sought to force the U.N. to surrender impounded heavy weapons.
Page A8.
A Warhol-Estate Decision
In a dispute over legal fees, a judge ruled that the artwork in the estate of Andy Warhol is worth far more than the artist's foundation said.
Page B1.
Support for the Big Bang
An observation from the world's largest telescope offers new backing for the theory that the universe began in a single explosive moment.
Page A22.


President Is Leaving At CBS Entertainment
The CBS television network announced long-expected executive changes yesterday, confirming that Jeff Sagansky would leave as president of its entertainment division and naming Peter Tortorici as his replacement.
Both moves had been rumored for months as Mr.
Sagansky contemplated taking a new entertainment post after helping revive CBS's fortunes in prime time during his four-year tenure.


Art in Review
Dietrich Orth
David Zwirner Gallery  43 Greene Street  SoHo  Through April 23
There is no shortage of self-taught artists whose work renders the line between outsider art and insider art fairly useless, but Dietrich Orth's eccentric paintings confuse the distinction in a style all their own.
Mr.
Orth, a 28-year-old German whose mental illness has been diagnosed as clinical psychosis and who has been in and out of psychiatric clinics for the last dozen years, is a kind of outsider Conceptual artist.
His paintings, which have the awkward simplicity of children's-book illustrations, often depict strange sculpturelike objects, along with written instructions for using them.


Rangers And Isles: Is It 1994, Or 1940?
This is what the Rangers-Islanders playoffs still mean, John Davidson recalled last night.
It was late last Sunday at the Copacabana in Manhattan, and the Ranger broadcast team for MSG television was walking to the podium to accept a New York Emmy for best sports show.


Goodrich (B.F.) Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No New Arab Attack, but Israelis Celebrate Independence Tensely
Tenser than normal and alert to possible hidden bombs, Israelis filled parks and forests today to celebrate an Independence Day that Palestinian Islamic radicals had threatened to turn "into hell."
The day passed peacefully, which was noteworthy because many here had awakened with a sense of dread that the militant Hamas group might take more Israeli lives today, the 46th anniversary of the Jewish state's founding.


Raytheon Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Art in Review
'Elizabeth Catlett'  'Works on Paper, 1944-1992'
The Studio Museum in Harlem  144 West 125th Street  Through May 8
Elizabeth Catlett is an important figure in black American art, not as an innovative stylist but as an artist whose sculpture and prints have helped for half a century to define black experience, particularly that of black women.


Suit Seeks to Halt Newark Schools Takeover
A civil lawsuit aimed at blocking the possible state takeover of this city's troubled school system was filed today in Federal court, not because the plaintiffs believe the schools are improving but because they argue that a takeover would deny minority residents their right to vote for the school board.
Jeffrey E. Fogel, one of the lawyers who signed the complaint on behalf of 11 black and Spanish-speaking residents, said: "This has nothing to do with the quality of education issues surrounding the pending takeover, but it is a classic civil rights and voting rights action that seeks to prevent the state from denying these residents a fundamental right to vote and to self-determination."


Nothing Is as Easy as ABC
The Battle of New York does not begin until Sunday and already there is controversy.
It is not between the Islanders and Rangers.
At least not yet.
It is between the Islanders and the National Hockey League over a first-round Stanley Cup schedule that is more accommodating to Madison Square Garden and network television than it is to the Islanders.


Scripps (E.W.) Co.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New York Fed's Research Post
The New York Federal Reserve has named Frederic S. Mishkin, an economist from Columbia University's business school, as its new director of research.
Mr.
Mishkin, 43, the author of the standard business school textbook on money and banking and an expert on the effects of monetary policy on domestic and international financial markets, will replace Richard G. Davis, who is retiring after 34 years at the bank.


Darkness of 'Carousel' Has Roots in Budapest
To the Editor:
Your March 25 review and Frank Rich's March 31 column praise the new production of "Carousel" for its attention to the darkness in the play, but fail to credit Ferenc Molnar, the Hungarian playwright whose "Liliom" is the basis of "Carousel."


Abroad at Home; 'Do What It Takes'
Bosnian Serb leaders deliberately provoked the United States and NATO by attacking the safe area of Gorazde.
Now they have responded to our bombing with more provocations: threatening U.N. peacekeepers and firing into other protected areas.
What should we do next?
"If they're going to play this ugly game," Warren Zimmermann said, "we shouldn't feel any need to limit ourselves to tit-for-tat. We should choose the time and place.


3 Players, 3 Agendas, One 3-Way Tug of War Fate of New York Coliseum Still Uncertain
It is, by most accounts, one of the most valuable potential development sites in New York City.
Yet nine years after Mortimer B. Zuckerman won the right to build a giant retail, residential and office complex to replace the New York Coliseum, the fate of the site is now tangled in a complicated three-way battle involving the developer, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the Giuliani administration.


Grainger (W.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


National City Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ojeda Eager to Answer Call
Bob Ojeda will make his pitching debut with the Yankees on Saturday afternoon, continuing a comeback that began last season with Cleveland after he survived a boating accident that killed two of his Indian teammates 13 months ago.
Instead of visiting Tiger Stadium tonight, Ojeda stayed in his hotel to watch the Yankees play Detroit on television.


Grant's Tomb Benches
To the Editor:
Your April 1 three-column photo of Grant's Tomb, with your article on souvenirs, helps restore America's mausoleum to its rightful prominence on the highest point of land in Manhattan.
Plans are under way by the National Park Service to renovate the building for its 100th anniversary in 1997, and the colorful tile benches surrounding the site will be restored this summer.


Carlo Bergonzi Will Define 'Retirement' as He Wishes
Retirement for an opera singer means an end to instant recognition, stage-door groupies, recording projects, the pleasure of filling a theater with one's voice and the thrill of standing center stage and receiving cheers from packed houses.
But the Italian tenor Carlo Bergonzi is hardly going into limbo after his American farewell concert, tomorrow night at 8 at Carnegie Hall.
He spoke of his plans, in English-sprinkled Italian, yesterday in the living room of his Central Park South apartment.


EMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


First Bancorp of Ohio (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
GATT Pact Is Signed
Culminating more than seven years of talks, ministers from 109 countries signed a trade agreement aimed at stimulating exports and slashing tariffs around the world.
Page 35.
Figure Skater Dies
John Curry, the elegant gold-medal winner at the 1976 Winter Olympic Games and a skater who embraced the possibilities of dance, was 44 years old.
Page 50.
Strife Crushing Armenia
Armenia is in desperate straits, cut off by an economic blockade and with many of its residents fleeing because of the ethnic war over an enclave in neighboring Azerbaijan.
Page 3.


White House Memo; Mitchell's Rebuff Touches Off Scramble for Court Nominee
White House officials who were astonished this week by Senator George J. Mitchell's decision to remove himself from consideration for the Supreme Court confess that they have started virtually from scratch to come up with a nominee.
And they have all but abandoned hope that the process of finding a justice will be neat and quick.
President Clinton sat down to meet with his advisers about the Court nomination for just over an hour today, his second such meeting since Justice Harry A. Blackmun Jr. announced last week that he intended to retire by the fall.


HON Industries(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


NBB Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AIR RAID REJECTED
Defying NATO and United Nations warnings, Serbian nationalist forces renewed their offensive against the Muslim enclave of Gorazde today, and were reported to be on the verge of overrunning it.
The Serbian forces seized critical points overlooking the riverfront town, and their commanders called on the Bosnian Army defenders to surrender.
A report by Serbia's official news agency said the Bosnian Serb army had offered to protect the estimated 65,000 soldiers and civilians, most of them Muslims, inside the enclave.


Bush Criticizes Caning but Likes Singapore
Former President George Bush said today that he regarded caning as a "brutal" punishment, but suggested that public criticism of Singapore over its plan to flog an American teen-ager would be counterproductive.
Mr.
Bush did not comment in any detail about the case of Michael Fay, an 18-year-old from Dayton, Ohio who has been sentenced to six lashes with a rattan cane for spray-painting cars, nor did the former President say whether he had raised the issue in his private meetings with senior officials of the Singapore Government.


A Bodega, A Bagman And a Sting
In late 1992, a former drug dealer and ex-convict came in from the streets and volunteered to work undercover for investigators seeking evidence of police corruption in New York City.
At first, officials of the Mollen Commission, which had just begun examining allegations of widespread corruption in the city's Police Department, were dubious about his trustworthiness and motives.


Classical Music in Review
'Otello'  Metropolitan Opera


METRO DIGEST
CORRUPTION IN UNIFORM: ARRESTS AND ANGER IN A HARLEM PRECINCT
Twelve New York City police officers were charged with forcing drug dealers to pay them protection money to operate in Harlem.
They beat up some dealers who would not cooperate, investigators said, and stole hundreds of thousands of dollars in drugs and cash from others.
Page 1.
ON FRONT LINE OF THE DRUG WAR, OLD NEWS
Neighborhood residents greeted news of the corruption arrests with a well-marinated mix of jubilation and cynicism.
While the charges may have captured the attention of the whole city, residents said the problems between the police and their community are nothing new.
Page 1.


Court Asked To Reinstate Rape Counts
Acting as special prosecutor in a contentious rape case, State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell asked a court here today to reinstate charges against five men who admitted having sex with a woman who had passed out in an upstate restaurant.
Mr.
Koppell's personal appearance in court, in a year in which he is seeking election to the post, was unusual for an attorney general.
Also unusual, legal experts said, was Mr.
Koppell's request: that a judge overrule a county prosecutor's dismissal of first-degree rape indictments against the men after they pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges before a town justice.


Corrections
The Business Digest yesterday misstated the change in the Dow Jones industrial average on Thursday.
The Dow rose 1.78 points to close at 3,663.25; it did not fall 1.78 points.


Pentair Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Molex Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bronx Pediatrician Accused of Molesting Boys
A Bronx pediatrician was charged yesterday with sexually abusing two boys, one of them a 10-year-old patient, the police said.
Dr.
Jaime Luis Cortes, 33, who works at the Montefiore Medical Center clinic in the Co-Op City housing complex, was arrested after turning himself in to the police yesterday afternoon, apparently after learning he was the subject of an investigation, said Lieut.
Giglio Bianco, commander of the Special Victims Squad in the Bronx.


Classical Music in Review
'Tosca'  Metropolitan Opera


Upjohn Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press on April 6 about Maj.
Gen.
Aharon Remez, the first commander of the Israeli Air Force, misstated two details of his career.
It was his father, David Remez, not General Remez, who was a member of the Israeli Parliament and Minister of Transport.


Bridge
The death of Jim Becker on Tuesday will be mourned by thousands who knew him as a player of high rank, as the proprietor of one of the world's most active clubs, the Beverly, and as a talented teacher.
The high point in a very successful tournament career came in 1991 when he captured the Barry Crane Top 500 title by winning 2,914 master points in the year.
In the last three decades the winners have nearly always been professional players from the West and Southwest, and he broke the mold.


Holy Bull Workout a Blue Grass Surprise
The speed demon Holy Bull created something of a sensation this morning when he shot three furlongs in 34 seconds flat on the eve of the Blue Grass Stakes.
Even for a horse with the natural speed of Holy Bull, the pace he set early this morning in his final workout raised eyebrows at the Keeneland Race Course.
The official clocker described it this way: "Holy Bull went easily."


Stickball, A Metaphor (2 Sewers!)
CHARLIE BALLARD is a retired salesman of millinery goods who lives in the Bronx, and John F. Stephens is a banker who lives in Scarsdale, but as spring wraps itself around asphalt weekends, the two men become what they have been for 46 years, stickball players and teammates.
"It was 1948," recalled the 65-year-old Mr.
Stephens as his Bronx Old Timers played the Iona Athletic Club on 35th Street off Queens Boulevard.
"It was the year after the Dodgers called up Jackie Robinson, and Charlie, who was the greatest stickball player ever to play the game, asked me to be the first white guy to play for the Mintons Playhouse team. I was 18 years old and playing for the LaSalle Street Boys and he was asking me to be a white Jackie Robinson. I was honored."


BancorpSouth (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


VCR Standards Drawn Up To Use Digital Technology
Paving the way for the next generation of videocassette recorders, a committee representing 50 electronics companies from around the world has agreed on a proposed standard for VCR's that will use digital technology.
The new machines, which promise superior image quality, are expected on the market in the next year or two, although some industry experts say it will take a few years for costs to come down enough for such machines, which can record high-definition television signals, to become popular.
Estimates of the initial cost range up to $3,000.


So Far, U.S. Senate Race Is Mostly About Finances
Money was on everyone's mind today as the race for the United States Senate officially got underway in New Jersey.
Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian, a Republican of Independence, released a summary of his quarterly fund-raising report to the Federal Election Commission that showed his campaign has collected $1,156,906 so far.
That compares with more than $4 million reported by the incumbent Democratic Senator, Frank R. Lautenberg, who has $2.9 million on hand as he starts his bid for a third term.


Corrections
A chart yesterday listing cigarette companies and their brands misstated the parent company of the Liggett Group Inc.
It is the Brooke Group Ltd., not Metropolitan P.L.C.
On the same page, a list of company executives who testified on Thursday at a Congressional hearing on the hazards of smoking misspelled the surname of one executive and rendered the name of his company incorrectly.
He is Thomas Sandefur Jr., chairman and chief executive of the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation.


A 'Socially Responsible' Offering, and Others
"Socially responsible" investing is booming.
Neuberger &amp; Berman has started the Socially Responsive Fund, which aims for long-term capital growth by investing in companies that are leaders in environmental policy and workplace diversity and employment.
The fund will not own companies with substantial revenues from alcohol, tobacco, gambling or weapons.
Neuberger &amp; Berman uses a value approach to investing, seeking companies with low stock prices.
MFS Union Standard Trust is a mutual fund designed for pension plans sponsored by labor unions, or in which union members participate.
The trust, which has an equity and a bond portfolio, invests in companies screened for such factors as whether they have been involved in strikes or have failed to comply with labor, health or safety laws.
The initial list is revised by a board made up of senior labor officials, company managers, academics and national labor leaders.


U.S. Policies Under Siege
The latest Serb offensive against the Muslim town of Gorazde is a setback for the Clinton Administration's strategy that the limited use of NATO air power would persuade the Serbs to back down on the battlefield and make peace.
Not only have the Serbs refused to return to the bargaining table, but they have also called NATO's bluff, mounting a major new offensive against the town and daring the alliance to do something about it.


Washington Federal Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Turkey Battles Terrorists, Not Kurds
To the Editor:
Re "Tragedy in Turkey" (editorial, April 4): For more than 900 years, peoples of Kurdish background have lived on the Anatolian peninsula in peaceful coexistence with all other ethnic groups, a reality of the very basis of modern Turkey.
However, certain extremists, who aim at destabilizing the region, found the turmoil after the Persian Gulf war convenient for using the Kurdish population in pursuit of their own ill agenda.
The power vacuum after that war in areas bordering southeast Turkey has become fertile ground for the P.K.K. -- Kurdistan Workers Party -- to breed its campaign of terror.


Tornadoes in the South and Midwest


Magic Johnson Won't Return
Magic Johnson will not return as coach of the Los Angeles Lakers next season, the team anounced before its 105-100 loss to the Portland Trail Blazers here tonight.
"It's been a tough decision," Johnson said.
"I've enjoyed it. This has been great for me, working with 12 guys and trying to get them to understand the Laker tradition."


Answers Needed on Iraq
"Clearly something went wrong," as Gen.
John Shalikashvili put it, in the friendly-fire downing of two U.S. helicopters ferrying Turkish, British, French, Kurdish and American personnel across the exclusion zone in northern Iraq.
The helicopters were reportedly en route to a meeting with Kurdish tribal elders to discuss responses to Iraqi military pressure in the area.
The only thing certain is that U.S. fighter pilots mistook the helicopters for Iraqi craft and fired missiles at them, killing all 26 on board.
Beyond that there are only questions.
A needed investigation has already begun.
Needed as well is a reconsideration of U.S. objectives in Iraq.
Risky military operations and prolonged economic sanctions are justified only when linked to explicit policy goals.


Wilder Takes Small Step Toward Race for Senate
The Virginia Senate race, already a bizarre tangle of charges of lying, sexual misconduct and mental instability, took another confounding twist today when former Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder sent a strong signal that he might jump in as an independent candidate.
Mr.
Wilder, a moderate Democrat who left office in January after serving four years as the nation's first elected black Governor, did not formally get into the contest.
But he took the next closest step: picking up the petition forms that must be signed by 15,000 Virginia voters before his name can go on the fall ballot.


Roosevelt Financial Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Trust Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Diebold Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mismatch: Mets' Kent Can't Do It This Time
Offensively, the Mets' first sign of life against the Houston Astros last night came in the bottom of the seventh inning when second baseman Jeff Kent smashed a 3-2 pitch over the wall in left field at Shea Stadium.
It was Kent who had pulled the Mets out of the fire on Thursday with a two-run homer in the bottom of the eighth inning.
That hit gave New York a 10-9 victory over the Chicago Cubs and wiped the egg off the faces of two members of the bullpen, which had blown an 8-3 seventh-inning lead.


Most Programs for Dyslexic Children Succeed; Sitting in the Circle
To the Editor:
I am a seventh grader at the Dalton School.
I am dyslexic and I have been in the Fischer Landau program since kindergarten.
When I was in first grade I had a very devoted teacher, who tried to teach me to read like the other children.
I was in the lowest reading group.
All the children in that group would sit in a circle and take turns reading about a paragraph each, but I could not do it, so my teacher would skip me, and I would just listen to the other children read.


Mid Atlantic Medical Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Greenwich, Small Is Beautiful; A Suburban Hospital Seeks to Retain Its Independence
At a time when most smaller hospitals are seeking to hitch up with larger medical centers to steer them through the turbulent waters of health care overhaul, administrators at Greenwich Hospital remain determined to pilot their own ship.
Thumbing its nose at health economists who predict the demise of small, independent hospitals, Greenwich is in the middle of a $60 million fund-raising campaign to build new clinic space and a 180-bed building.
Spurning the common belief that small hospitals cannot dispense good, cost-effective specialty care, it opened a comprehensive cancer center last year in this wealthy suburb, just a 40-minute train ride from one of the world's cancer giants, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
Spurning the Suitors
Though it has received offers of affiliation from top-ranked hospitals from New Haven to New York, Greenwich has rejected them, a decision that in time may prove either genius or folly.


Classical Music in Review
Mia Chung  Pianist Weill Recital Hall


A Sideshow to Macy Case: Lawyers' Letters of Vitriol
What was once a behind-the-scenes feud between two lawyers with leading roles in R. H. Macy &amp; Company's bankruptcy case has evolved into a very rare public sideshow.
Bankruptcy lawyers around the country have amused themselves this week with letters exchanged by Harvey R. Miller, a partner at Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges who represents Macy, and Robert M. Miller and Bari J. Mattes, partners at Berlack, Israels &amp; Liberman who represent Macy's bondholders.


Corrections
A listing on Wednesday of the winners of the Pulitzer Prizes misstated the background of Jim Mitzelfeld, who won a prize for beat reporting at The Detroit News.
When he left The News last year to attend law school, he had spent nine years as a reporter, not three years; five of them were at The News.


Potlatch Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Beijing Journal; A Dissident Finds the Political Prospects Bleak
Though the poplar trees are showing green along the capital's busy boulevards, for China's beleaguered democracy movement, there is no "Beijing spring."
Its leaders are either back in jail or under tight surveillance.
It seems hardly possible that mass demonstrations for democracy like those in Tiananmen Square in 1976 and 1989 could recur.


Ice-Pick Case Ignites New Debate Over Resisting Rapists
On the Barnard College campus yesterday, little more than a mile from where a 57-year-old woman used an ice pick to stab a man trying to rape her, Julia Johannsen had six words to describe the victim who turned on her attacker: "A hero for all of us."
"I think it's great," said Ms.
Johannsen, a Barnard sophomore.
"It's incredible that she could defend herself from this guy. She's a brave woman."


Dow Off 1.78 as Trading Continues on Light Side
In trading distorted by the "double witching hour," the stock market zigzagged a lot yesterday but closed essentially unchanged.
The biggest news of the day, a lower-than-expected capacity-utilization report from the Federal Reserve Board, barely lifted the price of bonds.
It was the fourth piece of good inflation news this week that the bond market shrugged off.
The others were favorable reports on the consumer and producer price indexes and March retail sales.


Justice for Jurors
Organized interest groups like trial lawyers and podiatrists -- and assorted professional naysayers -- are likely to resist the streamlining proposed in a new report on New York State jury reform.
Which is why the jury process remains so cumbersome and jury duty so often unpleasant.
And why Gov.
Mario Cuomo and leaders of the Legislature must push for overdue changes.
The proposals come from an official group called The Jury Project -- 30 judges, lawyers, court officials and citizen-outsiders appointed last summer by Chief Judge Judith Kaye and Chief Administrative Judge Leo Milonas.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


National Commerce Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 NO WARNING TO HELICOPTERS
The United States changed the rules of engagement for operations over Iraq after it was revealed that American planes that shot down two helicopters gave no warning because the rules did not require it.  1


12 POLICE OFFICERS CHARGED IN DRUG CORRUPTION SWEEP; BRATTON SEES MORE ARRESTS
Twelve New York City police officers were charged yesterday with forcing drug dealers to pay them protection money to operate on the streets of Harlem.
They beat up some dealers who would not cooperate, investigators said, and stole hundreds of thousands of dollars in drugs and cash from others.
It was the biggest single roundup of New York City police officers on corruption charges in nearly a decade.
By morning, the 12 were in custody and their precinct captain was transferred to a desk job, one of the few times a commanding officer has been removed for accusations of wrongdoing against subordinates.


Isn't It Time for a Searching Look at Taxi Commission Rules?
To the Editor:
As Captain Renault was "shocked" to find gambling at Rick's Place in Casablanca, the New York City Taxi &amp; Limousine Commission denied yellow medallion taxicab owners and drivers a fare increase because they were "shocked" to find older cabs on the road and drivers who have difficulty with the English language.


Holyfield-Lewis Set; Bigger Bouts Later
While Riddick Bowe prepares for summer camp and Mike Tyson gets ready for summer school, Evander Holyfield and Lennox Lewis have agreed to meet in a November showdown to unify the world's heavyweight title.
It could return luster to the sport, which needs the anchor of a universally acclaimed heavyweight ruler.


DQE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Financial Corp. (Wisc.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
These police officers have stained the honor of the vast majority of police officers who daily serve the people of our city with great dedication, integrity and distinction. -- JUDGE MILTON MOLLEN  [ 1:6. ]


Healthsouth Rehabilitation Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


LaSalle National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Theater; Skin Rash and Other Rock-Star Problems
What is the poor leader and chief songwriter of a rock band to do when his group's two principal singers abruptly depart?
This is the less-than-riveting dramatic crux of "Fallen Angel," a 90-minute show at Circle in the Square Downtown that bills itself as "a rock-and-roll play."
What that term means is a show that intersperses sardonic behind-the-scenes vignettes of the band coming apart with 10 songs that have lyrics by Billy Boesky, who also wrote the book.
Performed by a seven-member ensemble and featuring the muscular rock-soul vocals of Corey Glover, the lead singer of the popular New York band Living Colour, the songs inhabit a stylistic no man's land that is two parts soul to one part each rock, folk and Broadway.


Wachovia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Comsat Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clemens Pitches Like The Rocket Of Old
Red Sox 5, White Sox 3
Roger Clemens quieted critics with one of his best performances since early last season, allowing three hits in eight innings as the Boston Red Sox defeated the Chicago White Sox, 5-3, last night at Fenway Park.


Most Programs for Dyslexic Children Succeed
To the Editor:
I respond to "A Disabilities Program That 'Got Out of Hand,' " your April 8 front-page article about the Fisher Landau program for dyslexic children at the Dalton School in New York City, as a learning specialist, a member of the Fisher Landau advisory board, and as a member of the Orton Dyslexia Society (New York branch and national).


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Hawks Stay in Step  The Atlanta Hawks remained in a tie with the Knicks for the Eastern Conference lead last night as Kevin Willis had 24 points and 18 rebounds and Danny Manning 23 points in a 105-96 victory over the Bucks in Milwaukee.
The Bucks and Knicks are half a game ahead of the Chicago Bulls.
Milwaukee and New York have five games remaining and Chicago has four. (AP)


Editorial Notebook; The Sawdust Caesar
Even in an age addicted to revisionism, it is startling to read that Benito Mussolini is "the greatest statesman of the century." So says Gianfranco Fini, the youngish leader of Italy's resurgent neo-Fascist party, speaking to a Turin newspaper the other day.
Still, Mr.
Fini was not under oath, and yes, in some ways the Duce who ruled Italy from 1922 to 1943 did shape history.
Once a militant Socialist, he invented Fascism, a murky left-right creed that finds disciples wherever people seek the smack of firm government.
And to attain what he promised -- national unity, martial glory and trains running like clockwork -- Mussolini honed the skills of a journalist, actor and impresario.


State Power Agency Picks Nuclear Chief From Texas Utility
The State Power Authority has hired William J. Cahill Jr., a well-known figure in the nuclear industry, to take charge of its troubled nuclear operations, authority officials said yesterday.
The authority's Indian Point 3 nuclear plant in Buchanan, N.Y., has been shut for 14 months, mostly because of management problems.
Mr.
Cahill, 70, was hired by S. David Freeman, who became president and chief executive of the authority last month.


Old Kent Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Crash Killed Top Officers In North Iraq
The Air Force missiles that downed the two Army helicopters over Iraq wiped out the entire leadership of a Western military field operation that has worked as a liaison to the Iraqi Kurds since the end of the Persian Gulf war.
Among the 26 people killed in the accident were 15 Americans, including the mission's American commander, Col.
Gerald Thompson of the Army, and his replacement, Col.
Richard A. Mulhern of the Army.
The mission's senior officers from Turkey, France and Britain were also among the dead.


Rural Retreat Journal; Store Closes, and a Way of Life Is Just a Memory
In a brick pharmacy in this hollow of the Blue Ridge Mountains, a former Confederate surgeon named Dr.
Charles T. Pepper dispensed patent medicines in what was then fast becoming the "Cabbage Capital of the World." At least that's how the people of this hamlet saw it.
Local legend says that Dr.
Pepper also spent time mixing mountain herbs, roots and seltzer into a fizzy brew, which his assistant later mass-produced.
The assistant, Wade Morrison, moved to Texas and went on to fame and fortune as the creator of a best-selling American soft drink.
Dr.
Pepper went on to fame, but no fortune, as the brew's namesake.


Taking a Second Look at a Time-Share Vacation Home
George and Julia Church of Mariette, Ga. are satisfied owners of two time-share units, a much maligned vacation property concept.
Many people have bought such units only to have maintenance expenses rise sky-high or to have trouble finding buyers when it comes time to sell.
A time-share purchase entitles you to a block of time at a specified resort each year, and will probably be a better deal if you use it for a long time.
The initial investment is typically $9,000 for one week a year.
The break even point for a well-managed unit is about six years.


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A.M.A. Errs in Tie-In With Nutrition Chain
To the Editor:
Shame on the American Medical Association, of which I have been a member for 50 years, for accepting $1 million from a chain of health-food stores, General Nutrition Centers, to have exclusive rights to sell an A.M.A. anti-smoking kit (news article, March 31).
You report that the kit was devised by a pediatrician and author, who said it has been proved effective in unscientific tests with 100 of his patients.
But an A.M.A. spokesman said "the kit had not undergone rigorous scientific testing."


Clinton Taxes Laid Bare, Line by Line
It is a rite of spring in Washington for the White House to disclose the First Family's tax returns on this day, and typically the occasion is noted with little fanfare.
But because of the daily barrage of questions in recent weeks about the Clintons' finances, the White House decided today to try to avert any new controversies before they arose.


Corrections
An article yesterday about newspapers' minority hiring rendered the name of an organization of news executives incorrectly.
It is the Association of Minority Media Executives.


The Biggest Yields in Money Market Funds: Where to Find Them
After taking a beating in stocks and bonds in the first quarter, many investors are letting their cash idle in money market mutual funds, especially the tax-free variety.
But the smart money is landing in taxable funds.
Yields on taxable money funds have risen steadily since the Federal Reserve Board began pushing up short-term interest rates on Feb. 4, while yields on tax-frees have languished.
"The two markets don't necessarily march in tandem," said Walter Frank, chief economist of the Money Fund Report.
"And it's possible for them to go their own way for some period of time."
The annualized yield compounded weekly on taxable funds has risen to 3.05 percent from 2.71 percent in the week ended Feb. 4, according to IBC/ Donoghue.
The average yield on tax-free funds has bobbed under the 2 percent mark during that time.
It now stands at just 1.82 percent.
The result: taxable funds are yielding about 68 percent more than tax-free funds right now, up from 37 percent for all of 1993.
Several factors are at work.
"Yields on municipal paper are a lot less responsive to a particular move by the Federal Reserve than yields on taxable paper," explained Jacob S. Dreyer, a Washington mutual fund consultant.
"And ever since the Clinton tax hike, there has been a great demand for tax-exempt paper and not much of a supply."
IBC/Donoghue reports that cash is flowing into tax-free funds at a much faster pace than taxable funds.
Thus far in 1994, assets of tax-frees have increased 12.4 percent, compared with a 3.1 percent gain for taxables.
At Fidelity Investments, almost all the new money this year has gone into tax-frees, said Neal Litvack, executive vice president of marketing.
Last week, the money flowing into retail funds hit a two-year peak of $10.79 billion before falling back to $2.2 billion this week, the Investment Company Institute reported.
With short-term rates widely expected to go higher by the middle of the year, taxable money funds will probably maintain an edge for some time.
And the advantage could even grow if tax-free instruments remain scarce.
Although it comes as a surprise to many, taxable funds are more lucrative now even for people in the top 39.6 percent tax bracket, said Richard Marcis, acting director of research at the Investment Company Institute.
Here's how to find whether taxable or tax-free funds are a better deal: Subtract your tax bracket as a percentage from 1.
For the 39.6 percent bracket, the result is 0.604.
Then multiply that number by the taxable yield, which was 3.05 percent this week, to derive the tax-adjusted yield, in this case 1.84 percent.
"Since that exceeded the tax-free rate of 1.82 percent, a taxable fund is more favorable," Mr.
Marcis said.


Uncharted Change at the N.A.A.C.P.
Who is Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. and what in the world is he is trying to do to the venerable National Association for the Advancement of Colored People?
Is he a brash and brilliant innovator, pumping life into a sclerotic organization whose glory days are past and whose current relevance is questioned?
Or is he a unrepentant radical and a peripatetic neophyte whose lack of political acumen will lead the N.A.A.C.P. to the same fate as the Black Panther Party?


Sports of The Times; Hen House Guarded By Foxes
YINKA Dare's journey from Africa to the United States originated in Kabba, Nigeria, wound up in Washington and was supposed to end in two more years with a degree from George Washington University and a shot at the National Basketball Association.
But the journey has taken a detour to Connecticut, where the 7-foot-1 inch sophomore center has taken up residence with his new-found friend and agent, Larry Gillman.


Treasury Prices Mixed As Traders Mark Time
Treasury securities were mixed in sluggish trading yesterday as investors, uncertain of the Federal Reserve's next move, refrained from changing positions.
A report in The New York Times yesterday that the Fed was sending signals of another increase in short-term interest rates made an already- nervous market more so, traders said.
Earlier in the week, traders and investors shrugged off favorable inflation news when the producer and consumer price indexes for March showed that inflation continued to be moderate.


Wellfleet Communications Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Weis Narkets Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Corrections
An article on Monday about the musical life of Odessa, Ukraine, misstated the location of the city Kharkov.
It is in Ukraine, not in central Russia.


Solomon Hoberman, New York City Administrator, 79
Solomon Hoberman, who served as New York City's director of personnel and chairman of its Civil Service Commission from 1967 to 1970, died on Thursday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
Mr.
Hoberman, who lived in Manhattan, was 79.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Dorothy.


After Early Struggles, Perez Gets a Passing Grade
It was only Melido Perez's second start and it is only April, but tonight was a monumental test for him.
The Yankees gave him a lead, he gave it back to the Tigers.
The Yankees tied the game, he allowed the Tigers to take the lead again.
Then the Yankees burst ahead one more time and Perez knew he had to throttle the Tigers.
He had to pass the test.
If the Yankees want to have a legitimate chance of reaching the post-season, they need Perez to produce.
They need him to erase the memories of last year when a sore shoulder burdened him and eventually required arthroscopic surgery.
They need him to throw split-finger fastballs that dance and delight them.
Tonight, Perez did.
Tonight, he passed the test.


Public &amp; Private; Poetry Emotion
Yusef Komunyakaa won the Pulitzer Prize this week, but he does not expect to become a household name, and not because his name itself, phonetically simple once parsed out bit by bit, looks at first glance so unpronounceable.
Mr.
Komunyakaa won the prize for poetry, and there is little premium in poetry in a world that thinks of Pound and Whitman as a weight and a sampler, not an Ezra, a Walt, a thing of beauty, a joy forever.
It's hard to figure out why this should be true, why poetry has been shunted onto a siding at a time, a place, so in need of brevity and truth.
We still use the word as a synonym for a kind of lovely perfection, for an inspired figure skater, an accomplished ballet dancer.
Many of the finest books children read when young are poetry: "The Cat in the Hat," "Goodnight Moon," the free verse of "Where the Wild Things Are."


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


United Carolina Bancshares Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Q &amp; A
Renting and Taxes  Q. I recently retired and find my income tax bracket has dropped to 15 percent from 28 percent, thereby lessening the tax advantage of my condo mortgage interest and property taxes.
Are there any other advantages I may have overlooked for continued home ownership versus renting?
JOYCE A. BRUNO, Chatham, N.J.


Observer; Grandma Didn't Have One
There seems to be a controversy about Generation X. Some people of an age to qualify as Generation X'ers say there isn't any such thing, it's all a lot of magazine editor's hooey, also book editor's gaseous effusion.
Others disagree.
Whether these others consist solely of magazine and book editors I cannot say, as this is the kind of subject that sends me hurrying to bed the minute Ted Koppel and Charlie Rose tip their hands about the forthcoming theme of the witching hour.


Yeltsin and Ukraine's Chief In Pact on Black Sea Fleet
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine reached a new agreement today on the division of the much-disputed Black Sea Fleet.
The announcement of the accord came at the end of a week in which the two-year quarrel threatened for the first time to lead to armed conflict.
A spokesman for Mr.
Yeltsin said the agreement provides for 15 to 20 percent of the fleet's 300-odd ships to be handed over to Ukraine and acknowledges the rights of both countries to separate bases for their Black Sea naval vessels.


Knicks Able to Back Up Foul Language
The Knicks' mouths got them in trouble last night, but a strong fourth quarter got them out of it.
Overcoming the ejections of Charles Smith and Anthony Mason, the Knicks defeated the Washington Bullets for the second time in two nights, 103-90, this time at Madison Square Garden.
Smith and Mason were ejected for arguing with the officials -- Smith in the second quarter, and Mason, who finished with 12 points and 12 rebounds, in the fourth quarter.


109 Nations Sign Trade Agreement
Culminating more than seven years of arduous and often bitter bargaining, ministers from 109 countries signed a far-reaching trade liberalization agreement today aimed at stimulating exports and slashing tariffs around the world.
The agreement is the eighth to be concluded since World War II but is easily the most ambitious, reducing import tariffs by an average of 40 percent and embracing for the first time such areas as agriculture, textiles and financial services.


Trains Collide At Low Speed, With 15 Hurt
A New Haven-bound commuter train with 19 passengers aboard went through a stop signal this morning and struck an oncoming commuter train in Old Saybrook, Amtrak officials said.
Fifteen passengers and crew members suffered minor injuries in the crash.
Amtrak officials said a more serious accident was averted because both the commuter trains had slowed to about 10 miles per hour before the collision.
No cars derailed in the accident, which occurred at 6:51 A.M.


Fifth Third Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trade Talks Up to Japan, U.S. Says
Senior American and Japanese officials said today that they hoped to resume crucial trade talks before the meeting of the Group of Seven industrialized nations in July, but American officials insisted that "the ball is still in the Japanese court."
After a two-hour meeting with Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata of Japan this morning, the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, said the two sides needed to reach "common ground" before they could return to the so-called framework talks that were suspended in February.


Speeches Pay for Cuomos; Whitmans Need Extension
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo made an average of $17,583 for each of 12 speaking engagements in 1993, a slight decrease from 1992 but still enough to insure that he received far more income for speaking than he did for governing New York State, according to tax returns made available yesterday.
As they have in the past, Mr.
Cuomo's political opponents criticized his for-profit public speaking and Republican candidates and strategists pledged to make an issue of it during this year's campaign.
The Governor is running for a fourth four-year term.


Swift Transportation Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


John Curry, Figure Skater, Is Dead at 44
John Curry, the elegant 1976 Olympic champion who infused figure skating with the possibilities of dance, died yesterday of an AIDS-related heart attack, his agent said.
Mr.
Curry was 44.
The British skater died at his home near Stratford upon Avon, England, said the agent, Jean Diamond.
As a skater, Mr.
Curry was a visionary, redefining his sport with balletic sophistication.
Later, attempting to educate the public, he became one of the few athletes who spoke openly of being homosexual and having contracted AIDS.


Stanley Mays, Journalist, 73
Stanley Mays, a British journalist who worked in New York for foreign publications for more than 40 years, died on Tuesday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
Mr.
Mays, who lived in Manhattan, was 73.
The cause was liver cancer, said his wife, Patricia.


A New Playoff Format Begets a Good, Old-Fashioned Matchup
This spring, it was supposed to be different, with a fresh formula for the Stanley Cup playoffs in the stuffy old National Hockey League.
With expansion and a conference realignment, fans awaited exotic new matchups that could send Snowbelt teams to Sunbelt settings and New York franchises to venues more than a bus ride away.
In a couple of cases, it worked out that way for the opening round, which begins on Sunday in the Eastern Conference and on Monday in the Western.
Detroit, the Western favorite, will open against San Jose, which is making its first playoff appearance.
In the East, there is a similar novelty, with the Devils playing Buffalo, the first time the two teams have met in the post-season.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.56
3.49
2.84
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.58
3.56
2.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.99
3.98
2.95
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.94
6.95
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.28
7.28
6.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.10
8.11
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.35
5.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Citizens Banking (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Beliefs
Future wars and global tensions will no longer be primarily based on conflicts between states but on clashing civilizations, those broad cultural entities defined by history, language, ethnicity and, above all, by religion.
That is the thesis of Samuel P. Huntington, professor of political science and director of the John M. Olin Institute for Strategic Studies at Harvard.
It was published in an article titled "The Clash of Civilizations?" in last summer's issue of Foreign Affairs, and the thesis has been lauded and debated for almost a year.


Hilgenberg Recovering
JAY HILGENBERG, the New Orleans Saints' 35-year-old backup center, has been hospitalized near Chicago for several days after an apparent heart attack and a subsequent angioplasty procedure to clear a blocked artery.
Whether the former Bears star will be back on the football field is up to him, "but it would not be my recommendation," his cardiologist, Dr.
JAY ALEXANDER, said. (AP)


Rubbermaid Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Marriott International reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


The Chicago Board of Trade Will Leave Globex Network
The Chicago Board of Trade said today that it would pull out of Globex, the slowly expanding global electronic trading network for futures and options that it began nearly two years ago with its neighbor and longtime rival, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
The Board of Trade, which is the world's largest futures exchange, said that it would support electronic trading when its pits were closed by listing its most widely traded contracts on Project A, its own local area network.
And it announced a preliminary agreement with Bloomberg Financial Markets to work toward listing its contracts on the 37,000 terminals in the Bloomberg computer network, saving subscribers to the Bloomberg service the cost of investing in Project A terminals.


L.I.R.R. Chief Won't Resign Under Pressure
The president of the Long Island Rail Road said today that he has no plans to resign from his $145,000-a-year job, despite a harshly critical report issued Thursday on the railroad's shutdown in a snowstorm on Feb. 11.
"I'm not leaving here under these circumstances," the president, Charles W. Hoppe, said.
"I have had a very good record, and I am not about to quit in a fit of pique."


Classical Music in Review
Musicians from Marlboro  Metropolitan Museum of Art


A Dreaded April Tradition


Scripps Howard Broadcasting (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Deepening of Losses at Digital Equipment
Last June, when Digital Equipment's president and chief executive, Robert B. Palmer, and several of his top lieutenants presented their reorganization plans for the beleaguered company, the board of directors stood and applauded.
The optimism was stoked a few weeks later, when the computer maker reported its first profitable quarter in several years.
But the company has lapsed back into its losing ways.
Yesterday, for the third consecutive quarter, Digital Equipment exceeded most analysts' worst expectations, reporting a loss of $183 million -- three to four times higher than the loss many people on Wall Street had predicted.


Dance Magazine Awards
The winners of the 37th annual Dance Magazine Awards, given for excellence in dance, are Christine Dakin of the Martha Graham Dance Company, Kate Johnson of the White Oak Dance Project and Jiri Kylian, the choreographer and the director of the Netherlands Dance Theater.
The awards will be given in a private ceremony on April 25 at Asia Society.


Talk Radio Hosts Answer a Political Call
For years, radio talk shows have been sending messages to Congress.
Now they are sending candidates.
In no fewer than nine races, radio hosts are taking off their headsets and taking to the hustings, hoping to convert their listeners to voters.


Brazil in an Accord With Large Banks On Cutting Its Debt
Brazil, the largest debtor in the developing world, completed an agreement last night with its creditor banks that reduces its $49 billion foreign debt and provides the country with lower interest rates and new longer-term loans.
Although a number of new debtor countries, most notably Russia, still need to reach agreement with commercial banks on restructuring their foreign debts, the Brazilian agreement effectively ends the international debt crisis that began in 1982.


Flowers Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 12


Grenada Sunburst System Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Starks Recovering Rapidly
The Knicks announced yesterday that they hoped to have their All-Star shooting guard, John Starks, ready for the first round of the playoffs, and Starks insisted last night that he would "definitely be back" for them.
Starks underwent successful arthroscopic surgery on his left knee on March 14, and his recovery has been more rapid than expected.
It was originally thought he would miss six to eight weeks.
"John has been making steady progress, running in water with light shooting," Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician, said in a statement.
"He will now begin running, and we will try to get back to practice situations. We'll continue to monitor the strength and stability of John's knee. We're hopeful he will be ready for the playoffs."


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERICAN MOBILE SATELLITE CORP., ., has signed a multiyear agreement with Landstar System Shelton, Conn., to provide satellite mobile data communications for 3,000 of its vehicles.
IDB COMMUNICATIONS GROUP INC., Culver City, Calif., said its IDB Systems unit had opened an office in Beijing to provide customer service, engineering support and marketing for its products.


Becoming Artists the Old-Fashioned Way
Life drawing, once the art student's entrance ticket to the mythical world of canvas and paint, of chisel and stone, of masterpieces scribbled feverishly on napkins, of berets, garrets, mistresses, poverty, drugs, wine, death and, ultimately, fame, is now an entrance to -- well, no one seems to be sure anymore, but probably something bleak, like painting portraits of corporate executives for a living.
Certainly it is no longer an entrance to anything very fashionable, or, in the opinion of many, artistically credible.
At the Project of Living Artists, a basement drawing studio on Greene Street in SoHo, the study of life drawing, fashionable or not, continues.
Several nights a week, as many as 30 artists, ranging widely in age, gather to draw from the figure.
For the visitor, what is striking is the concentration in the room, to which the model, diligent but somewhat bored, provides a quiet counterpoint.


El Paso Natural Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Midwest Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bill Winfrey; Hall of Fame Horse Trainer
Bill Winfrey, a trainer of thoroughbreds including Native Dancer and a host of other champions, died on Thursday in a hospital at Lake Forest, Calif.
A resident of San Clemente, Calif., he was 77.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


Genentech Says Profit Surged
The Genentech Corporation reported today that its first-quarter earnings more than doubled from a year earlier, driven by the sales of two new drugs, and sales growth in older drugs.
But its shares fell $1.125 today, to $44.50, in Nasdaq trading.
Although the earnings results were strong, analysts said, they were below the most optimistic estimates.
And some investors may have seized a rare opportunity to take profits in the generally depressed biotechnology sector.


CCB Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Macy Worries Tax Authorities
The attorneys general for five states and lawyers for some local taxing authorities have asked Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator assigned to oversee R. H. Macy &amp; Company's bankruptcy case, to take note of their interests.
In a letter to Mr.
Vance from Karel S. Karpe, the assistant corporation counsel to the New York City Department of Finance, the taxing authorities said, "There is a sense among the taxing authorities that, to date, the interests of the taxing authorities have all but been ignored."


Teco Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


League-Leading Goalie Leading Test for Devils
Dominik Hasek was the name on the lips of every member of the Devils after today's practice here in preparation for their playoff series against the Buffalo Sabres.
The 29-year-old Hasek finished the regular season as the top goaltender in the National Hockey League with a magnificent goals-against average of 1.95 despite a won-lost-tied record of 30-20-6 in 58 appearances.
He is only the fifth goaltender since the 1967-68 season to give up less than two goals a game and his average was the best since Bernie Parent's 1.89 for Philadelphia in the 1973-74 season.


Tax Forms Are Done. Tax Traps Await.
From the amateur's perspective, investing is like ice skating: try to add a little spin and you may take a tumble.
Managing your money well and then stretching too far to minimize taxes is a case in point.
Having polished off their 1993 returns, many people will resolve to do everything they can to lower their tax bills next year.
In some cases, they will jump headlong at tax-advantaged investments that are doomed to fail or are completely inappropriate in their financial situation.
They may even blunder when deciding on a home or paying off debt by focusing solely on the highly coveted tax break.


Howard University Postponed Lecture by a Jewish Historian
Fearing that a visiting professor from Yale would be subjected to heckling and harassment because he is Jewish, Howard University postponed a lecture he had been scheduled to give earlier this month, university officials said today.
The officials at Howard, one of the nation's pre-eminent historically black universities, said they had suggested that Prof.
David Brion Davis postpone until next fall a lecture originally scheduled for April 4.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Brazil reached an agreement with its creditor banks that reduces its $49 billion foreign debt and provides the country lower interest rates and new longer-term loans.
The accord with Brazil -- the biggest debtor in the developing world -- effectively ends the international debt crisis that began in 1982.  [ Page 1. ]


Colonial BancGroup Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Coleman Goes Down And Anderson Goes Up
It may not have been as significant as Willis Reed walking onto the Madison Square Garden floor for Game 7 of the National Basketball Association finals for the Knicks in 1970, but the Nets were happy to see Derrick Coleman return from the locker room midway through overtime tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Coleman left tonight's game with a sprained right ankle midway through the third quarter and New Jersey leading the Detroit Pistons by 13 points.
Without Coleman, the Nets lost the lead and needed a stellar effort from Kenny Anderson to force overtime.


Cancellation of Timber-Cutting Contract in Alaska May Cost Jobs
The company that lost its 50-year contract to cut timber at low prices in the Tongass National Forest in Alaska said it would decide within a week or two how many of its 400 yearround workers would keep their jobs.
The Clinton Administration on Thursday canceled the contract that provided large amounts of low-cost timber from the the Tongass, the nation's last largely intact rain forest.


Chronicle
JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS, who has a treatable form of lymphatic cancer, is undergoing treatment at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, a hospital spokeswoman said yesterday.
"We expect her to be here for several days," said the spokeswoman, Mary Cialone.
She would not elaborate on the nature of the treatment that Mrs.
Onassis was receiving or when she was admitted.
Nancy Tuckerman, a Kennedy family spokeswoman, could not be reached last night.


U.S. Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


ALC Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Partnership Stigma And Equipment Leasing
BOB VORLOP has a plan.
He wants to buy computer equipment, lease it to businesses and then resell it.
He has ideas for dealing with the risks -- avoiding mainframes that can become obsolete quickly, buying mostly I.B.M. products because their maintenance policy means good resale prices.
If all goes well, he will turn a handy profit -- especially if the economy continues to grow.
But Mr.
Vorlop, manager of direct investments at Wheat First Butcher Singer in Richmond, is walking a rough road.
His plan, the Commonwealth Income and Growth Fund I, is a limited partnership.
"Yes, the 'P' word," he said.
"Nothing has a worse reputation."


Most Programs for Dyslexic Children Succeed; Fuzzy Classifications
To the Editor:
As a young child, I attended an elementary school in the Ocean Hill-Brownsville school district in Brooklyn.
The quality of education was so poor that I was passed to the second grade with an inability to distinguish the difference between the letter "A" and the number "1."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Activated Felix Jose, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Rusty Meacham, pitcher, to Omaha of the American Association.
Pacific Coast League


Michelangelo, C.E.O.
The unveiling of the refurbished "Last Judgment" in the Sistine Chapel calls to mind the phony image of Michelangelo, the lonely genius trapped between agony and ecstasy, isolated on his back on a scaffold, paintbrush in hand.
In fact, he was on everybody else's back.
This Renaissance artist, it turns out, resembled today's successful business executive.
Some 475 years ago, he was chief executive officer of a small to mid-size company -- a kind of workshop -- and, over time, reported to demanding chairmen of the board: nine Popes.


TCF Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
It would be difficult to determine who generated more comment at the Humanitarian Award Dinner given by the Elie Wiesel Foundation Thursday: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, recipient of the award, or her friend BARBRA STREISAND.
For one evening at least, conversation about Whitewater and Mrs.
Clinton's success at investing in commodities was put on hold.
Instead, guests at the dinner, held at the New York Public Library, lined up to meet the First Lady and photographed her with pocket cameras they had tucked into their dinner jackets.
The speakers, Mr.
Wiesel, CHARLIE ROSE and BERNARD KALB, showered her with compliments.


Review/Music; Electronic Sounds Evoke Earth, Sky and Humanity
Electronic music no longer has the cachet it once had, offering composers liberation from mundane human practitioners and overly familiar instruments.
But Morton Subotnick, at the age of 61, can still produce fresh effects with his electronic and computer-generated sounds, creating worlds in which the human and the electronic merge.
At the close of his 1991 work, "All My Hummingbirds Have Alibis," which was played in Merkin Hall on Thursday night, there is an intriguing conflict between the effects of these varied sounds and those of the music they create.
During the final moments of this half-hour piece, we are probably meant to feel a kind of liberation.
The flute seems to flutter freely, triumphantly released from the stuttering fitfulness that characterized its part earlier.
The cello, which displays a tonal, Romantic pathos, seems to come to resolution.
And human voices, produced by mallets hitting a computer-controlled console -- each contact calling up electronically stored words -- gently say: "The earth is soft and warm" and "The sky is falling into my heart." Even the layer of electronically modified sound is meant to be calming.


E-Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


FirsTier Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Glatfelter (P.H.) Co.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bobby Bonds Has Tests
The San Francisco Giants hitting coach BOBBY BONDS, the father of BARRY BONDS, remained hospitalized in Atlanta yesterday after complaining of dizziness and chest pains.
Bonds, 48, was expected to undergo further tests today. (AP)


U.S. HELICOPTERS GIVEN NO WARNING BY ATTACKING JETS
The F-15 fighter pilots who mistakenly shot down two American Blackhawk helicopters over northern Iraq on Thursday gave no warning before firing because the rules of engagement in effect did not require it, the Pentagon said today.
Defense Secretary William J. Perry, at a Pentagon news conference today, acknowledged the failure to issue the warning.
Pentagon officials also said the electronic system designed to identify aircraft as friend or foe apparently was not operating on the helicopters.


Review/Film; Proving Manhood by Hunting Men
"Surviving the Game" is a maladroit, racially inflammatory action film in which a homeless man named Jack Mason (Ice-T) is recruited to become the prey of wealthy hunters.
With the exception of Cole, played by Charles S. Dutton (the star of television's "Roc"), the hunters are white and grotesquely evil.
To give the film an unwanted campy edge, they also happen to sound like Iron John on steroids.
"Allow yourself to feel the purity of your primal essence!" a scary Gary Busey declares.
Although this latest variation on the story "The Most Dangerous Game" (the recent Jean-Claude Van Damme film "Hard Target" was another), is clearly intended for hard-core action audiences, it miscalculates.
Viewers eager for the cinematic equivalent of red meat will not care to watch a talky, tame adventure story featuring F. Murray Abraham baying in the wilderness.


On Front Line of the Drug Wars, Police Corruption Is Nothing New
A 27-year-old man, buoyed by the good weather, was walking his black Doberman pinscher past the 30th Precinct station house in Harlem yesterday when an angry voice broke his reverie.
"Put that Doberman on a leash," shouted the uniformed police officer standing in front of the precinct house at 451 West 151st Street.


Sherwin Williams Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


King's Assassin Is Given Power Of Subpoena in Bid for Retrial
A Memphis Criminal Court judge ruled today that James Earl Ray, the confessed assassin of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., would be allowed to subpoena witnesses in support of his assertions of innocence and his request for a new trial.
In what one prosecutor termed a bizarre situation, the judge, Joseph Brown, said he was constrained by Tennessee law to deny the new trial being sought by Mr.
Ray because the time limit allowed for such appeals had long since expired.
Judge Brown is hearing Mr.
Ray's ninth appeal since he pleaded guilty in 1968.


War, Blockade and Poverty 'Strangling' Armenia
Two and a half years after its independence, this tiny Caucasus nation should be enjoying the excitement of new-found freedom.
Instead, it is experiencing little but pain.
The capital has electricity two hours a day, shop after shop is closed, and lines form early for bread and kerosene, rationed and doled by international relief agencies.


Lance Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 19


Giuliani Seeks Delay On Coliseum
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called on the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday to delay a decision on the sale of the New York Coliseum by up to a month to grant time for an independent appraisal of the property to determine whether the developer, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, is being asked to pay a fair price.
Mr.
Giuliani's proposal, made in a letter to the M.T.A. chairman Peter Stangl, came as the transit agency prepared to end the nine-year battle over the West Side property by requiring Mr.
Zuckerman, who is also the publisher of The Daily News, to either close on the deal on Monday or forfeit a $33.8 million letter of credit.
Mr.
Zuckerman also has an option under his contract to take another 55 days to reach a decision.


Blood, Bureaucracy and Grief Linked in Alien-Smuggling Case
For nearly seven months, a swab of dried blood from China has been sitting in storage at the New York City Medical Examiner's office.
It was sent by the parents of a 38-year-old tractor driver from Fujian Province, Lin Guoshui, who was last seen diving from the tramp steamer Golden Venture into the frigid waters off Queens.
Some relatives and other passengers have long surmised the names of the six unidentified men who died in a tragic swim from the ship, which ran aground last June with nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard.
But no one has been able to positively identify them or to link a name with a body because of decomposition and the paucity in China of conclusive medical records like dental X-rays.


Classical Music in Review
Boston Symphony  Peter Serkin, Pianist Carnegie Hall


Ceremony Heralding the Week of the Child Gets a Mixed Review


Redskins Appear Close To a Deal With Friesz
The Washington Redskins seem close to signing JOHN FRIESZ, the San Diego Chargers' backup quarterback and an unrestricted free agent.
LEIGH STEINBERG, Friesz's agent, said yesterday that he and the Redskins were discussing a one-year contract worth $900,000 to $1 million.
Steinberg said he expected an agreement by today.


Safety-Kleen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


A Real Taste of Home at La Marqueta
As a girl growing up in San Sebastian, Puerto Rico, Elba Gaffney turned up her nose at pasteles, the meat-filled pies that are a highlight of the island's holiday meals.
"I was a very particular eater," she said.
"Everybody looked at me like I was crazy."
These days, however, Mrs.
Gaffney rarely goes home at night without the sweet, oilysmell of banana dough used for the pies still strong on her clothes.
In the last five years, through her East Harlem business, her name has become almost synonymous with the pies that offer a taste of home for the neighborhood's large Puerto Rican community.


The Executive Life; Survival Strategies Of the Road Warriors
FOR people who think business travel is glamorous, let Thomas G. Stemberg set the record straight.
"It's as bad as it gets," said Mr.
Stemberg, chairman and chief executive of Staples Inc. in Framingham, Mass.
But Mr.
Stemberg has adapted to frequent jaunts and the lost time, lost sleep and lost luggage they can entail.
He travels at night, which he considers "the least productive part of the day" -- and which allows him to put his children to bed first.
He uses his time aloft to sort through some of the paper that piles up on his desk.
Immediately upon boarding an airplane, for instance, he asks the flight attendant for a large garbage bag, which he uses for paper disposal. (Attendants occasionally misunderstand and remind him of the airsickness bag already at his seat.)


THE FREEDOM TO CHOOSE DOCTORS: WHAT FREEDOM?
As Michael Weinstein points out, "the punishingly low fees set by the Government" make it difficult to find competent physicians.
This being the case, why does he recommend a vast increase in the role of Government in our system of medical care?
For hangovers, a "hair of the dog that bit you" may be a good prescription.
It will not work for our health care system.
LESLIE ROSE Birmingham, Mich.


The Nation; Euphemisms Mask Fervor In Latest Attack on Poverty
THEY came to office talking of little besides the middle class.
But President Clinton and his allies then quietly embarked on the most energetic anti-poverty effort in a generation.
Recently their efforts have become a little less quiet.
Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros convened a conference two weeks ago that turned into a coming-out party for the Administration's anti-poverty agenda, celebrating dozens of new or expanded programs.
Seven other Cabinet officers joined him at the affair, which drew 2,000 people and had a program so varied it required guides to direct traffic in the halls.


THE LITTLE-PEOPLE PROBLEM
We're having a servant problem, darling.
Or perhaps it's a public servant problem.


Motivation for Moorer Only Issue for Holyfield
It has never been about money for Evander Holyfield, whose lifetime ring earnings will pass $100 million when he defends his heavyweight title next Friday night against Michael Moorer.
This one should be worth about $10 million more to the 31-year-old champion, who holds the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titles.


Ins and Outs Of Inn Stays
IN 1980, according to the Professional Association of Innkeepers International in Santa Barbara, Calif., there were 1,000 inns and bed-and-breakfasts in North America; today there are more than 15,000.
Since inns are by nature quirky places, travelers should ask a lot of questions when planning a stay.
Here are some of the key concerns, based on my own experiences at some 30 inns and on interviews with a dozen people in the field.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL  HOUSE RULES  By Heather Lewis. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.95.


Crew Tryouts Start
It was a little like spring training here today for the 16 women who came to try out for Bill Koch's America's Cup team.
Those who are chosen will become members of the first all-female team in the 142-year history of yachting's most prestigious trophy.


Vietnam Hotels
To the Editor: Having specialized in providing travel services in Vietnam for the past four years, I read John H. Cushman Jr.'s report entitled "Travel Industry Prepares for a Rush to Vietnam" (March 13) with great interest.
However, it contained one piece of information that I'm afraid is misleading.
That is where Heather Smith of the Earth Island Institute is quoted as saying: "You can get a great hotel for 10 bucks a night. In the north they have a hot shower, but in Saigon they don't."
As a tour operator, my company, Absolute Asia, has found that the minimum acceptable standard of hotel in Saigon for our clientele costs in the $50-to-$60-a-night range.
Many tourist class hotels cost $100 plus per night, and deluxe hotels in Saigon (i.e., the Century, the Norfolk, the Omni and the Floating Hotel) are priced at $150 to $200 per night.


Is Disney the Newest Broadway Baby?
ATTENTION, PLEASE.
This season, the role of the Beast, usually played on Broadway by the Shubert Organization with its 16 theaters, will be played instead by the Walt Disney Company, which is almost single-handedly rejuvenating 42d Street by renovating the New Amsterdam Theater.
It is also producing the most expensive Broadway musical in theater history, opening tomorrow night at the Palace Theater.


Trump to Seek Federal Help to Get Riverside South Under Way
Though the financing for most of Riverside South, Donald J. Trump's long-delayed residential and commercial complex on Manhattan's West Side, has not yet been fully arranged, the developer will seek Federal help for at least the first stage of the $1.9 billion project.
Within 90 days, the Trump Organization will apply to the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development for Federal mortgage insurance, said Michelle de Milly, a spokeswoman for the developer.


Mutual Funds; Five Underappreciated Performers
WITH more than 3,000 stock mutual funds clamoring for investors' attention, it's not surprising that a few good ones slip through the cracks.
But it's worth the research to find them, particularly today as more and more top-notch funds slam the door on new investors.
In its fifth annual list of "forgotten funds," Morningstar Inc., fund researchers in Chicago, presents a handful of overlooked stock funds it calls real winners.
Despite impressive returns, none of the funds had more than $125 million in assets when Morningstar did its screening in February, perhaps because of poor marketing or bad naming or just plain bad luck, say the researchers.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
On July 23, 1992, one day after my husband's death from lung cancer, I spent a good many hours trying to persuade people at The New York Times obituary department to include the sentence, "He died of lung cancer due to cigarettes." The legal department objected to these eight words.
They said there was no way to prove it; but in my grief and anger, these eight words meant more to me than the list of credits and movies my husband had made.
A few days later, The Times found a way, and my husband's obituary included the sentence, "He died of lung cancer, said his wife . . . who noted that he was a heavy smoker." I felt satisfied.
A few months later, after a period of deep solitude and mourning, I decided to venture out into the world and went to the gala opening of the Matisse exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art.
The first thing I saw when I entered was a large sign that said the exhibit had been underwritten by Philip Morris.
It felt like a fist in the face.


Ante Up; International Investors Bet Everything On Anything
THERE is a memorable scene in the musical "Guys and Dolls" where Nathan Detroit wants to bet Sky Masterson on whether Mindy's Restaurant sells more cheesecake each day than strudel.
As Nathan points out, Sky Masterson will bet on anything, from caterpillar races to his own body temperature, so why not cheesecake?
It is a useful scene to keep in mind when trying to understand some of the exotic global cyber-investing now taking place through hedge funds, derivatives or interest rate swaps.
Investors today can bet on anything.
Got a feeling that the spread between German interest rates and French interest rates is going to narrow in the next 90 days?
No problem.
Some investment bank will create a strategy, and buy the bonds, the currencies and the futures contracts for you to bet that hunch.
Some bank might even loan you the money to expand your bet so that if you win, you win really big.
If you lose, though, you could end up like Procter &amp; Gamble last week.
You thought P. &amp; G. made toothpaste and diapers, but like so many multinational companies they are also scouring the globe for exotic currency transactions or interest-rate bets to balance out the risks of doing business in many different countries.
Betting wrong on some of this exotica, though, just cost P. &amp; G.'s shareholders $102 million.
That's a lot of diapers.


At Work; Preaching the Gospel of Reward
YOU might think a man who could write a book called "1,001 Ways to Reward Employees" would have put what most people would consider the most obvious -- more money -- at the top of the list.
Actually Robert Nelson thought of that, and rejected it.
"Most managers think it's just money," said Mr.
Nelson, a management consultant now traveling around the country promoting his book.
"Most people won't start with that. They want appreciation. They want to know what's going on with their job and how they're doing."
Mr.
Nelson's book, from Workman Publishing in New York, bears a family resemblance to another Workman product, the design-and-graphics-intensive Silver Palate cookbook series.
It documents the ways in which companies can make their employees feel appreciated, from having a chief executive stop by to pay compliments for good work to giving everyone, including receptionists, a business card to featuring workers in commercials or giving them cars.


Hold the Polo
Charles Walker Jr. doesn't play polo.
Neither do most of the young men and women, including black Americans like him, who at one time or another have made Ralph Lauren's Polo gear and Tommy Hilfiger clothing part of their daily wardrobes.
And so it is that Mr.
Walker, 26, of Augusta, Ga., has designed a line of clothing that he calls "Afrocentric preppy" and that made its debut this month.
Instead of a polo-pony logo, some of his shirts and caps bear an embroidered African-American crest of his devising: his slogan is "We Don't Play Polo." He also puts a new spin on preppy tradition by using African kente prints in his button-down shirts; the crest adorns rugby shirts and even, yes, polo shirts.


CRIME
Arresting, even dangerous images loom large in MEAN HIGH TIDE (Delacorte, $21.95), James W. Hall's fifth crime novel set in Florida and the third to feature the reclusive protagonist he calls Thorn.
But the sight that really sticks is the spectacle of two alligators mating in a steamy, sloshy swamp -- an apt metaphor for nature's fecundity and an unnerving comment on mankind's puny efforts to tame this primal power.
The theme of righteous vengeance also gets a workout in this pounding action thriller when Thorn's beloved companion, Darcy Richards, is murdered in a bizarre underwater attack by a human predator.
Vowing to become "hard and cold and merciless" in avenging Darcy, Thorn takes over her private investigation of various fish hatcheries involved in the experimental breeding of a red tilapia.
According to one marine biologist, the amazing procreative capacities of this mutant fish could wreck the entire ecosystem.


Daniela Pacher, C. L. von Breitenbach
Daniela Katharina Pacher, the daughter of Monika Pacher of New York and Ulf K. Pacher of Washington, was married last evening to Charles Ludwig von Breitenbach, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Powell of Fairfield, Conn.
The Very Rev.
Christopher Johnson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Dominic Church in Washington.
Mrs. von Breitenbach, 28, is a lawyer for the National Broadcasting Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University and received her law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the press counselor at the Austrian Embassy in Washington.
Her mother is the president of ICD Austria, an agency for industrial development in New York and Vienna.


Those Who Stay Calm in Disasters Face Psychological Risk, Studies Say
People who seem to be handling a disaster with aplomb may need the attention of rescue workers and counseling as much as those who seem to be experiencing panic, new studies show.
Those who react with an apparently unwarranted calm may be particularly prone to post-traumatic distress problems like severe anxiety, sleep disruptions or flashbacks, which may not surface until months or even years later, experts say.
They may also be inclined to put themselves in danger during a disaster because they ignore the reality of the peril.


Vaccination for TB
To the Editor:
It is time the United States began vaccinating all our children immediately against tuberculosis, which has reached epidemic proportions.
A Harvard School of Public Health study shows BCG vaccine (bacillus Calmette-Guerin) is highly effective, reducing full-fledged tuberculosis of the lung by 58 percent and death by 71 percent.
The World Health Organization recommends the vaccine as a standard childhood immunization.


Psychology Today, Solutions Tomorrow?
SCHIZOPHRENIA AND MANIC-DEPRESSIVE DISORDER The Biological Roots of Mental Illness as Revealed by the Landmark Study of Identical Twins.
By E. Fuller Torrey with Ann E. Bowler, Edward H. Taylor and Irving I. Gottesman.
Illustrated. 274 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $27.
HOUSE OF CARDS Psychology and Psychotherapy Built on Myth.
By Robyn M. Dawes. 338 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


Serbian General Who Calls the Shots: Determined and Calling West's Bluff
Beguiling and brutal by turns, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the commander of the Bosnian Serbs, has called the West's bluff yet again.
Western officials have speculated widely on the influence, and even the mental stability, of this blunt, explosive and passionate soldier, but his devastating assault on the Muslim enclave of Gorazde in eastern Bosnia suggests that the United States and its allies have not come to terms with the general's decisive role.


Access for Handicapped to Subways


Serbs Down a British Jet Over Gorazde
A British jet-fighter trying to strike against Serbian tanks that were attacking the besieged city of Gorazde was shot down today, apparently by a Serbian surface-to-air missile, United Nations spokesmen said here tonight.
The abortive air strike, part of a last-ditch attempt to save Gorazde from falling to the Serbs, came in response to Serbian tank attacks on the city's center today.
Among other targets, the Serbian artillery struck a local hospital, injuring several patients and prompting United Nations officials to threaten immediate air strikes unless the Serbs held their fire, a spokesman, Maj.
Dacre Holloway, said.


Address Proliferation
Stationery is becoming top-heavy.
Once, all you needed was an address.
Then came the telephone number, ZIP code and ZIP+4, and then the fax number, and in what seemed the final insult: address, telephone number, fax number and E-mail address.
Now, thanks to E-mail mania, stationery is popping up with address, telephone number, fax number, Compuserve address, Internet address, and America On-Line address.
Add pager and car phones and the message itself will have to go.


Onetime Darling Of French Artists
A HUNDRED YEARS AGO, PEOPLE all over France were awed and impressed by the gigantic historico-religious murals of Pierre Puvis de Chavannes.
And when Puvis showed the nine muses levitating, or lolling around in white shifts and doing nothing in particular, the public was captured, just as it is captured today by a Kurosawa movie or a daylong interpretation by Peter Brook of an Indian epic poem.
But times change, and perspectives change.
So do expectations.
The centenary in 1998 of the death of Puvis de Chavannes may or may not be a matter for heartfelt celebration around the world.
But already at this moment (and through May 29) there is a retrospective exhibition of more than 140 paintings and drawings by Puvis at the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam.


Scrap Metal? No Way. Antiques!
IT'S a familiar image.
As computer technology hurtles ahead, the "antique" machines of perhaps two years back are discarded, useless rubble piled ever higher in landfills.
Forget that picture.
Yes, just as Barbie dolls, Fiestaware and doo-wop records crossed that mysterious line that separates trash from treasure, old computers are becoming collectors' items.
In fact, clubs are sprouting up around the country, with doctors, lawyers and other professionals among their members -- some of whom are proud owners of as many as 60 computer dinosaurs.


On the Gulf Coast
To the Editor: In Cynthia Hacinli's report on Naples, Fla., ("A Low-Key Gulf Coast Retreat," Jan. 23) no reference is made to the Conservancy Inc. of Naples, which is the largest local environmental organization in Florida, nor to either of the Conservancy's two visitor centers.
One of these, in the city, is unusually diversified, with snake feedings, cages for injured birds large enough for them to practice flight again, and self-teaching electronic displays.
Visitors can take free boat rides in a mangrove lagoon.


A Crossroads of Politics and Protest
Ask anyone who has spent much time around the corridors of City Hall and he is likely to attest that it is not the corridors, but the steps, that are the most memorable place in New York City government.
Leland T. Jones, who was a spokesman for Mayors David N. Dinkins and Edward I. Koch, remembers the time a group of ministers paraded to the steps of City Hall chanting and "performing some sort of exorcism."


ON THE BUS
From the perspective of catching a glimpse into the lives of some dozen bus travelers, Rasmussen's article is quite revealing.
Yet a picture of the actual camaraderie that can occur "On the Bus" extends beyond travelers swapping bios.
It includes everything from riders helping a tired mother with her two young children during a 4 A.M. depot stop to the sharing of food among passengers whose paths may never cross again.
It is this that distinguishes bus travel from other forms of transportation in America.
L.
J.
MELTZER Nashville


THE GUIDE
POSTERS AS ART
Logos for Audi automobiles, Cat's Paw soles and Amoco gasoline are certainly familiar, but the man who designed them, Lucian Bernhard, a Viennese artist who died in 1972, is not.
Nevertheless, he is acknowledged to be one of the most influential poster and advertising artists of the 20th century, with examples of his work in the permanent collection of the Museum of Modern Art in Manhattan and many other institutions.


Gooden Toes Mark And Feels Just Fine
Over the past few seasons, when it comes to bizarre misfortune, there seems to have been a dark cloud hanging over Dwight Gooden, like one of those hard-luck characters in the comic strips.
How often does an ace starter miss a turn because a teammate (Vince Coleman) hits him on the shoulder while swinging a golf club in the clubhouse?
Is a bent spike jamming into the big toe a common baseball injury?
And back in 1991, Gooden hurt the middle toe on his left foot when teammate Mackey Sasser sat in a chair resting on the pitcher's foot.


April 10-16: A Study of Risks; Breast Cancer Near Chemical Sites
A report by the New York State Health Department appeared to lend weight to a growing belief among breast cancer activists that the environment, along with personal risk factors, could be responsible for the high rate of breast cancer on Long Island.
But it stopped short of making a direct causal connection between factory emissions and breast cancer.
What it did find was that women who spent years living near large chemical plants ran a 60 percent greater chance than the general population of developing breast cancer after menopause.
Their risk was roughly equal to that of having a family history of cancer.


Weddings; Jason Rosenfeld and Jamie Kreitman
Jamie Lauren Kreitman, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Benjamin Z. Kreitman of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Dr.
Jason Philip Rosenfeld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney M. Rosenfeld of East Williston, L.I.
The bride's father, the Rabbi of the World Council of Conservative Synagogues in New York, is to officiate at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride owns a knitwear company in New York that bears her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in Islamic studies from Columbia University and an associates degree from the Fashion Institute of Technology.


Fate of Vacant School Undecided
FOR nine years South Salem elementary school in Port Washington has remained closed and virtually unused.
Nearby residents have bused their children to a school five miles away.
The one-story structure, built on seven acres in the Salem section, was one of four schools closed by the district over the last decade because of declining enrollments.


In Bryant Park, Fashion Alfresco
Bryant Park is no stranger to spectacle and architecture.
In 1853, the Crystal Palace was built there for the World's Fair, and since 1910, the park has been the neighbor of the Beaux-Arts public library.
This past week, it was host to the white tents that held the fall fashion shows.
Nearby, 42d Street became a stylish promenade as women arrived for the collections.
Legs and short skirts emerged from their winter cover-ups; a trapeze coat, top right, fended off spring's chill.
Models clutched the week's accessory, bottled water, as they dashed from show to show.
And vibrant yellow daffodils along the park's garden paths provided their own glorious show.


'Spittin' Image' In World Premiere
THREE musical theater newcomers have compressed an expansive World War II novel about a Kentucky mountain clan, the Tussies -- 45 of 'em -- into a down-home show with a contemporary spin.
Down the country dirt roads more than 50 years ago, Grandpa, proudly illiterate, holds back his fatherless 12-year-old grandson, who is itching to learn.
Grandpa just wants him to go fishing.


Suicide Trial Set to Begin On Tuesday
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian will force a jury to try him this week for breaking a law that has already been ruled unconstitutional by three judges, that is under review by an appeals court and that the doctor has openly flouted, daring prosecutors to charge him.
"I assisted Thomas Hyde in a merciful suicide, no doubt about it," Dr.
Kevorkian said on Aug. 4, just hours after Mr.
Hyde, a 30-year-old man with Lou Gehrig's disease, inhaled carbon monoxide in the doctor's van in a park in Detroit.


New Race for Women
The sponsors of the CoreStates United States professional road-race cycling championship have announced a simultaneous women's bicycle race June 5 in Philadelphia.
The new CoreStates Liberty Classic will offer $25,000 in prize money, making it the world's richest one-day bicycle race for women.


Is U.S. Really Taking a Wrong Turn?
To the Editor:
Theodore J. Forstmann points out that American statism has "increased ignorance while spending more on education" and "increased racial tensions while trying to engineer equality." How true.


Weddings; Miss de Csepel And Mr. McGrady
Catherine de Csepel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John de Csepel of Riverside, Conn., was married there yesterday to Victor Robinson McGrady, a son of Susanne Kinsman McGrady of Waldoboro, Me., and Seamus McGrady of Seattle.
The Rev.
Gilbert D'Souza performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church.
The bride, 25, is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at Manhattanville College.
She graduated from Pine Manor College.
Her father is a vice president of Paine Webber in Darien, Conn.
Her mother is a music teacher at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Greenwich, Conn.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Rebecca Stafford; Leading Change at Monmouth College
DR.
REBECCA STAFFORD vividly remembers that May day in 1984 when she was inaugurated as the president of Chatham College in Pittsburgh.
She says she is not superstitious but, as a result of that experience, she will be looking for as many good omens as possible here on April 29.
That is the day that Dr.
Stafford, 57, a Kansas-born and Harvard-educated sociologist and a management expert, will officially be installed as the sixth president of Monmouth College.
She will be the first woman to hold that position in the 60-year history of the college, a private institution on the Jersey Shore.


Crossing Swords
To the Editor:
In her review of "The Silent Woman: Sylvia Plath &amp; Ted Hughes," by Janet Malcolm (March 27), Caryn James, while summarizing an earlier work by Ms.
Malcolm, writes that "Fatal Vision," my book about Jeffrey MacDonald, "made Dr. MacDonald look guilty" of the murders of his wife and two children.


Four Crazies With a Profusion of Pasta
"WHAT does Quattro Pazzi mean?" we asked the friendly waitress at the new restaurant of that name in Stamford.
"Four crazies," she replied.


Holocaust Memories Make the Serbs Fear Their Neighbors
To the Editor:
Frank Rich is justly concerned in "The Holocaust Boom" (column, April 7) about changing perspectives of the Holocaust.
For example, comparing the bestiality and rationalized murder that occurred in World War II, where 45 million people lost their lives, to the civil war in the former Yugoslavia is ridiculous and belittles the magnitude of the loss to humanity in World War II.


How to Fly
To the Editor:
Regarding your review of Kip S. Thorne's "Black Holes and Time Warps" and Michio Kaku's "Hyperspace" (March 20): In order to fly, according to Douglas Adams, you simply throw yourself to the ground and miss.
At 68, I've about given up hope.


In New London, Dorothy and Toto
DOROTHY and her pals will be following the Yellow Brick Road twice today in Connecticut as the stage version of "The Wizard of Oz" is performed at the Garde Arts Center in New London at 3 and 7 P.M. (The number to call for ticket information is 444-7373.)
Jewish customs and legends with "traditional songs set in styles ranging from jazz to salsa to foot-tapping rock" will be explored by Rabbi Joe Black in a 3 o'clock session today at Congregation Mishkan Israel in Hamden (281-0135).


Art and Commerce
IN the late 1970's and early 80's, Anita Contini produced a series of collaborative art projects on a landfill on Manhattan's lower West Side.
Art on the Beach, as it was called, presented spectacles like "The Language of Whales," a 30-foot-tall metal dome shaped like a head that was strung with automotive parts and children's toys and featured a percussionist who played his way to the top.
The series caused something of a stir and gave Ms.
Contini, a former actress, a reputation in downtown art circles for presenting avant-garde events in public places.


Ojeda Done in 1, Yankees Done in 11
Bob Ojeda was searching for his own version of the Yellow Brick Road today when he made his debut with the Yankees, searching for a path to make himself comfortable in his new baseball home.
All he discovered after struggling through nine batters at Tiger Stadium was a faded grassy route from the mound to the dugout.
His day ended in the first inning, and the Yankees' day ended with a 5-4 loss to Detroit in 11 innings.


Wegerle Has Surgery
ROY WEGERLE, a forward on the United States team, underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right knee on Friday but is expected to be recovered in time to play in the World Cup.
Wegerle, 30, who plays for Coventry City of the English Premier League, had surgery in Mission Viejo, Calif., and will remain there to rehabilitate his knee with the American team's medical staff.


Weddings; Susan Darrow, Andrew Jaques
Susan Elizabeth Darrow, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William R. Darrow of Basking Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Milton Jaques, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Jaques of Edgewater, Md.
The Rev.
Cynthia Strickland, a sister of the bridegroom who is a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Newton White Mansion in Mitchellville, Md.
Ms.
Darrow is keeping her name.
She and her husband graduated from Drew University.
She expects to receive a law degree from American University in May.
Her father is the senior vice president of medical operations at the Schering-Plough Corporation, the pharmaceutical company in Kenilworth, N.J.


POSTINGS: Navigating Central Park; A Topographical Map With Delights, Past and Present
Of course, one great joy of a walk through Central Park is an absence of purpose or destination, a willingness to let oneself be drawn off course by an unexpected vista.
But those who seek more in the way of navigational aids will probably rejoice in a colorful new map of Central Park that shows its features in delectable detail: hills and meadows, pathways and arches, buildings and bridges and bodies of water, prominent rocks and notable trees -- a turkey oak near West 92d Street, a Carolina silverbell near East 76th Street.
Topographical contours are given in four-foot intervals.


Explaining a Vision for a Grander Grand Central
Grand Central Terminal has never lost its monumentality but it has certainly frayed at the edges.
In coming years, it is to undergo a $100 million renovation that will increase its retail space and restore its architectural features.
To guide this project, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority chose the team that transformed Union Station in Washington in the 1980's into a bustling shopping center and food court as well as a rail hub.
LaSalle Partners will direct and manage the work, and Williams Jackson Ewing will handle retail planning and leasing.
A master plan has been drawn up by the architectural firm of Beyer Blinder Belle.


TAKING THE CHILDREN: From Naked Guns and Fangs to Thumbelina; Ace Ventura, Pet Detective
With this issue, the Arts and Leisure section starts a new feature appearing every other week: Taking the Children.
It will have synopses of movies with notes on elements that some parents may find objectionable.
The items are contributed by Janet Maslin, who is the Times's chief film critic and has sons aged 8 and 4; Patricia S. McCormick, a contributing editor of Parents magazine, who has a 10-year-old daughter and 4-year-old son, and Kenneth C. Davis, the author of "Don't Know Much About History," who has an 11-year-old daughter and 8-year-old son.
Ace Ventura, Pet Detective  Jim Carrey, Sean Young Directed by Tom Shadyac PG-13 85 minutes


Journal; The Plot Thickens At PBS
The continuing soap opera of PBS -- will it survive its cable competition, conservative critics, financial woes? -- is hardly the most thrilling of cliffhangers.
It's barely more compelling than the middlebrow "Middlemarch," a profusely illustrated Cliffs Notes version of George Eliot, now airing on a public station near you.
But with the new revelation that PBS has, in a cloak of darkness, abruptly abandoned its most successful prime-time dramatic series in more than a decade, the plot thickens most mysteriously.
Is PBS heading for a disastrous denouement?
The series in question is "Tales of the City," a six-hour adaptation of the first of Armistead Maupin's six novels about life among a cross-section of San Franciscans.
When broadcast in January, "Tales" was greeted with critical acclaim and record-breaking audiences for its touching portrait of the bygone 1970's and its wonderful cast headed by Olympia Dukakis and Donald Moffat.
Because the show contained a sprinkling of female breasts and profanities, PBS offered a slightly modified alternative version to its stations.
But except for three Southern states in which the religious right predictably exploited "Tales" for political ends, the series was not only broadcast without incident but served as an exceptionally potent tool for local station pledge drives.


Weddings; Benay Beth Klein, Steven D. Rubin
Benay Beth Klein, a fitness consultant, was married yesterday evening to Steven D. Rubin, a financial systems manager at Societe Generale, the Paris bank.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Brooks Sussman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.


Democrats Need Money and a Message to Rebuild
The last time the New Jersey Democratic Party lost the governorship and both chambers of the Legislature, the telephone company threatened to pull out the phones and the party's headquarters building had to be sold.
Things are not quite that bad now, only the second time since the adoption of the State Constitution in 1947 that the Democrats have been more spectators than players around the Capitol.


Ecological Correctness in Foodstuffs
FOR the purveyors of organic foods, April 22 Earth Day -- is cause for celebration.
At Mrs.
Green's Natural Market on Central Avenue, the event will be marked with two days of festivities, said the proprietor, Harold Hochberger.
"Earth Day is when we go all out to show consumers the difference between organic and commercial products," Mr.
Hochberger said.
"We will have representatives from organic food companies and from those who make herbal and homeopathic preparations on hand on Friday and Saturday giving out samples and demonstrating their products."


April 10-16: Smoke at the Capital; Tobacco Executives Testify for Cigarettes
Getting the top seven tobacco company executives to appear last week before Congress to say, under oath, what they did -- that cigarettes are not addictive and may not even be bad for you -- was one of the more unusual events in the long, strange history of tobacco politics in Washington.
The event followed by a few weeks the appearance of six Surgeons General to support a bill banning smoking in public buildings.
For the first time the Food and Drug Administration says it is willing to consider regulating cigarettes as drugs.


Weddings; Sharon Harms, Robert Johnson
Sharon Louise Harms, a computing consultant for the International Business Machines Corporation in New York, was married yesterday to Robert Warren Johnson, a public affairs manager for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard L. Jeske performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in New York.
Ms.
Harms is keeping her name.
She graduated from Pennsylvania State University and received a master's degree in education from Northeastern University and an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur M. Harms.


Ralph Ellison, Author of 'Invisible Man,' Is Dead at 80
Ralph Ellison, whose widely read novel "Invisible Man" was a stark account of racial alienation that foreshadowed the attention Americans eventually paid to divisions in their midst, died yesterday in his apartment on Riverside Drive.
He was 80.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his editor, Joe Fox.


Habitats/Edward Durrell Stone, Modified; 'Good Bones' in Rye
WHEN Victoria Paul first saw the strange amalgam of materials and architectural styles that had once been an Edward Durrell Stone house, she refused to get out of the car.
"That's why my husband and I complement each other," she said.
"He may have the better eye for a sow's ear than I do."


No Sociology. Just Help for Young Mothers.
"One day you're a teen-ager, and the next you're a mom," said Hilda Delgado, in her grave and stolid way.
Three years ago, in her senior year at Julia Richman High School on East 67th Street, soon after she was accepted at an upstate community college, Hilda Delgado became one of about 30,000 city teen-agers who get pregnant each year.
"I thought, 'Oh, my God, what am I going to do with a baby, I can't take it to college,' " she said.
"But my boyfriend was happy because he didn't want me to go away."


Very Much In Touch
To the Editor:
I would like set straight several misleading statements in Jamie James's otherwise very nice article about my grandfather, Louis Krasner  [ "A Model T Fuels a Masterpiece," March 20 ] .


A Chicken in Every Pot-au-Feu
The term "spring chicken" is now quaint, and that's a woeful sign of the times.
The fluffy chick that pecks and feeds indiscriminately has its charms, and those include an embarrassing tenderness and a mild, amiable flavor that happily absorbs any aromatics it comes in contact with.
A spring chicken is also freighted with innocence and a bald acceptance of the world.
In this way, its seductiveness cannot be underestimated.
The word "chick" has also come to mean a girl, specifically the kind who hangs out with very macho guys.
Likewise, "chicken," in gay circles, means the young and easily exploited.
Both concepts are about as dignified as chicks dyed pink in an Easter basket.


Readers Flocking to Book Discussions
DURING a recent lunch hour, when most of the daytime inhabitants of downtown White Plains were either grabbing a bite at their desks or indulging in consumer activities at the Galleria, a dozen adults sat in a small upstairs meeting room at the White Plains Public Library devouring another sort of sustenance.


Weddings; Ms. Creppel, Mr. Higginson
Collette Angeline Creppel, a daughter of Claire and Jacques Creppel of New Orleans, was married there yesterday to Stephen Andrew Higginson, a son of Genevra and Charles Higginson of Washington.
The Rev.
David A. Boileau performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Academy of the Sacred Heart Chapel.
Ms.
Creppel is keeping her name.
She is an architectural designer, and an adjunct assistant professor of architecture at Tulane University.
She and her husband graduated from Harvard University, from which she also received a master's degree in architecture.
Her parents own and manage the Columns Hotel in New Orleans.


The Icing on the Grape
I'd come to Strasbourg from Paris in the dead of winter to do a piece on a new luxury train.
It meant a night and most of the next day in this pretty Alpine town, so I called Christian Trimbach, of the famous Alsatian wine-making family, in nearby Ribeauville and wangled an invitation to lunch.


Gaining Insight Through Invisibility
Excerpts from "Invisible Man," by Ralph Waldo Ellison (Random House, 1952):
I'd like to hear five recordings of Louis Armstrong playing and singing "What Did I Do to Be so Black and Blue" -- all at the same time.  . . .
Perhaps I like Louis because he's made poetry out of being invisible.
I think it must be because he's unaware that he is invisible.
And my own grasp of invisibility aids me to understand his music.  . . .
Invisibility, let me explain, gives one a slightly different sense of time, you're never quite on the beat.
Sometimes you're ahead and sometimes behind.
Instead of the swift imperceptible flowing of time, you are aware of its nodes, those points where time stands still or from which it leaps ahead. . . .
. . .


Rental Market Tight in Hamptons
IN the worst of times, a downbeat real-estate broker is hard to find.
But when talk of economic recovery is in the air, just about everyone in the business turns into an unqualified optimist.
So it seems as the rental season moves into high gear in the Hamptons.
Among a group of South Fork brokers, pessimists are as rare at the end of March as unrented houses south of the highway with a pool and four bedrooms, and for the same reason.


Parenthood


Bratton in the Precinct: Earning Trust
After the biggest roundup of New York City police officers on corruption charges in a decade, Commissioner William J. Bratton addressed the morning roll call on Friday at the 30th Precinct, where the arrested officers had been assigned.
Here are excerpts from his remarks, as recorded by The New York Times:
It is unfortunate that in this command for the last number of months many officers who wear that shield that you also proudly pinned on your chests when you took the oath of office decided to use that shield for purposes other than for which it was intended, specifically to protect and serve.
Many chose to use it to rob, to steal, to beat, to violate the law.
They have now been arrested and many of them are going to go to jail for a long time.


Two Exhibitions Intended to Contrast the Mind and the Body
AT an exhibition occupying the Gallery at Hastings-on-Hudson, 22 artists are, according to the title, "In Search of the Spirit." At another show, on view at the John Froats Gallery in Cold Spring, a painter is obsessed with human anatomy.
When taken together, these displays promise a contrast between mind and body, but what they deliver is more an exercise in blurred distinctions.
At Hastings, for instance, Carol Hamoy's assemblages of creamy satin, ostrich feathers, lace and beads imply acquisitiveness, Edwardian style.
The ceramic figures of Elizabeth Surbeck Biddle are a blend of the decorative and humorous, especially the one that is a body with male and female heads, the first of which is crowned by a baby.


Weddings; Paula Garell, D. A. Greenwood
Paula Claire Garell, a news anchor at WSTM-TV in Syracuse, was married last evening to Donald Arthur Greenwood, the lawyer for the Town of DeWitt, N.Y.
The Rev.
Martin Weitz, a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church, performed the ceremony at the Grand Palazzo Hotel on St.
Thomas, V.I.
Ms.
Garell is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul Garell of Wappingers Falls, N.Y.
She graduated with honors from Villanova University.
Her father is the senior physician at the Park Medical Group in Beacon, N.Y.
Her mother, Teresa Garell, is a dental hygienist in Fishkill, N.Y.


Melanie Derman, Stephen Hoenig
Dr.
Melanie Paige Derman, a resident in internal medicine, and Dr.
Stephen John Hoenig, a surgical resident, both at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston, were married last evening.
Rabbi Gerald L. Zelizer performed the ceremony at the Shackamaxon Country Club in Scotch Plains, N.J.
The bride, 28, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received her medical degree from the Albert Einstein School of Medicine.


Time to Replace the Lawn With a Potato Patch
I WENT a little hog wild on my potato order this spring, but I couldn't help myself.
For one thing, I've had such great luck with potatoes.
No scab, no blight.
No Colorado potato beetles to speak of (now watch the hordes descend).
Just big bushy green plants covered, in good time, with delicate white flowers.
Once the plants bloom, you know those tubers are burgeoning underground and you can steal a few new potatoes. (Just sneak a hand into the soft soil and pick a few off the stems, but be gentle, so as not to injure the plants, and don't be too greedy.)


April 10-16; New, for the 4-Wheel Buff: Truck Chic a la Russe
THE burly steel bodies were designed to repel small-caliber bullets.
Siphon tubes are standard equipment, for those who run out of gasoline in the mountains or on the Cross Bronx Expressway.
The vehicles need little maintenance and take a lot of abuse.
With virtues like these, who needs a compact-disk player and fancy upholstery in the cab?
If the sales pitch doesn't grab you, maybe the price will.
We're talking $13,000 or $14,000, about half the going rate for one of those insanely popular sport utility vehicles.
O.
K., so it's really a truck -- a Russian truck, the UAZ.
A Virginia businessman hopes there's a market for this no-frills Clydesdale in the United States.


At Last, the 107th Moves In
After four months of delays, complaints and inconvenience, the 107th Precinct finally moved into its new headquarters in the Electchester section of Flushing last week.
The building, on Parsons Boulevard at 71st Avenue, was finished in November, but problems including a leaky roof, a faulty temperature-control system and a central-air-conditioning fan that was installed backward delayed the original January moving-in date.


CLINTON ASKS HELP ON POLICE SWEEPS IN PUBLIC HOUSING
A week after a judge blocked a more ambitious approach, President Clinton today announced a new initiative intended to increase police searches for illegal drugs and weapons in public housing projects plagued by gang violence.
A Federal judge last week halted an effort by the Chicago Housing Authority to conduct these searches without warrants.
But Mr.
Clinton said today that Attorney General Janet Reno and Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros had devised a "constitutionally effective way" of allowing more voluntary or emergency searches of public housing.


Clintons' Co-Investor in Whitewater Rides a Crest
While Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton may consider the furor caused by their investment in the Whitewater Development Company 12 years ago depressing, for James B. McDougal, their partner in the real estate venture, it has suddenly become utterly rejuvenating.
Some months ago, Mr.
McDougal was lamenting with friends and interviewers about his miserable life, which he said would soon be ended by an assortment of medical problems.
But these days, he is running for Congress.


New Hotels Attest To Cuba's Reawakening
IT often seems that the only new buildings in this majestic but badly moldering city are its hotels.
Glass and steel high-rises reach skyward on the Malecon, Havana's curving sea-wall boulevard.
Proud landmarks like El Nacional strut their newly renovated fin-de-siecle elegance.
Meanwhile, along the country's generously endowed coastline, beach resorts are cropping up like mushrooms.
Downtown, in the elegant Prado area, the Hotel Plaza opened recently.
Farther along is the nearly finished Cohiba, and in the mostly residential seaside quarter of Miramar are the Triton and Neptune hotels.
The new hotels here and elsewhere in the country are being built and managed with the participation of foreign firms.
Spain's Grupo Sol and Guitart have become two of the biggest players.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Trade deficit, Feb., billions of dollars
9.85
10.56
Wednesday
Housing starts, March, millions, ann. rate
1.31
1.40
Building permits, March, millions, ann. rate
1.25
1.45
Thursday
U.S. budget deficit, March, billions of dollars
41.6
34.0
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
348
335
This Week's Numbers
Tuesday
Chrysler reports earnings
Wednesday
Treasury announces 2- and 5-year note sales
Thursday
Philadelphia Fed releases business survey


The Nod That Launched a Dozen Populist British Films
DAVID AUKIN'S OFFICE doesn't conjure up the lair of a movie mogul.
No potted palms, white gravel garden, sweeping sofas.
Instead there are a comfortable if sagging couch, stacks of papers and framed family photographs on a ledge overlooking the streets behind Tottenham Court Road.
It is more like the office of a harried television executive, which, in a sense, Mr.
Aukin is.
But as head of drama and commissioning editor of films for Channel 4, one of Britain's two independent non-cable stations, he is arguably the most influential figure in the British film industry.


Weddings; Adele Myers, Gary Abrams
Jeanie Adele Myers, an account executive at Creamer Dickson Basford, a public relations agency in New York, was married yesterday to Gary Stephen Abrams, the executive producer of the international division of Major League Baseball in New York.
The Rev.
Edward Morgan performed the ceremony at the First Baptist Church in Asheville, N.C.
Mrs.
Abrams, 25, is known as Adele.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon S. Myers of Asheville.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina.


Groups Trace Soldiers' Footsteps
THERE is an enormous choice of tours, cruises and self-guided tour packages available, in a wide range of prices, that either focus on or include D-Day sites in Normandy.
A selection is offered here.
Tours, many of them for veterans, that include attendance at the official commemorative ceremonies are sold out.
Special Cruises
Unless otherwise stated, all prices are per person in double occupancy.
Air fare, when included, is generally from selected U.S. gateways.


World Markets; Lisbon Marches to Its Own Drummer
INVESTORS in Lisbon's small but booming stock market were barely ruffled when rising American interest rates sent most European markets into a turmoil last month.
Never mind the bears on Wall Street, forget the wild swings in neighboring Madrid.
Portugal is on its own cycle.
Foreign investment and falling local interest rates have been fueling a strong rally that began more than a year ago and is likely to continue, albeit at a slower pace.
Lisbon's widely followed BVL index had already soared 53 percent in 1993, reaching a high of 848.54 on the last day of the year.
Defying all predictions, the index continued to climb at an even dizzier pace throughout the first two months of this year, zooming up to 999.46 on Feb. 18, just short of the psychologically important 1,000 mark, which was last surpassed in October 1989.


Serbs' Orchestrator
The Bosnian Serb commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, has become the wild card in the Balkan conflict.
To underestimate him and his role is to risk underestimating the depth of Serb passion aroused by the war and the complexity of making peace.
Article, page 12.


No Headline


In Small Claims Court, David Defeats Goliath
To the Editor:
I would like to add the story of my experience in Small Claims Court to your article, "The People's Court," on March 20.


If You Can't Tell a Figgis From a Newell
THE BRITISH themselves are quick to admit that their film industry is an economic shambles.
You wouldn't know it, though, from the first-rate films by English and Irish directors that have flooded out of the country lately.
Films as somber as "Naked" and as fluffy as "Enchanted April" have gained high profiles in recent years, but the profiles of the directors have remained fuzzy.
It's as if they were all one person -- a middle-aged, shaggy-haired guy named Mike.
Is it Mike Leigh or Ken Loach who makes indignant, witty films about the beleaguered working class (the backhanded artistic legacy of the Thatcher years)?
Actually, they both do.


Is U.S. Really Taking a Wrong Turn?
To the Editor:
In his passionate defense of laissez-faire capitalism, Theodore J. Forstmann seems unaware of how ahistorical his views are.
How someone who ignores so much American history can hope to predict the future is a mystery.


Where Does Viewer Discretion Begin?
THE SIGN ON THE DOOR SAYS: "This exhibition contains stark images of war. Viewer discretion is advised." The show is "Farewell to Bosnia: New Photographs by Gilles Peress" at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, some of the images are stark enough, and the idea that we should view Bosnia with discretion adds a mordant note to the politics of art.
A wall labeled "Dismemberment" includes the image of a young boy, his face tactfully left out of the picture, holding up two stumps at the ends of his arms; a man on an operating table, fully awake, his entire leg clamped open and displaying its secret structures; and on a shelf in the prosthetic unit, three gleaming feet made of some up-to-date synthetic, the toenails meticulously drawn in.


Coroner Be Not Proud
The Los Angeles Department of Coroner runs a popular gift shop and mail-order catalogue.
It sells personalized toe-tag key chains, mugs and boxer shorts -- all decorated in good taste, says Alan Velasquez of the coroner's office.
For instance, he says, "the chalk body outlines on the beach towels are more artistic and rounded than what you would find at a homicide scene."
Given that New York City faces a $2.3 billion deficit and given Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's interest in new sources of revenue, why shouldn't New York also try to profit from death?


U.S. Passports Return To Blue From Green
After an 11-month stint of green, the State Department has returned to blue for passport covers.
Last month the Department once again revised passports to incorporate additional security features to protect against forgery and other alterations, including a thread embedded in the cover and special inks.
The woven cloth introduced in last year's cover has been retained.
Since the green passports were introduced in April 1993, 3.8 million were issued.


The World: 'Friendly Fire' in Iraq; The Pentagon Re-Examines Hair Triggers
THE deadly case of mistaken identity in which two F-15C fighter planes shot down a pair of Army helicopters ferrying allied officials over northern Iraq last week is more than a baffling mystery for military investigators.
It has also set the Pentagon thinking about the tricky business of making rules of combat for the netherworld between war and peace.
The immediate issue is how to set the wisest rules of engagement for a new military concept -- the air exclusion zone, now in use in both Iraq and Bosnia.


Movie Miracle On 76th Street: No Complaints
For six days, Central Park West was overrun by Keebler elves, walking Christmas trees and Santa Claus.
All were part of an invading force deployed by 20th Century-Fox nearly two weeks ago to film a massive Thanksgiving Day parade scene for its remake of the holiday classic "Miracle on 34th Street."


Overlooked Question in Singapore Caning Debate: Is the Teen-Ager Guilty?
Lost in the trans-Pacific debate about crime and punishment over the proposed caning of an 18-year-old American living here is a question that is on the minds of many Americans in Singapore: Did the teen-ager, Michael Peter Fay, really commit the crimes that could now result in six skin-splitting lashes from a rattan cane?
Although Mr.
Fay signed a statement last fall in which he confessed to spray-painting cars during 10 days of vandalism, he has since insisted to friends and family that the confession was coerced during a police beating, and that he is innocent of any crime.


Smithsonian Exhibit Charts Science's Role
The Smithsonian's National Museum of American History in Washington is commemorating both the input and the fallout of "Science in American Life" with a new, permanent interactive exhibition scheduled to open April 27.
The 12,000-square-foot science center uses artifacts, photos and audio to take visitors from a re-creation of the pioneering chemical laboratory opened at Johns Hopkins in 1876, to a family fallout shelter in Fort Wayne, Ind., to the life-size kitchen, living room and lawn of a typical tract home in Albuquerque, N.M.


The Nation; Music Confers an Afterlife As Cacophony Lingers On
HE put a gun to his head, pulled the trigger and was gone.
And his next single was his biggest hit.
The singer was Johnny Ace, who died in a Russian roulette game on Christmas Eve, 1954; the song "Pledging My Love" made him the first posthumously successful rocker.
Kurt Cobain went about his suicide more deliberately.
He left a note and identification when he shot himself, a few days before he was discovered on April 8.
Although Mr.
Cobain's band, Nirvana, was selling millions of albums and filling concert halls, Mr.
Cobain's note said he was tired of "faking it." A turbulent marriage, drug problems and chronic stomach pain probably didn't make his life any easier.
His career, however, is not over.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  She used to present experimental art on a Manhattan landfill.
Now, Anita Contini is bringing downtown to Wall Street.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.4  Charlie Goldstein, power broker, sells sport coats.
Actually he sells a style, the Brooks Brothers style.


A Not-So-Perfect Garden
To the Editor:
Lena Williams wrote a fascinating article on the success of Madison Square Garden.
Of course, I could do a lot better myself if I could get the type of favorable tax breaks the Garden has received.
I have a great idea!
Why don't you do a story on how much in taxes Madison Square Garden hasn't paid and then find out how much that money could have helped New York City and its people -- especially those who are soon to be unemployed, left without medical care or suffer from the downgrading of services, like park maintenance and street cleaning, because of the city's huge budget gap.
ELI GANIAS  Manhattan, March 30


POP BRIEFS
Ace of Base: 'The Sign' Arista 18740: CD and cassette.


Weddings; Nina Stuzin, Gary Vincoff
Dr.
Nina Elizabeth Stuzin, the daughter of Drs.
Gerald Stuzin and Marie deCorse of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., was married last evening to Gary Vincoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Vincoff of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Rabbi Fred Neulander performed the ceremony at the Mansion on Main Street, a catering establishment in Voorhees, N.J.
The bride, 26, is an intern specializing in internal medicine at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she magna cum laude and he cum laude.
She also received her medical degree from Penn.


Whose History Is It?
To the Editor:
In his polemical review of Ira M. Rutkow's "Surgery: An Illustrated History" (March 13), Sherwin B. Nuland repeatedly demonstrated the very narrow-mindedness that makes his brand of medical history vulnerable to criticism.
Because medicine, in Western culture and elsewhere, exceeds the activities of doctors, contemporary historians of medicine include the perspective of nurses, technicians, insurers, journalists and (egad!) even patients in their projects.
If Dr.
Nuland had explained why he thought the views of physicians should be privileged over those of other participants, his review would have been more persuasive.
DEBORAH J. FRANKLIN  Philadelphia


Q and A
Co-op Units And Laws On Renting Q. I am currently in the market to buy an apartment, with the purpose of renting it.
But I have one great concern.
I remember reading about someone who rented out his co-op apartment and its status returned to a rent-stabilized apartment, so the co-op owner is stuck with a rent-stabilized tenant.


Bites of Spring On the East Side
ARCADIA **  (212) 223-2900; 21 East 62d Street; all major credit cards
The popularity of this charming restaurant is owed to its chef and owner, Anne Rosensweig, who has managed over the years to delight a filled house night after night with inventive, contemporary American cooking.
The clamorous dining room is pretty and cozy with its bucolic wraparound mural, soft lighting and tightly arranged tables.


Holy Bull Front-Running Straight to Derby
Holy Bull kept bounding along the road to the Kentucky Derby today in his customary catch-me-if-you-can way.
He led from the start and finished with a flourish as he won the Blue Grass Stakes by three and a half lengths over a stalking but fading Valiant Nature.
It was the seventh time in eight starts that the imposing gray colt had won almost wire to wire.
The next time he tries to outrun the world, he will be shooting out of the gate at Churchill Downs three weeks from today as the favorite in the 120th Kentucky Derby.


49ers Making Norton A Five-Year Offer
CARMEN POLICY, president of the San Francisco 49ers, says he is cautiously optimistic that KEN NORTON, a free-agent linebacker from Dallas, will accept the club's five-year, $8 million contract offer.
Policy also confirmed on Friday that his team is trying to trade quarterback STEVE BONO, scheduled to make $1.55 million next season as STEVE YOUNG's backup, to create more room under the $34.6 million player payroll cap.


Weddings; Nell C. Brickner and Brent L. Lewis
Nell Cecilie Brickner and Brent L. Lewis, both musicians, are to be married today by Dr.
Matthew Ies Spetter, a leader of the Riverdale-Yonkers Society for Ethical Culture, at the home of the bride's parents, Dr.
Philip W. and Alice R. Brickner, in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The bride, 36, graduated from the California Institute of the Arts.
She is a singer and songwriter whose work has been released by Ikauma Records in Joshua Tree, Calif., which is owned by the bridegroom.
Her father, an internist, is the chairman of the community medicine department at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in New York.
Her mother is a painter.


Vizquel's Glove Suddenly Turns to Brass
Royals 12, Indians 9  Shortstop Omar Vizquel, a Gold Glove winner last season, committed three errors that led to seven Kansas City runs yesterday and the visiting Royals beat the Cleveland Indians, 12-9.


Is U.S. Really Taking a Wrong Turn?
To the Editor:
One pities the folks at old Pepperdine University who had to listen to Theodore J. Forstmann's diatribe about government subverting capitalism while the rest of the world embraces it.
The chieftains of investment companies should leave lecturing on economics to others and stick to what last month's market debacle confirmed they do best: fleecing the middle class.
RICHARD PHILLIPS  Brooklyn, April 4  The writer is a retired architect who relies on the income from his investments.


Weddings; Lynn Breidenbach, Richard Phillips
Lynn Breidenbach, a coordinator of corporate affairs for the National Basketball Association in New York, and Richard George Phillips, the associate at Suffolk Capital Management, an investment management company in New York, were married last evening.
Rabbi Peter J. Rubinstein performed the ceremony at the Metropolis Country Club in White Plains.
The bride is the daughter of Carolyn S. and Lester Breidenbach Jr. of New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


Choosing Prize Winners
THE spring craft exhibition at the Prallsville Mills in Stockton melds the bland with the beautiful.
You have to search for the finesse and esthetic innovations that distinguished work shown in the last two years, but there are still enough highlights to justify a trip to this 10th annual show in a historic mill building.
Of the 55 craft artists who were invited, 11 live in New Jersey.
Prize winners were selected by Toshiko Takaezu, an internationally renowned ceramic artist who lives in Hunterdon County.
Although Ms.
Takaezu was pleased with her final choices, she said the task of picking prize- caliber work was a challenge.


Crossing Swords
To the Editor:
In Caryn James's excellent review of Janet Malcolm's "Silent Woman," Ms.
Malcolm is quoted in favor of biographical bias: "The pose of fair-mindedness, the charade of evenhandedness, the striking of an attitude of detachment can never be more than rhetorical ruses."


If You're Thinking of Living In/Chatham; Rich Past, Bustling but Homey Present
FIRST settled in the 1720's along the Indian Minisink Trail, where the Leni Lenapes forded the Passaic River, the Morris County Borough of Chatham thrives in its rich past.
Main Street, which follows that trail, still has black cast-iron fire hydrants with the date 1889 in raised numbers.
Businesses -- including banks, boutiques, hardware stores, beauty salons, video shops and one supermarket -- are all small enough to blend in with the town's turn-of-the-century look.


Who's in Charge of Endangered Species?
To the Editor:
"An 'Extinct' Butterfly Flutters Back to Life" (Science Times, April 5) makes some intriguing statements about the rediscovery of the Palos Verdes blue butterfly, thought until several weeks ago to be extinct.


Right as the Rain Forest
Uptown -- Larry Cox, the executive director of the Rainforest Foundation International, was feeling a twinge of envy.
Last weekend, he was sitting in the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria at the supper and auction after the foundation's benefit concert on Saturday at Carnegie Hall, where he got to share the stage with Sting, Elton John, Tammy Wynette, James Taylor, Whitney Houston, Branford Marsalis, Aaron Neville and other musicians.


The Little Radio Station That Could
DUMONT
STUFFED into a cramped studio on the second floor of a cinder-block building here, a tiny FM radio station short on power but long on enthusiasm is changing the way tens of thousands of residents in northern New Jersey tune their radios.
The station, WJUX-FM, 103.1, has just celebrated its first anniversary as "Bergen County's Hometown Radio Station." In one year it has attracted 40,000 listeners a week and a cadre of loyal sponsors by broadcasting local news, traffic reports and ballads and big-band hits from the 1930's, 40's and 50's.


Blacks in Oakland Are Trying to Buy City's Major League Team
Ever since Jackie Robinson broke through professional baseball's color line in 1947, blacks have complained that they remained underrepresented in the front office.
Now, prominent blacks here and nationally are trying to pull together a coalition of business leaders, entertainers and former athletes to buy the Oakland Athletics baseball club, which may soon be for sale.


Officer, 26, Kills Himself in Brooklyn, Police Say
A 26-year-old New York City police officer shot and killed himself early yesterday morning in the basement of his parents' house in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, the police said.
He was the third officer to commit suicide this year and the second this month, they said.
The officer, Bill Kokkalakis, had been on the force for four years and was assigned to the 67th Precinct in East Flatbush, where he worked the 4 P.M.-to-midnight shift on Friday.
He was not under any investigation, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.


ON THE BUS
With Charles Kuralt retiring, you might consider doing more pieces like the human-interest vignettes in Tim Rasmussen's "On the Bus" (March 27).
We need glimpses into the lives of others to gain understanding of ourselves and those around us whose lives we otherwise might not touch.
This is the purpose of literature.
COLLEEN SPANGLER Larchmont, N.Y.


Chronicling Connecticut Artists, Well Known and Unknown
SINCE there are reputations exhumed by revisionism that might better have been left buried, news of yet another revival is not necessarily good news.
Accordingly, it is a pleasure to report that the William Benton Museum of Art's exhibition called "Art in Connecticut: Between World Wars" is not more of the same.


Let's Hit Two: Batters Are Doing Just That So Far This Season
This is the Noah's Ark of baseball seasons: Players are hitting home runs in pairs.
The talk of the major leagues in the first two weeks of the season has been the increase in the number of home runs being hit and the number of runs being scored.
Lurking within that puffed-up production, though, is a development more intriguing than the general trend.


Weddings; E. R. Sollmann, Dean C. Durling
Elizabeth Ryder Sollmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Sollmann of Redding, Conn., was married yesterday to Dean Chapman Durling, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlton C. Durling of Whitehouse, N.J.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Durling, 31, is an associate with Bunny Williams Inc., an interior design company in New York.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is the president of the Fastener Systems Corporation, an enginering concern in Fairfield, Conn.


Weddings; Amy M. Ellis, Gregory Coffey
Amy Miriam Ellis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Ellis of Newton Centre, Mass., was married yesterday to Gregory Joseph Coffey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin J. Coffey of Port Charlotte, Fla.
Judge David H. Kopelman of Massachusetts Superior Court in Dedham officiated at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston.


District Lines for a Nassau Legislature Taking Final Shape
WHEN demographers began drawing districts for the new Nassau legislature they focused on Hempstead, in the heart of the county.
They molded its growing minority-group neighborhoods into the first two districts, following a directive from Judge Arthur D. Spatt of Federal District Court for the Eastern District of New York.
"The judge's first demand was that we insure the constitutional requirement of one-person one-vote," a demographer, Dr.
Luther Blake, said.
"The second was that we provide minority representation, as required by the Voting Rights Act."


The Great Midtown Car Race
If a mythical car race was held on midtown's north-south boulevards between 30th and 59th Streets, this would be the finish.
The Indianapolis 500 it ain't.
Driving in midtown isn't getting easier.
In 1982, the New York City Transportation Department began issuing twice-yearly reports on car speeds in midtown.
That fall vehicles moved at 7.3 miles per hour on streets and avenues.
The most recent report, covering last fall, shows vehicles moving at 6.5 m.p.h.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SEX  HETEROSEXUALITY  By William H. Masters, Virginia E. Johnson and Robert C. Kolodny.
HarperCollins, $27.50.


Iowa Remembered


A Principal Is Getting High Marks
When David Vas Nunes became principal of Community Elementary School 53 in 1991, the school had not yet recovered from the arrest three years before of Matthew Barnwell, its principal, on cocaine possession charges.
The school, at 360 East 168th Street, ranked last in the district in both reading and mathematics scores, and the State Education Department was monitoring the school to decide whether it should be included on the list of the state's worst schools.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  SERBS SHOOT DOWN NATO JET  The Serbs shot down a British jet that was trying to halt the Serbs from advancing into the Bosnian city of Gorazde.
The assault continued despite Serbian promises to halt.  1  HARD CHOICE FOR U.N.
IN BOSNIA  News analysis: The United Nations faces a quandary over whether to escalate its operation in Bosnia to force the Serbs to the negotiating table or whether to withdraw and end its mission there.  12


Not Their Fault
When long-term taxpayers like the Alcor Life Extension Foundation start leaving a state it's a sign of trouble.
Alcor freezes people after they die for future revival.
And it just packed up its "patients" and moved from Riverside, Calif. to Scottsdale, Ariz.
Why?
Taxes, of course.
And the city prohibited Alcor from conducting animal research.
But perhaps most worrisome for a future-oriented business, and for its patients, an 8.0 earthquake is predicted for Riverside and environs when the San Andreas Fault finally slips.


Sisterhood


Data Bank/April 17, 1994
Data Bank/April 17, 1994
Producer Price Index
March
Feb.
Jan.
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.5
0.2
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.3
0.0
Sales at Retail Outlets
Monthly percent change
0.4
1.6
-1.7
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.6
0.4
Business Inventories
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.2
-0.2
Lumber Production
Jan.
Dec.
Nov.
Millions of board feet
4,548
3,515
3,847
Weekly Jobless Claims
April 8
March 31
March 24
In thousands
348
336
331
Cash Wheat Price
April 15
April 8
March 31
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.54
$3.63
$3.55


Touch of New York In Miami Dining
I FIRST went to Miami a good many years ago, when fine dining there meant chicken-fried alligator steak and not much else.
Miami restaurants had nowhere to go but up and they have been doing exactly that, with polished consistency, ever since.
A few years back, Miami chefs like Allen Susser of Chef Allen's, Mark Militello of Mark's Place and Douglas Rodriguez of Yuca Cafe took a look at what was at hand.
They found some of the nation's finest fruits and vegetables, rich seafood resources from the Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico and a Caribbean cooking tradition that was full of exciting flavors.
Recently, chefs from other parts of the country, notably New York City, have flocked to Miami to experiment with new ideas.
So it was not surprising on a recent visit to discover New York cooks like Larry Forgione of An American Place and Richard Chiavari, formerly of the River Cafe, in Miami.


Remember the Mainframe
To the Editor:
"Helping Big Corporations Out of Computer Limbo" (The Executive Computer, March 20) was on the mark in citing the interest in client-server applications and the allure of new graphic-user-interface tools in developing those applications.
But it was off target when it said networks of personal computers and servers "are a much cheaper and friendlier source of computing power."


Weddings; Laura J. Schisgall, S. C. Sterenberg
Laura Judith Schisgall, an associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, was married last evening to Stanley Charles Sterenberg, the owner of the Athlete's Foot store on West 72d Street in Manhattan.
Rabbi Michael Kramer officiated at the Ritz-Carlton in Washington.
Ms.
Schisgall, who is keeping her name, graduated from Vassar College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Jane Kushner Papish of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Dr.
Richard Michael Schisgall.
The bride's mother teaches the third grade at Strathmore Elementary School in Kensington, Md.


Letters From A Lonely Poet
ONE ART Letters.
By Elizabeth Bishop.
Selected and edited by Robert Giroux.
Illustrated. 668 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $35.


B. J. Greenwood, And James Pugh
Barbara Jessup Greenwood, a lawyer, and James Richard Pugh, the treasurer of the Hill School in Pottstown, Pa., were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
John W. Riegel, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in the school's chapel.
The bride, 37, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. J. Greenwood of St.
Catharines, Ontario, Canada.
She was until recently a deputy director of legal services for the Ontario Ministry of Health in Toronto.
She graduated from the University of Toronto and received her law degree from Osgoode Hall Law School at York University.
Her father is a consulting engineer and the president of Greenwood Engineering Ltd. in St.
Catharines.


M.T.A. Offers Later Closing for Coliseum but Dismisses Call for Appraisal
As a struggle over the sale of the New York Coliseum site headed for a showdown, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority offered yesterday to delay closing the deal for up to two weeks but dismissed City Hall's call for a fundamental review of the site's value.
On Friday Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani called on the agency to delay the closing, which had been scheduled for tomorrow, to allow an independent appraisal of the property.
The transportation authority is trying to sell the property to the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman, but Mr.
Zuckerman, with the Mayor's support, wants to renegotiate the agreement.


Ariane Is Her Name; the Avant-Garde Is Her Game
WHAT A PIECE OF WORK I AM (A Confabulation).
By Eric Kraft. 275 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $22.


Thomas Likes High Intensity of Rangers-Isles After High-Water Year
Steve Thomas of the Islanders has much in common with Adam Graves of the Rangers.
Both led their teams in goals, Thomas with 42, Graves with 52.
Both play on the wing of the top forward line alongside star centers.
Thomas skates to the right of Pierre Turgeon, Graves to the left of Mark Messier.
Both Thomas and Graves play ruggedly along the boards and in front of the net.
Both are enjoying the prime years of their careers in New York after beginning with other teams.
Both are from Toronto and both played as juniors in the Ontario League.
And both have family roots in England.


Fewer Buttons Make Gear Simpler
THAT DURABLE MASTER of intelligent simplicity, the essayist E.B.
White, once explained why things get complicated.
"Because," he says, "one thing leads to another." Details of his argument escape me, but I remember his conclusion: "I predict a bright future for complexity in this country."
That's exactly what happened in home electronics.
Sound gear these days looks like something from the cockpit of a jetliner, leaving knob-shy listeners lost among all those buttons.
So it's welcome news that efforts are under way to reverse this trend.
Some new equipment is designed expressly to make it simpler to operate -- more user-friendly.


The Satirist Who Landed in a Sitcom
IN MAY 1993 DAVE THOMAS, formerly of the brilliant "Second City Television" comedy troupe, appeared on NBC's 90th birthday tribute to Bob Hope.
During that three-hour "parade of stars," a tuxedoed Mr.
Thomas (whose turn came just after Lucie Arnaz and just before Brooke Shields) was introduced as "Chester Hope, Bob's nephew." He did a gently satirical version of Mr.
Hope's standup style.
Then, dropping out of character, he praised Mr.
Hope as "the guy everybody acknowledges as the best."
The few former SCTV fans who would watch a Hope tribute were probably puzzled at this.
In the late 1970's and early 80's Mr.
Thomas' darkly hilarious impersonation of Mr.
Hope -- portraying the comedian as a tightfisted pragmatist totally dependent on his gag writers and business sense -- typified the biting, seditious "SCTV" approach.


Mideast Talks Turn Focus To Prisoners
Israeli officials said today that they would allow another group of Palestinians deported from the occupied territories to return home this week and that the issue of some 8,500 Palestinian followers of an Islamic militant group held in Israeli jails would be discussed when peace talks resume in Cairo on Sunday.
The issue of the prisoners remains one of the few obstacles left before the conclusion of an agreement on carrying out the accord for Palestinian self-rule signed by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization in Washington last September.


Toward Seizing a Market
In an effort to revive a dilapidated stretch of waterfront in the South Bronx near Yankee Stadium, the city has taken its first tangible step toward seizing the Bronx Terminal Market from its long-term lease holder, officials said last week.
The property, a collection of ramshackle warehouses in Mott Haven, was leased to Arol Development Corporation in 1972 by the Koch administration.
The lease expires in 2052.
For years, the city and the company have been battling in court over repairs and rent.
Last July, Mayor Dinkins announced that the fading waterfront property would be redeveloped in a move seen as an important step toward keeping the Yankees in the stadium.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
There were wonderful portraits in Roger Rosenblatt's article "How Do Tobacco Executives Live With Themselves?" (March 20).
What exactly is a "social smoker"?
If smoking has become an antisocial behavior, how then could a social smoker exist?


The World; Anti-Western Winds Gain Force in Russia
THE UNITED STATES gave the Russian Government a sizable and unwelcome jolt last week with the bombing of the Bosnian Serbs.
Because the Clinton Administration didn't bother to advise Russia in advance, another rung on the ladder of trust seems to have snapped.
The Russian reaction -- humiliated, angry, even petulant -- had a familiar ring, but from another era.
It united ultranationalist politicians with the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin in a fashion that signals a revived and growing anti-Westernism.


Casting Doubt on Study In a Landfill Dispute
To the Editor:
In your description of the debate over whether the Fountain Avenue and Pennsylvania Avenue landfills in Brooklyn pose health threats ("Landfill Anxieties Underlined in Debate on Draft Study," April 3), you report the results of a health study conducted by the New York Public Interest Research Group (NYPIRG).
As you note, the 1983 study found greater incidence of reported respiratory illnesses and other ailments among longer-term residents of a housing complex near the landfill.
The study cited airborne pollution from the landfills as a likely cause.


The Bottom Line on Banks
APRIL Tyler opened an interest-bearing checking account at Chemical Bank eight years ago, and now has thousands of dollars in an individual retirement account there, too.
But the relationship took a nose dive last month when Chemical announced that it was closing 50 branches, doubling the minimum balance required for "free checking" and sharply increasing fees for checking accounts that fail to make the cutoff.
For Ms.
Tyler, the changes mean a choice of tying up $7,500 between her two accounts or paying at least $9.50 a month in extra charges.


THE FREEDOM TO CHOOSE DOCTORS: WHAT FREEDOM?
The vision of consumers "comparison shopping" among plans, based on published medical outcomes, is unrealistic, unless one compares apples to apples and adjusts for number of procedures performed and their relative difficulty, various characteristics of patient populations, hospital size and type and a host of other factors.
As to the modus operandi of H.M.O.'s, in terms of screening doctors and their practices, clearance for CT and MRI scans, as well as for invasive procedures, is routinely made by nonmedical personnel, who second-guess physicians as to the indication for such tests.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Challenging the Faith Of the Vitamin Culture
IT seemed almost too good to be true.
Just taking simple, natural, cheap and harmless vitamins every day could not only make you healthier but even protect against the most feared and deadly illnesses -- cancer and heart disease.
The pills might even slow down the aging process.
Even cynical scientists were won over.
Many were taking vitamins themselves.
When a new study, published last week, found that vitamin E and beta carotene -- two of the so-called antioxidants -- might not protect against cancer and heart disease after all, that they might even cause harm, it came as something of a shock.


Porcelain to Peking
It may seem like carrying coals to Newcastle, but American Standard, a $4-billion-a-year plumbing fixtures company, is determined to bring porcelain to China.
Indeed, the company has already been quietly expanding abroad (10 percent of its revenues are foreign) and has one plant in China already.
It is establishing 11 more to turn out its version of what one company official calls "probably the finest piece of porcelain you will ever have" -- the toilet bowl.


Rugged, Aggressive, A Hockey Throwback; New York-New York Spotlight on Graves
With sandy brown hair that can't stay combed and full lips that frequently curl upward at the corners in a smile, Adam Graves looks a little like a kid on the cover of "Boy's Life," except for the ugly cuts, bumps and bruises that flare and recede during the course of a hockey season.
The wounds are part of the reason Graves is a key member of the Rangers, perhaps their most valuable player, as they begin their Stanley Cup playoffs today against the Islanders at Madison Square Garden.
By leading the team this season with 52 goals, Graves has attracted a spotlight of his own, no longer merely sharing in the one that shines on Mark Messier, his linemate and mentor.


Two Baltic Cruises For Music Lovers
Two tours that combine cruises in the Baltic region with musical performances are being offered this spring and summer.
The Baltic Opera Odyssey, from May 27 to June 4, combines flights to St.
Petersburg and Helsinki with a cruise from Helsinki to Stockholm and a total of six peformances -- in St.
Petersburg, Stockholm and Helsinki.
Works include the ballet "La Bayadere" by Minkus and the operas "Le Nozze di Figaro" by Mozart and "The Invisible City of Kitezh" by Rimsky-Korsakov (in St. Petersburg), "Simon Boccanegra" by Verdi (in Stockholm) and "Lohengrin" by Wagner (in Helsinki).
A concert by the St.
Petersburg Philharmonic and a visit to the Hermitage Museum and city tours in the three cities are also planned.
The tour price is $3,265 a person in double occupancy, including round-trip air fare from New York.


Six Airlines Agree To Change Fare Display
Six major airlines recently agreed to demands from the Justice Department that they change the way they set advance fares in their computer reservation system.
The Government had accused the airlines of using the computer system to signal each other over proposed increases -- in effect, price fixing -- for fares that took effect between a week and two months in the future.
The agreement states that fares will go into effect immediately after they are entered into the reservation system, and the airlines may not list the last day on which a discount will be offered.


The World; Embers From Past Ignite Suspicions in Mexico
ON the morning in 1968, after the worst political violence of Mexico's last half century, residents of the capital could read through their newspapers without ever learning that soldiers had killed scores and perhaps hundreds of students at what had begun as a peaceful demonstration.
The papers, under tight Government control, wrote of student provocateurs firing against the army.
In the years afterward, under elected leaders who proclaimed themselves democratic, hundreds more politically motivated killings took place without prosecutions, punishment, or the killers becoming known.
So it was to be expected that even before officials announced that at least seven men had participated in the March 23 assassination of the governing party presidential candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, Mexicans would see other hands behind the husky, 23-year-old factory worker whom they watched over and over on television pulling the trigger.


Tale of the Half-Built Yeshiva
When construction of a five-story yeshiva began on the corner of Avenue N and East 19th Street in Midwood in the mid-1980's, residents eagerly awaited its completion.
They are still waiting, and now they are wondering what is going to become of the shell of a building that sits idle with its steel girders looming out of the earth.


Is U.S. Really Taking a Wrong Turn?
To the Editor:
In "As Capitalism Wins, the U.S. Drops Out" (Viewpoints, March 27), Theodore J. Forstmann sets up a number of strawmen, then proceeds to knock them down to prove the United States is slipping away from capitalism while many other countries are embracing it.


BY LAND, AIR AND SEA IN ENGLAND AND U.S.
England
March 29 to Oct. 30, Salisbury.
An exhibition of Frank Wootton's paintings of D-Day, at Wilton House, wartime headquarters of Southern Command, as well as photographs, maps and personal memorabilia of Britain's Royal Signal Corps.


Weddings; Amy L. Talbert, Charles D. Hartwig
Amy Lauren Talbert, the daughter of Marilyn and Jerome Talbert of Kings Point, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Charles Douglas Hartwig, the son of Jean and Arthur Hartwig of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey officiated at Glen Head (L.I.) Country Club.
The bride, 33, is a lawyer with Lawyers Alliance for New York, a nonprofit legal services organization.
She graduated from Colgate University, as did her husband, and received her law degree from Albany Law School.


More Tours of Frank Lloyd Wright's Home
Taliesin, the former Wisconsin home of Frank Lloyd Wright, whose work is currently the subject of a major retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, will expand its roster of guided tours from three to five this year.
The 600-acre estate, situated in the hills of Spring Green, will be open to visitors from May 1 until Nov. 1.
The new programs are a four-hour Taliesin House Tour, which offers an in-depth look at the architect's house and includes a slide presentation and refreshments in the gardens, and a two-hour Preservation Tour, featuring sections of the Taliesin House and Hill Wing currently undergoing a multimillion dollar restoration project.


Is U.S. Really Taking a Wrong Turn?
To the Editor:
Theodore J. Forstmann's article should be reprinted and solely occupy your front page.
The importance of this article's insight into the roots of our country's ills and its attending call to reason dwarfs that of any other issue facing our nation today.
DEAN A. ZARRAS  Barrington, Ill., March 27


Not Just Another Baldwin Brother
Stephen Baldwin IS about to stop traffic.
The actor, visiting New York, is on his way to Sarabeth's Kitchen on the Upper West Side, and his stretch limousine is stuck in a traffic jam on Central Park South.
Mr.
Baldwin is a busy man.
He has a schedule to keep.
The limo driver looks nervously in his rear-view mirror, realizing that his passenger is impatient.
"I want to make a U-turn," says the driver helplessly.
But he is boxed in on all sides.
Mr.
Baldwin leans forward eagerly.
"You want me to stop traffic?" he says.
"I'll do it." Before the driver can respond, Mr.
Baldwin is out the door and leaping through the intersection.
He holds up his hand to stop the flow of cars on the Avenue of the Americas, and the limousine scoots into an opening.
Halfway through the turn the car stops and Mr.
Baldwin jumps back in.
"There you go!" he says exuberantly.
"Now drive."


Lighter, and Less Strontium
Real draft.
Ice beer.
Beer that's less filling.
Beer that has more taste.
And now Lulin Special Light Lager -- what to drink after the Meltdown.
The beer was developed by the Bulgarian Defense Ministry in the wake of the 1986 nuclear accident at Chernobyl, in Ukraine, according to the journal Proliferation Watch.
A mystery ingredient, kantatonic, is said to help the body flush away radioactive strontium, which can accumulate in bones and teeth.
So far, the beer is not available in the United States.
And George Pauli, a chemist with the Food and Drug Administration who monitored the effects of Chernobyl, is skeptical of the claims: "I expect that anything that removes strontium would probably remove calcium from bones and teeth as well."


U.S. Issues Warning On Guatemala Travel
Recent mob attacks against Americans in Guatemala have prompted the State Department to issue a warning urging United States citizens to defer nonessential travel to that Central American country.
According to the March 30 warning, the incidents were brought on by "widespread unfounded rumors that foreigners are involved in the theft of children for the purpose of using their organs in transplants." Americans are advised to avoid crowds and solitary travel, and register with the United States embassy in Guatemala City.


The World; Once Chosen, Tribal Elites Now Suffer Consequences
THEY are tall and narrow featured, and during the colonial era in central Africa, the Tutsi were among Africa's most remarkable elites.
While they numbered only a small minority among the majority Hutu, the Tutsi not only administered Rwanda and neighboring Burundi, but the Germans and, later, the Belgians celebrated them with a kind of Wagnerian romanticism, assuring them the best jobs and favored treatment.
Even entrance to school was fixed in the Tutsi's favor; admission to college was limited to those who could pass a minumum height test.
But over the last 40 years, after the Belgians left Africa and Rwanda began to grapple with the uncertainty and turbulence of majority rule, the Tutsi sinecure unraveled.
Tribal uprisings among the Hutu singled out the Tutsi for reprisal; hundreds of thousands fled, tens of thousands were massacred.
Last week, in the latest and most horrific spasm of ethnic and political violence yet, uncounted thousands of Tutsi were slaughtered by Hutu gangs and soldiers, who went on a bloody rampage after the Hutu presidents of both Rwanda and Burundi died in a suspicious plane crash.


Meetings of Community Boards in Manhattan
DISTRICT 1: Battery Park, Civic Center, Financial District, South Street Seaport, TriBeCa; third Tuesday of month.
Next meeting is April 19, 5:30 P.M.
Borough of Manhattan Community College, Fiterman Hall, 30 West Broadway, Stuyvesant Room, 14th Floor, (212) 442-5050.
Chairwoman: Anne Campoccia.
DISTRICT 2: Greenwich Village, Little Italy, NoHo, SoHo, West Village; third Thursday of month.
Next meeting is April 21, 7 P.M.; St.
Vincent's Hospital, 153 West 11th Street, Cronin Auditorium, 10th floor, (212) 979-2272.
Chairwoman: Carol Feinman.


Social Agencies Often Struggle Not to Stumble Over Others
Finding a spot for programs like residences for the mentally ill in New York City can be like landing a plane at a busy airport without a control tower: Agencies operate myopically, with no sure way of knowing what is going on outside their field of vision.
There is no single clearinghouse for information about where such programs are being planned or already exist.
There is no comprehensive map showing where they are clustered.
It is not even clear how many agencies are involved, but most seem to follow their own rules.


Looking for Prize Pianists Off the Beaten Path
MINGLING HALF-NOTICED IN the crowd of keyboard stars about to descend on the Irving S. Gilmore International Keyboard Festival in Kalamazoo, Mich., next weekend are the Gilmore Award winners themselves.
Andre Watts and Ray Charles are household names.
David Owen Norris and Ralf Gothoni are not.
Will they ever be?
Does the Gilmore Foundation care?
The Gilmore -- which, like the MacArthur Foundation, does its work in stealth -- is certainly the oddest family member in a worldwide clan of competition-givers numbering in the many hundreds.
The idiosyncratic tics of this four-year-old event have to be making colleagues nervous.
There is, after all, a clear-cut work ethic in the competition business: start small, get big; practice, practice, practice; to the victor go the spoils.
The Gilmore people seem to be telling us something not only different but subversive: that the meek shall inherit the earth.
That's not going by the rules.


Wall Street; A Concealed Danger for Funds
THE great unwashed may be yucking it up on learning that big players in the derivatives market have taken some disastrous falls.
George Soros, investor extraordinaire, parted with $600 million in a recent currency deal that went sour.
David Askin blew his hedge fund -- and his clients' -- right out of business when interest rates went the wrong way on his "market neutral" portfolio.
Even the Mom-and-apple-pie players at Procter &amp; Gamble managed to drop $102 million as a result of interest rate swaps that went bad.


Connecticut: Testing Ground For Communications Future
Connecticut, home of the nation's first telephone switchboard 116 years ago, is about to become a laboratory again for innovation and competition in communications.
A combination of forces is at work, some driven by technology, some by the politics of economic development and some by the odd quirks of how the old Bell system broke up 10 years ago.
Everything points, communications experts say, to a call to battle between the old telephone companies, the new cable television companies and the even newer wireless empires of the cellular era.
The one certainty is that thousands of Connecticut residents will have communications choices -- from the availability of interactive television to the source of their local dial tone -- sooner than their neighbors.


No Headline


Where Men Are Men, Guns Were for Movies
To the Editor:
I don't know where Michael Zirmo ("Gun Control Is Fine, Within Reason," April 3) went to school or how old he is, but I do know he's seen too many Clint Eastwood movies.


Correction
An article last Sunday about the Whitewater affair and the Washington press corps misstated President Gerald R. Ford's term of office.
He was President for two and a half years, not one year.
The article also misstated the experience of Daniel Schorr, the former CBS newsman, during the Watergate period.
There is no evidence that Henry Kissinger wanted to tap Mr.
Schorr's telephone.


After Two Illegal Closings, Public Plaza Will Reopen
After being shuttered illegally for more than six months, the public plaza in the Bel Canto condominium building at 68th Street and Broadway will reopen by the end of May, the building's manager said.
The closing of the plaza, a popular neighborhood spot for reading and drinking coffee, has been a continued source of anger for area residents.


Mission of Hope -- A special report.; Poverty Raises Stakes for Catholic School
For all the risky places Brother Paul Beaudin passes each morning in East Harlem, none holds as many uncertainties, as many gambles, as his destination: a grammar school.
He could discover that crack addicts have once again pried open the windows at St.
Francis de Sales &amp; St.
Lucy Academy and made off with what little audio-visual equipment remains.
He could find that the boiler has given out, and stare again at the numbers in his budget.
Or, as is usual a few times a week, he could be told that a teacher will be absent.


'Gigantic Ears' With Room for Old, New, Even Jazz
THE PIANIST Ursula Oppens whose tenacious devotion to contemporary music has been hailed by composers and critics for more than 25 years, performs new music not out of obligation or even just out of curiosity.
"There are many, many, many, many reasons I have been involved in new music," Ms.
Oppens said recently, with her trademark fourfold pattern of emphasis.
"But one of them is that the only people who could tell off piano teachers, the only people who could outrank them, were composers."


Guns and Tanks, Flags and Diaries
France
D-Day Circle Vision Cinema, Arromanches.
This presentation opening June 6 orients visitors with a 15-minute film projected on a 360-degree circular screen, re-creating the experience of landing at Normandy during the invasion.


In a Cliffhanger, A Junk Deal Is Finally Sold
SOMETIMES one troubled deal can take on almost mythical proportions on Wall Street, as onlookers gather to see whether buyers can be found at any price.
So it was in the junk bond market the last few weeks, as a big West Coast drugstore merger appeared in jeopardy as investors balked.
Finally, the deal was done last week, bringing a sigh of relief.
"It says the high-yield market is still alive," said Max Holmes, the junk bond strategist at Salomon Brothers.
"This was a very tough deal."


Is Disney the Newest Broadway Baby?
ATTENTION, PLEASE.
This season, the role of the Beast, usually played on Broadway by the Shubert Organization with its 16 theaters, will be played instead by the Walt Disney Company, which is almost single-handedly rejuvenating 42d Street by renovating the New Amsterdam Theater.
It is also producing the most expensive Broadway musical in theater history, opening tomorrow night at the Palace Theater.


Weddings; Kathryn Shattuck, Paul A. Papay
Kathryn Louise Shattuck, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dan L. Shattuck of Ashland, Kan., was married yesterday to Paul Adolf Papay, a son of Mrs.
Albert G. Papay of Montvale, N.J., and the late Mr.
Papay.
The Rev.
Dr.
J.
Barrie Shepherd performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in New York.
The bride, 32, graduated from the University of Kansas.
She is a member of the newsroom staff at The New York Times.
Her father is a rancher in Ashland, where her mother, Phyllis Shattuck, is a voice teacher.


POSTINGS: Regional Plan Conference; Improving The Area
What steps can government take to improve the New York area's attractiveness as a place where people want to work, live, visit and invest?
The Regional Plan Association will try to answer that question when it holds a day-long conference, "The Manageable Region: Rethinking the Way We Govern," on April 26 at the Sheraton New York Hotel &amp; Towers, 811 Seventh Avenue, at 53d Street.


IN SHORT: FICTION
TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY MEXICO  TROZAS  By B. Traven. Ivan R. Dee, $22.50.


Political Notes; Republican Attorney General Candidate Wins a Rave From Cuomo
Despite debate within his party about which candidate might provide the best demographic balance to his ticket, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has remained studiously neutral thus far in the Democratic race for attorney general.
The campaign already features the incumbent, G. Oliver Koppell, who is Jewish and from the Bronx, and the Brooklyn District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, who is Irish Catholic.
Judge Karen S. Burstein of Brooklyn Family Court, a Manhattan woman who is Jewish, is expected to announce her candidacy soon.
But readers of the Governor's new book, "The New York Idea," scheduled by Crown Publishers next month, might think he has decided to endorse a Republican candidate, Joe Holland.
Mr.
Cuomo devotes a page and a half to Mr.
Holland, a Harlem lawyer and entrepreneur who opened a Ben and Jerry's ice cream parlor in his neighborhood with the help of a $100,000 loan from the state.


Schubert Songs Hail Season
The Concert Society event will be offered twice: on Friday at 8 P.M. at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Somers and next Sunday at 3 P.M. at Gilead Presbyterian Church in Carmel.
Call 277-8564 for more information.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about movie cameos misstated the title of a film by Donal Lardner Ward.
It is "My Life's in Turnaround" (not "Turnabout").


Ardis K. DeCamp, Keith M. Maillard
Ardis Kennedy DeCamp, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack M. DeCamp of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Keith Meredith Maillard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. Maillard of Hollis, Queens.
The Rev.
Charles S. Temple performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Transfiguration in New York.
Mrs.
Maillard, 38, is a pediatric nurse at the Lucile Salter Packard Children's Hospital at Stanford University Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif.
She graduated from Colorado State University and from Columbia University, and is a candidate for a master's degree in nursing at the University of California at San Francisco.


A. A. Whedon, 78, Artist and Teacher
Aida Anthony Whedon, an artist and a teacher to generations of children, died yesterday at her home in Port Washington, L.I.
She was 78.
Her New Orleans accent unaltered despite half a century in New York, Mrs.
Whedon was a bustling mother hen for thousands of children at the Whedon School of Art, which she and her husband, Daniel Whedon, a sculptor, operated.


Exploring Psychedelia, the East and Questions of Temperament
THE terms microtonalism, equal temperament and pitch ratios might have seemed alien at first.
But by the end of a recent demonstration of an unusual musical instrument collection at Purchase College, a group of 20 Nyack High School music students were talking wistfully about psychedelic music and "mind pictures" and asking curious questions about the 1960's.
Dean Drummond, a co-director of the ensemble Newband and the caretaker of the Harry Partch instrument collection, which is now housed in the music division of the college on the state university campus here, did not set out to discuss the roots of experimental rock music as he spoke in front of the most unusual collection of handmade musical instruments the students had probably ever seen.
Instead, he explained mathematically how the Partch instruments differed from a piano, a violin or any other traditional Western instrument.


Weddings; Susan Gaffney, James Kellogg Jr.
Susan Gaffney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Gaffney of Oyster Bay, L.I., was married yesterday to James Crane Kellogg Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kellogg of Summit, N.J.
Msgr.
Charles Ribaudo performed the ceremony in the chapel at St.
Dominic Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay.
The bride, 30, is a senior vice president at Sands Brothers Investment Bankers, a stockbrokerage in New York.
She graduated from St.
Bonaventure University.
Her father, who is retired, was a customer service representative for United Parcel Service in Uniondale, L.I.


The Vexing Adventures Of the Last Alaskan Bushrat
Looking back on 22 years as a bushrat, which is what wilderness homesteaders are called in Alaska, Miles Martin reflected that things began to go wrong in the spring of 1983, the year of the "big moose bust."
Miles was in his cabin 50 miles from the town of Nenana when a helicopter landed and three game wardens from the Alaska Department of Fish and Wildlife Protection jumped out.
"It costs them lots of money to operate the chopper," he recalled, "and when they come looking for you, you can bet they're not going to go home empty-handed."


Riot Scars Are Gone, but Bombay Is Still Healing
A year after Bombay's most serious riots in decades, much that meets the eye suggests that life has returned to normal after Hindu-Muslim riots and serial bomb explosions rocked the city.
Factories are working full tilt, and luxury hotels along the Arabian Sea are full.
Tourists are back, along with foreign executives exploring India's newly relaxed investment laws.
Many who are in a position to prosper from the turnaround, especially the Hindus who predominate among the city's 12.5 million people, say that Bombay has once again become India's most confident, outward-looking metropolis.


Recipes for Artichokes Large and Small
UNTIL recently the options, when it came to buying artichokes, were to purchase medium to large ones, suitable for boiling until tender, then serving them hot or cold with a sauce.
They could also be stuffed.
As for tiny artichokes, the home cook was usually limited to frozen or soggy canned ones.
That situation is changing as an increasing number of produce markets now sell baby artichokes by the pound in addition to the more common large ones.
If fresh baby artichokes are unavailable, the frozen kind are suitable for some recipes.


April 10-16: An 80's Exodus; New York City's Downward Welfare Trend
"Live Free or Die" is New Hampshire's state motto.
But residents had another alternative in the 1980's: move to New York City where, common wisdom held, poor Southern blacks and Puerto Ricans had been poring in to live on welfare.
Last week, an analysis by The New York Times of fresh 1990 Census results defied that stereotype.


Weddings; Miss Merrifield, Mr. Filter 3d
Elizabeth Suzanne Merrifield, the daughter of Roberta and Roger Merrifield of Bay St.
Louis, Miss., was married yesterday to Henry Charles Filter 3d, the son of E. Margie Hostetter of Westport, Conn., and Henry C. Filter Jr. of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
The Rev.
Gregory Barras performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Andrew by the Bay Church in Annapolis, Md.
Mrs.
Filter, 29, works in Annapolis as a sales manager for Electrobiology Inc., a medical equipment company in Parsippany, N.J.
She graduated from Tulane University.
Her father is the director of plans and resources for the Naval Oceanographic Office in Bay St.
Louis.


Digging Away at School Work
Rain was falling over Brooklyn, but at Public School 13 in Bedford-Stuyvesant, 400 parents were packed into an auditorium to meet Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines.
Two hours into the evening, Mr.
Cortines leaned against the stage, nodding attentively as a P.T.A. president grumbled about classroom overcrowding.
The evening had been a cascade of complaints; everything from textbook shortages and leaking roofs to incompetent principals and unresponsive superintendents.
But the auditorium erupted in applause when Mr.
Cortines closed the forum with a pep talk about working together to improve schools.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
GRAMERCY PARK  $280,000
39 Gramercy Park  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, key to park; maintenance $1,073, 60% tax deductible, listed at $325,000, 29 weeks on market (Broker: J. I. Sopher &amp; Co.)


When Signs Are Only In Russian
For decades the tree-shaded streets of Bensonhurst were Italian-American enclaves, and mom-and-pop stores anchored the business hub along 86th Street.
But waves of Asian, Hispanic and Russian immigrants have changed the mix, both residential and commercial, inevitably creating some friction.
In a reflection of that tension, a number of long-established storeowners are complaining that many stores operated by Russian immigrants -- the most recent arrivals -- display signs in their native language only.
About 20,000 Russians have moved into the area in the last few years.


In America; Making the Children Pay
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has based his aggressive efforts to cut the bureaucratic bloat at the Board of Education on the premise that it hurts schoolchildren -- that the money wasted on useless bureaucrats would be better spent on classroom services.
"This is a $7 to $8 billion system," said Mr.
Giuliani, "and we have classrooms that are falling apart, schoolbooks that are 20 years old."


The World; On the Hustings in South Africa
Roelf Meyer, President F. W. de Klerk's boyish-looking Minister of Constitutional Affairs, arrives on his first campaign visit to the largest black metropolis in South Africa.
He enters a fenced and weedy park.
Before he speaks to the tiny crowd of the living gathered there, he is informed he must commune with the dead.
A traditional diviner, or sangoma, has been invited to explain the presence of this descendant of white oppressors to the ancestors who watch over African affairs.


Where Dogs Romp and Humans Sue
The Mercer-Houston Dog Run is usually a congenial, orderly place, a private park in Greenwich Village where the 250 members bring their pets to romp with their peers.
Now the harmony has been disrupted.
And it's not the dogs who are fighting.
In February, the board of the park, which is on the northwest corner of Mercer and Houston Streets, expelled Harold and Judith Magida, and their 10-year-old black bouvier, Bleu, for breaking the rules of the run.
Now the Magidas are suing the board, seeking to be reinstated.


The Satirist Who Landed in a Sitcom
IN MAY 1993 DAVE THOMAS, formerly of the brilliant "Second City Television" comedy troupe, appeared on NBC's 90th birthday tribute to Bob Hope.
During that three-hour "parade of stars," a tuxedoed Mr.
Thomas (whose turn came just after Lucie Arnaz and just before Brooke Shields) was introduced as "Chester Hope, Bob's nephew." He did a gently satirical version of Mr.
Hope's standup style.
Then, dropping out of character, he praised Mr.
Hope as "the guy everybody acknowledges as the best."
The few former SCTV fans who would watch a Hope tribute were probably puzzled at this.
In the late 1970's and early 80's Mr.
Thomas' darkly hilarious impersonation of Mr.
Hope -- portraying the comedian as a tightfisted pragmatist totally dependent on his gag writers and business sense -- typified the biting, seditious "SCTV" approach.


Weddings; Patricia Van Buskirk, Steven Madsen
Patricia Van Buskirk, a daughter of Mary Ellen C. Van Buskirk of Peoria, Ill., and the late Daniel Van Buskirk, was married yesterday to Steven Wayne Madsen, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Elmer E. Madsen.
The Rev.
Michael Lanning performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in New York.
The bride, 35, is an associate at Whitman Breed Abbott &amp; Morgan, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her mother owns Brunswick House Ltd., an interior-design company in Peoria.
Her father was the president of the Van Buskirk Construction Company in Peoria.


Daily News And Columnist Differ and Split
Earl Caldwell and The Daily News, for which he has written a column for 15 years, have apparently parted ways over the refusal of the newspaper to publish an op-ed page column he wrote last week on a long investigation of allegations that a Queens police officer had raped five or more livery van drivers.
Mr.
Caldwell said yesterday that he was dismissed Tuesday by Arthur Browne, editor of the editorial page, in a heated dispute over the column, which named the officer and said he was "still on the job" despite an inquiry more than a year old.
The column said the victims were black and quoted a lawyer and a minister as saying they suspected a racially motivated police coverup in the case.


Weddings; Nanna Lydiker, Daniel H. Stern
Nanna Jarlshoi Lydiker, the daughter of Trille J. and Richard B. Lydiker of Rome, was married yesterday to Daniel Hennelly Stern, a son of Marion B. Stern of New Hope, Pa., and the late Robert K. Stern.
The Rev.
Tom Hughes, an Anglican minister, performed the ceremony in a private home on Necker Island, V.I.
The bride, 25, is a freelance journalist in New York.
She graduated from the University of Westminster.
Her mother is a teacher at the New School, a private British school in Rome.
Her father is the director of information for the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization, in Rome.


Weddings; Odila I. Galer, Dominique Noel
Odila Irene Galer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raul Galer of Brooklyn and Hospitalet del Infante, Spain, was married yesterday to Dominique F. Noel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hubert Noel of Paris.
Judge Ruth Pickholz of New York County Criminal Court officiated at Rakel, a restaurant in New York.
Mrs.
Galer-Noel, 34, is the United States public relations director in New York for Food and Wines From France Inc., a private marketing group.
She graduated from the American College in Paris.
Her father, now retired, was the director of interpretation services for the United Nations in Geneva.


Streetscapes/The Guyon Earle Kitchen; A Forest Hills Find for Fuller's Dymaxion House
FEELING pretty good after finally junking that rusty, dented kitchenette unit with the strange drawers?
Then don't read on.
The Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Mich., just bought a similar kitchenette that it values at $80,000.
The museum found the kitchen in an apartment in Forest Hills, Queens, and it is looking for another.


Correction
An article on Wednesday about U.S. military aid to Pakistan misstated the extent of nuclear arms on the Asian subcontinent.
The author, Nathan Glazer, wrote that both Pakistan and India had nuclear arms capability, not nuclear arsenals.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
CHELSEA  A Deaf Theater Triangle: A Nurse, a Milkman, a Swan
The New York Deaf Theater, a company that includes both deaf and hearing performers, is presenting an adaptation of Elizabeth Egloff's play "The Swan."


Wrong Message
To The Sports Editor:
"Inappropriate" is the mildest term I can find to describe Arkansas Coach Nolan Richardson's venting of his anti-white feelings in the national championship pre-game broadcast.


SURFACING
LEISURE  The extended-family spa: Certain luxury spas like Rancho La Puerta in Tecate, Mexico, are offering special weeks for families -- that is, children, parents, grandparents and anyone else you consider family.
SHOPPING  Catalogues on CD-ROM: The mall of the future?
The Merchant is a CD-ROM collection of 39 catalogues and brochures (or about 6,000 products), including those from companies like Spiegel, Lands' End and Brooks Brothers, (800) 663-3472.


Bengals Committed To Tackle As Top Pick
Barring a huge upset, the first choice in next Sunday's National Football League draft will be Dan Wilkinson, Ohio State's 6-foot-4-inch, 325-pound defensive tackle.
And barring an upset almost as huge, the team that takes him will be the Cincinnati Bengals.
Because the Bengals had the worst record (3-13) last year in the N.F.L., they earned, if that is the word, the first choice.
Several other teams are trying to persuade the Bengals to trade that choice, but the Bengals have stood firm.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 17, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
9
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
15
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
3
4
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
4
4
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a killer.
5
4
HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.
6
3
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Researching his ancestry, an American journalist learns about the history of Mexico.
7
3
CAULDRON, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $6.50.) Economic disaster and nationalist hate groups besiege Europe; America enters World War III.
8
3
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to a South Carolina town.
9*
5
LORD OF RAVEN'S PEAK, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romance and adventure among vikings in 10th-century Britain.
10
2
FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) An affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people returning to their hometown.
11
1
SPANDAU PHOENIX, by Greg Iles. (Signet, $5.99.) Intelligence agencies vie for a diary full of still-invaluable secrets about World War II.
12*
16
DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent novelist.
13*
12
PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of murders in a California town.
14
6
THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal of past crimes.
15*
1
PRIVATE SCREENING, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The assassination of a Presidential hopeful leads to a series of events that frighten the nation.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
14
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
545
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
3
14
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
4
3
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
5
61
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6
6
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture and murder.
7
46
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
8
131
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British writer.
9
24
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
10
145
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
11*
3
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.) The memoirs of an Irish rebel, wrongly imprisoned in the 1970's and 80's.
12
11
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day battle in Vietnam in 1965.
13*
48
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
14*
144
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
15*
31
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
161
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles for success.
2
6
MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Ways to teach children about spending and saving money.
3
168
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
26
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 2, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Constructive Criticism
WHAT IS ARCHITECTURE?
An Essay on Landscapes, Buildings, and Machines.
By Paul Shepheard.
Illustrated. 131 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
Cloth, $20.
Paper, $9.95.


The Nation; The High Court Is Not Everybody's Dream
THE last time George J. Mitchell gave up a lifetime job back in Maine in 1980 -- his friends told him he was crazy.
Last week he did it again, and though his friends were supportive this time, many in the capital were puzzled over how anyone could pass up a nomination to the Supreme Court; they had assumed that he was giving up the power and the tedium of the Senate majority leader's post so he could claim the next court vacancy.


At Home in the City, Baseball's Newest Parks Succeed
The most rabid football fan thinks little about what surrounds the gridiron; the ardent basketball fan dreams of 3-point goals, not of arenas.
But baseball is connected intimately to the place in which it is played and derives much of its aura from that place.
It is no accident that people do not merely like ball parks, they love them, and they remember them with passion.
Could any other sport yield a Wrigley Field or a Fenway Park?
Only baseball, which is played over time, not against it, and whose field dimensions are never quite fixed.
Every outfield is different, or at least it used to be until the concrete flying-saucer stadiums of the last generation replaced glorious eccentricity with banal, bureaucratic sameness.
The Astrodome may be great for rodeos, but it is not what baseball is about.


Fontasia
Last year's bankruptcy of American Type Founders of Elizabeth, N.J., was a sad reminder of the end of the hot-type era.
The oldest and largest metal type foundry went belly up because it couldn't compete in the new age of computerized fonts.
A new generation of small font shops is now promoting a new typesetting esthetic.
In the last six months tiny foundries like T-26 in Chicago, Garagefonts in Del Mar, Calif., and Plazm Fonts in Portland, Ore., have cropped up selling original digitized typefaces with names like Freakshow, New Hamburger and Blast-O-Rama.
The type shown above, Sketcho, from Garagefonts is one of the more readable ones.
But bizarre and sometimes illegible fonts clutter the pages of youth-culture magazines like Ray Gun and Bikini and spice up new ads for Pepsi and Nike.
Text traditionalists may view this as a distressing triumph of visual culture -- turning words into pieces of eye candy -- but David Carson, co-founder of Garagefonts, the designer of Ray Gun and unofficial godfather of the New Type generation, says he's just updating type to fit the times.


Why Catholic Schools Succeed: A Community of Shared Values
Early explanations for the effectiveness of Roman Catholic schools dwelt on their stricter discipline, longer homework and higher percentage of students enrolled in academic rather than vocational courses.
But why, without wielding constant threats of expulsion, were Catholic schools managing to enforce discipline and to demand more academically from students when many public schools failed in similar efforts?
Researchers theorized about the values shared by school officials, students and parents -- but their explanations remained speculative.


Learning to Walk With Fear in the Halls
FOURTEEN years old and self-assured, Anthony Mayhew strode down a crowded hallway at Roosevelt High School here one recent morning.
"Sure, I have a weapon, just in case," he said, referring to the box-cutter knife he carries with him.
"It's not that I plan to use it, but I like to keep it handy."
That morning, two weeks after a fellow student, Wayne Copeland, 16, was stabbed in the stomach during school hours, others interviewed in the high school's corridors admitted that they also carried box cutters -- and some said they carried switchblades as well.


The Chosen One
A year ago, I boarded a flight to Shanghai during a gale force wind.
The plane shivered and taxied back to the hangar twice before takeoff.
It is testimony to my anxiety about the purpose of my journey that I felt no fear of flying.
I carried with me an empty infant car bed (aptly named the Dream Ride), a three-week supply of diapers, wipes, pediatric antibiotics, bottles and disposable nipples.
I was on my way to adopt one of the tens of thousands of baby girls abandoned in China each year.
Today as I write, my 1-year-old daughter sleeps in a crib in the next room.
She lies in the position of trust -- on her back, her arms widespread, her face tip-tilted as if for the next kiss.


Balloons Make a Statement in 'The Winter's Tale'
THE ROYAL SHAKESPEARE Company is renowned for classical repertory, but one intends no slight to the troupe's new "Winter's Tale" to suggest that this staging demands attention first for its balloons.
Balloons?
From the celebratory opening scene on through Shakespeare's alternately sobering and transporting shifts of mood in this fable of forgiveness, they are everywhere.
Nor do they vanish when the jealous Leontes's Sicilian court gives way to rural Bohemia, once his queen, Hermione, is presumed dead.
It is there that balloons wittily signal Time's choric announcement that 16 years have passed; and there that they figure bawdily as part of a phallic dance during Bohemia's rustic sheep-shearing festivities.


INSIDE
Ralph Ellison Is Dead
The author whose "Invisible Man" foreshadowed racial conflict in the South was 80 years old.
Page 38.
Guilt at Issue in Singapore
The American teen-ager sentenced to caning in Singapore says he is innocent, and much of his account apparently can be corroborated.
Page 10.
Hockey Playoff Preview
The National Hockey League playoffs get in full swing with the Rangers against the Islanders.
Section 8.


Photography View; Where Does Viewer Discretion Begin?
THE SIGN ON THE DOOR SAYS: 'This exhibition contains stark images of war.
Viewer discretion is advised.' The show is 'Farewell to Bosnia: New Photographs by Gilles Peress' at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, some of the images are stark enough, and the idea that we should view Bosnia with discretion adds a mordant note to the politics of art.
A wall labeled 'Dismemberment' includes the image of a young boy, his face tactfully left out of the picture, holding up two stumps at the ends of his arms; a man on an operating table, fully awake, his entire leg clamped open and displaying its secret structures; and on a shelf in the prosthetic unit, three gleaming feet made of some up-to-date synthetic, the toenails meticulously drawn in.


The Executive Computer; Netware's Directory Goes Global, but Users Stay Put
"GIVE 'EM what they want" is a reasonable marketing strategy in most businesses.
But in the computer industry, fulfilling customers' needs and desires is never simple.
Just ask Novell Inc.
For years, customers, competitors and industry pundits decried the lack of a global directory in Netware, Novell's operating system software for computer networks.
Last year Novell added this feature, which allows an employee to log on to a corporate network and gain access to files and services wherever he or she may be located throughout the organization, without searching cryptic lists of electronic addresses and without encountering multiple requests for passwords and authorization.
Everyone should have been happy.


U.S. Opposes Heavy Force Against Serbs
Despite the shooting down of a British plane by Bosnian Serbs near the town of Gorazde, the United States and its NATO allies are determined -- at least for the moment -- to respond with minimal force in hopes of persuading the Serbs to agree to a cease-fire and return to negotiations, American and Western officials said today.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher conferred by telephone today with Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, shortly before Mr.
Kozyrev flew to Belgrade for urgent talks with Serbian leaders.


Two Rappers In Search Of Revenge
IN HIP-HOP -- WHERE REPUTATION IS everything and the criteria for determining what's "real" changes in less time than it takes to fire a burst from an Uzi -- the worst label to be stuck with is "sell-out." How do you rebound from such a tag, or, more important, how do you get your revenge if you're the artist who's been dissed?
New releases from two superstars who've been maligned for their pop propensities -- Hammer's fourth album, "The Funky Headhunter," and Vanilla Ice's third, "Mind Blowin' " -- contain intriguing, if contradictory, answers.
The artists' strategies are markedly dissimilar; where Hammer blasts a sizzling rejoinder full of signifying and prideful parody into the ears of his accusers, Vanilla Ice crumbles under the pressure to perform.
His attempt to harden his image simply doesn't work.


Brazil Reaches Accord With Large Banks to Cut Debt
Brazil, the largest debtor in the developing world, completed an agreement last night with its creditor banks that reduces its $49 billion foreign debt and provides the country with lower interest rates and new longer-term loans.
Although a number of new debtor countries, most notably Russia, still need to reach agreement with commercial banks on restructuring their foreign debts, the Brazilian agreement effectively ends the international debt crisis that began in 1982.


Morton Dolinsky; Israeli Spokesman, 63
Morton Dolinsky, who had retired as an official spokesman for the Israeli Government in Jerusalem, died in Israel yesterday.
Mr.
Dolinsky, who lived in Jerusalem, was 63.
The cause was the effects of a stroke, said his brother, Hyman Dolinsky.


An American in Style
HE DIDN'T LIKE TAPPING IN WHITE TIE AND tails, preferring a soft, beat-up fedora to a top hat.
And few Bakelite floors ever saw his scuff marks.
Instead, Gene Kelly danced atop a flatbed truck, in a rain-soaked gutter, up a stepladder, down a hillside, on roller skates and everywhere in Paris you wished you'd been kissed.
MGM provided him with beautiful partners.
Talented partners.
Leggy partners.
But he was just as happy being paired with brooms, curtains, umbrellas, newspapers, baseball bats, kids and rodents.
His buoyant athleticism, naive passion and look-ma-I'm-hoofing brand of enthusiasm introduced cinematic dance to sweat, lust and earthly delights.
Gene Kelly made Everyman believe he could dance, and Everywoman wish that he would.


Time to Study the Trees and Shrubs
THE trees and shrubs have not yet put out their leaves, meaning it is possible to examine their handsome silhouettes or scaffolding, as well as their buds and bark.
Leisure time activities can wait for a bit; the boats are still in storage, it is too soggy for outdoor tennis and still rather cold to go to the beach.


Home for Former Prostitutes Rejected
City officials last week vetoed a physician's proposal to convert her West Village town house into a residence for former prostitutes in rehabilitation.
But the physician, Dr.
Joyce Wallace, said she hoped to revive the concept at another site, to be selected.
"They're not getting rid of me," she said.
When the City Department of Homeless Services sought proposals to help the homeless, Dr.
Wallace's Foundation for Research on Sexually Transmitted Disease submitted the only plan specifically for prostitutes.
But it prompted a neighborhood uproar and was overwhelmingly opposed by Community Board 2.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the victims in the downing of two American helicopters over northern Iraq included one officer among the dead incorrectly.
Brig.
Gen.
Scott Pilkington, the overall commander of the military field operation, was not killed in the incident.


Footprints on the Infobahn
Say the word footprint, and I immediately think of the Abominable Snowman of the Himalayas.
Does this prepare me for a nanosecondary grasp of computer lingo?
Not yeti; a generation of hackers, confronted with the old word footprint, thinks first of its latest sense, "the desk space taken up by a computer."
Those of us with fat footprints (I am pounding this out on an archaic, 33-megahertz pre-Pentium monster that I have to start with a crank) get the feeling that ours is an offline life.
I take that new usage from a clipping about cybersex sent over by my computer multimentor, Andy Glass of Cox Newspapers.
Cybersex is defined in Compuserve Magazine as " 'adult-oriented' games and CD-ROM's; steamy online 'chats'; people discussing their sex lives and wanton desires with strangers in online forums, even falling in love without having met."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
103.50
105.29
112.25
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7134
1.7115
1.6166
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3844
1.3848
1.2598
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4715
1.4760
1.5245
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$377.50
$384.50
$338.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Correction
An article last Sunday about Gensler &amp; Associates Architects, an interior design firm, misidentified the head of its New York office.
She is Margo Grant Walsh.


How Do You Turn On the Twentysomething Market?
WHEN Charlie von Simson sees the latest commercial for Budweiser pop up on his television screen, the one that features people his age joking about characters in "Gilligan's Island" and other sitcoms of the 1960's, the one that marketing experts spent months researching and developing just for people like him, he grabs the remote control.
"That Bud ad is so lame, I wince every time I see it," said Mr. von Simson, 29, who studies law in Brooklyn.
"By the time we were watching those shows, they were reruns, which makes it painfully clear that these ads were made by people 10 years older than me."


Weddings; Sylvia M. Veitia, Scott L. Baker
Sylvia Marie Veitia, a daughter of Alex Veitia of Miami and the late Mercedes Veitia, is to be married today to Scott Louis Baker, the son of Corinne and Charles Baker of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Alfred C. Landsberg will perform the ceremony at Bridgewater (N.J.) Manor.
Ms.
Veitia, 27, is keeping her name.
She is the director of public and legislative affairs for the American Automobile Association of Central New Jersey, in Robbinsville.
She graduated from Rider College, from which she also received a master's degree in sociology.
Her father, now retired, was a lawyer in San Juan, P.R.


A Loving Mother
To the Editor:
I enjoyed Betsy Sharkey's article on Glenn Close but was stunned by this comment about the actress's attachment to her young daughter: "Certainly for Ms. Close professional success has been easier to attain than personal success, and perhaps that is why she holds Annie so dear."


Fill Those Judgeships Faster
President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton, professing strong interest in a fairer, more representative judiciary, created high hopes among their supporters (and concern among their opponents) that they would move swiftly to correct the imbalance in the nation's judiciary caused by 12 years of relentless Reagan/Bush appointments of conservative judges.
Politically and philosophically they were expected to leap to the task.
By some measures the Administration has performed well, making appointments at a faster pace than its predecessors did at this stage.
Yet the performance is not up to the expectations the Clintons generated, nor does it yet meet the needs of justice.


TAKING THE CHILDREN: From Naked Guns and Fangs to Thumbelina; D2: The Mighty Ducks
With this issue, the Arts and Leisure section starts a new feature appearing every other week: Taking the Children.
It will have synopses of movies with notes on elements that some parents may find objectionable.
The items are contributed by Janet Maslin, who is the Times's chief film critic and has sons aged 8 and 4; Patricia S. McCormick, a contributing editor of Parents magazine, who has a 10-year-old daughter and 4-year-old son, and Kenneth C. Davis, the author of "Don't Know Much About History," who has an 11-year-old daughter and 8-year-old son.
D2: The Mighty Ducks Emilio Estevez Directed by Sam Weisman PG 107 minutes


Nothing to It: All the Knicks Need Is 5 Straight
All the Knicks need to do to insure themselves the home-court advantage throughout the Eastern Conference playoffs is to win their last five games, starting today in Charlotte, N.C., against the Hornets.
Of course, that's easier said than done.
Those five games include showdowns with Atlanta on Tuesday at Madison Square Garden and a regular-season finale against the Bulls at Chicago Stadium next Sunday.


Weddings; Michele Collier, David Kaufman
Michele Anne Collier, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Collier Jr. of Stamford, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Richard Kaufman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard N. Kaufman of Rowayton, Conn.
The Rev.
Francis T. Hoffmann performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Leo's Church.
Mrs.
Kaufman graduated from Catholic University of America.
She is a district manager in Stamford and Greenwich, Conn., for New York/New England Video, a franchise of the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation.


Evening Hours; A Belgian Inspired by India
The spring collection of Dries van Noten arrives at Charivari, April 5.


Sexuality and Creativity
To the Editor:
Aram Boyajian's response (Letters, March 20) to Sharon O'Brien's essay on writing a biography of Willa Cather is troubling.


'Bailey's Cafe' at the Hartford Stage
THE customers in Bailey's Cafe don't mind the slow service because there's no place else to go.
"Everyone who comes here is hopeless," says Bailey, the proprietor and counterman.
What gets you into Bailey's?
Chaos.
Where is Bailey's?
In limbo, surrounded by void.
Sure, Bailey's Cafe is a feeding place for the spiritually dispossessed, which means Bailey serves any metaphor you want.
Yet "Bailey's Cafe," the remarkable work at the Hartford Stage Company, is only cursorily derived from a long line of plays about lost souls gathered in a bar, a diner or hotel lobby.
No calculated microcosm here, rather an uncharted place that resonates with distinct life and originality.


Just Add to the Court a First-Rate Legal Mind; Overboard on Balance
To the Editor:
"How to Fill a Justice's Shoes" (editorial, April 7), urging President Clinton to "reach beyond the herd of white males" in nominating a replacement for Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun, falls into the same pit of self-righteous, symbolic political correctness that marked the Clinton Administration's often misguided early attempts to fill Cabinet posts.


Renewal of Once-Vibrant Marketplace Is Back on Track
After a setback in which a key development partner dropped out, plans to breathe new life into La Marqueta, the once-vibrant marketplace on upper Park Avenue, seem to be on track again, officials involved with the project said.
On Dec. 20, the city granted a Harlem-based nonprofit organization, the Puerto Rican Association for Community Affairs, conditional approval to revive the market in partnership with Gilbert Rivera, owner of a Brooklyn construction and retail company.


THE FREEDOM TO CHOOSE DOCTORS: WHAT FREEDOM?
As a person who has worked in managed care for the past 12 years, Michael M. Weinstein's article "The Freedom to Choose Doctors: What Freedom?" (March 27) interests me.
The real issue of managed competition is what kind of health care structure it will create and who will benefit.


JUST TAKE AWAY THEIR GUNS
James Q. Wilson's views on gun control are as frightening to me as was the 9-millimeter semiautomatic used to decimate the commuters on the third car of the Long Island Rail Road train in which my daughter was trapped last Dec. 7 ("Just Take Away Their Guns," March 20).
Who would have frisked Colin Ferguson that night?
Someone who thought a black man wearing an army-fatigue jacket and carrying a canvas bag looked suspicious as he boarded a suburban-bound train filled largely with white commuters, suit-and-tie types, carrying briefcases?
Is this what Americans want?
And even if no one objected to the obvious inequity there, the gun Ferguson was carrying had been legally purchased by him, after he spent 12 days "residing" in a California motel.


California Strike Becomes a Battle Over Permanent Job Replacements
Until a decade ago, the Diamond Walnut plant here could be a rollicking place to work.
"We gave parties for supervisors," said Deborah Goodin, 49, a longtime employee.
"We put up balloons. We brought in strippers. If a supervisor got married, we'd go out and buy a set of silver. There was nobody who was any better than anybody else."


A Hidden Wealth of Railroad History
Imagine a railroad hobbyist's clubhouse nearly frozen in the time when F.D.R. was President and the 20th Century Limited raced westward.
Put that clubhouse in a forgotten corner of one of New York's premiere public spaces, Grand Central Terminal, and you have the Williamson Library.
To reach it, a visitor with an appointment takes an elevator one flight above the great hall, passes through a locked maintenance door and along a catwalk inside some of the building's monumental double windows, then opens an unmarked door.
Inside is the library, home of the Railroad Enthusiasts New York Division; it is a dingy room that has changed little since the day it opened, in 1937.
Much of the collection came from Frederick E. Williamson, then the president of the New York Central Railroad.
Allan H. Roberts, a library trustee, estimates the collection now contains 5,000 to 10,000 books, magazines and other items about railroading, with a heavy emphasis on the age of steam.


Lincoln Square: Growth and Doubts
SOMETIMES these days, the developer Philip E. Aarons sits in his office at Broadway and 67th Street, gazes out his fifth-floor windows and thinks of the Eiffel Tower.
Just across Broadway, and just outside his windows, Lincoln Square, his $250 million, 47-story combination of rental apartments, condominiums, seven-level health club, movie multiplex and commercial space, is nearing completion.
The building has been criticized for its height, its bulk, the increased pedestrian and vehicular traffic it will bring and, most especially, for the two-tone brick in shades of burnt sienna and burnt umber with which it is clad.


IN NORMANDY, FIELDS OF REMEMBRANCE
American
Normandy American Cemetery.
On a cliff overlooking Omaha Beach and the English Channel, in Colleville-sur-Mer, just east of St.-Laurent-sur-Mer, a 172-acre cemetery contains the graves of 9,386 United States servicemen, most of whom died during the landing and the ensuing combat.
The names of 1,557 missing, buried in unknown graves, are inscribed on the garden walls.
Brittany Cemetery.
One and a half miles southeast of St.
James and 12 miles south of Avranches is a 28-acre cemetery with the graves of 4,410 United States servicemen, and, inscribed along a retaining wall, the names of 498 missing.
Pointe du Hoc Ranger Monument.
Eight miles west of the Normandy American Cemetery is a granite pylon erected by the French to honor the United States Army Second Ranger Battalion led by Lieut.
Col.
James E. Rudder.
Utah Beach Monument.
Almost two miles northeast of Ste.-Marie-du-Mont, overlooking Utah Beach, a red granite obelisk marks the victory of the United States Army VII Corps in liberating the Cotentin Peninsula.


Oh, How the Critics Raved. Why Didn't the Masses Follow?
FROM THE STAGE OF THE Bottom Line in Manhattan, Marshall Crenshaw peered out at the audience and introduced his next song.
"I wrote this one about a year and a half ago," he said, "and then I decided to rest on my laurels."
That's not to say he has been idle.
For one thing, Mr.
Crenshaw has just finished his first book, "Hollywood Rock," an exhaustive and funny reference guide to movies that have anything to do with rock music or rock performers.
The book was published last week by HarperPerennial, and Mr.
Crenshaw is now on the road promoting it.


Police Seek 2-Month-Old Reported Missing in Central Park
Dozens of police officers searched last night for a 2 1/2-month-old girl who disappeared on Friday in Central Park as her father briefly dozed beside her on a park bench, the police said.
The mystery of the infant's disappearance was deepened by the fact that her parents, tourists from Canada identified as Joseph and Helena Bales, did not report it until about 20 hours later.
Instead, they went to their Manhattan hotel and waited until yesterday afternoon to report the disappearance of their infant daughter, Mujuet, the police said.


RECALLING A NIGHT AT OMAHA BEACH
SEYMOUR W. MILLER found the long-forgotten photographs in a scrapbook, and it all came rushing back.
There he was in uniform at Fort Leonard Wood, Mo.
And in Patchway, England, where he never got a good night's sleep -- the ack-ack guns seemed to be going around the clock.
But there was nothing in the scrapbook about the lonely voyage across the English Channel, the landing craft piloted by the ensign who hadn't shaved in three days, the climb down the rope ladder, the scramble across the beach they called Omaha.
Like thousands of G.I.'s, he hardly needs photos of that daring June 50 years ago: he has his memories of the Normandy invasion.
Like thousands of G.I.'s, he will carry them along when he returns to Normandy in June.


Some Secrets to Smooth the Way for Balky Windows
ONE of spring's early joys is opening the windows to let in the first warm breezes.
But windows that have been shut all winter sometimes stick tight.
Double-hung windows, especially older wood ones, can be balky.
When trying to raise those, beware of pushing mightily against the middle rails, the horizontal pieces that form the top of the lower sash and the bottom of the upper sash.
Doing so can separate those from the rest of the frame and also break the seal between the putty glazing compound and the glass.
Take a measured approach.
First, as with any window, make sure that the sashes are unlocked and that there are no hidden fasteners preventing them from moving.
Then consider that the wood may have swollen.


Weddings; Andrea Lassally, C. H. Gibbin
Andrea Lassally and Christopher Holliday Gibbin, freelance set designers and decorators for films, were married yesterday.
Judge James Albracht of Los Angeles County Superior Court officiated at a home of the bride's parents, in Malibu, Calif.
Mrs.
Gibbin graduated from Parsons School of Design.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Lassally, who also have homes in New York and Beverly Hills, Calif.
Her father is an executive producer of the "Late Show With David Letterman."


Credit Due
To the Editor:
Mindy Aloff notwithstanding  [ "How American Intellectuals Learned to Love Ozu," April 3 ] , the Japanese master's films were introduced to America not by the illustrious institutions she credits but by Cinema 16, the New York film society that existed from 1947 to 1963: "Tokyo Twilight" on Feb. 4, 1959, and "Good Morning (Ohayo)" on March 21, 1962.
AMOS VOGEL  New York The writer was the director of Cinema 16 and the first director of the New York Film Festival.


TAKING THE CHILDREN: From Naked Guns and Fangs to Thumbelina; Thumbelina
With this issue, the Arts and Leisure section starts a new feature appearing every other week: Taking the Children.
It will have synopses of movies with notes on elements that some parents may find objectionable.
The items are contributed by Janet Maslin, who is the Times's chief film critic and has sons aged 8 and 4; Patricia S. McCormick, a contributing editor of Parents magazine, who has a 10-year-old daughter and 4-year-old son, and Kenneth C. Davis, the author of "Don't Know Much About History," who has an 11-year-old daughter and 8-year-old son.
Thumbelina Animated G 85 minutes


Parks in the West
To the Editor: Southern Utah's remarkable redrock country ("Treks to Tackle in Rugged Utah," March 20) is besieged by two forms of development.
The first is mainstream economic activity: grazing, mining, dam and road construction, and (very recently) plans to import hazardous waste and to test guided missiles in remote venues.
Over the last few decades, many concerned citizens have suggested tourism as a way to halt irresponsible development, both by building a political constituency that would work against it and by providing the region with an alternative, more environmentally benign, economic base.
Sadly, tourism now poses a threat in its own right.
In some places, tourist-related development has compromised the very qualities of solitude and beauty that people visit the desert to find.


How to Help The B Train?
An experiment to reduce delays on the vandalism-plagued B train will be stopped because it created another problem: overcrowding.
Under the experiment, which started two weeks ago, the Transit Authority shortened 14 of the 19 B trains -- to 8 cars from 10 -- and used the freed-up cars to create three replacement trains that could be sent immediately in relief.


Photography View; Where Does Viewer Discretion Begin?
THE SIGN ON THE DOOR SAYS: 'This exhibition contains stark images of war.
Viewer discretion is advised.' The show is 'Farewell to Bosnia: New Photographs by Gilles Peress' at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, some of the images are stark enough, and the idea that we should view Bosnia with discretion adds a mordant note to the politics of art.
A wall labeled 'Dismemberment' includes the image of a young boy, his face tactfully left out of the picture, holding up two stumps at the ends of his arms; a man on an operating table, fully awake, his entire leg clamped open and displaying its secret structures; and on a shelf in the prosthetic unit, three gleaming feet made of some up-to-date synthetic, the toenails meticulously drawn in.


Fighting for a Bus Seat: The Survival of the Fit
To the Editor:
In a city already filled with competition and greed, how disappointing to find Elliott Rosenberg's how-to article ("Step Onto the Bus. Claim Your Seat," March 26) about one of New York's most unseemly and selfish weekday rituals, battling for a seat on the bus.


Sight Specific
Lewis Mumford, New York's most eloquent architectural booster of the 30's and 40's, used to walk around Manhattan to admire good design.
I hike around the block.
It's a game I sometimes play in Mumford's honor to test the notion that good design delights even at the most pedestrian level.
Mumford looked up at skyscrapers; I scan the sidewalks.
For this exercise, I randomly chose 18th Street between Broadway and Avenue of the Americas.
It's both residential and commercial, newly developed in parts and yet still down at the heel.
There are only a few rules to this seeing game, and no score; my eyes are the winner.
Anything from the curb to the first story is fair game (as long as it's made, not grown).
No posters, window displays or other temporary installations intended to impress.
Nothing overtly nostalgic or clever. (Sorry, no Nynex ads.) Period details count only if they're still functional or an integral part of the whole.
In my game, good design means carefully made, purposeful and authentic.
And there should be an inexplicable iota of exuberance.


A Surprising SILENT Majority In South Africa
ENCOUNTERED AT HIS WORK IN THE MAMELODI WEST CLINIC, where he tends to the inhabitants of a black township east of Pretoria, Dr.
Jonathan Maaga is the model of a new South African, progressive in his opinions, generous in his services to the community, a thoroughly modern man.
He counsels his patients about AIDS and family planning.
He spends a couple of days every week at a satellite clinic he set up in an abandoned bus in a squatter camp, Mandela Park.
He has sent four children to college.
On April 27, he will take a break from vaccinating homeless babies to cast the first vote of his life.
Mindful of the large and petty humiliations inflicted upon him by apartheid during his 56 years and a great admirer of "the old man," as he calls Nelson Mandela, Maaga will vote for the African National Congress.
Close that window now and open another.
It is Easter weekend and Maaga is driving his 10-year-old orange Mercedes north into the Transvaal, where the stark jut of the Drakensberg Mountains subsides into rocky valleys of red earth and thorn trees.
He has changed his hospital whites for a proletarian khaki suit and black peaked cap.
Pinned to his lapel is a small silver star, like a sheriff's badge, etched with the letters Z.C.C. and backed by swatches of green and black cloth.
Three hours north of Pretoria, he slows behind an endless caravan of overloaded vehicles streaming into a scrub-covered saddle of land.
The doctor parks and joins a million other pilgrims, identically dressed, carrying bedrolls and paraffin cookstoves into the bush for a weekend of ecstatic surrender and thoughtless obedience.


Couple Offer Temple Service
THERE is nothing unusual about being married 45 years, Walter and Hannah Shmerler say.
Few of their friends are divorced because people of their generation simply worked things out.
"When you said, 'Till death do us part,' you really meant it," Ms.
Shmerler said one recent afternoon as she sat in her immaculate home here and gazed out the picture window at a fog-shrouded lake.
Seated across the table from his blond, animated wife was the man who calls her Cookie, who graduated two years before she did from Scarsdale High School and raised two sons, David and Stephen, with her.
During a long marriage you come to share interests, Mr.
Shmerler said, ticking off theirs: "Music, art -- cross out golf, don't ever discuss golf -- travel, museums."


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
California Desert: Vote on passage of a bill to set aside 6.6 million additional acres of California desert as wilderness and federal parkland.
Approved 69 to 29, April 13.
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . . Yea
Lieberman (D) . . . Yea New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . . Yea
Lautenberg (D) . . . Yea New York
D'Amato (R) . . . Nea
Moynihan (D) . . . Yea KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present. House
1.
Crime Bill: Procedural vote to limit the number of crime bill amendments that can be considered.
Approved 244 to 176, April 13.
2.
Crime Bill: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime bill that would have eliminated the death penalty for drug kingpins in cases in which no death resulted.
Rejected 316 to 108, with one member voting "Present," April 14.
3.
Crime Bill: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime bill that would have changed all the death penalty provisions to life in prison without possibility of parole.
Rejected 314 to 111, April 14.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
2. Gejdenson (D)
Yea
Nea
Yea
3. DeLauro (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
4. Shays (R)
Nea
Nea
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
6. Johnson (R)
Nea
Nea
A
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
A
Nea
Nea
2. Hughes (D)
Yea
Yea
Nea
3. Saxton (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
4. Smith (R)
Nea
Yea
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
A
A
A
6. Pallone (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
7. Franks (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
8. Klein (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
9. Torricelli (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
10. Payne (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
11. Gallo (R)
A
A
A
12. Zimmer (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
13. Menendez (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
2. Lazio (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
3. King (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
4. Levy (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
5. Ackerman (D)
Yea
A
Yea
6. Flake (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
7. Manton (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
8. Nadler (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
9. Schumer (D)
Yea
Nea
Nea
10. Towns (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
11. Owens (D)
Yea
P
Yea
12. Velazquez (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
13. Molinari (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
14. Maloney (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
15. Rangel (D)
Yea
A
A
16. Serrano (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
17. Engel (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
18. Lowey (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
19. Fish (R)
A
A
A
20. Gilman (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
23. Boehlert (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
24. McHugh (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
25. Walsh (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
26. Hinchey (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
27. Paxon (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
28. Slaughter (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
29. LaFalce (D)
Yea
Yea
Yea
30. Quinn (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
31. Houghton (R)
Nea
Nea
Nea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Brentano's to Abandon Bookstore on Fifth Avenue
Generations of New York book lovers have made their way to 597 Fifth Avenue to browse, perchance to buy.
The elegant site, with its mahogany walls, wrought-iron balconies and vaulted ceilings, began its life as a bookstore in 1913 under the Scribner's banner.
In 1989 it was taken over by Brentano's.
And now Brentano's is bowing out, with no assurance that 597's bookstore tradition will continue.


'Behind The Times'
To the Editor:
Your reviewer, Tom Goldstein, a reporter for The Times in the 1970's and now dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at the University of California, Berkeley, had some harsh words for my book on The New York Times, "Behind The Times: Inside the New New York Times" (Jan. 30).
He and you are entitled, of course, though I found some of his criticisms quite strange, and at odds with what other critics have been saying.
In fact, while your review was negative, many of the other reviews to date have been positive.
Might some of the bad press "Behind The Times" received in the Book Review have something to do with the fact that an entire chapter of my book looks into some of the alleged shortcomings of . . . the Book Review?


Out of the Ashes; More Derelict Factories Are Returning to Productive Use
From the outside, it looks like one more decrepit multi-story brick factory building left for dead.
The inside, however, is alive with the sound of screaming band saws and the smell of fresh sawdust.
The former 19th-century rope factory on the Brooklyn waterfront in Greenpoint has been broken up into dozens of smaller spaces for woodworking shops and artisans.
"It would be much easier for me to operate in Pennsylvania," said Eric Seibel, a cabinet maker with five employees.
"So if a place like this didn't exist, I definitely wouldn't be in New York."


Rightist Bloc In Italy Wins 2 Top Posts In Parliament
Bruised but victorious after his first battle with Parliament, Silvio Berlusconi today secured the Speakers' posts in both houses of Parliament for his hand-picked candidates, paving the way for his own nomination as prime minister in the next few days.
After two days of fractious bargaining, the Chamber of Deputies elected as its Speaker Irene Pivetti, a 31-year-old freshman legislator from the separatist Northern League, while the Senate chose a 49-year-old economist, Carlo Scognamiglio, from Mr.
Berlusconi's Forza Italia party.


A New Nynex Service Comes With a Catch
To the Editor:
The new "service" Nynex is offering, referred to in "Directory Assistance Goes an Extra Step," April 3, seems designed more to pad the company's own pockets than to be a true help.


For U.S. Miners, the Rush Is On to Latin America
FOR Leonard Harris, a craggy veteran of mining battles in the American West, Peru offers an investment climate to warm a rock lover's heart.
"We got all our mining permits in one year here," said Mr.
Harris, general manager of a new Andean gold mine operated by the Newmont Mining Corporation of Denver.
"One year and 15 days after approval, we poured gold."


The Worms Crawl in, And Then Come The Entomologists
Spring is busy season for forensic entomologists.
More people are out in the woods, walking, bird-watching, gathering mushrooms and stumbling across corpses.
When the police want to know how long the victim has been dead, they may call in the entomologists, because blowflies (their larvae are maggots) tend to be first on the scene of the crime.
The kind of insects and their stage of development can help pinpoint time of death and provide other clues to the victim's demise.
The trouble is, cops don't always give insect collection their full attention.
So Ke Chung Kim and Stephen W. Bullington are giving a three-day course in June at Penn State to train cops, coroners and pathologists.


Trying to Keep Jobs Cooking in the Bronx
A contract that could create hundreds of jobs to supply inmates at all city jails with prepared meals should go to a company inside the five boroughs, not to Rockland County, city officials say.
Complying with a court order to improve the food at the jail complex, the Dinkins administration had decided in November to contract the job out to the State Department of Mental Health, which had planned to spend $4.5 million to expand its high-tech kitchen in Orangeburg to supply food through the cook-chill method.


In the Region/Connecticut; Habitat Expands Its Sweat-Equity Homebuilding
TAKING a year to build a 3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,150-square-foot house with a crew of volunteers who work only on Saturdays wins no medals for efficiency, said Brenda Mleziva, regional director of Habitat for Humanity Northeast in Acton, Mass.
"But that's what you do," said Ms.
Mleziva, whose office serves six New England states and New York.
"If you rush it, there isn't time for the owner family to complete the 400 hours of sweat equity that we require, nor to establish the sense of community that is Habitat's goal."


Weddings; Marlene Schwaeber, Paul Platkin
Marlene Robin Schwaeber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry T. Schwaeber of Roslyn Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Paul Stuart Platkin, a son of Judith Platkin of Parlin, N.J., and the late Stanley M. Platkin.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski officiated at Glen Oaks Country Club in Old Westbury, L.I.
Mrs.
Platkin, 28, is a consultant at Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Company, an accounting firm in New York.
She graduated from Johns Hopkins University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.


Weddings; Leslie Farrow, David Hutchinson
Leslie Ann Farrow, the daughter of John Farrow of Ellington, Conn., and Sandra Farrow of East Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to David Travis Hutchinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Travis Hutchinson of Essex Fells, N.J.
The Rev.
Sidat Balgobin performed the Congregational ceremony at the Trinity College Chapel in Hartford.
Mrs.
Hutchinson, 27, a graduate of the University of Connecticut, is a senior product specialist for Anderson Consulting in Chicago.


No Headline
"Before, the view of Russian men were as creatures without willpower who drink too much. Now they have the ability to make money, they want everything in this life. They have that macho feeling." VALENTINA KONSTANTINOVA, on the rise of sexual harassment.  [ 8:3. ]


When Networks Took Risks, and the High Road
ALTHOUGH TELEVISION AS WE know it today is, give or take a couple of years, only 45 years old, talk about one golden age or another has been bandied about for decades.
The medium thrives on almost instant nostalgia. (It does wonders for the rerun business.)
The 1950's were no sooner over than industry observers were mourning the demise of the golden age of live drama on series like "Playhouse 90." Television veterans still get misty-eyed about the challenge of going on the air live without the safety net of a second take.


April 10-16; A Pilgrimage Across California in Cesar Chavez's Memory


On the Seamy Side of the Street
EACH IN HIS SEASON By W. D. Snodgrass. 126 pp.
Brockport, N.Y.: BOA Editions.
Cloth, $25.
Paper, $12.50.
CROSSROADS By David R. Slavitt. 58 pp.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
Cloth, $15.95.
Paper, $8.95.
RED TROUSSEAU  By Carol Muske. 82 pp.
New York: Viking.
Cloth, $18.
Penguin Books.
Paper, $12.


The World; Israel Turns 46


Insult to Injury
To the Sports Editor:
"Coleman: 'I Was Mets' Scapegoat' " (The Times, March 6) quotes Vince Coleman regarding a lawsuit filed on behalf of our 3-year-old daughter, as well as the two of us (her parents), against him for damages arising out of an incident at Dodger Stadium.
In that incident, Coleman is alleged to have tossed an explosive device toward a group of people that included the three of us.
Since Coleman was permitted to present his unique view in that article of the facts surrounding the incident, it is only fair that my wife, daughter and I should be permitted to give our view of what happened.


The Importance Of Watercolor
In a recent review ("An Attractive Exhibition of What Watercolorists Can Do"), Vivien Raynor said watercolor had great practitioners in India, Persia and early 19th-century England, but seldom elsewhere.
She said watercolor "can hardly be counted a medium of overwhelming importance."
Apparently Ms.
Raynor has been isolated on that provincial island of Manhattan for so long that she has lost touch completely with the rest of the country.
Evidence of that may be found in the fact that her department seems to think that Staten Island is part of New Jersey and rarely ventures south of Exit 14 on the New Jersey Turnpike for reviews.


After 27 Years, Housing Fight Is Intensifying
On the Lower East Side, where housing is one of the most pressing needs, a prime site cleared for development 27 years ago has stood vacant ever since, serving instead as a battleground for community groups fighting over what to build there.
That dispute is heating up anew, pitting a prominent local Orthodox Jewish group favoring commercial development against advocates of affordable housing who say more apartments are desperately needed for doubled-up and homeless families.


The Cherrys' Trove: Will Ethics Also Be on the Block?
THE FIVE-WEEK EXHIBITION OF the Wendell and Dorothy Cherry collection ends today at the J. B. Speed Museum in Louisville, Ky. -- and the next move part of the collection makes is raising the hackles of some art world ethicists.
Nearly half of the 88 Old Master, Impressionist, Austrian Expressionist and American paintings and the palace-quality French and English antiques will be shipped to Sotheby's in New York to be auctioned next month.
Sotheby's estimates that the sale could reap as much as $27 million, with four works accounting for half the total: Gustav Klimt's "Lady With a Fan," John Singer Sargent's "Spanish Dancer" and two lavishly inlaid pieces of French 18th-century furniture -- a desk by Andre Charles Boulle and a commode by a cabinetmaker to Louis XVI.


Ukraine's Opportunity: Western Suspicions of Russia
Ukraine, barely de-Sovietized and economically unreformed, is hoping to take advantage of new strains in the American-Russian relationship by promoting itself as a bulwark against any potential Russian imperialism.
Ukrainian officials and senior Western diplomats here discern growing mistrust and disillusionment between Moscow and Washington, where the Clinton Administration is being pushed to regard the Russians as rivals instead of partners, as Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Indiana Republican, recently put it.


U.S. Is Paying More Low-Earners for Working, I.R.S. Survey Finds
Perhaps enticed by news of expanded benefits to come, lower-income workers flocked this year to claim the earned income tax credit, which can bring Government checks of more than $2,000 to married parents who work and rear children.
Unlike most other credits, which are limited to reducing tax liabilities, this one generally brings money to supplement the wages of the working poor.


TAKING THE CHILDREN: From Naked Guns and Fangs to Thumbelina; White Fang 2: Myth of the White Wolf
With this issue, the Arts and Leisure section starts a new feature appearing every other week: Taking the Children.
It will have synopses of movies with notes on elements that some parents may find objectionable.
The items are contributed by Janet Maslin, who is the Times's chief film critic and has sons aged 8 and 4; Patricia S. McCormick, a contributing editor of Parents magazine, who has a 10-year-old daughter and 4-year-old son, and Kenneth C. Davis, the author of "Don't Know Much About History," who has an 11-year-old daughter and 8-year-old son.
White Fang 2: Myth of the White Wolf Scott Bairstow, Charmaine Craig, Alfred Molina Directed by Ken Olin PG 90 minutes


A Friendly Hand Offers Help


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Floyd Shoots 69 to Gain Lead  Ray Floyd eluded the double-bogey disasters that struck other contenders yesterday and took a two-stroke lead in the PGA Seniors Championship in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
Floyd shot a three-under-par 69 over the wind-blown PGA National Golf Club course and took a nine-under-par 207 total into today's final round.(AP)


Weddings; Amy B. Jack, Wayne Powless
Amy B. Jack and Wayne M. Powless were married yesterday at the Huntington (L.I.) United Methodist Church by the Rev.
Dr.
Robert Huston.
The bride is a vice president in the fixed-income division of Lehman Brothers in New York.
The bridegroom is an associate there.


Buyers Can Change the Tires Before Driving the Car
A VISIT to a dealer's showroom makes it clear that car shoppers pay a lot more attention to a car's color, mileage rating and sound system than they do to the tires.
Consumers often make a broad presumption about new-car tires: that the auto makers surely picked tires that will be reasonably safe and wear reasonably well.
In fact, car makers do work closely with tire companies to find suitable tires, and generally come up with models that perform reasonably well.


A Little Icing on the Cake Never Hurts
IF the Courtyard Cafe were a wine, connoisseurs would say it travels well.
The 10-year-old restaurant from Bohemia has been known as a pretty spot with good food.
Late last winter, the Courtyard Cafe moved a few miles east to larger quarters in a new office building in Ronkonkoma.
There, pretty has been transformed into strikingly beautiful, and good food has become very good, with flashes of exceptional.
First glimpses of the restaurant reveal a welcoming lounge highlighted with a mahogany bar, garden mural, fireplace, cafe tables and wicker chairs.
White tablecloths and fresh flowers define the more formal dining rooms.
The mood is set by soft lighting, masses of green plants, tapestries, garden statues, a mirror-fronted armoire and other antiques.


Will Write for Food
The dark days of reckless harmaceutical excess are embarrassing to recall for Jim Harrison, poet, novelist, screenwriter, semiprofessional food critic and self-described pig.
So are his blurry memories of hangovers in Key West, long depressions in northern Michigan and fortunes misspent on expensive fishing boats, winters in Palm Beach and a decade's worth of back taxes.


Mary Grace Is Going to Die
SOULS RAISED FROM THE DEAD By Doris Betts. 339 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


You Can't Tell Left From Right Anymore
To the Editor:
Representative Henry A. Waxman has announced he might propose a ban on nicotine in cigarettes, a perfect illustration of why it is getting hard to tell the difference between liberal and conservative ideologies.


Wanted: Candidate. No Privacy, Little Glory.
They had a great race here for the United States Senate. But almost nobody came.
For months, even years, Democrats in this state have talked excitedly about their chance to defeat Senator Orrin G. Hatch, a three-term Republican who enraged many women and Democrats with his sharp-tongued treatment of Prof.
Anita F. Hill during the 1991 confirmation hearings of Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court.


Devils Put Grown-Up Pressure on The Kid
Jacques Lemaire calls him the Kid.
His Devils teammates are undecided what to call him.
Some call him Marty.
Others call him Martin, with the accent on the second syllable, the way it is pronounced in French.
No matter what anyone calls Martin Brodeur, everyone agrees that the 21-year-old rookie from Montreal plays a cool game in goal.
Brodeur performed so efficiently and effectively for the Devils, in fact, that some have already started to compare him with Ken Dryden and Patrick Roy, two rookie goalies who led the Canadiens to Stanley Cup triumphs, in 1971 and 1986, respectively.


Did You Hear The One About . . .
To the Editor:
Clifford Odets's "Flowering Peach" was a puzzle to critics when it was first produced as a vehicle for the great Yiddish comic actor Menasha Skulnik.
They remained puzzled when it was set to music as a vehicle for Danny Kaye.
They are apparently still mystified by its newest revival by the National Actors Theater  [ "Odets Waves an Olive Branch in a Last Play," March 27 ] .
They just can't figure out why Odets latched onto the biblical story of Noah and the Flood.


Blowing Smoke at Congress
"It's theater," a public relations adviser to a cigarette maker sneered about last week's dramatic clash between a Congressional subcommittee and executives of the seven largest American tobacco companies.
So it was, and a particularly corrupt and mendacious kind of theater at that.
Perhaps the prospect of someday owing millions to the victims of their product compelled the tobacco executives to deny the reality of the consequences of cigarette smoking.
It was a shameful day for American business, even though we are wearily familiar with the obfuscations employed by the defenders of an industry responsible for the deaths of nearly half a million Americans every year.


Corrections
A review on page 13 of the Book Review today, about "Dogmatic Wisdom: How the Culture Wars Divert Education and Distract America," by Russell Jacoby, misstates the price of the book.
It is $22.95.


Subtler Than a Picket Line
JAMES WEAVER, a 62-year-old retired truck driver, doesn't like the way his former employer, Consolidated Freightways, is doing business, so he has joined the growing number of union-related efforts to lobby for change with proxies instead of pickets.
Mr.
Weaver, of Florissant, Mo., who owns 2,284 shares of the trucking company, has filed shareholder resolutions two years in a row, and although he is retired from the company and from the teamsters' union, Consolidated executives say he is a wolf in sheep's clothing, a front man for a teamsters effort to harass Consolidated's board and gain some leverage in ways more subtle than the union's current strike against the nation's largest trucking firms.


A Not-So-Perfect Garden
To the Editor:
Although Paramount Communications spent $200 million to renovate Madison Square Garden and the Paramount Theater ("Paramount's Bet on Madison Square Garden Is Looking Good," March 27), the Garden still lacks accessible seating sections for fans who use wheelchairs, possibly violating provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act.
The renovations did include new elevators and wheelchair-accessible lavatories.
But while the corporate privileged sit in luxury suites and the Hollywood nouveau fans sit courtside, wheelchair users like myself must sit in a walkway about two-thirds the way up from courtside, even if we are holding fourth-row tickets.


The Adam, Eve and Maybelle of Country
ON A MIDSUMMER evening in 1927, in a makeshift recording studio in Bristol, Tenn., a farmer and carpenter named A .P.
Carter, his wife Sara, and sister-in-law Maybelle sat down in front of a microphone to record four songs for the Victor Talking Machine Company.
The day before, lured by reports that the Victor Company was holding auditions and on-the-spot recordings, Carter had packed his skeptical wife and pregnant sister-in-law into their Model A Ford and driven 25 miles over dirt roads from their home in the Virginia mountains to Bristol.


Want a Scene? Make It
FROM the time his day begins by noon's early light until he goes out to dinner at 8 P.M., Mark Baker has a Mitsubishi cellular phone glued to his ear.
By his count, he receives 200 calls a day and places 50 more.
"I have a very tight network around the world," he said.
"You need to be taken care of in Caracas? You call me."
Mr.
Baker is not a travel agent, C.I.A. desk officer or international gold speculator.
He is a restaurateur.
His ardent networking on the phone, which falls somewhere in the gray zone between business and social calling, is intended to swell the tide at Flowers, his country-style restaurant whose French doors open onto 17th Street west of Fifth Avenue.


April 10-16; A Poem as Cost-Efficient as a Tree
Urban trees have long been cherished amenities, connections to a softer, greener world beyond asphalt and concrete.
And scientists have long known that trees cool cities, absorb pollution and bestow a number of other environmental benefits.
But in this era of the budgetary squeeze, city officials have begun to ask whether planting and maintaining trees are worth the cost.
Now, in what is said to be the first study of its kind, the United States Forest Service has found that city trees can save millions of dollars over the long term.


THE FREEDOM TO CHOOSE DOCTORS: WHAT FREEDOM?
In an otherwise excellent article, Michael Weinstein neglects to mention that physicians get financially rewarded for doing less for H.M.O. patients.
I am referring, of course, to the fact that a fraction of the fee for the physician's visit is withheld (typically 15 to 20 percent).
The physician gets this back at the end of the year, if medical expenses for either his group of patients or the H.M.O. as a whole have not been too high.


Deals and Discounts
LONDON PACKAGES British Airways is offering a four-day, three-night London package starting at $599 a person, double occupancy, for departures through May 31, $699 through June 24.
It includes round-trip air fare between New York and London, transportation between the airport and the hotel, accommmodation with private bath, service charge, daily Continental breakfast and tax.
The minimum price is for the 301-room Tavistock Hotel on Tavistock Square; upgrading to the 896-room Cumberland at Marble Arch, for example, raises the price to $739 in April and May, $839 in June.
Weekend travel costs an extra $20 each way.
The package also includes a theater ticket, lunch at a pub and a London Regional Transport Visitor Travelcard good for transportation on the Underground or city buses.
A seven-day, six-night package is also available.
As of early April, May departures were selling quickly but June dates were available.
Information: (800) 359-8722.
Qantas Vacations: (800) 442-9951.


PHANTOM RIVAL
In "Phantom Rival" (Hers, March 20), Marilyn Greenberg has dealt with cancer with courage and spunk, preferring to fight it at her own pace rather than by some external time clock.
Her words will lead many of us to reconsider how we phrase what we think are well-meaning messages of support to stricken friends.
Silence and just being there often show more wisdom than proffered pep talks.
ELLEN GOLD Rockville, Md.


It Looks Like a Single Greenpoint Store, But It's Two
THERE is an invisible wall in a recently opened commercial space in Brooklyn, dividing two new stores.
They have opened in a sizable early-20th-century building that was long leased by the J.J.
Newberry department store, on Manhattan Avenue.
A customer might think the two stores are one, not drawing the correct inference from the difference in merchandise on left and right, up and down.
But Mark Hanan and his old friend Morris Mizrahi know better.


Weddings; Maryann Curry, T. S. Cassidy Jr.
Maryann Curry, a daughter of Patrick and Carole Curry of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., was married yesterday to Terrence Sean Cassidy Jr., a son of Katherine M. Cassidy of Stamford, Conn., and Mr.
Cassidy of New York.
The Rev.
Peter M. Colapietro performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Church of the Immaculate Conception in Quiogue, L.I.
The bride, 29, is a vice president in the institutional account marketing division of J. &amp; W. Seligman &amp; Company Inc., an investment management company in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is a vice president at the Corporate Printing Company, a financial printer in New York.


Judianne Albertson and Kenneth Zirk
If Judianne Albertson were not a banker she could write romance novels.
A 29-year-old Citicorp vice president in New York, she is more sentimental than steely; she loves candlelight, potpourri, dainty teacups, roses and tear-jerker movies.
As Lisa Hirsch, her matron of honor, said, "Judi puts perfume on everything in her own way."


Evening Hours; Pratt Institute Dispenses Honors
Barbaralee Diamonstein-Spielvogel is the first woman to receive the school's Founder's Award, April 4, at the Plaza.


Fudging the Budget
When asked why the state budget for the fiscal year that began April 1 is now more than two weeks late and not close to final passage, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and state legislative leaders point to ideological disputes over school aid, health care and tax cuts.
But the coarser reality about the budget fight is this: it's mostly about protecting incumbents.


Business Diary: April 10-15
COMPANIES In the Great Tobacco War, The Generals Go to the Front Lines Battles have long raged in the trenches -- in offices, restaurants and hospitals, in tirades by lobbyists and activists.
And last week, the pitch rising daily, the generals themselves faced off.
The subject was tobacco.
Industry leaders had come to Capitol Hill to answer charges of manipulating nicotine levels to fine-tune smokers' addiction.
Yes, they said, nicotine levels change, but that's to enhance flavor.
Is smoking addictive?
A chorus of "no"s.
Does it cause lung cancer?
"It may," said James Johnston of R.J.
Reynolds.
But Andrew Tisch of Lorillard said, "I do not believe that." At one point Mr.
Johnston lashed out, "If cigarettes are too dangerous to be sold, then ban them." Next to the executives, their host, Representative Henry Waxman, had placed a placard that read, "One American dies every 80 seconds from tobacco use." If so, then 270 died in the hearing's six hours.


Editors' Note
An article in the Education Life section on April 10, "Hands-On Philanthropy," described efforts to upgrade programs at Lewis &amp; Clark College in Portland, Ore.
Much of its focus was on Robert B. Pamplin Jr., the board chairman.
After publication, The Times learned that Gary K. Eisler, the freelance author of the article, had worked in the past as a public relations consultant for Mr.
Pamplin.
Although that work was unrelated to the college, The Times would not have knowingly assigned such an article to a writer with that kind of connection to his subject.


Spano's Strategy For the Democrats
ANDREW J. SPANO, the former County Clerk, received a call last week in his new capacity as the county's Democratic Party chairman "from three Assembly people asking me to do something," he said.
"I asked them how the county legislators felt about it and one of them said, 'Oh, I never talk to them.' "
They should be talking to each other, Mr.
Spano said, noting that one of his first tasks as party leader will be to "develop communications between and among the various levels of government -- county legislators, state legislators and local officials."


Weddings; Monica Furlong, Elliot Essman
Dr.
Monica Winefryde Furlong, an anesthesiologist at Beth Israel Medical Center North, was married yesterday to Elliot Theodore Essman, the president of the Autonomy Publishing Corporation.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Jane Brendel of the Church of Religious Science in New York officiated at the home of the bridegroom's parents in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Richard Curtis, the screenwriter of "Four Weddings and a Funeral," omitted several words because of a mechanical error.
The paragraph at the top of the second column should have read: "When I wrote the script, I had no idea how anybody could get the nerve up to ask someone to marry them. I was trying to get to the bottom of that mystery."


Pleasing Fare in Foreign Restaurants
THEY are the most authentic foreign restaurants on Long Island.
Yet even adventurous English-speaking diners usually give them a wide berth.
They are the tiny storefront Hispanic spots that dot Nassau and Suffolk.
The reasons for restaurantgoers' hesitation are obvious.
Most of the restaurants that offer the food of El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and the other Central and South American nations are unpretentious, even primitive.


On Traffic At Newark Airport
The March 20 article on the expension of Newark International Airport ("Newark Airport Has Overseas Image") contained several references by officials to the airport as "user friendly."
When it comes to dropping off passengers or picking them up, Newark International is as "user friendly" as a pit bull.


On a Limp and a Prayer
I WAS sitting in my wheelchair, minding my own business, when a stranger approached our table at the sidewalk cafe.
"Wouldn't you feel terrible if you left Singapore without trying something that could make you walk?" she said.
I rolled my eyes.
Ever since my husband, Duke, and I had arrived in Singapore, our first stop on a three-week Southeast Asian vacation, people had been trying to heal me.
"I have special health food from Beijing," the stranger said.
"It can make you well." I explained that I wasn't sick: I'd injured my leg.
"What happened?" she said.


April 10-16: Fighting Cancer; More Broccoli, Cabbage And Groans Heard Round, Some Dinner Tables
Lest anybody think the revelation last week that much-vaunted vitamin supplements  [ see page 6 ]  do not necessarily prevent cancer or heart disease means scientists don't know anything and, hey, maybe we can eat whatever we want after all -- put down that butter knife and get out the vegetable steamer.
Far from doubting the health benefits of a diet rich in fruits, vegetables and grains, researchers are gathering ever more evidence of the power of plants.
Reporting last week in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Dr.
Paul Talalay and colleagues at the Johns Hopkins University showed that a chemical isolated from broccoli sharply inhibited the growth of breast cancer in lab animals.


At a Tax Sale, A Fine Address Is on the Block
The city plans to auction off a jewel on its list of forfeited properties next month: a 38-unit apartment house, with tenants, at 823 Park Avenue, between 75th and 76th Streets.
The opening bid for the building, which has 12 stories plus a penthouse, has been set at $2.4 million.
The apartment house was acquired by the city in 1991 for nonpayment of taxes; the owners owed about $1.4 million in back taxes and penalties, city officials said.


Charlie Goldstein, Power Broker
Charlie Goldstein sells sport coats.
But not just any sport coats.
Not in just any store.
Not to just anybody.
Mr.
Goldstein is a salesman for Brooks Brothers.
Third floor.
Sport coats, slacks and formal wear.
Across 37 years, on one floor or another of the company's flagship store at 44th Street and Madison Avenue, Mr.
Goldstein has also sold suits, shoes, and boys' underwear, just about everything a well-dressed member of the establishment could want or need.


One-Liners to Lighten Up Science
THE elderly gentleman with a full head of white hair, gripping a pipe between his teeth, stands in front of a blackboard, chalk poised to write, papers full of scribbling scattered around his feet.
He has crossed out two equations: E=MA , and E=MB  .
So goes Sidney Harris's cartoon view of how Einstein must have stumbled across the theory of relativity, E=MC  .


The Chosen One
A year ago, I boarded a flight to Shanghai during a gale force wind.
The plane shivered and taxied back to the hangar twice before takeoff.
It is testimony to my anxiety about the purpose of my journey that I felt no fear of flying.
I carried with me an empty infant car bed (aptly named the Dream Ride), a three-week supply of diapers, wipes, pediatric antibiotics, bottles and disposable nipples.
I was on my way to adopt one of the tens of thousands of baby girls abandoned in China each year.
Today as I write, my 1-year-old daughter sleeps in a crib in the next room.
She lies in the position of trust -- on her back, her arms widespread, her face tip-tilted as if for the next kiss.


April 10-16; Symbolically, a Tiny Victory
It was not exactly a major doctrinal pronouncement, but then, God's hand is in the details, they say.
Yet when Pope John Paul II dropped the Vatican's objection last week to girls serving at Mass, a task until now restricted to males, it seemed more than a mere detail.
The decision, which came in a letter from the Vatican Congregation for Divine Worship and the Sacraments, removed any official objection to young women lighting candles, handing the wine and water to priests and otherwise helping them celebrate the eucharist.
It will be left to each bishop whether the practice is permitted in his diocese.


LINE BY LINE BY SONDHEIM
In Annette Grant's "Line by Line by Sondheim" (March 20), I felt that I was taken inside the composer's complex approach to creating words and music.
Stephen Sondheim's reflection on the significance of dreams during the weeks of intense work made the process more real as well as more magical.
DYAN PIKE Ross, Calif.


The Great Midtown Car Race


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LITERARY CRITICISM  THE STRANGER WILDE  Interpreting Oscar.
By Gary Schmidgall.
William Abrahams/Dutton, $25.95.


Princeton's Library
To the Editor:
Your "If You're Thinking of Living In/Princeton" on March 20 perpetuates a half-truth about the university's library system.
While it is true that access and borrowing privileges are limited, the library has much to offer the public.
Above all, the library runs a major exhibition program -- two galleries are open seven days a week.


Fallen Principal: The Last Days
Matthew Barnwell, the former principal of Community Elementary School 53, whose arrest on cocaine possession charges in 1988, touched off investigations of corruption on the city's school boards, died on June, 3, 1992, at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan, Barbara Quinn, a hospital spokeswoman, said.
She would not give the cause of death.


Off the Bench, Out of Purgatory; John Starks
HERE HE COMES AGAIN, breaking around Charles Oakley, who sets a pick by magically turning into a brick pillar.
Half-plaintively, he looks at Greg Anthony and holds his arms outstretched for the pass.
It simply will have to be there.
Anthony will have to see that John Starks is free for that minisecond one is ever free in a game with the Chicago Bulls -- before the defense closes in.
Now all Starks needs is the ball; when he gets it, he will swing his head away from Anthony and see only the halo of the basket, floating like an apparition, 10 feet off the floor and 23 feet away.
His knees will swivel to the right, his torso will follow, his shoulders will lock and he'll uncoil and jump straight up.
There: Anthony has delivered, and Starks is where he wants to be, standing in the air like an angel, with his right hand about to flick.
How does anyone know, after a basketball is released, where it will land?
Any shot, other than a layup or a dunk, is an act of faith.
Not even the shooter can see the arc of its flight at the outset.
Now Starks touches down, but the ball is up, and all he can do is to watch like any member of the Madison Square Garden crowd.
He leans forward, curious.
The ball, careless of approximately 19,000 watchers, rattles inside the rim, as if in a pinball socket, drops in, thinks better of it, and pops out.
From all in attendance: "Oh!"


Orwell - Class of 1994
CYBERPUNKS and Internet jockeys sometimes call Neal Stephenson's novel "Snow Crash" (Bantam Books, 1992) the "Neuromancer" of the 1990's, a reference to William Gibson's seminal work, which appeared in 1984 and coined the term "cyberspace."
"Snow Crash" posits a not-too-distant future when the Los Angeles suburbs have incorporated as semiautonomous "burbclaves," each with its own constitution and contract law enforcement.
Freelance hackers upload reams of random "intel" to the Central Intelligence Corporation and scrabble a living on the fringe of the technopolis.


Banks of New York: What They Offer, What It Costs
Here is a look at the types of accounts and services offered by a selection of local banks.
Most banks offer free checking if requirements for a minimum balance are met.
The requirements are based either on an average of the daily balances during the statement period (generally about a month) or on a minimum daily balance (in which there is a charge if the balance drops below the required level at any time during the statement period).


Hosokawa's Failure Dashes the Hopes of Many
When Morihiro Hosokawa took office as Prime Minister last year, promising to lower taxes and prices to make life better for Japan's silent majority of urban consumers, he raised hopes in the Hibari housing complex, where 500 middle-class families live in small apartments in 21 identical concrete buildings and breadwinners commute up to two hours each way to jobs in Tokyo.
But Mr.
Hosokawa's sudden decision to resign is being viewed here not with the sadness at the loss of a champion, but with disillusionment at promises broken and hopes dashed.


The True Magdalen
To the Editor:
Michael Jones's otherwise excellent review of Susan Haskins's "Mary Magdalen" (March 20) has a strange, unjustified ending.
It states that he is "with Ms. Haskins in concluding that we shall all be the poorer" for, in effect, abandoning a total deception.
For centuries a stubborn misreading of the Bible has turned three women into one and quite without warrant made Mary Magdalen, trusted companion of Jesus, into a repentant prostitute who goes about -- as painters loved to portray her -- naked or nearly so, clothed only in her long red hair.


CORRECTION
A report in the Postings column last Sunday about a new X-Press office of the State Department of Motor Vehicles in Manhattan misstated its opening times and services because of incorrect information supplied by a spokesman for the agency.
The office, at 300 West 34th Street, will be open from 8 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday and until 7 P.M. on Thursday; it will be closed on Friday, Saturday and Sunday.
The office will issue only renewals, not new licenses.


Diana Rigg Is A Chilly, Elegant Medea
LET'S FACE IT: MEDEA, THOUGH grievously wronged by her husband, Jason, is not exactly your prototypical battered wife.
She's the daughter of the king of Colchis, the granddaughter of the sun, a wife, a witch, a mother, a primeval terror in her own right.
Medea is not a woman to be easily characterized.
"I am adept at everything that's hidden," she boasts to the women of Corinth.
She then goes on to commit atrocities that astonish even her.
To play her mostly as victim is to humble one of world literature's most titanic creations.
Yet even if the initial concept of the production is wrongheaded, the Euripides "Medea" now in a limited engagement at the Longacre Theater is efficient, polished and high-toned.
It's also a theatrical event, marking the return to Broadway of Diana Rigg, who plays the title role, her first appearance in New York since 1975 and her bewitching performance as Celimene in "The Misanthrope." Further, this "Medea," directed by Jonathan Kent, is fashionably contemporary in its theatrical effects and in Alistair Elliot's new translation.
Mr.
Elliot does not veer eccentrically from other versions, but he makes more pronounced the feminism that is built into the Euripides text without, however, being its point.


Bratton Says Corruption Sweep Involves Dozens More Officers
About 35 more police officers in a Harlem precinct will be arrested or otherwise disciplined in the next few weeks on various drug charges or for failing to report corruption they witnessed or had heard about, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday.
With 14 officers of the 30th Precinct already taken into custody on felony charges in recent weeks, the housecleaning would be the most sweeping in any station house in more than a decade.
Mr.
Bratton estimated that "25 percent of the precinct has problems," suggesting that there was pervasive knowledge among the 191 officers assigned to the precinct that rogue police were selling drugs, protecting drug dealers and brutalizing citizens on day and night shifts, and virtually every day of the week.


Parks in the West
To the Editor: Thank you for publishing "Away on Wheels to Bryce and Zion" (March 20).
The article brought back excellent memories of a similar bicycle trip I took to Zion, Bryce and the Grand Canyon nearly two years ago.
This bicycle and hiking adventure, also organized by Backroads, was the most picturesque vacation of my life.
It was more tiring than the trip described by Dianna Waggoner, your writer, since we cycled up to 121 miles in one day.
The rock formations in the canyons were colorful and the hiking was spectacular.
A highlight of the trip was the Narrows at Zion National Park.
The waters of the Virgin River flow through a snaking gorge accessible only on foot.
Hundreds of people hiked the river -- marveling at the natural rock sculptures and richly tinted landscapes.


Dancers for the Dance
The American Friends of the Paris Opera and Ballet salute the American choreographer Jerome Robbins at a dinner-dance, St.
Regis Hotel, April 6.


Weddings; Hope I. Dobrow, Stephen Goodman
Hope Ilene Dobrow, a daughter of Isabel Helfat Dobrow of Teaneck, N.J., and the late Joseph I. Dobrow, was married yesterday to Stephen Leonard Goodman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Goodman of Miami.
The Rev.
John E. Wilbur, an Episcopal priest, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Carleton Hotel in Washington.
The bride, 37, is keeping her name.
She was until recently a business planner for Societe Internationale de Telecommunications Aeronautiques, a telecommunications company in Montreal.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.


Sexual Harassment Thrives In the New Russian Climate
The advertisement for a secretary in a Moscow newspaper listed computer skills, typing, English and German as necessary qualifications.
It also specified that applicants should be 18 to 25, 5 foot 7 and have long hair.
"There will be a contest," it said.
The advertisement was just one of scores placed every day that list youth and sex appeal as job requirements.
It was also among the more courtly.
Some Russian employers include another prerequisite in their advertisements: "bez kompleksov," or "without inhibitions." Everyone in Russia knows what that means.


Guest Shortage
R.S.V.P.'s for a formal dinner for the Richard Avedon show ran about 4 to 3 in favor of regrets.
WHAT: The master invitation list for the black-tie dinner at the Whitney Museum of American Art, on March 29, to celebrate the opening of "Richard Avedon: Evidence, 1944-1994."


U.N.'s Bosnia Dilemma: Press Serbs or Pull Out?
Attacked by the Serbs, berated by the Bosnian Muslims, and seemingly powerless to act, the United Nations faced a painful dilemma today over whether to escalate NATO attacks to force the Serbs to the negotiating table or withdraw and end its mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
After the downing of a NATO plane over Gorazde, the killing of a British United Nations officer there, and the detention or restriction of about 200 United Nations personnel over the last week, a statement issued by the United Nations here said that unless the Serbs began to cooperate, "it would be meaningless in the present circumstances for the United Nations Protection Force to continue to fulfill its present activities."


PHANTOM RIVAL
I am not Marilyn Greenberg's tennis lady, but I've heard a lot about her since I was diagnosed with breast cancer last fall and started this odd adventure with surgery, reconstruction and chemotherapy.
I have heard a lot about the tennis lady's opposite number, too -- the one who is so much worse off than I am.
"You're just having six chemo treatments?" someone will say.
"My next-door neighbor's best friend had to go in twice a week for six months."


Contrasting Temperaments Battle in Haydn Warhorses
FOR SOME DECADES NOW the record-buying public has been aware that Franz Joseph Haydn wrote a few symphonies before his No. 93.
There have been several complete recordings, the cheerful, buoyant CD's of Roy Goodman and the Hanover Band on Hyperion being the latest.
Yet Haydn's last 12 symphonies -- the "London," Nos. 93-104 -- still claim pride of place.
A mundane reason is that the average record buyer still has trouble sorting out the pearls among the earlier symphonies. (Haydnomaniacs, of course, will argue that they are all pearls.)


Word for Word/Sexual Harassment; Red Light/Green Light: Next Time The Navy Plans to Play by the Book
WITH its penchant for by-the-book precision, the military relies on manuals to fix broken weapons and attitudes alike.
This month the Navy made public its handbook on preventing and dealing with sexual harassment, compiled in the aftermath of the 1991 Tailhook scandal, in which scores of women were assaulted at an aviators' convention.
The handbook appears as the military's commitment to change has come under question by some because the Pentagon has campaigned to allow Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, to retire at four-star rank despite his role in the scandal; last week the Senate Armed Services Committee voted 20 to 2 in his favor, and the full Senate is expected to follow suit.


Weddings; Melinda Hammer, Stephen Lehman
Melinda Leigh Hammer, a daughter of Dr.
Harvey and Ronnie Hammer of Morristown, N.J., and Stephen Paul Lehman, a son of Burton and Brenda Lehman of New York, are to marry today.
Rabbi Norman J. Cohen is to perform the ceremony at Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N.J.
The bride, 26, is a staff lawyer at the Legal Aid Society in the Bronx.
She graduated from Cornell University and received her law degree from Duke University.


On Sunday; Shared Lives Won't Accept Eternity Apart
THEY were in many ways your typical suburban couple, the kind with a mortgage and a car and a joint checking account and a dog named Harvey.
Twenty years they had clocked together, living the lives their neighbors lived, gazing out their storm windows at a world that seemed to offer them a place with no questions asked.
Into their comfortable existence illness had come, and along with it a disheartening decision by the leaders of their town that suddenly made them feel, after all those years, that they were not as completely a part of the place as they imagined.
At least not as completely as most other suburban couples.


TAKING THE CHILDREN: From Naked Guns and Fangs to Thumbelina; Naked Gun 33 1/3
With this issue, the Arts and Leisure section starts a new feature appearing every other week: Taking the Children.
It will have synopses of movies with notes on elements that some parents may find objectionable.
The items are contributed by Janet Maslin, who is the Times's chief film critic and has sons aged 8 and 4; Patricia S. McCormick, a contributing editor of Parents magazine, who has a 10-year-old daughter and 4-year-old son, and Kenneth C. Davis, the author of "Don't Know Much About History," who has an 11-year-old daughter and 8-year-old son.
Naked Gun 33 1/3  Leslie Nielsen, Priscilla Presley, Fred Ward, Directed by Peter Segal PG-13 83 minutes


End Is Sought To Spraying Foreign Jets
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena has called for more than 20 foreign governments to stop spraying passenger compartments with insecticides before aircraft arriving from outside their borders can land.
Citing health dangers created by the spraying, Mr.
Pena said in a letter to transportation officials around the world that the United States would begin warning travelers to countries that continued the practice.
The spraying is done in countries in the Caribbean, South America and South Pacific.
About 30 minutes before a flight lands, the plane's interior is sprayed to keep disease-bearing pests out of the countries.


Detroit Officers Acquitted In Cuban Immigrant's Death
Two police officers were acquitted this week in the shooting death of a homeless Cuban immigrant, touching off protests by Hispanic residents of Detroit.
The officers, Ira Todd, 36, and Rico Hardy, 34, both on the force for eight years, had been charged with second-degree murder in the death of Jose Itturalde, 42, last April 28 outside Ybarra's Bario Lounge on the city's Southwest Side.


Weddings; Daryl Wieland, A. T. Berenblum
Daryl Louise Wieland, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William F. Wieland of Atlanta, was married there last evening to Andrew Todd Berenblum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin B. Berenblum of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Harvey J. Winokur officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 26, is a medical student at Columbia University.
She graduated from Yale University, as did her husband.
Her father is a psychiatrist in private practice in Atlanta.
Her mother, Aileen W. Wieland, is an organizational development consultant at American Red Cross Blood Services in Atlanta.


Touring Homes and History
Park Slope residents began giving annual tours of their neighborhood's historic homes in 1959 as a way of attracting homeowners to the area.
In the years since then, Flatbush and other neighborhoods have begun offering their own tours, drawing hundreds of people to many of the borough's architectural treasures, ranging from the Victorian homes of Flatbush to the early Federal brick houses of Brooklyn Heights and pre-Civil War era brownstones in Fort Greene.
This year, for the first time, neighborhoods are banding together to promote the annual events.


Diets: Cons by Pros
"Feeding on Dreams" a new attack on the "diet con game," by Diane Epstein and Kathleen Thompson, presents some stunning claims: One in every 250 diet program clients loses weight in the long term; 70 to 90 percent of clients are repeaters; the diet industry pulls in $30 billion a year.
And according to an old college physical-education textbook for women, "Your thigh should be 10 to 13 inches larger than your ankle."
But when the authors use the phrase "con game" they really bring a fair part of the diet business into perspective as a classic bait-and-switch operation.
First, there's the mark.
She's probably a woman between the ages of 35 and 50, married, a veteran of at least one diet program.
Then comes the bait, the promise of a life-changing new body shape, as much a dream as winning the lottery.
Finally comes the switch.
When the mark gets her new body home, she finds that the weight comes back, and brings a few new pounds with it.


Sports of the Times; Jim Rome Didn't Just Happen
When I got back from Norway, I received dozens and dozens of letters from bright Times readers who had been captivated by the Tonya-Nancy-Oksana Frolics, but many of the readers also complained about the fragmentation of the events on television.
"Do they think we're stupid?" one reader asked.


A Soaring Moment of Fame in a Derailed Life
The story begins on the baseline, right of the basket, at Rupp Arena in Lexington, Ky.
It begins at the 1977 Mideast Regional final, last stop before the Final Four.
Chad Kinch, a freshman shooting guard, had the ball and, it appeared to the senior point guard Melvin Watkins, nowhere to go.
"I had passed him the ball and I remember waving my arms and yelling, 'Bring it out; bring it back out,' " Watkins said.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE GREAT MELODY: A Thematic Biography and Commented Anthology of Edmund Burke By Conor Cruise O'Brien.
University of Chicago, $22.50.
This 18th-century political scholar was more than a crusty conservative.
The author emphasizes Burke's stance against government tyranny, stressing his role as a champion of independence for America, Ireland and India.
"Mr. O'Brien has brought back a lost treasure," John Patrick Diggins said here last year.
His is "a brilliant work of narrative sweep and analytic depth."


U.S. Should Take Lead in Arms Sale Code
To the Editor:
"Still No Policy on Arms Sales" (editorial, April 3) is on target.
The United States has reigned for three years as the world's top arms supplier.
Arms deals can boomerang, particularly if they go to repressive regimes.
In the last three foreign conflicts -- Somalia, Iraq and Panama -- United States troops ran the risk of facing "Made in U.S.A." weapons or technology.
Clearly, for our national security, the United States needs a new policy on arms sales that is far more selective about the arms it sells and the countries it sells them to.


BEST SELLERS: April 17, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
2
88
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
3
4
13
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
4
3
9
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
5
5
24
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
6
6
53
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
9
2
ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
8
1
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and fun as experienced by half a dozen couples working in advertising and film production.
9
7
6
ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials from reaching North Korea.
10
1
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
11
8
8
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
12
12
32
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
13
10
3
RIVER GOD, by Wilbur Smith. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $24.95.) Ambition, greed and romance in Egypt at the time of the Pharaohs.
14
11
12
FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a sylvan Vermont town.
15
1
NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $21.95.) The ordeal of a physician after she is accused of being responsible for the death of pregnant women.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
49
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
3
17
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
2
7
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
4
4
5
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
5
5
6
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
6
5
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
7
7
14
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
8
8
20
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
9
9
28
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
10*
1
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
11
12
32
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
12
13
35
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
13
10
9
A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.
14
15
34
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
15*
14
87
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
13
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
47
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
4
25
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
36
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 2, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE COLLECTED WORKS OF HAROLD CLURMAN: Six Decades of Commentary on Theater, Dance, Music, Film, Arts and Letters, edited by Marjorie Loggia and Glenn Young. (Applause Books, $49.95.) Fully a third of the journalism of the theater's distinguished gadfly and cheerleader over a long, long time.
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Mr.
Kissinger's "great man" history of diplomacy focuses on individuals, not trends or forces, and shows his reverence for cool thinkers who employ both power and analysis.
E.M.
FORSTER: A Biography, by Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally punctuated by little bursts of liberation.
THE END OF THE HUNT, by Thomas Flanagan. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $24.95.) This splendid novel, last of a trilogy, brings Ireland's tragic history down to the civil war of the 1920's.
Analogies will be drawn with the present.
HERE: Stories, by Elizabeth Inness-Brown. (Louisiana State University, $19.95.) Short stories concerning chiefly people encompassed (or imprisoned) wholly by the present, without a clue how to get out of it or beyond it.
MASTER OF THE GAME: Steve Ross and the Creation of Time Warner, by Connie Bruck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The inner truth of this amazing entrepreneur may not be within human grasp, but Ms.
Bruck, a staff writer for The New Yorker, makes known what seems knowable.
MESHUGAH, by Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) The third (so far) posthumously published novel by Singer is set in the early 1950's; its characters, despite their high spirits and unstoppable gab, are haunted by stories that can't be forgotten and can't be told.
REBELLIONS, PERVERSITIES, AND MAIN EVENTS, by Murray Kempton. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) Pieces long and short by a journalist whose abiding fidelity to the radical impulse and the baroque style have made him as inimitable as he is indispensable.
THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath &amp; Ted Hughes, by Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $23.) In the course of a contrarian approach to the Plath myth (genius-housewife crushed by odious male poet), Ms.
Malcolm raises pages of provocative questions about the values, and value, of biographers.
STONES FROM THE RIVER, by Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to 1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.
WHAT IS TOLD, by Askold Melnyczuk. (Faber &amp; Faber, $21.95.) This genially pessimistic first novel follows the fortunes of three generations of cosmopolitan Ukrainian-Americans from places like Paris and Berchtesgaden to places like Free Fall, N.J., in a narrative presided over by presences from the spirit world.


Benefits
TADA, an Anniversary TODAY -- TADA, formerly the Theater and Dance Alliance, an ensemble theater company whose performers range in age from 6 to 17, will celebrate its 10th anniversary with a benefit at La Belle Epoque, 827 Broadway at 12th Street.
From 6 to 10 P.M., there will be cocktails, a buffet supper and performances by several singers who are currently appearing in Broadway musicals.
Tickets, $135, from (212) 627-1732.
Dance Company Celebration TODAY -- Soundance, a repertory company that features dances in a variety of styles, will celebrate its 10th-anniversary season with a benefit performance featuring the premieres of four dances as well as repertory works.
A reception follows the 4 P.M. performance, all at the Clark Studio Theater/Kaplan Penthouse at 70 Lincoln Center Plaza, Broadway at 65th Street.
Tickets $60, from (212) 941-6457.


Irgun Wins Wood, Refusing to Bow to Go for Gin
At the beginning of the year, there weren't any odds on an unraced 3-year-old colt named Irgun winning the Kentucky Derby the first Saturday in May.
In under two minutes yesterday, that same big chestnut with the dappled coat thrust himself to the fore of the Derby picture with a rousing wire-to-wire victory, defeating Go for Gin by a length and a half in the 70th running of the Wood Memorial at Aqueduct.


Evening Hours; Photographer in Fashion
Arthur Elgort is in front of the camera on April 5 as the Staley Wise Gallery toasts him for his new book.


Weddings; Anne E. Pascale, Stephen Shively
Anne Elizabeth Pascale, the daughter of Rosemary Pascale of Manhasset, L.I., and the late Dr.
Sebastian T. Pascale, was married yesterday to Lieut.
Col.
Stephen Dennis Shively, U.S.A.F., a son of Col. and Mrs.
Deane S. Shively of Turbotville, Pa.
The Rev.
Kevin Smith performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Mariners Chapel of the United States Merchant Marine Academy at Kings Point, L.I.


Why the Flames Of Waco Won't Die
The siege at Waco ended a year ago Tuesday, a little after 11 A.M., in a conflagration that Americans experienced first with horror and then confusion.
The temptation was to interpret the event in tragic or heroic terms.
Some used the word "holocaust"; some compared the death of the Branch Davidian community to the mass suicide of Jews at the fortress of Masada in A.D. 73.
Others tried to laugh it off.
Today, after much Congressional celebration, an evasive Justice Department report and an inconclusive criminal trial, the events and images at Waco are so absurd that the temptation is to tell the story as a satire.
"This is not an assault," said the voice of a Government official at the scene as an M-60 tank tore off the wall of the Branch Davidians' home and shot tear gas in their faces.


Weddings; Caroline James, Stephen Altschul
Caroline Kershaw James, the daughter of Caroline James-Pritz of Cincinnati and Harry Keithan James of Dayton, Ohio, was married yesterday to Stephen Frank Altschul, a son of Arthur Goodhart Altschul of New York and the late Stephanie Wagner Altschul.
The Rev.
Luther D. Miller Jr. performed the ceremony at St.
David's Episcopal Church in Washington.
Ms.
James is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at George Washington University.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Building A Better Brain For Baby
IN a series of classic experiments beginning in the early 1960's, neuroscientists subjected kittens to all kinds of strange childhoods.
Some were raised with one eye sutured shut or covered by an opaque contact lens.
Others were reared in a visual world consisting of nothing but vertical or horizontal stripes.
Then, all of a sudden, the veils were lifted.
Normalcy prevailed.
But from the point of view of the kittens, nothing had really changed.
Eyes deprived of light in those first crucial days were now blind.
Kittens raised in a vertical world were unable to see horizontal lines.
They might as well have been asked to detect radio waves.
For lack of stimulation, the neurological wiring -- the connections, called synapses, that pass signals from neuron to neuron -- had not developed.


LINE BY LINE BY SONDHEIM
Excuse me, but isn't a musical by Sondheim called "Passion" tantamount to an opera by Wagner called "Brevity"?
NEAL HERR New York, N.Y.


The Decline and Fall of Liberal Education
DOGMATIC WISDOM How the Culture Wars Divert Education and Distract America.
By Russell Jacoby. 235 pp.
New York: Doubleday. $29.95.


Commercial Property/383 Madison Avenue; New Office Tower For Midtown?
EVER-louder whispers are sounding in the real estate community lately: Rents are up, concession packages are down, space is getting tight.
Is the real estate recession really over?
Now even those who insist that money speaks louder than words may soon have tangible proof of recovery.
Howard Ronson, the British developer, has contracted to buy 383 Madison Avenue, a long-vacant old building on a wonderful site at 47th Street, for about $57 million.
He plans to raze it and put up a 24-story, 800,000-square-foot multitenant office tower.
The scheduled completion date is the third quarter of 1996.


F.Y.I.
'Make Eye Contact'
Q.
Just as you enter the Lincoln Tunnel on the New Jersey side, there is an office.
Above its doors is a large banner that reads, "Make Eye Contact." What's the story?


Vigil Transforms a Neighborhood
Praying for the recovery of the man he believes will soon be revealed as the Messiah, Mendy Uminer leaned his arms on a wrought-iron fence in Stuyvesant Square Park and bowed his head.
Across the park at Beth Israel Medical Center, Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson has hovered near death since suffering a stroke on March 10.
"I'm basically here all the time, 24 hours, waiting for the good news," said the 17-year-old member of the rabbi's Lubavitcher group.
"There are a lot of us here."


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Maya Lin; Human Proportions on a Heroic Scale
MAYA LIN, the architect and sculptor, has deep roots in Connecticut's soil.
It was as an undergraduate at Yale that she submitted the winning design for the Vietnam Veterans War Memorial in Washington, D.C. (She graduated in 1981, and earned a master's degree there in architecture in 1986.)
Ms.
Lin's public works deal with profound human issues.
In 1989, she focused on racial inequality in her Civil Rights Memorial sculpture at the Southern Law Poverty Center in Montgomery, Ala.
A black granite water wall and circular table are carved with events and names crucial to the civil rights struggle.


Editorial Notebook; Plath, Hughes and Malcolm
On Feb. 11, 1963, a young American named Sylvia Plath stuck her head in the gas oven of her London home.
It was not the first time she had attempted suicide.
This time she succeeded.
Ms.
Plath was survived by her husband, two children, her mother, her brother, some short fiction, a brief autobiographical novel and many poems.
The last of them, collected in a book called "Ariel," were written with a passion that insures their permanence -- as their author was the first to realize.
"I am writing the best poems of my life," she wrote her mother a few months before her death.
"They will make my name."
Since February 1963 Sylvia Plath has captured the attention of several biographers, countless English professors and a legion of women who saw in her work, and in her life and death, some curious reflection of themselves.
Her husband, to whom she once gave the kind of encomium Emily Bronte might have given Heathcliff, also fascinates.


Beware Of Co-op Gadflies
SOME call them gadflies, others "condo commandos." By whatever name, they can mean problems for the volunteer committees who run co-op apartment buildings or condominium developments.
There are two definitions of the human gadfly: A person who annoys others or one who rouses others from complacency.
The one to watch out for is the former.


Manager's Profile
Edmund H. Nicklin Jr.
Fund: Evergreen Value Timing, $62 million in assets.
Manager since 1986 inception. (Sponsor: Lieber &amp; Co., Purchase, N.Y.)


200 Events Mark D-Day In France
IN France alone, more than 200 events, both grand and small, will mark the 50th anniversary year of the D-Day landings in Normandy.
Towns and cities throughout the region will commemorate their liberation dates.
A selection of events is given below.
Many are free and open to the public, although the official commemorative ceremonies on June 6 are not public.
The week of June 4, however, is already booked solid in Normandy. (See "Where to Stay," page 18.) For details or free brochures on Normandy, contact the French Government Tourist Office, 610 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10020; (900) 990-0040 (each call costs 50 cents a minute).
April 1 to Sept. 30, Avranches.
Photo exhibition of Avranches under the Occupation and during the liberation, at the tourist office.


About Berg's Ford
To the Editor:
As a charter member of the Alban Berg Society, an admirer of Louis Krasner's playing and a lifelong car buff, I must correct Mr.
Krasner's recollection of Berg's Ford.
The car in question is a 1930 two-door Model A Ford -- not a Model T. Berg purchased it in the summer of 1930 and, according to Willi Reich's biography, boasted that the car "will do 60."


'Not Along Just For the Ride'
To the Editor:
Intelligence and accuracy of pitch have always been hallmarks of Glenn Close's performances, but she strikes a sour note with the disingenuous characterization of what she refers to as her "blank period" in the 1960's  [ "Glenn Close: So Visible a Star, So Distant," March 17 ] .


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'LA FRONTERA' EXHIBIT
The Neuberger Museum at Purchase College has turned to the Mexican border as the source of its new exhibition: "La Frontera/The Border: Art About the Mexico-United States Border Experience." It opens today and runs through June 26 for its only East Coast showing.


Weddings; Colleen Sullivan and Marc Trevisan
Colleen Marie Sullivan, the beauty and fitness editor of McCall's magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Marc Joseph Trevisan, an associate director in Saddle Brook, N.J., of the Edward S. Gordon real estate company.
The Rev.
Michael Carnevale performed the ceremony at St.
John's Roman Catholic Church in Old Saybrook, Conn.
Ms.
Sullivan, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Susquehanna University.
She is a daughter of Rosemary Terese Sullivan of New Rochelle, N.Y., and John Robert Sullivan of Tucson, Ariz.
The bride's father retired as a financial analyst for the International Business Machines Corporation.


Wall Street; Is an End in Sight for Casinos' Losing Streak?
GAMBLING on gambling has been pretty much a bust in 1994, with many investors rolling snake eyes.
The most recent bad news for certain stocks in the group came on April 6, when Missouri voters rejected a proposal to allow slot machines and other gambling games on riverboats.
That helped knock five points off shares of the Promus Companies, which would have benefited had voters said yes.
President Riverboat Casinos also had a bad day, with shares plummeting $5.375, to $12.50, on news of the vote.
But there was already reason to dump gaming shares, says Steve Leuthold of the Leuthold Group, a securities research outfit in Minneapolis.
"There is a point of saturation here," he said, referring to the frenetic spree of building new casinos.
Mr.
Leuthold says he has been shorting the casino stocks -- betting on price declines -- since January.


In the New Russia, an Era of Takeovers
BORIS ISGARCHEV does not dress the part of a corporate raider.
His shirts are of flea-market quality, with stiff, cardboard-like collars.
The overcoat he wears is brown polyester, and his suit, when he wears one, is shapeless and old.
But in bravado and self-importance, Mr.
Isgarchev would fit in well among America's takeover artists of the past decade.
When he gains control of a company, he proclaims, it prospers.
"My best quality is bragging," Mr.
Isgarchev said, describing himself accurately, but with just a hint of self-deprecation.
"I enjoy great prestige as a businessman. People know that I am fair. And they know that when I buy into an enterprise, that enterprise will make money."


Words to Eat By
A party for a new book by Pierre Franey, the chef and writer, La Cote Basque, April 4. (Photographs by Bill Cunningham/The New York Times)


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
Rosenblatt's article, albeit unintentionally, has provoked in me admiration for tobacco executives who think independently, act lawfully and successfully conduct their business -- despite all the organized attempts, scornful of freedom of choice, to thwart their activity.


School Board Faces Inquiry After Critical Report
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines has sent a report charging a pattern of violations by a troubled Queens school board to the school system's chief investigator.
The report on School District 27, issued 12 days ago by a Manhattan educational watchdog group, accuses the board of violations of the state's open-meetings law and of state requirements that adequate records be kept of meetings.


Q and A
Spanish Dance Lessons
Q.
Could you give me any information about dance classes in flamenco and Sevillanas in Seville, Spain, or maybe in Madrid? -- Samuel Pereira, Howard Beach, Queens


Just Add to the Court a First-Rate Legal Mind
To the Editor:
Re "How to Fill a Justice's Shoes" (editorial, April 7):
While there is a certain political acumen in recommending that the President search for a woman or a nonwhite man to fill the vacancy left by the retirement of Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun from the Supreme Court, it seems to me there is another, paramount consideration.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Goose Plague
MOWING the lawns of the Crossways Commercial Park in Woodbury may soon involve hazard pay.
Goose droppings are as thick as the bluegrass.


Beyond Super Mario
To the Editor:
I don't agree with Bernard Sharratt's caveat, in his otherwise thoughtful review of "Microsoft Art Gallery: The Collection of the National Gallery, London" (March 6), that children might not want to attend art galleries because they would find them disappointing after hyperspace or that they would find all art reduced to cultural information.
The great popular dissemination of art books and classical records in postwar America did not demean art and music, but created larger audiences for them.
The CD-ROM disk speaks to the masses of children who are already interactive computer literati and opens up a world for them that is different from the Super Mario game world to which most of them are already addicted.
The most highly motivated children will want to go to the National Gallery after using the CD-ROM anyway.
They can use the disk to do papers in high school and college.
The least motivated and least able to visit the world of cultural treasures will have an access, through their school CD-ROM equipment, that they never had before.


Sports of The Times; Will Rangers Pour Their Champagne?
IT'S as if a magnum and four bottles of champagne were put on ice for a celebration-in-waiting -- the Madison Square Garden ice.
The magnum, Mike Keenan, was hired a year ago today as the Rangers' coach with one task: win the Stanley Cup.
Nearly four weeks ago the four bottles, Glenn Anderson, Craig MacTavish, Stephane Matteau and Brian Noonan, arrived in three trade-deadline deals swung by General Manager Neil Smith to add the "grit" Keenan demanded for the Rangers' quest.


Guarding the Image in Newark; City Bars Local Filming of a Movie About Teen-Age Car Bandits
After decades of trying to claw its way out of the ranks of urban has-beens, Newark can be a bit prickly about its image.
The local boosters often complain that no matter how much they rebuild their venerable but often pitied city, they cannot wipe away the stains left by a history of poverty, bad schools and rampant car theft.
So when a young director named Nick Gomez recently sought permission to shoot a movie about Newark in the city itself, municipal officialdom winced.
Backed by the film maker Spike Lee, Mr.
Gomez had written a screenplay, "New Jersey Drive," about the reckless teen-age car bandits who have given the city gobs of unflattering publicity in recent years.


Hoax Unravels: 'Missing' Baby Is Found Dead
A Canadian couple's stunning but suspicious tale of a baby's disappearance in Central Park was exposed as a hoax yesterday as the parents gave the police a dramatic new account, saying they found the child dead in her crib 10 days ago and abandoned the body in a Quebec woods.
Confronted by evidence that they had only an older child with them when they crossed the American border and when they checked into a New York City hotel, the parents said they had concocted the story because they had been accused of abusing a foster child at home in St.
Romain, Quebec, last year and feared serious new charges.


CHRONICLE
ALICE WALKER , who was named a California "state treasure" last month for her literature, is horrified at the award statuette: a foot-tall sculpture of a woman's torso, without arms, legs or head.
Ms.
Walker's latest work is a film and companion book about female genital mutilation titled "Warrior Marks."


Bronx Woman Is Slain
A 63-year-old Bronx woman, whom residents called the unofficial mother or grandmother of nearly everyone in her apartment building, was found stabbed to death yesterday, apparently during a robbery.
The body of Aida Ortiz Lugo, 63, was found about 9 A.M. just inside the door of her apartment, at 985 Simpson Street in Morrisania, by her son, Enrique Lugo Jr., said Sgt.
Ben Dowling, commander of the 41st Precinct detectives.


Punishing China Will Hurt the Chinese
To the Editor:
Chinese dissidents and their supporters in the United States want to extricate themselves from the dilemma of trying to force China to improve its human rights conditions by threatening to revoke China's trade privileges while hurting the Chinese people by inflicting damage to the Chinese economy and giving an excuse to hardliners to crack down even harder on dissent.


GORAZDE IN PANIC AS SERBIAN FORCES ENTER 'SAFE' AREA
Panic erupted among the trapped residents of Gorazde today as Bosnian Serb forces entered the United Nations-declared "safe area" with a tank and as artillery and snipers took aim at people who were unable to find shelter.
By tonight, after the tank left the town limits, the battle continued with street fighting, and the death toll from the last three weeks of the siege reached more than 200.


A River Runs Through Him: Rangers Overwhelm Hextall and Isles
After his Rangers humiliated the Islanders and goalie Ron Hextall in the local opener of the Stanley Cup playoffs yesterday, Aleksei Kovalev couldn't keep the grin off his face.
After the 6-0 victory at Madison Square Garden, someone asked him, "When did you think Hextall was giving up easy goals?"
"The first one," said Kovalev, who didn't score one of his own until it was already 4-0.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7 TANKS ENTER BOSNIAN TOWN
Serbian armor entered the Bosnian town of Gorazde, causing panic as thousands of people were forced into the center of town, and the United Nations said Gorazde had become virtually defenseless.
A1


No Headline
It's a little dishonest to say in one breath that nicotine is an addictive drug, that 50 million smokers are addicted, and then not have some sense of compassion and understanding that to ban the product would be cruel punishment. -- REPRESENTATIVE MIKE SYNAR, Democrat of Oklahoma.  [ A10:4. ]


Yankees Survive Both Gusty Winds and Porous Defense
There were snippets of today's game against the Tigers that the Yankees would not offer for an instructional video on baseball fundamentals.
The early mishaps and miscues, some of them caused by a vicious, swirling wind, would have been perfect for "America's Funniest Home Videos."
See funny running from Luis Polonia and Bernie Williams, see erratic defense from Wade Boggs, see a bunch of pop-outs and fly balls with more twists and turns than a mystery and see Cecil Fielder hit a ball that headed toward Polonia in left field and amazingly drifted, drifted and drifted to Williams in center field.
See it all happen today.


Review/Theater; Dreamers and Exploiters in a Slice of Americana
Before Baby Jessica, there was Floyd Collins.
On Jan. 30, 1925, Collins went exploring underground in Barren County, Ky., looking for a cavern that could be turned into a tourist attraction.
Trapped by a fallen rock, he could still speak to the outside world.
A cub reporter from The Louisville Courier-Journal climbed down to interview Collins and started an avalanche of press coverage, making the buried man a national obsession and drawing 20,000 curiosity seekers and hustlers to the site.
The hoopla didn't save Collins, who died after two weeks underground.
"Floyd Collins" is having its premiere through April 24 at the Plays and Players Theater here to open this year's American Music Theater Festival.
It was written and directed by Tina Landau; Adam Guettel wrote the music and, with Ms.
Landau, the lyrics.


Jurors Find L.I. Murder Case Easy to Resist
Some prospective jurors said they did not want to serve on the jury in the Joel Rifkin case because they already thought he was guilty in the serial killings of several women.
Others said they could not spare the five to six weeks the murder trial was expected to take.
And some said they did not want to serve because they were afraid of Mr.
Rifkin.


Ron Vawter, Actor, Dies at 45; Known for Avant-Garde Roles
Ron Vawter, an avant-garde actor who was a pillar of the Wooster Group, an experimental theater collective in SoHo, died on Saturday on a plane flying from Zurich to New York, his agent said.
He was 45 and lived in Greenwich Village.
He died of a heart attack in his sleep and had AIDS, said his agent, Philip Carlson.
Mr.
Carlson said Mr.
Vawter had been acting in a production of Sophocles' tragedy "Philoctetes" in Brussels when his health deteriorated.
He had been hospitalized in Milan, Italy, before leaving for New York.
A versatile performer, Mr.
Vawter won praise from critics for his acting in "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith," his 1992 one-man show Off Broadway, and for other roles.
Since the mid-1980's, he was also seen in small parts in mainstream vehicles including the films "Philadelphia," "Sex, Lies and Videotape" and "The Silence of the Lambs." A Dual Role
In the first half of "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith," which was directed by Greg Mehrten, his companion, and performed at the Performing Garage in SoHo, Mr.
Vawter wore a purple smoking jacket and gave what has been called an eerie impersonation of the lawyer Roy Cohn denouncing homosexuality.
After intermission, Mr.
Vawter appeared in sequined eye makeup, a mustache and what has been described as bogus Ali Baba finery to depict the eccentric Jack Smith, the creator of the 1962 movie "Flaming Creatures," which celebrated transvestite fantasy and camp posing.
Mr.
Vawter said the two disparate men had much in common.
"They were both white male homosexuals, and they both died of AIDS," he said in a 1992 interview.
But, he added, "You couldn't pick two more vastly different reactions to being homosexual and responding to a society that told them their sexuality was wrong or bad or abnormal. Cohn was in complete denial of his homosexuality and on the attack against homosexuals. Smith was the reverse. His theatrical world had to do with the ultimate flaunting."
Mr.
Carlson said Mr.
Vawter's film work included starring in the movie version of "Roy Cohn/Jack Smith," which has been filmed but not yet completely edited.
Mr.
Vawter's acting career began in the 1970's.
Among his roles with the Wooster Group, he played a talkative prosecutor in "LSD (Just the High Points)," the central figure in "Frank Dell's Temptation of St. Anthony" and a bleak Vershinin in its adaptation of Chekhov's "Three Sisters." Inspiration From Rehearsals
Mr.
Vawter was born in Glens Falls, N.Y., and grew up in Latham, N.Y., near Albany.
He graduated from Siena College in Loudonville, N.Y., a private liberal arts college with Franciscan ties, and earned a master's degree from New York University.
He served in the Army, became an Army recruiting officer in downtown Manhattan, watched rehearsals at the Performing Garage, which was on his way to work, and was inspired to become an actor.
In addition to Mr.
Mehrten, Mr.
Vawter is survived by his mother, Matilda Buttoni Vawter of Latham, and two sisters, Celeste Fonda of Albany and Shelley Booth of Kitty Hawk, N.C.
A memorial service is to be held at a date to be announced.


A Mustang And a Boy Named Bill
For a moment today, he was no longer a President isolated in the back seat of a bulletproof limousine.
He was Bill Clinton, car-crazy baby boomer, back behind the wheel of his most prized possession, an ice-blue 1967 Mustang convertible.
The Mustang was the classic of Mr.
Clinton's generation, and today, 30 years to the day after the first Mustang rolled off the assembly line, he was here to claim a share of nostalgia.


Graves and Kasparaitis Dance the Playoff Tango
After the first game of their playoff series, the Rangers' Adam Graves talked at length while the Islanders' Darius Kasparaitis wouldn't talk at all.
While both teams played down that individual matchup in the Rangers' 6-0 victory yesterday, there is a mini-rivalry developing between the two players and it is sure to continue tonight in Game 2 at the Garden.


Dividend Meetings


Patents
IT has been a quarter of a century since Hal, the orbiting computer whose soothing humanoid voice belies a malevolent egomania, appeared in Stanley Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey." The idea of a talking computer has since insinuated itself into the popular imagination, but so far the imagination is the only place where computers have real conversational skill.
The problem, experts in artificial intelligence say, is that efforts have focused on the building blocks and rules of language rather than on its expression.
Thus, computer-generated voices sound flat and can manage only the most primitive sort of inflection, such as a rise in pitch at the end of a sentence when posing a question.


Rwanda Puzzle: Is Uganda Taking Sides?
Eight years ago, Defense Minister Yoweri Museveni of Uganda seized power in Kampala, the Ugandan capital, with the help of about 2,000 guerrillas, a force he recruited among Tutsi refugee families who had fled neighboring Rwanda to escape ethnic bloodletting.
Now some of the same guerrillas are on the verge of taking over in Rwanda, three years after returning with an invasion force they assembled in Uganda, using Ugandan equipment and enlisting Rwandans serving in the Ugandan Army.


Capitals Get Step on Penguins
Capitals 5, Penguins 3
The Washington Capitals wore down the Pittsburgh Penguins with patience and defensive pressure, sealing a 5-3 victory on Joe Juneau's breakaway goal at 10 minutes 34 seconds of the third period in a first-round playoff game in Pittsburgh last night.


Topics of The Times; Listening Critically
We have all heard about those characters who stroll into police departments and confess to any crime that has not already been claimed.
Editors are a little like that when they get together.
At least they have a tendency to listen politely to any bill of particulars.
Self-criticism and confession are healthy antidotes to journalistic hubris and the only acceptable response to error.
That said, a decent respect for accuracy and reason demand correction of the speeches that Lani Guinier and Adm.
Bobby Ray Inman made to the American Society of Newspaper Editors last Wednesday.


Cairo Journal; Battling the Religious Right: The Celluloid Front
A tourist bus is raked with automatic fire.
A video shop is firebombed.
A Christian jewelry store is robbed, and a police official assassinated.
These episodes, rather than a litany of the latest attacks by Islamic militants, are taken from the opening scene of the "The Terrorist," Egypt's first feature film to tackle the rise of Islamic fundamentalism.


Books of The Times; Dissecting the Values Of a Divided Intellectual
A Rebel in Defense of Tradition  The Life and Politics of Dwight Macdonald  By Michael Wreszin  Illustrated. 590 pages.
Basic Books/HarperCollins. $30.
Several decades ago, The New York Review of Books ran an essay on Dwight Macdonald, the American social critic, under a headline that read, "He's All Dwight!" After reading Michael Wreszin's engaging new biography, "A Rebel in Defense of Tradition: The Life and Politics of Dwight Macdonald," one is tempted to write as a headline, "He's All Dwong!"


Giuliani Meets With G.O.P. To Break Albany Deadlock
With talks on a new state budget still deadlocked in Albany, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani met yesterday with Republican members of the State Senate to try to persuade them to support Democratic proposals that would help New York City.
The Mayor said after the meeting last night at Gracie Mansion that the Republican senators had agreed to lobby their colleagues to seek more aid for the city's schools and for the state to take over a greater share of the city's Medicaid costs.


Foreign Debt Mop-Up; After Refinancing Brazil, Banks Now Face Just a Few Small Bad International Loans
Last week's refinancing agreement between Brazil, the largest debtor in the developing world, and its foreign creditors allowed bankers to trumpet what many had been saying more quietly for years: The international debt crisis is over.
"The conversion of the bank debt into Brady bonds on April 15th represents a good end point to what people had previously considered the debt crisis," Donald G. McCouch, a group executive with responsibility for developing markets at Chemical Bank, said.


Dance and Conversation
Clark Center for the Performing Arts and Louise Roberts, its longtime director, will be honored in "Remembering Clark Center," a free program of dance and conversation on Sunday at 7:30 P.M. at the Charles Moore Center for Ethnic Studies, 397 Bridge Street, in Downtown Brooklyn.
Information: (718) 773-3046.


Holy Bull's Front-Running A Dilemma for Derby Foes
So, who can catch Holy Bull in the Kentucky Derby?
The question was hanging over the barns today with less than three weeks to go, especially after the big gray colt won the Blue Grass Stakes at Keeneland on Saturday in his customary, dominating manner: leading every step of the way.


Don't Need to Be a Rock Star to Feel Suicidal
To the Editor:
Re "Reflections on Cobain's Short Life" (critic's notebook, April 11): In the press rock stars who die are remembered primarily as martyrs.
Yet, though rock stars may have the public eye and the often unwarranted job of speaking for society, they are only examples of what many of the rest of us feel and live and die with.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Kidder, Peabody said it had dismissed its chief government bond trader after it uncovered fraudulent trading apparently aimed at inflating the firm's profits and the trader's annual bonus.
As a result, Kidder said, $350 million in profits it had recorded during the last year never actually existed.  [ Page A1. ]
Two directors of Macy are calling for the board to hire new legal and financial advisers, people close to the board said.
The two directors have circulated letters calling into question the relationship between Macy's law firm and Fidelity Investments.  [ D1. ]


The Gramm Exemption
Senator Phil Gramm has a charmed way with the Senate Ethics Committee.
Faced with questions about the Texas Republican, the committee does not bother to investigate.
It simply accepts his version of events, provided in secret correspondence, and then quietly issues a letter that the Senator can use to deflect critics.
Peachy for Mr. Gramm. But what about the public's right to a thorough, open inquiry?


Topics of The Times; No April Gushing, Next Year
Writers for editorial pages -- not to mention the hapless readers -- know the dangers of April.
The abrupt vernal glory of the fourth month annually brings a flood of fatuous nature writing.
Only October comes close to competing with April as an inspirer of seasonal tributes, and April's spell is stronger.
This is a month, after all, that has caused editorial writers to render into a cliche the opening lines of one of the great poems of the century.
Were he living, poor Eliot might have thought his literary effort wasted indeed.


A New Ford in California's Future
Californians beset by fires, earthquakes, recessions and riots received one glowing omen last week: Gerald J. Ford, known for his sensitivity to sweet deals and impending turnarounds, is moving to their state.
He and Ronald O. Perelman of New York won the bidding last week to buy First Nationwide Bank, the nation's fifth-largest savings and loan, from the Ford Motor Company for $1.1 billion.


New Hits Bolster ABC's Hand for the Fall
This is the kind of season ABC had in the annual prime-time ratings contest:
The network had the No. 1 series on television, "Home Improvement." It had the No. 1 new comedy, "Grace Under Fire." It had the No. 1 new drama, "N.Y.P.D. Blue." It had the No. 1 spring season show, "These Friends of Mine." It even had the No. 1 new newsmagazine, "Turning Point."'


Sports of The Times; This Hextall Joins Ranger History Books
HIS family name already resides in the New York Rangers' record book: winning goal in 1940 Stanley Cup final game -- Bryan Hextall Sr.
His grandfather scored the last cup-winning goal in Ranger history.
His father played for the Rangers, too.
So did his uncle, Dennis.
This generation's hockey-playing Hextall has merely played goaltender against the Rangers for seven years, hearing all the amusing things fans shout at opponents in Madison Square Garden.


Treasury's Calendar Offers Only Today's Bill Auction
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.58 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.99 percent.


Report Shows Check Cashers Filling a Void
Early every morning an armored car pulls up to a storefront in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.
And for the next nine and a half hours, faces of all kinds pass in front of the four panes of bulletproof glass at Roebling Check Cashing -- black, Hispanic, Hasidic, male, but mostly female, with children placed on countertops.
"The whole neighborhood," William Siegel, the owner, said proudly.


Dance in Review
Soundance Repertory Company  Clark Studio Theater Lincoln Center
The program presented by the Soundance Repertory Company on Friday night swung dizzyingly from the very simple to the very complex.
Weighing in for simplicity among the program's four premieres were dances by Lonne Moretton and Sandra Stratton, the founder of the company in 1984.


More Democracy Vital, Mexican Candidate Says
The new presidential candidate of Mexico's long-governing party says further democratization of the political system has become essential to economic and social progress.
"I do not believe the country can advance significantly in the economic or social areas if we do not strengthen our democracy," the front-running candidate, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, said in an interview on Saturday.
"People are demanding more democracy."


INSIDE
A Precinct in Crisis
The 30th Precinct is depressed, with officers leaving in handcuffs and reports of more arrests to come, but there is still a job to do.
Page B1.
Bid for Power in Japan
A leader of Japan's disgraced former governing party resigned in an effort to become Prime Minister.
Michio Watanabe is unlikely to succeed, but his move created new political turmoil.
Page A3.


Jones: A Man After His Own Heart?
Twelve college football seniors eagerly anticipating the 1994 National Football League draft gathered one night last week in a hotel suite here with Dallas Cowboys coaches and other team officials.
Next Sunday, when the N.F.L. draft begins, these prize players, each likely early round picks, will learn where their pro careers will unfold and which team's colors they will proudly wear.
But on this night, they all might as well have been draped in the famous Cowboys blue and white.
They formed a circle and listened intently as the Cowboys' No. 1 fan stood in the middle and talked about what the draft meant, what the N.F.L. meant and what the Cowboys meant to others and, especially, to him.


Review/Music; A Vision of Cultures in Flux
Yothu Yindi's audience at the Grand on Thursday night pretty much just stood around.
The band, which mixes aboriginal music from Australia with various international pop styles, performs in aboriginal outfits.
The band members come out, bodies painted, playing sticks and didgeridoos.
They perform a short set of tribal music, unaccompanied.
And they do traditional dances.
Inadvertently, their shows become a type of ethnic spectacle.
Their music deserves more of a response.
The band, from northeastern Australia, has recently released a new album, "Freedom" (Hollywood), and can get a real rock momentum going.
Its blend, where a didgeridoo, gutturally repeating a few notes, anchors the bottom end of the music and the clanging of hard wooden sticks sifts in and out of bass, guitar and keyboards, offers a beautiful musical vision of cultures in flux.


Ex-Foreign Minister of the 'Old Guard' Seeks to Lead Japan
A longtime leader of the former governing party said today that he was defecting in a bid to become Prime Minister and would create an alliance with the rocky coalition now running the country.
The announcement by former Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe added to the current political turmoil and dealt a potentially crippling blow to the Liberal Democratic Party, which governed Japan for 38 years with little challenge.


For Richter, It's Highlight Reel Time
Mike Richter's best save yesterday afternoon wasn't either of those fine stops late in the game, when Pierre Turgeon and Marty McInnis tested him, back to back, on a two-on-one break, amid the din of a festive Madison Square Garden.
And the most dangerous threat to his Ranger shutout wasn't even when Benoit Hogue of the Islanders cruised around Richter's net and whipped a wraparound shot off the far goal post in the first period.


Schools Prosecute Parents for Children's Truancy
Ellen Freeman concedes that from last September to December she was less than attentive to her 10-year-old son's school attendance.
Beset by personal problems and "fighting off another nervous breakdown," she said she actually kept him home sometimes simply to provide her with a focus and anchor -- some needed ballast in her storm-tossed life.
So it was with a mixture of contrition and bitter resignation two weeks ago that Ms.
Freeman, an unemployed single mother of four, pleaded guilty in a court here to charges of failing to insure her son's school attendance.
She was sentenced to 50 hours of community service in the schools.


Dr. Marcel Bessis French Biologist, 76
Dr.
Marcel Bessis, a French physician who was applauded in the United States 30 years ago for his role in developing instruments and techniques for studying portions of single live cells, died on March 28 in Paris.
He was 76 and lived in Paris.
Dr.
Bessis, a leader in that field, was given an ovation in 1964 in Atlantic City, N.J., at a meeting of the American College of Physicians after he described how it had become possible to study a single cell.


De Klerk's Party Is Driving Wedge Between Nonwhites
In the darkest ways, the history of this nation has been a journey into the unthinkable.
So it may be understandable that Michael Africa, a "colored," or mixed-race merchant seaman, stepped ashore this week and immediately charted a political course into the once unthinkable choice: voting for his long-time oppressors in South Africa's first free election.
"The National Party," Mr.
Africa said with only a touch of defensiveness about his choice, the incumbent party that directed a brutal white racist regime in which Mr.
Africa and others like him were penned into an underclass engineered to be a half-step above the vast, enslaved black population.


Making Trails Easier for Hiking


CUNY to Train Recruits For Police in Puerto Rico
Tomorrow, almost 900 students will begin their first day of classes in a new City University of New York program to train police officers and confer on them an associate degree in police science.
The program is in Puerto Rico.


Kidder Reports Fraud and Ousts a Top Trader
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company said yesterday that it dismissed its chief government bond trader during the weekend after it had uncovered fraudulent trading apparently intended to inflate the brokerage firm's profits and the trader's 1993 bonus.
As a result, Kidder said $350 million in profits it recorded in the last year never existed.
To rectify its accounts, Kidder's parent, the General Electric Company, will take a $210 million charge to its first-quarter earnings, which will be announced this week.
Kidder said no customers lost money because of the fraud.


Bridge
How well extraterrestrials play bridge is a subject that receives little attention, perhaps understandably.
The only evidence comes from Warren Dix of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, who reports occasionally on the appearance of some Little Green Men wearing metallized jump suits at a duplicate game at the French Bridge Club in Athens.
On the diagramed deal the South cards were held by Minnie, a Little Green Woman, and she played five spades with great skill.
After the opening club lead, threatening a ruff, a routine attempt to draw trumps would have failed.
At other tables West won the second round of spades, underled the heart ace and scored the decisive club ruff.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Air Methods Corp., Englewood, Colo., one million shares of $25 convertible preferred shares.
Paulson Investment Co.


Essay; Reds Under the Bed
In the wake of charges that a high C.I.A. official was a Russian "mole," an old question is being newly raised: how deeply did the Soviet Union penetrate the American Government?
Through two generations, that issue poisoned relations between liberals and conservatives.
The liberals' villains were Joe McCarthy and Roy Cohn, and to a lesser extent, Whittaker Chambers and Richard Nixon.
Among the conservatives' villains were the diplomat Alger Hiss, the nuclear scientist J. Robert Oppenheimer and the Lillian Hellmans who defended them.


Anguish, East and West
To the Editor:
William Safire's usual precision with language fails him in "Crime in Singapore" (column, April 7).


Corrections
An obituary by The Associated Press on April 6 about Marlon Riggs, a film maker and a professor at the University of California at Berkeley, misstated his educational background.
He received a bachelor's degree from Harvard University and a master's degree from Berkeley.


A startling merger pins its hopes on an industry maverick to help lift the 'Ketchum curse.'
THE colorful career of Jerry Della Femina, the rambunctious ad man whose self-promotional skills almost equal his creative capacities, is taking perhaps its most unexpected twist yet.
Mr.
Della Femina, who has provided Madison Avenue with more surprises than a carload of Cracker Jack, is merging the fledgling agency he founded as a refuge from large corporate agencies with the New York office of, well, a large corporate agency.


Macy Urged To Hire New Advisers
Two directors of R. H. Macy &amp; Company have circulated letters to their colleagues suggesting that it would be in the board's best interests to hire new legal and financial advisers, people close to the retailer's board of directors said last night.
Those people said the letters call into question the relationship between Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, the law firm that represents Macy in its bankruptcy case, and Fidelity Investments, the giant mutual fund company that is one of Macy's largest and most active creditors.


Question Is Raised on Hormone Maker's Ties to F.D.A. Aides
Two House committee chairmen and a Vermont Congressman asserted yesterday that the Food and Drug Administration may have collaborated with the manufacturer of a genetically engineered dairy hormone in clearing the new drug for sale.
The gene-altered drug, bovine somatotropin, which stimulates cows to increase milk production by up to 20 percent, is the first important product of agricultural biotechnology to reach the American market.
Since the drug's introduction in February, some consumers have questioned its safety even though its maker, Monsanto, the White House, the F.D.A. and the American Medical Association say that milk from hormone-treated cows is indistinguishable from the milk of untreated cows.


The Boston Entrants Boast the Times if Not the Names
Monday in Massachusetts is Patriots Day, commemorating the 1775 nastiness in suburban Lexington and Concord between the British and their American colonists.
In recent times, the people here marked the holiday with two special sports events.
One was a Red Sox morning-afternoon doubleheader, actually two games for the price of two.
The doubleheaders are history, and the Red Sox will play only one game Monday in Fenway Park, at 11 A.M. against the Chicago White Sox.


Penske's Engine Has Opponents Singing Brickyard Blues
When Andy Granatelli whooshed into the Indianapolis Motor Speedway in 1967 with a turbine-powered car that outran the competition, the protests of other car owners could not obscure this: The car was legal, and Granatelli was the only man with the vision and resources to take advantage of a small opening in the rules.
This year, another car owner is updating that script, perhaps adding the happy ending that eluded Granatelli when a small part broke with three laps to go.
Roger Penske, richly financed by Philip Morris and Mercedes-Benz, is either gambling a lot of money or using it to buy a victory in the Indianapolis 500 next month.


White House Goes Courting In California
It is well established that the White House is determined to stroke California voters as often and as vigorously as possible to win their allegiance in the 1996 Presidential election.
But in the latest effort to plant the Bill Clinton flag in the richest electoral soil of the nation, Vice President Al Gore stands out.


Trevino Defeats Floyd, Who Falls Apart in Stretch
If Raymond Floyd isn't absolutely the last golfer one would expect to see fly apart like a cardboard suitcase, he is at least in the final foursome.
Throughout his career, Floyd has always been regarded as the front-runner's front-runner.
When he took the lead in a golf tournament, the theory went, it would be easier to loosen a sirloin from a pit bull's mandible than snatch the victory from Floyd's grasp.
But there he was today in the final round of the 55th PGA Seniors Championship at the Champion Course at PGA National, pumping a sleeve of golf balls into the water at the 15th and 17th holes and tossing away both his lead and the second major championship of the year on the Senior PGA Tour.


Hungary and the Jews: Looking at 1944 Is Difficult
Just before the mass deportation of Jews from Hungary to death camps 50 years ago this spring, a young Protestant minister arrived for a clandestine meeting in a cafe here.
He left his battered suitcase slightly open on a chair beside him and watched as a courier dropped a 30-page account of the workings of Auschwitz inside.
The cleric, Jozsef Elias, now 80 years old, hurriedly arranged to have the accounts of witnesses, known as the Auschwitz Protocols, translated and circulated among Budapest church leaders and passed to the Hungarian leader, Adm.
Miklos Horthy.
There was little response.


Ode to Joy: Mighty Jeffrey At the Bat
His last name makes it too easy to characterize how he is hitting by substituting Clark for his first name.
But Jeff Kent would be far more comfortable being the Invisible Man than Superman.
"I don't like to be the focus," Kent the mere mortal said yesterday, declining after a point to answer questions about himself.
"I don't like to be in the limelight."


Don't Need to Be a Rock Star to Feel Suicidal; Depression and Art
To the Editor:
"Quest for Evolutionary Meaning in the Persistence of Suicide" (Science Times, April 5) questions how the seemingly irrational behavior of suicide might relate to natural selection and be of survival value to the species.
A number of lines of evidence (summarized by Ellen Dissanayake in the book "What Is Art For?") indicate that art must have survival value, possibly by reinforcing selectively valuable behaviors associated with sacred communal rituals, belief systems and myths.
Therefore the link between depression, the most frequent antecedent of suicide, and creativity may provide useful insights.


Compaq's New Line
The Compaq Computer Corporation, in a move likely to intensify competition in the lucrative corporate market for personal computers, will introduce today a new line of premium PC's priced hundreds of dollars lower than the models that they will replace.
Compaq is pricing the new series, called the Deskpro XL, at $500 or more below the comparable models of the three-year-old Deskpro/M line, which is being discontinued.


Drug Arrests
A renewed emphasis on arrests is at the core of the Giuliani administration's drug strategy.
After reaching a record high in 1989, drug arrests declined.
The police department stopped aggressively pursuing low-level drug dealers because of soaring costs, the strain on the city's courts and jails and doubts about the effectiveness of mass arrests.
Despite fears that beat cops aggressively involved in drug enforcement can more easily fall into corruption, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton now wants all uniformed officers to concentrate on drug offenses.
He is also doubling the number of specialized drug units.
The Giuliani administration hopes to complement the increased arrests with more drug treatment.
According to state officials, 2,000 people per month wait for treatment in New York state.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; How correct is political correctness? American editors seem as divided as everyone else.
IT is, of course, impossible these days to get together with news people without having it come up.
And, of course, it came up here last week as the editors of hundreds of the country's biggest newspapers met for the annual convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.


In Brazil, Help From Viewers On TV Ad
In November, W/Brasil, the fourth-largest Brazilian advertising agency, and its high-powered client, Unibanco, had a sticky problem.
A 31-year-old actor, Felipe Pinheiro, who had played a leading role in the bank's award-winning television commercials, had died of a heart attack.
At the time, the agency was preparing new versions of the commercials, which showed a middle-class couple dealing with financial troubles -- all of them solved, of course, by various Unibanco services.


Abroad at Home; Peace At Any Price
Truman! thou shouldst be living at this hour.
(with apologies to Wordsworth)  For 50 years American power, purpose and resolve have kept the peace in Europe.
They faced down the severest challenges, and prevented a third great war.


Dance in Review
'Goodbye and Good Luck'  Neta Pulvermacher and Dancers Dance Theater Workshop Bessie Schonberg Theater
"Goodbye and Good Luck" was the title of both the premiere and the program as a whole that Neta Pulvermacher and Dancers presented on Thursday night.
Ms.
Pulvermacher depicted times of transition, uncertainty and, occasionally, even peril.
She also paid poignant tribute to human determination.


Some Senators Renew Call To Lift Bosnian Arms Ban
On a bewildering and confusing day for the Clinton Administration, several influential senators today renewed their call to allow the Bosnian Muslims to obtain weapons by lifting a United Nations arms embargo if diplomatic efforts to end the fighting fail.
Administration officials anxiously followed reports today of Bosnian Serb forces advancing on the besieged Muslim enclave of Gorazde.


World Economies


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Thursday about a new magazine being introduced by the Library of Congress misstated the number of items in the Library's collection.
It is more than 101 million.
In some editions, the first name of the Librarian of Congress was omitted.
His name is James H. Billington.


Review/Concert; An Exercise in Harmony, Aside From Music
It took a two-tier system of listening to make compelling sense out of Friday night's concert by the American Symphony Orchestra at Avery Fisher Hall.
Devised and conducted by Leon Botstein under the title "Common Ground: Jazz, African-American and Jewish-American Composers (1930-1955)," this long program of recent Americana was either wildly uneven or a well-reasoned affair.
It depended on what you were listening for.
The governing idea was less music itself than how music can be made to mirror social and political concerns.
Addressing an apparent increase of anti-Semitism among blacks, Mr.
Botstein's exercise in harmony showed how Jews incorporated jazz into their music and how black composers took the European tradition to heart in theirs.
With Ulysses Kay, Florence Price and Duke Ellington in one group and Morton Gould, George Gershwin and Louis Gruenberg on the other, ethnic symmetry reigned.
No political corrections needed.


Waco Inferno Remembered By Davidians
Though most of Waco was otherwise occupied, rock music blared from loudspeakers and vendors hawked religious tracts under colorful tents today as nearly 300 people gathered at the site of the Branch Davidian compound nearly one year after the fire that destroyed it.
The grandmother of David Koresh, the sect's leader, came to contest the medical examiner's version of his death.
A sect member, Woodrow Kendrick, recently cleared of murder charges, was there, he said, because he "felt compelled by God to speak out." A conservative disk jockey, Ron Engleman, said he had come from Dallas to "present information the lap dog media doesn't have the courage to report."


Review/Television; Erik and Lyle, The Year's Stand-Ins For Amy and Joey
The Menendez brothers are back, and Fox has got them, at least for the tonight-at-8 moment.
Next month, CBS will have a four-hour movie about Erik and Lyle, the weepy young men whose first California trial for the murder of their wealthy parents was a hit, televised live, on Court TV.
After hung juries, a second trial seems inevitable.
Television entertainment, desperately looking for this year's equivalent of Amy and Joey, couldn't care less.
Justice be damned.
Just cash in fast on the sensationalism while it's hot.
Fox's "Honor Thy Father and Mother," wistfully subtitled "The True Story of the Menendez Murders," is a typical exercise in television docudrama, replete with warnings about composite characters and compressed time sequences.
The script is based on public records, meaning the trial itself and newspaper accounts, and on the book "Blood Brothers," by John Johnson and Ronald L. Soble, Los Angeles Times reporters who covered the case.
Mr.
Soble actually does a cameo bit in the movie.


New Casualty Fuels Debate In Britain
The death of a British soldier in Sarajevo today and the downing of a British warplane on Saturday have prompted renewed debate here about the United Nations strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina and about the need for 3,300 British troops in the peacekeeping force there.
"Do not expect there to be good progress in all directions," Defense Secretary Malcom Rifkind told the BBC today.
"This is a very messy, bloody war. The idea that it can be sorted out in some neat clinical way is a nice aspiration, but totally unrealistic."


Bronx Postal Building Fails to Stem Mail Delays
A Bronx building that the Postal Service bought for $25.9 million in 1989, intended for use as a mail processing center, sits largely dormant, even as Bronx officials say postal delays have plagued the borough for nearly a year, with letters mailed within the Bronx sometimes taking weeks to arrive.
With a shortage of mail-sorting capacity in the borough, much of the mail for addresses in the Bronx is sorted in Westchester County, Queens and Manhattan.
Despite months of complaints from public officials and residents, postal officials have said they have yet to determine the extent of the problem, but a Postal Service spokesman said lack of mail-processing space in the Bronx might contribute to the delays.


Bulls Go Backward In Fight for Top Spot
Magic 118, Bulls 101
Orlando ended Chicago's 10-game winning streak and moved a game closer to clinching home-court advantage in the first round of the playoffs with a 118-101 victory over the visiting Bulls yesterday.


Business Shuns Areas That Look Too White
The offer was sweeter than a bushel of Iowa roasting ears: $25 million in incentives to a Maryland biotechnology company if it would flee the nerve-rattling East Coast and settle here in America's heartland -- fresh air, quiet streets, smiling faces.
But after a closer look at Iowa, the company noticed that almost all of those faces, smiling or not, were white.
The offer was ultimately rejected.


Snyder Adjusts Nicely And Belts Three Homers
Dodgers 19, Pirates 2
Cory Snyder went 3 for 4, all home runs, and drove in 7 runs yesterday as the Dodgers matched their highest run total since moving to Los Angeles by beating the Pittsburgh Pirates, 19-2, at Three Rivers Stadium.
Snyder had a pair of two-run homers, then added a three-run drive during a nine-run seventh inning.
Snyder was advised by the Dodgers' batting coach, Reggie Smith, to keep his head down and to alter the position of his hands during his swing.


Cancer Study Prompts New Awareness
In the days since the New York State Health Department released a report suggesting an association between the high rate of breast cancer on Long Island with living near chemical plants, citizen groups that fight breast cancer in the Northeast have been taking another look in their own backyards -- and at Long Island's vocal breast-cancer lobby.
From New Jersey to Massachusetts, advocacy groups that normally concentrate on breast cancer or pollution have been examining the study.
The findings came after years of intense pressure from breast-cancer support groups on Long Island armed with their own maps showing clusters of breast-cancer cases in certain parts of the Island, and from elected officials like Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York and State Senator Michael J. Tully of Roslyn Heights.


Sabre Defense Is Too Much to Crack
The Devils and the Sabres, the top two defensive teams during the regular season, opened their playoff series here tonight true to form: Goals were hard to come by.
There was also an unexpected development in that Buffalo's Todd Simon, who had never scored a goal in the league before, got one with 10.6 seconds left before the first intermission while the Sabres had the man advantage.


Market Place; Boeing's stock seems unable to rise above its plateau.
THE BOEING COMPANY is set to fly its new airplane, the wide-body 777, in June, but the company's stock price is hovering in the mid-40's and not gaining much altitude.
With the airline industry still in trouble, orders for new airplanes have been shrinking and the decline is expected to continue at least through this year.
Still, Boeing must continue to spend heavily on developing the 777, which it wants to have certified as qualified to fly over oceans, three hours from an airport that can safely accommodate it.


Celebrating Robert Altman And His Most Loved Films
The Film Society of Lincoln Center will honor the director Robert Altman tonight at its annual film tribute.
Mr.
Altman, whose 30 films include "M*A*S*H," "McCabe and Mrs. Miller," "Nashville," "The Player" and "Short Cuts," will attend, taking time off from filming "Pret a Porter," a multi-character drama set in Paris's fashion industry.
There will be a compilation of memorable scenes from the best-known films of Mr.
Altman's career, which spans nearly four decades.
At intervals, friends of the director and actors with whom he has worked will speak.
They are Jack Lemmon, to whom the Film Society paid tribute last year, and Lauren Bacall, Harry Belafonte, Keith Carradine, Elliott Gould, Sally Kellerman, Lyle Lovett, Dina Merrill, Michael Murphy, Tim Robbins, Lily Tomlin and Robin Williams.


Pentagon Book For Doomsday Is to Be Closed
After spending 11 years and $8 billion searching for ways to keep the Government running after a sustained nuclear attack on Washington, the Pentagon will shelve its project as an antique of the cold war, military officials familiar with the program say.
The Doomsday Project, as it was known, sought to create an unbreakable chain of command for military and civilian leaders that would withstand a six-month nuclear war, which was regarded as a plausible length for a controlled conflict.


Ride Into Nostalgia


Review/Pop; Going With the Flow at a Party With Phish
A show by Phish is unmistakably a pop-music party.
At the Beacon Theater on Wednesday night, the opening show of a three-day, sold-out stand, the auditorium was packed with smoke, legal and illegal, and the audience swayed under the influence of the music and other things.
Pop concerts form a temporary community, one where for an hour or two most people can agree on the pleasures taken from the music.
Phish's audience is liable to get into a fight after the show: Grateful Dead followers, on a brief vacation from following band No. 1, are there, selling macrame, as are high school and college lacrosse players.
And they all smoke, a lot.


CHRONICLE
JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS , who has a treatable form of lymphatic cancer, is recovering from ulcer surgery at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


In Co-ops and Condos, Apartment Managers Are Girding for a Possible Strike
As negotiators met yesterday to discuss a new contract for unionized doormen, porters, elevator operators and other building workers, apartment managers made preparations for a possible strike beginning as early as midnight Wednesday.
If the talks fail, residents in thousands of New York City and Long Island cooperative and condominium buildings -- more than half of them in Manhattan -- may have to guard their own lobbies, carry garbage to the curb and do their own repairs.
The strike would also affect private rental buildings, whose owners would have to make other arrangements for their tenants.


Who'll Defend the Persecuted Smoker?
To the Editor:
Am I the only nonsmoker who is shocked and fearful that our freedom is threatened by a government powerful enough to consider laws that ban smoking even more than it is banned now?


Insurance Law Shift Is Gaining
A proposal to overhaul a 49-year-old Federal law shielding the insurance industry from antitrust rules has been endorsed by large insurance companies and one of their longtime Congressional critics.
Although smaller insurance companies are adamant in opposing changes to the McCarran-Ferguson Act, that has not stopped larger companies from reaching an agreement with Representative Jack Brooks, a Texas Democrat and the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee.


Report Cites Boast In Crown Hts. Case
Lemrick Nelson Jr., the Brooklyn teen-ager acquitted of fatally stabbing a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights, boasted about the attack to high school classmates in Georgia, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution has quoted a former classmate as saying.
But the student, Erik Heard, 17, reached yesterday at his home after the article was published on Friday, denied telling the newspaper that Mr.
Nelson, 18, had bragged of the attack.


Banking Scandal Endangers Spain's Government
Allegations of tax fraud and financial misconduct against the former head of Spain's central bank have thrown the minority Government of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez into disarray.
Although no formal charges have been filed, the affair is viewed as potentially the most damaging of many corruption scandals involving Mr.
Gonzalez's Government and his Socialist Party since he took office in 1982.
It has led the opposition to call for early elections.


Moscow Embarrassed When Serbs Make, and Break, Promise of Pullback
The Russians were embarrassed today when their power to put pressure on the Serbs in Bosnia proved to be as feeble as everyone else's, underlining the weakness of their claim of influence over their Slavic brothers.
Russia, which was infuriated last week when NATO bombed the Bosnian Serbs in the eastern Bosnian enclave of Gorazde without informing Moscow, stepped in on Saturday to make peace. 'Urgent Recommendations'
But no sooner had Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev, returned to Moscow today bearing news of a cease-fire and a pullback agreement in Gorazde than Bosnian Serb tanks started moving into the town.


Nets Clinch Fittingly: Anderson and a Rally
Before the game today against the Miami Heat, Nets Coach Chuck Daly thought back to early in the season, when his club was 13-20 "and ready to go into the dike," as he called it.
Three hours later, the Nets' turnaround was officially complete.
Daly's players were leaping around Miami Arena and high-fiving in celebration after a throbbing 110-103 comeback victory over the Heat that clinched a playoff spot.


Despite Growing Support, New Laws On Smoking Are Unlikely This Year
The momentum is building, no doubt about it.
But the time does not seem to be ripe this year for new Federal laws or regulations that would sharply curtail the use of tobacco.
Politicians are moving slowly for many reasons, but the main one may be that no one is exactly sure what to do to stop people from smoking.


Review/Opera; 'Ariadne' Brings Its Mix Of Tragedy and Pratfalls
Richard Strauss resolved the paradoxes of stagecraft by acting them out in his own operas.
Just as "Capriccio" wages a war of ascendancy between words and music, so "Ariadne auf Naxos" which returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Saturday night, lets classical drama and low comedy go 10 rounds to a draw.
Both conflicts are fought on the neutral ground of centuries-old opulence.
Bewigged aristocracy serves as referee with liveried servants as discreet seconds.
Sequestered from the present, these debates allow Strauss a languid bemusement, a condescending affection toward the heated questions of art his characters personify.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions Friday with an article about a dispute over the value of Andy Warhol's estate referred incorrectly to "Shot Red Marilyn," the Warhol painting that was shown.
It is not part of the estate.


Review/Theater; Sinister and Gothic? Can You Hum a Few Bars?
Bad things happen to most people in the whimsically sinister world of Edward Gorey, the author of 90-some exquisitely illustrated books in which life is presented, quite calmly, as a very dangerous prospect.
His delicate, densely crosshatched ink drawings, suggestive of 19th-century engravings and ironic story-book texts meld into a singular sensibility: gothic, yes, but without a hint of the genre's hysteria.
In fact, the most disturbing element of Mr.
Gorey's work is its cool acceptance of all things horrific.
"With God almighty being flighty and absent frequently," as Mr.
Gorey writes, these witty novels in miniature tend less to build to climaxes than to trail off into existential ellipses, leaving a final impression of forbidding stillness.
They are not the sort of thing, one would think, that would naturally lend themselves to the songs and punch lines of musical comedy.


In Shaken Police Precinct, a Somber Time
In the last three days, they have seen fellow police officers carted off in handcuffs, they have been razzed by residents in their Harlem neighborhood, they have been dressed down by their Commissioner, and their captain has been stripped of his command.
Newspapers strewn around the 30th Precinct station house have mug shots of their friends splashed on the front pages and report that more officers will be arrested in the coming days on charges of selling drugs, protecting drug dealers and breaking into apartments.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on April 7 about Greece's relations with the Republic of Macedonia misstated the timing of six Western European countries' diplomatic recognition of the former Yugoslav republic.
The diplomatic recognition was in December 1993, not at the end of 1991.


Dance in Review
Homer Avila and Edisa Weeks  Dia Center for the Arts SoHo
Homer Avila and Edisa Weeks are unlikely partners.
He is a small, agile and obviously gifted dancer.
She is tall and full of dreamy theatrical presence, and she moves somewhat roughly.
But they respond to each other with an almost childlike playfulness and exuberance.
Their spirit and warmth filled the six dances they presented on Thursday night.


Chiat/Day Resigns A Liquor Account
Chiat/Day East in New York has resigned the account of William Grant &amp; Sons Inc. after eight years, noting "differences over long-term business strategies." Billings on the account, which includes brands like Glenfiddich and Grant's Scotch whisky and Frangelico liqueur, were estimated at $5 million to $6 million.


Command Presents
So now the Senate Armed Services Committee has joined the old boys' network that protects the top military brass from accountability.
It recommended last week that Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, retire at the rank of four stars as his predecessors traditionally have.
The full Senate ought to reject the committee's decision as one based on sympathy rather than a fair assessment of the admiral's performance.
The senators should instead let his rank revert automatically to two stars as it will unless they take affirmative action to accommodate Admiral Kelso.


Mini-Series Blazes Trail In High-Definition TV
When "World War II: When Lions Roared" is broadcast on NBC tomorrow and Wednesday nights, it will be a technological first for a mini-series.
The four-hour production is the first significant American foray into high-definition television.
The high-definition format, or HDTV, is shot with 1,125 lines of visual information on the screen instead of the usual 525.
It is generally regarded as the future standard for all television because of its sharper, deeper images.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Balance of Trade . . .
Feb.
Wednesday  Housing Starts . . .
March  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  None


Dance in Review
The Joffrey Ballet  New York State Theater
The Joffrey Ballet offered new soloists in several principal roles in the company's repertory programs on Friday night and Saturday afternoon.


Is This the Far East or Lower Manhattan?


METRO DIGEST
MISSING BABY REPORT REVEALED AS HOAX
A Canadian couple's stunning but suspicious tale of a baby's disappearance in Central Park was exposed as a hoax as the parents gave the police a dramatic new account, saying they had found the child dead in her crib 10 days ago and abandoned the body in a Quebec forest.
Confronted by evidence that they had only one daughter -- not two -- when they crossed the United States border and checked into a New York City hotel, the parents said they concocted the story because they had been accused of abusing a foster child at home in St.
Romain, Quebec, last year and feared serious new charges.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  POSTAL SITE REMAINS UNUSED
A Bronx building, a former printing plant on the Hutchinson River Parkway near the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge, which the Postal Service bought for $25.9 million in 1989, and intended for use as a mail-processing center, sits largely dormant, even as Bronx officials say postal delays have plagued the borough for nearly a year, with letters mailed within the Bronx sometimes taking weeks to arrive.
B3.


CHRONICLE
The weather was dreadful the other day when MARK E. TALISMAN transported a 300-year-old Torah from Washington to the United States Military Academy at West Point, but the flight, he said, was smooth.
"There were no bumps, no sudden falls," he said, recalling a heavy downpour, "but when I returned home to Washington that evening in the same weather, it was a bumpy difficult trip."


A Bond Bull Takes a Bearish Turn
The bond market's recent plunge in the face of continued low inflation, has seemed something of a mystery: How did so many Wall Street money managers and large investors change their view on bonds so quickly?
A talk with Henry Kaufman, one of Wall Street's best-known economists and head of his own money management firm since 1988, offers some clues to the turnaround in sentiment.
Mr.
Kaufman, whose training includes stints as a Federal Reserve economist and later as chief economist at Salomon Brothers, now manages $700 million, including some of his own money.
As money managers go, he is small, and his thinking is not necessarily representative.
But after 35 years of taking the bond markets' pulse, he is one of the most experienced market watchers.


Don't Need to Be a Rock Star to Feel Suicidal; My Sensitive Son
To the Editor:
As the mother of a beautiful son who committed suicide three years ago at the age of 27, I was most interested in "Quest for Evolutionary Meaning in the Persistence of Suicide" (Science Times, April 5).


New York City Police Richly Deserve a Shorter Workweek
To the Editor:
"A Better Way to Curb the City Payroll," (editorial, April 5) not too surprisingly, accepts as gospel a report by the Citizens Budget Commission that purports to produce enormous savings in the New York Police Department.
While you may be convinced of the commission's nonpartisanship, we seriously question its political motivation and self-anointed fiscal watchdog status.


SENATOR OUTLINES CHEAPER VERSIONS OF HEALTH PLAN
Senator George J. Mitchell, with White House help, offered Democratic senators three cheaper modifications of President Clinton's health care legislation this weekend as he sought to get them to start making choices.
Each of the Mitchell variations, like Mr.
Clinton's proposal, seeks to guarantee all Americans health insurance that can never be canceled and to require employers to pay some of the cost of their workers' insurance.


A van Gogh Becomes a Cause Celebre
Even though repeatedly rebuffed by the Culture Ministry, Jacques Walter kept lobbying throughout the 1980's for permission to take his van Gogh painting, "Garden at Auvers," out of France, first to hang it in his Geneva home, later to sell it for a better price than it would fetch here.
Finally in December 1992, after a decade of frustration, the 86-year-old retired mine operator auctioned off the painting in France, selling it to a Paris banker for $9.5 million, less than one-sixth of the value he believed it was worth on the international market.


Frayed Knicks Continue to Unravel in Loss
It was an alarming loss for the suddenly vulnerable Knicks.
And after it ended, Coach Pat Riley showed more concern than at any other time this season.
Riley questioned whether the Knicks had the right mental attitude to win a championship.
He said he had "failed miserably" as a coach.
And he admitted that he was perplexed as to what his next move would be.


Detroit's Booming Auto Sales Mean Waiting Lists for Some
What had seemed a stately recovery in the auto market turned into a boom this year, and some dealers' lots are emptying even as auto makers are piling on the overtime to raise production.
Particularly for buyers of four-wheel-drive wagons and other light trucks, the wait for vehicles with the options they want can stretch beyond three months.


Tribute to Cunningham
"Cunningham on Camera," a 10-day festival of films and videos about and by Merce Cunningham, opens on April 26 at 8 P.M. at the Walter Reade Theater, Lincoln Center, with a tribute to the modern-dance choreographer.
The program includes the New York premiere of "Beach Birds for Camera" and a discussion featuring Mr.
Cunningham.
Tickets are $10; $7 for members of the Film Society of Lincoln Center.
The festival is to include 25 films and videos and rare clips from the Cunningham archives.
Information: (212) 875-5600.


Three South Africans Are Killed in a Crowd Stampede at a Political Rally


Wealthy Mexican's Abduction Underlines Vulnerability of Elite
The kidnappers of one of the richest men in Mexico have threatened to kill him unless they are paid a ransom.
They made the demand in a letter sent to news agencies in Mexico City last week, a month after the kidnapping.
The agencies also received a handwritten letter from the kidnapped man, Alfredo Harp Helu, who pleaded for the ransom to be paid so he does not become one more of Mexico's recent tragedies.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Irwin Holds Off Norman in Heritage  Hale Irwin, who nearly ruined his chances at the sixth hole, recovered with a three-under-par 68 yesterday for a record-setting victory in the Heritage Classic at Hilton Head, S.C.
The 48-year-old PGA Tour veteran finished with a record 18-under 266 at Harbour Town Golf Links, two strokes ahead of Greg Norman.
Norman, who led Irwin by three strokes with 11 holes left, closed with 13 straight pars for a 68 and 268. (AP) Women's Championship to Skinner: Val Skinner birdied five holes and closed with a four-under-par 68 to win the L.P.G.A.
Women's Championship by one stroke over Liselotte Neumann at the Eagle's Landing Country Club in Stockbridge, Ga.
Skinner completed the three rounds in 10-under 206. (AP) TENNIS  Courier Takes Surprising Tumble  Alberto Berasategui upset Jim Courier in the final of the Philips Open, 6-4, 6-2, in Nice, France.
The 20-year-old Spaniard, ranked No. 34, broke for a 3-2 lead in the first set and saved two break points at 5-4 before winning the set.
Both players had two matches in one day.
Berasategui struggled past Slava Dosedel, 3-6, 6-3, 6-4, in a rain-delayed semifinal, and Jim Courier defeated Marc Rosset, 6-0, 6-3. (Reuters) MARATHON  Ceron Wins 4th Straight in London  Dionicio Ceron of Mexico won his fourth straight marathon, capturing the London race yesterday under gusty conditions in 2 hours 8 minutes 53 seconds.
Ceron won last year in Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Mexico City, and Fukuoka, Japan. (AP) HOCKEY  Canadian Women Beat U.S. in Final  In a matchup of unbeaten teams, Canada defeated the United States, 6-3, yesterday in the title game of the women's world hockey championships at Lake Placid, N.Y.
Canada also defeated the Americans in the previous two world tournaments, at Ottawa in 1990 and at Helsinki in 1992.
TRACK AND FIELD  Lewis and Teammates Break Record  Carl Lewis and his Santa Monica Track Club teammates rewrote their world record in the 800-meter relay yesterday at the Mount San Antonio College Relays in Walnut, Calif.
Lewis ran the anchor leg on the team with Mike Marsh, Leroy Burrell and Floyd Heard.
They were timed in 1 minute 18.68 seconds, bettering the mark of 1:19.11 set by the same four April 25, 1992. (AP)


Motorola Offers a New Chip
Motorola Inc. will introduce today the latest generation in its 68000 line of microprocessors, which is best known as the chip at the heart of Apple Computer's Macintosh.
Motorola said the new chip, the 68060, maintained software compatibility with the current 68040 and was about three times as fast as the older chip.
But Apple has shifted from the 68000 line for new Macintosh models to the PowerPC, a chip jointly developed by Apple, Motorola and the International Business Machines Corporation, which uses RISC, or reduced instruction set computing, technology to speed operation.
Makers of work stations long ago abandoned the 68000 for their own RISC chips.
The Intel Corporation's x86 line dominates personal computers.


Books of The Times; Profiles in Leadership, and in Anti-Leadership
Certain Trumpets  The Call of Leaders  By Garry Wills  Illustrated. 336 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
After the brilliant and original scholarship of Garry Wills's last book, "Lincoln at Gettysburg" (1992), his latest offering comes as something of an unhappy surprise.
In "Certain Trumpets: The Call of Leaders," Mr.
Wills has taken a hackneyed and overly generic subject -- leadership, and what makes a good leader -- and given it a highly perfunctory treatment.
The result is a volume that feels less like a real book than a treatment for an inspirational television series aimed at high school students.


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Connecticut is selling $50 million of tax-exempt general obligation capital appreciation bonds through Merrill Lynch &amp; Co., initially priced to yield a maximum 6.30 percent for an issue due in 2013.
The remaining bonds were priced to yield from 5.10 percent in 1999 to 6.25 percent in 2011.
The issue, for a college savings plan, is rated Aa by Moody's Investors Servive, AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's and AA+ by Fitch Investors Service.
*
Palm Beach County, Fla., is selling $26.4 million of tax-exempt criminal justice revenue bonds through Pryor, McLendon, Counts Inc., priced to yield a maximum 6.25 percent for a bond due in 2015.
For shorter maturities, yields range from 3.6 percent in 1995 to 5.10 percent in 2000, 5.65 percent in 2005, and 5.95 percent in 2009.
The bond offering is insured by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Co. and rated triple-A by Moody's, S.&amp; P. and Fitch.


SOCCER
United States  News of Roy Wegerle's most recent knee surgery wasn't good news for the United States team.
The 30-year-old Wegerle, who had arthroscopic surgery on his right knee last Friday, is one of the few members of the American squad capable of playing at World Cup level.
A native South African and naturalized American, he has marvelous skill and vision, and can play as an attacking midfielder and striker.


It Was Like a Bull Ring for McLennan
When the other team is wielding the puck like the playoff weapon it is and your team is handling the puck like a hot potato, you can't want to be a rookie goaltender making your first playoff start a scant 24 hours after your team has suffered the worst post-season defeat in club history.
When there is blood pouring from the face of the other team's boy wonder, Adam Graves, and it's coloring your crease, you start to feel a bit unsafe there.
Suddenly the opponents turn into five charging bulls, you imagine you're wearing a red towel, and meanwhile your teammates, those sorry underdogs, seem busy throwing in the towel.


No Headline
"I really don't think the Senate imprimatur should be put on the leadership that  allowed Tailhook to take place and then did not provide the kind of vigorous leadership to successfully take action." -- SENATOR DIANNE FEINSTEIN.  [ A16:1. ]


Player of Year Times Two
The Metropolitan Basketball Writers Association presented the Haggerty Award to co-winners tonight at Giants Stadium -- Arturas Karnishovas of Seton Hall and Izett Buchanan of Marist.
Karnishovas, who was in Phoenix, participating in the Nike Desert Classic for possible National Basketball Association draft choices, spoke on a telephone hookup.
Buchanan, the Northeast Conference player of the year, wasn't expected to be there either, but he arrived with his family and picked up the award, which goes to the outstanding player in the metropolitan area.


Illinois Power Co. (IPC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Front-Runner for Japanese Premiership Gains as Rival Falters
Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata stood on the verge of being named Japan's sixth Prime Minister in five years today when his chief rival wavered after it became clear that he did not have the votes to win.
The rival, former Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe, confidently declared on Sunday that he was going to quit the opposition Liberal Democratic Party, taking many of his supporters with him, and run for Prime Minister.


United Cos. Financial Corp.(UCFC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (MAH:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trinova Corp.(TNV:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Settlement Recommended For L.I.R.R. and Workers
With the possibility of a strike looming in June, a Presidential panel has recommended a settlement between the Long Island Rail Road and its workers based on a management proposal.
The union, the United Transportation Workers, said it had already rejected the proposal weeks ago.


Sweeney Is No Saint, and the Jets Are Relieved
The Jets avoided what could have been a calamitous situation on their offensive line and came to terms with the veteran center Jim Sweeney today.
Sweeney turned down an offer from New Orleans to return to the Jets, agreeing to a three-year, $3.7 million contract.
The Saints' offer was in the same range, but Sweeney preferred to return to the Jets, according to his agent, Ralph Cindrich.
The Steelers also put on a strong push for Sweeney, who is a Pittsburgh native.


Review/Music; The Y Continues Its Examination of Schubert
In a fascinating talk on Sunday during the opening festivities of the Schubertiade at the 92d Street Y, Leon Botstein gave a portrait of the Vienna of Schubert's day, a town of about 300,000 people with no running water, no sewage system and an elaborate series of government regulations.
There were high death rates and a life expectancy that only slightly exceeded Schubert's (who died at the age of 31).
The city was stench-ridden; gastrointestinal disorders were plentiful, personal hygiene minimal.
As for Schubert himself, Mr.
Botstein said, "none of us would survive sitting next to him."
"We make a terrible mistake extracting high art from daily life," Mr.
Botstein added, echoing a theme that has often recurred at the Schubertiades in recent years.


Accounts
*
Growing Healthy Inc., Eden Prairie, Minn., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, to handle advertising for the maker of frozen baby food, previously at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GENERAL CABLE CORP., Highland Heights, Ky., announced that it had received a proposal from an unaffiliated third party to acquire all of the company's common stock at a price not exceeding $6 a share.
KELLWOOD CO., St.
Louis, said its American Recreation Products unit had agreed to acquire Sierra Designs, a unit of closely held Odyssey International.
Terms were not disclosed.


A Tunnel Waiting Two Decades for a Train; Shafts for the Second Avenue Subway Are Maintained, in Case the Line Is Ever Built
The lights, strung on makeshift wires between steel girders, dimly illuminate a long shaft that seems to stretch far into the distance.
As Mike Hardiman, a Transit Authority supervisor, strolls with a flashlight on the subway tunnel's floor, there is a deep rumble.
The impulse is to flee before a train comes roaring out of the darkness.
But it is only an illusion.
In the two decades since the section of tunnel was dug beneath Second Avenue in East Harlem, no train has disturbed the stillness.
The rumble comes from a truck on the street three stories above.
Ambition and Failure
The fate of the Second Avenue subway has long been part of the lore of New York City, becoming a metaphor for expansive governmental ambition followed by equally large-scale failure.
The line has already died not once, but twice.


Pentair Inc.(PNTA:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


True 'Skinheads' Are Not the Racist Thugs of Media Fame
To the Editor:
Dominick Bruno Jr., whom you profile in an April 4 news article, certainly deserves lauds for his work in reporting on neo-Nazis and their cohorts in New Jersey.
However, Mr.
Bruno does not and never did deserve the name "skinhead."


Cracking Down on Corrupt Cops
The dramatic arrest of 14 officers in the 30th Precinct on drug-dealing and other charges -- plus evidence that many of their fellow cops knew what they were up to -- is further proof that New York City has a serious police corruption problem.
It also argues strongly for bringing back the defunct office of the Special State Prosecutor for Criminal Justice.
Only months ago, witnesses before the Mollen commission on police corruption painted a frightening picture of a see-no-evil, hear-no-evil departmental culture in which felonious misconduct of the kind uncovered in Harlem's 30th Precinct easily flourishes.
The crimes involved are neither trivial nor subtle.
One officer charged last week is said to have shot and seriously wounded a drug dealer while stealing a bag of cocaine.


An Ad (Gasp!) in Cyberspace
An Arizona lawyer had an entrepreneurial idea: advertise his services over the Internet, the global web of computer networks.
He may have reached millions of people.
But thousands of them were outraged that he had violated the unwritten rules of the electronic global community by sending unsolicited commercial messages.
He has been bombarded by thousands of scathing messages -- known as being "flamed" in the argot of cyberspace.


Kimball International Inc.(KBALB:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dr. Annemarie Weil, A Child Psychiatrist And a Teacher, 84
Dr.
Annemarie P. Weil, a child psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, died on Friday at a convalescent home in Bryn Mawr, Pa., near Philadelphia.
She was 84 and lived in Manhattan.
She had had a long illness, said her daughter, Dr. Susan Caroline Weil.


Breastfeeding Isn't Always Better
To the Editor:
Your April 6 Personal Health column on breastfeeding takes the position that breastfeeding infants is the best way no matter what.
I do not agree.
Mothers and their parenting partners need to determine what is best for them.
The issue of breastfeeding is a private matter, and while I support education for breastfeeding, we must not overlook supporting those parents who do not nurse.


Eyeball to Eyeball, the Curiosity Is Mutual


Turner Is Lost to Magic
JEFF TURNER, who started the past 13 games at power forward for the Orlando Magic, will miss the remainder of the season because of a knee injury.
Turner, averaging 10.5 points and 6.7 rebounds per game since regaining his starting job last month, was injured with 1 minute 27 seconds remaining in Sunday's 118-101 victory over the Chicago Bulls.


Progressive Corp.(PGR:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Maxwell McKnight, a Diplomat In Postwar Europe, Is Dead at 83
Maxwell Stewart McKnight, a retired lawyer and former State Department official who held diplomatic posts in postwar Europe, died on Friday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Bethesda, Md.
He was 83.
Mr. McKnight, who lived in Washington, died of cancer, his family said.


Stelco (STE.A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Patterns
Cutting the Mustard
Russell Simmons, the chairman of Phat Fashions Inc., used the tents in Bryant Park last week as his own large, crowded, noisy phone booth.


Hemlines on Unfamiliar Territory: The Knee
Several thousand new designs were paraded in the tents set up in Bryant Park in a week of fall fashion shows ending last Wednesday; at least an equal number were introduced in lofts and showrooms all over Manhattan.
In the explosion of new shapes and often violent colors, the emphasis was on short flaring skirts that barely covered the top of the thighs.
The collection that will have the most lasting effect was relatively quiet and low-key.
It was that of Calvin Klein, and it was introduced in a straightforward presentation that avoided any bizarre styles or theatrical tricks.
What made it memorable was the concentration on relatively subdued hem lengths that generally reached the top of the knees.


Lanes Open For Car Pools
Forget the 4-minute mile.
Yesterday more than 1,000 drivers managed a 4-minute Queensboro Bridge, compared with the usual 20 minutes or so.
The drivers were using the bridge's new car pool lanes, which opened yesterday, for vehicles with at least one person in addition to the driver.
The Department of Transportation was not sure precisely how many people used the lanes, the first of their kind in the city, but said the ride was a little faster than intended; the lanes can handle twice the volume of cars and still provide a quick trip, Lisa Daglian, a spokeswoman, said.


NEC Selects Houston Effler
NEC Technologies Inc., a maker of computers and peripheral products, said yesterday that it had selected Houston Effler &amp; Partners in Boston to handle its North American account, which had been at DDB Needham New York for the last eight years.
Billings were estimated at $35 million.


U.S. Diplomat's Speech on Extremism in Germany Stirs Storm
An unusually frank speech by a senior American diplomat about right-wing extremism in Germany has stirred a tempest here.
The diplomat, Douglas H. Jones, who heads the American diplomatic mission in Berlin, told an audience last week that many foreigners believe that Germany "lacks the will to confront its extremism problem pragmatically."


Public Service Co. of N.C.  (PSNC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


G.E. Shaken by Phantom Trades at Kidder Unit
Just when the General Electric Company thought that it had put its investment banking subsidiary, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, on solid footing, a seemingly rogue bond trader caused it to take a $350 million pretax charge to its first-quarter earnings.
Kidder had rebounded since a 1986 insider-trading scandal embroiled the firm, posting strong profits in 1992 and 1993.
The report of the phantom trades, however, comes as a challenge to John F. Welch Jr., General Electric's strong-willed chairman and a believer in tight, nearly obsessive internal controls.


Shaw Industries(SHX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Case Review Under Way Due to Police In Scandal
Hundreds of convictions and pending court cases involving arrests made by 14 police officers charged last week with corruption will have to be reviewed, and a small number are likely to be thrown out, two prosecutors in New York City said yesterday.
District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan and Special Narcotics Prosecutor Robert H. Silbering said they were preparing lists of cases in which police officers charged in the 30th Precinct corruption scandal had made or assisted in an arrest.
The prosecutors said the total number of cases was not known late yesterday, but they agreed it was likely to be in the hundreds.


CHRONICLE
Could this be the beginning of the end for one of the country's more public marriages?
ROSEANNE ARNOLD filed suit yesterday in Los Angeles for a divorce from TOM ARNOLD.
JENNIFER ALLEN, a spokeswoman for both Arnolds, confirmed that the couple had split after some volatile arguments, but would not give further details.


FED AGAIN RAISES SHORT-TERM RATE ON LOANS, TO 3.75%
The Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates today for the third time in two and a half months, trying once again to slow the nation's brisk economic growth before it begins to feed inflation.
The announcement prompted swift criticism from Democrats on Capitol Hill, a sharp fall in stock and bond prices and a large increase by big banks in the rates they charge for many adjustable-rate mortgages and some credit cards.


Zilog Inc.(ZLOG:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Coca-Cola Co. (KO:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nationsbank Net Falls; Chase Has a Big Rise
Nationsbank said yesterday that its net income for the first quarter fell 13 percent, largely because of an accounting change affecting the first quarter of 1993, while Chase Manhattan Bank said its earnings more than doubled in the first quarter, helped by a continued evaporation of its problem real estate and strong trading results.
The results were another sign that the first quarter, with rising interest rates and volatile bond markets, were not as bad for banks as many people had expected.


Classical Music in Review
Gamelan Sekar Jaya  Symphony Space
Seeing predominantly Western faces in an ensemble called Gamelan Sekar Jaya reminded listeners on Sunday night that the flow of Asians to American music conservatories has its reverse direction as well.
This is a San Francisco group of 28.
They are organized along Balinese ideas of shared responsibility and social community, and at this concert of music and dance they were augmented by artists like I Nyoman Windha, I Nyoman Catra, Desak Made Suarti Laksmi, Wahyu Indira and I Gusti Agung Ayu Warsiki.
Wayne Vitale is the orchestra's director.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Allen J. Frances; Revamping Psychiatrists' Bible
PERHAPS the most powerful psychiatrist in America at the moment is Dr.
Allen J. Frances, the man who has been directing the fourth major revision of his profession's diagnostic bible, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, to be published next month.
The decisions made under his direction will dictate for the next decade or so the alignment of that thin membrane separating diagnosable psychiatric disorder from the ordinary travails of life.


Aztar Corp.(AZR:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Q&amp;A
Looking at the Moon
Q.
When we see a backward-C-shaped new moon at dawn, do Southern Hemisphere dwellers see it as a regular C?


Attorney General Files Suit Against 2 Ticket Brokers
Spurred by a frenzy over tickets to five Barbra Streisand concerts at Madison Square Garden in June, the New York State Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, said yesterday that his office had brought suit against two ticket brokers he said were reselling tickets at illegal rates.
The legal and ethical uncertainties surrounding ticket resales have long confounded lawmakers, entertainment producers and consumers alike, but the two lawsuits take advantage of one of the few unambiguous points of law: New York State restricts the price at which a broker can resell a ticket to $5 or 10 percent above its face value, whichever is greater.


William Fabrikant, Diamond Trader, 79
William Fabrikant, a Manhattan diamond trader, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
He was 79 and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
He had a long illness, his family said.


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber Co.(CTB:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  BOSNIAN TOWN SURROUNDED  The Bosnian town of Gorazde was surrounded by Serbian forces after Bosnian Government defenses collapsed, and the top United Nations general warned of a humanitarian catastrophe.
A1


Review/Folk; Songs of the Season When Fastballs Are in Bloom
Why is it that a recitation of the names of Major League baseball players carries a mythic resonance that doesn't extend to lists of professional football, basketball and hockey players?
That question was one of the mysteries to be pondered on Friday evening at Weill Recital Hall where a program called "Baseball Blues" opened the Carnegie Hall Folk Festival, which this year is devoted to exploring Americana.
In an evening that brought an a cappella group, a polka band, a jazz composer and a real-life baseball legend to the stage, it was the jazz composer Dave Frishberg who evoked the mystique of baseball most absorbingly.
In his performances of original songs that are richly laced with baseball history and lore, the game emerged as a metaphor for a lost American innocence.


Alco Standard (ASN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about modifications offered by Senator George J. Mitchell for President Clinton's health care legislation described one alternative incorrectly in some copies.
Mr.
Mitchell's apparent preference is for a plan that calculates subsidies for small businesses based on each worker's wage, not age.
Under this plan, a company could get a subsidy for each of its low-paid employees.


Cuts and Tax Rises Urged To Bolster Social Security
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, today proposed shoring up the finances of Social Security by reducing next year's cost-of-living adjustment, increasing the retirement age, trimming benefits for new retirees and raising payroll taxes in the 21st century.
Some of the proposals, standing alone, would provoke a political outcry.
But Mr.
Rostenkowski said he hoped they would be acceptable as part of a comprehensive plan to preserve Social Security for future generations.


Hawks Next So Knicks Need Rapid Recovery
The Knicks spent yesterday saving their energy for the biggest game of the season.
A victory over the Atlanta Hawks tonight at Madison Square Garden will put the Knicks in the driver's seat for the best record in the Eastern Conference.
The Hawks lost to the Bulls in Chicago last night, but that outcome had no impact on one fact facing New York.
The Knicks will finish as the East's No. 1-seeded team for the playoffs if they win their final four regular-season games.


Dudley Looks to Return
CHRIS DUDLEY, who has missed virtually the entire season with a broken ankle, worked out with the Portland Trail Blazers yesterday and hopes to play before the regular season ends Sunday.
The 6-foot-11-inch former Nets center center said his left ankle showed no ill effects after his first full-court scrimmage since he was injured in the third game of the season Nov. 9.


Polaroid Corp.(PRD:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Slaying in St. Thomas Stains Image of an 'American Paradise'
According to the license plates on the cars and buses that haul tourists around this bustling port, the Virgin Islands are still an "American Paradise." But a surge in violent crime over the last year, including the slaying of a San Diego swimming instructor this week, has put that image in jeopardy.
Cruise ships are warning visitors to be cautious, the Navy has canceled port calls here on St.
Thomas, and territory officials are promising drastic steps to combat what they call a full-fledged, mainland-style "crime crisis."


Presidential Health Show Travels to a Friendly Spot
Saying the health care system "costs too much and does too little," President Clinton took his campaign to change the system to the constituents of three friendly but uncommitted Democratic members of Congress today.
As Representative Gerald D. Kleczka of Milwaukee and Wisconsin's two Senators, Herb Kohl and Russell D. Feingold, looked on, the President sought to fire up their constituents, especially members of the Communications Workers of America.
The union members had gathered to hear him under the auspices of their telephone company employer, Ameritech.


True 'Skinheads' Are Not the Racist Thugs of Media Fame; Don't Slander Oi!
To the Editor:
Your April 4 news article refers to "the throbbing racist music from Germany and Britain called oi." This baldfaced statement slanders oi! music and thousands of its fans in the New York area.
New York's leading oi! band, Oxblood, is half black, and the other leading band, the Templars, is one-third black -- hardly the composition of "racist music" bands.


The Shape of Things to Come


Failure at Gorazde
The battle for Gorazde leaves no one covered with glory.
The Serbs now have the city at their mercy.
But their duplicity and bloodthirstiness have disgusted the world.
NATO and the U.N. have been ignored and humiliated.
And Russia, despite its supposed clout with the Serbs, is as powerless as everyone else to hold them to their word.
What next?
NATO and the U.N. have several basic choices.
They can continue with their ineffective efforts to protect the six safe havens designated by the U.N. last year, a course almost certain to fail.
They can escalate the conflict by attacking Serbian positions elsewhere, inviting wider war on the ground and air.
They can withdraw, exposing Bosnian Muslims to even worse cruelties.
Or they can keep their forces in place but lift the arms embargo on Bosnia, giving the Bosnian Government a fairer chance to defend itself from Serbian attacks.


Budget Plan Draws Fire From Hevesi
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said yesterday that the Giuliani administration's budget proposals would mean fewer home-delivered meals for the elderly, less support for companies owned by women and minorities, dirtier parks and more potholes.
The report by Mr.
Hevesi, a Democrat, looked at the effect on city services of the preliminary budget plans announced earlier this year by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican.
Mr.
Hevesi applauded Mr.
Giuliani's efforts to close a projected budget gap of $2.3 billion for the next fiscal year.
But he added, "It is important to recognize that the proposed cuts will have long-term consequences -- in some cases severe -- for New York City residents."


KU Energy Corp.(KU:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Beefing Up Bradley
The Philadelphia 76ers are hoping that an eight-time world body-building champion can help beef up center SHAWN BRADLEY before next season.
A former Mr.
Olympia, LEE HANEY, has been hired by the team to help the 7-foot-6-inch Bradley gain more weight and strength.


Traders Ponder Fed's Moves as Dow Falls
How gradual is gradual?
Is Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and famed gradualist, preparing the markets for speedier increases in interest rates, greasing the stock and bond markets' already slippery decline?
That is what stock and bond traders are asking themselves in the wake of the Fed's third quarter-point increase in its short-term interest rate target this year, to 3.75 percent yesterday.


Oakwood Homes Corp.(OH:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


On My Mind; Domestic Tranquillity
"Every law-abiding American, rich or poor, has the right to raise children without the fear of criminals terrorizing where they live."
President Clinton said that the other day.
The Constitution says the same thing in different words -- those phrases in the preamble about the Government insuring domestic tranquillity and promoting the general welfare.


Harte-Hanks Communications (HHS:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Isolation As Tactic
One year later, the Bosnian Serbs have applied the Srebrenica model again.
Just as in the eastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica, which was the focus of world attention a year ago when its 60,000 residents were brought close to starvation by a Serbian siege, the Serbs have turned Gorazde into a refugee camp totally dependent on their whim.


Tribune Co.(TRB:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


No Regrets From L.T.
Lawrence Taylor insisted, "No, no, no," when asked today if he had any second thoughts about retiring from the Giants.
"I'm not the sentimental type," he said.
"I played 13 years. I wasn't too good the last two, three years anyway. I'd miss it only if I felt I had something to give to the sport."


Reviews/Pop; A Harp Here, A Concept There, Naturally
What strange things the 1960's have left us.
Ethnic exoticism, yesterday's allegiance to experimentalism, the New Age movement; without the 1960's, the Swiss harpist Andreas Vollenweider wouldn't exist.
Mr.
Vollenweider, who performed at the Beacon Theater on Saturday night, is the king of touchy-feely New Ageism.
He has made a career of creating mammoth landscapes around the tinkling of his harp.
His music occasionally has the sounds of nature percolating through it, and there is a touch of sci-fi medievalism to titles like "Dancing With the Lion" or "Jugglers in Obsidian."
Mr.
Vollenweider has recently released a new album, "Eolian Minstrel" (SBK), which breaks with tradition in that it features songs, sung by Eliza Gilkyson.
At the Beacon, something even stranger happened.
The naturally charismatic Mr.
Vollenweider began to disappear under the weight of the band, becoming a supporting player on his own stage.
This was almost a rock show, with Mr.
Vollenweider's harp playing the bass parts along with the sort of synthesized sounds that are now all over pop music.


Miami Officer in '89 Shooting Is Dismissed
William Lozano, the Miami police officer whose shooting of a black motorcyclist in 1989 led to three days of rioting here, is being dismissed, the Miami Police Department said today.
A police spokesman said Mr.
Lozano's dismissal was for violating "administrative regulations" in connection with the shooting, but he declined to be more specific.
He said that the dismissal would be formally announced on Tuesday and that more details would be provided then.


Harding Says Thanks
TONYA HARDING, who has led a very private existence lately, has a public message for her fans: thank you.


Huffy Corp.(HUF:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


United Technologies Inc.(UTX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Aides Ready to Ask Clinton To Send Jets Against Serbs
President Clinton's principal national security advisers will recommend to him on Tuesday that he seek approval for the broader use of air power in Bosnia to halt hostilities and force the Serbs back to the bargaining table, senior Administration officials said tonight.
Among the leading options to be presented to Mr.
Clinton at a 9 A.M. meeting is a plan calling for wider NATO air strikes against the Serbs unless they withdraw from positions around Gorazde and other areas that the United Nations has declared to be "safe havens" for the Bosnian Muslims, the officials said.


Sports of The Times; Montague The Obscure And Jordan
"SURE Babe Ruth was good, but could he play hoop?"
This is an inscription on the front of a T-shirt currently sold in Birmingham stores.
The back of the shirt reads: "The great American pastime just got greater." And with it a picture of Michael Jordan, the Birmingham Barons' novel right fielder who, after seven games this season, is the team's leading hitter at .304, coming off a 2-for-4 game Sunday.


Success Greets A Little Movie
Every now and then a movie unexpectedly climbs to the No. 1 slot without big stars, huge budgets, violent action, a half-dozen uncredited writers and the cliches that mar too many studio films.
"We did it! We did it!" shouted Russell Schwartz, the president of Gramercy Pictures, which is distributing the hit comedy "Four Weddings and a Funeral." He said over the phone early this morning from his home in Los Angeles, "I'm bouncing off the wall."


INSIDE
Compromise in South Africa
South Africa appeared to be nearing a pact for elections to go forward peacefully as the Zulu leader said he would like his party added to the ballot and cut his demands.
Page A3.
New Fray for Israeli Army
Pressure from the right on Israeli soldiers, urging them to refuse to remove settlers from the occupied territories, is causing new political and religious schisms.
Page A8.
Warning on Well Pumps
The Environmental jProtection Agency advised users of private wells to use bottled water and to test for possible lead contamination from pumps installed in the last year.
Page A13.
Disney's Boradway Debut
"Beauty and the Beast," the Walt Disney Company's lavish foray onto Broadway, opened last night at the Palace Theater.
A review by David Richards is on page C15.


Review/Dance; The Pennsylvania Ballet Looks Back on 30 Years
The Pennsylvania Ballet has faced various economic and directorial crises since Barbara Weisberger founded it 30 years ago.
But it remains alive and kicking.
On Sunday afternoon at the Academy of Music here, the Philadelphia-based troupe gave itself a well-deserved birthday present with "Directors' Retrospective," a program devoted to works by Christopher d'Amboise, who became the company's artistic director in 1990, and by two previous directors who are also choreographers: Robert Weiss, artistic director from 1982 to 1990, and Richard Tanner, associate artistic director from 1985 to 1990.


U.S. Urges Users of New Well Pumps to Drink Bottled Water
The Environmental Protection Agency today advised hundreds of thousands of people who drink from private wells to switch temporarily to bottled water and to test for possible lead contamination from pumps installed in the past year.
Citing new experimental data, the agency recommended that millions of other households with older pumps should also have the tests done while continuing to use well water.


A Spring Ice Jam Bursts, and a Maine Town Is Pummeled
Spring arrived with a vengeance over the weekend in this town in northeastern Maine when an ice jam clogging the Aroostook River burst, sending huge blocks of ice barreling into town on a wave of frigid waters.
Like outsized pieces of some frozen jigsaw puzzle, the ice slammed into buildings and cars on Saturday night, forcing 60 people to evacuate their homes.
Ten feet of water flooded Main Street, damaging more than a score of businesses in this rural Aroostook County town of 1,700 people about 10 miles northeast of Presque Isle.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


'Deal of the Century': Debt-to-Riches at Citicorp -- A special report.; How an Argentine Bonanza Helped Big Bank and Friends
Two years ago, when Citicorp was in financial trouble and its chairman, John S. Reed, was battling to save his career, he turned for help to Argentina and to his old friend and confidant, H. Richard Handley, the president of Citibank Argentina.
The bankers, who spent childhood years in Argentina, had a special relationship.
They liked to sit in Mr.
Handley's office, bantering in Spanish and plotting the Latin American strategy for Citibank.


American Cyanamid (ACY:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Giulio Gari Is Dead; Operatic Tenor, 84
Giulio Gari, a tenor who sang at both the New York City Opera and the Metropolitan Opera, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 84 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was pneumonia, said his wife, Gloria.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Newark officials' refusal to allow the filming of the movie "New Jersey Drive" in their city referred incorrectly in some copies to the position of the director, Nick Gomez, in the photo.
He was at the left, near the camera, pointing with his left hand.


Bell Industries Inc.(BI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Crafty Signs Spun in Web Say to Prey, 'Open Sky'
THE room beckons warmly and widely, lighted high overhead by gladdening bulbs that recapitulate the brilliance and spectral range of the sun.
But as you step into this parlor of a laboratory just try not to jump, or at the very least stiffen.
In every corner, under every surface, dangling into one's hair, brushing against one's shoulder, are large, dainty, lacy, spiraling, glittering spider webs.
And tending each of these webs is a large, undainty, big-bellied, generously appendaged spider.
There are dozens and dozens of spiders, some of them yellow, some brownish-black, some pale caramel.
And all of them are weirdly frozen in place because -- what do you know! -- spiders really are more scared of humans than most humans are of them.


Chess
The type of attack most difficult to see through is the one that demands painstaking preparation because a long series of developing moves can often look routine and thus lull the defender into dropping his guard.
Quite often none of this preliminary stage will embody direct threats.
Indeed, the course of the game will look deceptively as though the opponent were just tending to his knitting.
The defender must not swallow this yarn but alertly penetrate to any possible web the opponent might be creating.
Even the overtly defensive move must come under scrutiny because it can have a double meaning.


Nassau Executive Will Not Run for Governor
Ending speculation about his plans, Thomas S. Gulotta, the Nassau County Executive, said tonight that he would not seek the Republican nomination for governor.
"I will not actively seek the Republican nomination for statewide office," Mr.
Gulotta told a group of about 300 Republicans gathered at the Swan Club here.
"I will, however, continue to be available to work with state and local leaders to achieve a consensus that will defeat the liberal Cuomo administration this fall."


Dana Corp.(DCN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Slap Shot Is a Long Shot in the All-Important Ratings as Well as on the Ice
Why is hockey on ABC when its ratings' tote board looks like World League football's did?
Over the first three weeks of ABC coverage on Sunday afternoons, the national Nielsen rating averaged a 1.7.
In the first playoff telecast Sunday, the preliminary overnight rating came to a 2.4.
That sounds like an improvement, but last week, the overnight fell from a 2.4 to a 1.5 national rating.
There's no cheering in the penalty box.


Senate Women Want Admiral To Lose Rank
Six of the seven women in the Senate said today that they would oppose allowing the Navy's top officer to retire with his four-star admiral's rank because of his role in the Tailhook sexual-harassment scandal.
The seventh woman, Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, had not decided how she would vote on Tuesday, when the full Senate is to debate the fate of the admiral, Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, an aide to the Senator said.


Cincinnati Bell (CSN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


At Kidder, Peabody, Where Trading Went Awry


Big Picture of Cancer Process Is Being Seen for the First Time
FOR years, molecular biologists have held fast to a deep-seated belief about the nature of cancer.
Malignancy, they argued, must have something to do with a loss of the molecular brakes that halt the growth and division of cells.
After all, they reasoned, the most distinctive feature of a cancer cell is that it does not stop growing, while a normal cell does.
If so, then any defects in the genes that control the cell cycle -- the cell's orderly progression from growth, to division into two daughter cells, and back to the resting state -- would be a likely cause cancer.
This grand hypothesis sought to unify two major research programs, study of the cell cycle and the search to understand the molecular basis of cancer.


Wandering Down Civilization's Garden Paths
IN the course of Western civilization, April 19 has been something of a day off.
It is St.
Alphege (pronounced ALF-edge) of Canterbury's Day, commemorating the Archbishop of Canterbury who went to his eternal reward in 1012, axed in the head after refusing attempts to ransom him from the marauding Danes on the ground that the money should go to the poor.
On the same date a scant 869 years later, in 1881, Queen Victoria's favorite Prime Minister, Benjamin Disraeli, joined St.
Alphege in eternity and in doing so created the legacy of Primrose Day, a holiday observed by his party in England.
Since today's schedule is so light, historically speaking, it might be a good opportunity to explore other avenues of Western civilization that we may have avoided in school.
For owners of Apple Macintosh computers, one of the more enjoyable ways to do so is with Culture 2.0, subtitled "a multimedia guide to Western Civilization."


Springs Industries(SMI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Merrill Net Was Up 21% In Quarter
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company reported yesterday that its earnings for the first quarter rose 21 percent, to a record $371.8 million, largely because of substantial increases in commissions and asset-management fees.
Merrill, the nation's largest brokerage firm and the first of the leading ones to report earnings, said its income was $1.68 a share, well above analysts' expectations of about $1.45 a share.
Merrill's stock rose $1, to $36.25, on the Big Board.


CHRONICLE
NORMAN DORSEN was a 23-year-old graduate of Harvard Law School and in the Army's judge advocate general's office when he landed his first assignment: helping Joseph N. Welch, counsel to the Army in the McCarthy hearings.
This week marks the 40th anniversary of the start of those Senate hearings, which riveted the nation's attention, and Professor Dorsen, who now teaches at New York University Law School, will discuss the hearings at 6 P.M. tonight at D'Agostino Hall on West Third Street.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday, about the plans of the Ford Motor Company to increase its dividend and split its stock, misstated the percentage of outstanding shares in the Hertz Corporation that Ford intends to buy to gain full ownership of the company.
It is 46 percent, not 26 percent.


Promus Cos.(PRI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Jersey Teachers Flex Muscles, but Carefully
In the tightly knit universe of New Jersey politics, no organization has had more muscle than the New Jersey Education Association and none has been more willing to use it, whether to reverse control of the State Legislature or to run an otherwise friendly Governor out of office for crossing it over teachers' salaries and pensions.
Now the state's teachers find themselves reaping the whirlwind they helped sow when they crushed former Governor Jim Florio's education reforms and at least indirectly helped elect his Republican rival, Christine Todd Whitman.


Kent Hits Another Key Homer, But 2 by Bell Outdistance Mets
Once again, Jeff Kent tried to save them.
Once again, Jeff Kent took a mighty swing and smashed a two-run home run over the wall when the Mets were in desperate need of offense.
This time, it wasn't enough.
Kent, the National League player of the week for his offensive performance in five games last week, lofted his shot off Gene Harris in the eighth inning, pulling the Mets into a 3-3 tie with San Diego.


Dissidents Threaten A Macy Bid
Dissident directors of R. H. Macy &amp; Company threatened yesterday to step in with a bid of their own for the bankrupt retailer.
In a meeting that ran more than four hours without a vote that would resolve any of the thorny issues facing Macy's board, the directors told their colleagues they were prepared to counter any reorganization plan that valued the company below what they believed it was worth.


I.B.M. AND MOTOROLA ANNOUNCE FASTER POWERPC CHIP
I.B.M. and Motorola announced yesterday that they had completed development and fabrication of a new chip in the PowerPC family, the 604.
Intended for use in high-end desktops, servers and work stations, the new chip is 60 percent faster than the Intel Corporation's Pentium chip running an industry-standard set of programs, according to Michael Slater, publisher of the Microprocessor Report in Sebastopol, Calif.
But the PowerPC family of chips is mainly an advantage for users of Apple MacIntosh personal computers running Apple's operating software.
More than 85 percent of today's personal computers run the Microsoft Corporation's operating software on the Intel chip architecture.
The 604 chip is scheduled to move into volume production in the fourth quarter of this year.


Stryker Corp.(STRY:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Robert Altman Honored By Film Society


Zulu Nationalist Leader Appears to Yield on Election
South African negotiators said today that they were near a breakthrough that could avert a violent election boycott, after Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, the Zulu nationalist leader, made a last-minute appeal to be included in elections next week.
Chief Buthelezi met for much of the day with President F. W. de Klerk and senior officials of the African National Congress, reportedly seeking a way his Inkatha Freedom Party could be added to the ballot for the vote that begins in eight days.


Review/Music; Concordia Offers Premieres
New works, and works that draw on jazz elements, have always been the heart of Marin Alsop's repertory with her Concordia Orchestra, and in that sense, the ensemble's concert on Saturday evening at Alice Tully Hall was business as usual.
One piece, George Bogatko's "Go for It," was hardly even a jazz-classical hybrid: its language, structure and moves were pure jazz, but it was scored for strings rather than for winds.
Besides a drum solo, played with spectacular variety and energy by Chris Adams, it included a cello solo, which Erik Friedlander played deftly.
A lighter jazziness enlivened the latest of Jon Deak's children's works, "The Broccoli Beast of Bedford Avenue," a drama based on a story by Michelle Ellis, a student at P.S. 3 in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
In the story, Michelle discovers a broccoli monster in her refrigerator, and after first recoiling (on the ground that he is smelly), she sprays him with perfume, shields him from the police and becomes his pal.


Autopsy Data Inconclusive In Baby Death
An autopsy on the baby of a Canadian couple who concocted a kidnapping hoax in New York City last weekend to conceal her death and the abandonment of her body in a Quebec woods found no signs of violence, abuse or malnutrition, but further tests will be needed to pinpoint the cause of death, Canadian officials said yesterday.
The 10-week-old baby, Muguet Bales-Lemay, was found Sunday near Eastman, 20 miles north of the Vermont line, with the aid of a map drawn by her parents, Joseph Bales, 33, and Helene Lemay, 31.
The couple said they had concealed what they called her crib death on April 8 and had hidden her body because they had been accused of abusing a foster child last year and feared serious new charges.


Enron Oil &amp; Gas (EOG:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Now It's the Israeli Right That Urges Soldiers to Refuse to Evict Settlers
In Israel, where the army is respected to the point of veneration, soldiers rarely refuse to carry out orders.
There have been exceptions, conspicuously some Israelis on the political left who said no to taking part in the 1982 invasion of Lebanon and to serving in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
About 300 men preferred jail to following commands they considered to be unjust.


Nixon 'Stable' After Stroke At His Home
Former President Richard M. Nixon suffered a stroke yesterday, and an aide said that he was conscious and in stable condition but unable to speak late last night at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
Mr.
Nixon, 81, was stricken at 5:45 P.M. as he started down the stairs for dinner in his home in Park Ridge, N.J., his chief of staff, Kathy O'Connor, said.
"He was able to summon the housekeeper for help," Ms.
O'Connor said.


Reviews/Pop; Rebellions Small And Many
One of the best videos on MTV is by Seaweed, a punk-rock band from Tacoma, Wash.
In its video for "Kid Candy," from its third album, "Four" (Sub Pop), the quintet parodies Soul Asylum's overplayed video "Runaway Train." But where Soul Asylum displays photographs of missing children, Seaweed flashes pictures of missing bicycles.
Such suburban irrelevance -- even to the point of tastelessness -- saturates Seaweed's melodic hard-core music and its bratty, energetic live shows.
On Friday night at CBGB, Seaweed stomped through roughly a dozen three-minute punk rockers.
Its guitarist, Clint Werner, grounded Aaron Stauffer's hoarse-voiced abandon in catchy heavy-metal riffs while Bob Bulgrien worked furiously to keep the drumbeat fast but gentle.
Though the music of similar hard-core bands usually inspires slam-dancing, Seaweed's pop-informed thrash was more suitable for humming and contemplation.


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.(WTI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Health Debate Is Filling Campaign Coffers
Representative Jim Cooper offers a simple explanation for his putting forward a health care proposal: "This is a pocketbook issue. It really matters to every family."
It has also become a pocketbook issue for Mr.
Cooper, and whatever the fate of his health plan, he is already a winner.


Chris-Craft Industries(CCN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Salary Cap Is Misguided Medicine
Considering some of the comments emanating from major league club owners, it seems that the salary cap they want the players to accept would cure not only their economic problems but also the problems of health care, secondary smoke and the succession to the British throne.
Bill Giles, the verbose owner of the Philadelphia Phillies, was the latest to register his views.
Speaking on a sports business panel last week, Giles said, among other things, that if the owners don't get a salary cap in the current but stagnant labor negotiations, "a lot of teams" will have to move.
He predicted that these teams, which could number six or seven, would include the San Diego Padres, the Montreal Expos and the Pittsburgh Pirates.


Big Project Dead, Physicists Find Small Is Beautiful
SCATTERED bands of inventors are quietly laboring to insure that physics, three centuries after its birth, has a chance to keep advancing into its most challenging realms despite the recent collapse of its flagship project, the superconducting supercollider, which would have been the biggest science experiment of all time.
In universities and at research centers from coast to coast, inventors are toying with innovative ways to throw the age of gargantuan accelerators into reverse yet still achieve great energies of collision.
They are relying on bright ideas rather than big budgets and tracts of land.


Frederick B. Opper, Broadcaster, 82
Frederick Burr Opper, a retired broadcaster, foreign correspondent and editor, died on Thursday in Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
A resident of Westport, he was 82.
He had a brief illness, his family said.


MICROSOFT CORP. (MSFT:NMS)
The Microsoft Corporation reported quarterly profits yesterday that were above analysts' expectations, led by strong sales of its Windowsoperating system and its bundled offering of business applications, called Office.
Margins -- profits before taxes, interest payments and special charges -- rose to 38.6 percent, from 35.3 percent in the year-earlier quarter.
Many analysts had expecteded, and the software giant previously signalled, that margins would decline as its growth rate tapered off.


Diamond Shamrock Inc.(DRM:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Publisher Withdraws Novel
Responding to a complaint that "Cranes' Morning," a recent novel by the Indian author Indrani Aikath-Gyaltsen, was almost completely plagiarized from "The Rosemary Tree," a 1956 book by the English novelist Elizabeth Goudge, Ballantine Books said yesterday that it had stopped shipping "Cranes' Morning" and had ordered its sales representatives not to distribute any more copies.
"Ballantine is shocked and dismayed to have just discovered this situation," said Joelle Delbourgo, vice president and editor in chief of Ballantine's trade paperback and hard-cover division.
"It does appear that there's some kernel of truth to this claim and that the author had copied substantial portions of Elizabeth Goudge's work. We are investigating the matter."


Corrections
An article in some editions of Business Day on Saturday, about a feud between two lawyers in the bankruptcy case of R. H. Macy &amp; Company, omitted a connection of Stutman, Treister &amp; Glatt, a Los Angeles law firm, to the case.
The firm was recently retained to represent Fidelity Investments, a mutual fund company that is one of Macy's largest creditors.


Rockwell International Corp.(ROK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COMPANY NEWS: Corporate Communicating; The Fax Flood Shows Little Sign of Receding
Like kudzu, paper spews out endlessly from the office fax machine, crucial reports and rubbish alike.
Missed two pages of a 40-page document?
No problem -- The whole thing will be resent.
If the facsimile flood at your office seems out of control, it probably is -- as it is at most major American companies, according to a survey by the Gallup Organization.


Russell Corp.(RML:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Xerox Creates Software To Rival Offset Printing
Seeking to promote plateless printing, the Xerox Corporation is expected to announce today that it has developed software to link computer terminals and scanners with high-speed copiers, regardless of location or manufacturer.
The company said the system, which it is calling the Document Services Platform, will be available to others in the field, including competitors.
"In the past, the systems have been closed, and they have not taken off," Colin O'Brien, a Xerox vice president, said.
"This system is open, so our competitors can connect as well. This is the way the whole computer world is going."


Brick Injures Officer
Two teen-age boys were arrested after a police officer was struck in the head by a brick thrown through the window of a patrol car in Queens yesterday, the police said.
The officer, whose name was not released, was admitted to Jamaica Hospital, but his injuries did not appear to be serious, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a spokesman for the Police Department.
He said the officer was riding in the front passenger seat, his window down, when he was hit about 7 P.M. on Rockaway Beach Boulevard near 91st Street.
Julio Estebes, 14, and Jason Rivera, 15, were charged with assault, reckless endangerment and criminal possession of a weapon.
Officer McInnis said they would be prosecuted as adults.


1-2-3 Homers Put Braves at 13-1
Braves 7, Cardinals 1
Ryan Klesko, Fred McGriff and David Justice hit consecutive home runs in the first inning and the Braves beat the St.
Louis Cardinals, 7-1, in Atlanta last night for their sixth straight victory and 13th in 14 games.


Classical Music in Review
Andreas Haefliger  Pianist 92d Street Y
As Leonard Bernstein tells it, the legendary conductor Serge Koussevitzky had one adjective he prized above all others: "warm," or, as he pronounced it, "varm." "One and two and three and varm," he would say during rehearsals.
Varm was the quality missing from Andreas Haefliger's recital on Saturday night at the 92d Street Y. One heard bright, brilliant playing, incisive contrasts, firm resolutions.
But the music did not have the inner glow that comes from a pianist immersing himself in the sound rather than manipulating it.


5 Players Move On In N.F.L.
Six days before the college draft, the National Football League's free agent game of musical teams picked up tempo yesterday.
Defensive end Sean Jones moved from Houston to Green Bay, quarterback John Friesz went from San Diego to Washington, guard Kevin Gogan moved from Dallas to the Los Angeles Raiders, guard Derek Kennard went from New Orleans to Dallas and returner Vai Sikahema said goodbye to the Philadelphia Eagles and hello to broadcasting.
One player decided to stay put: Quarterback Bobby Hebert signed a one-year contract with the Atlanta Falcons.
He is expected to back up Jeff George, the former Indianapolis starter whom the Falcons acquired last month.


Okidata Calls Off An Agency Review
Okidata, a manufacturer of computer printers, facsimile equipment and desktop processors, has called off an agency review and retained the incumbent, Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor of New York, on its estimated $10 million account.
Larry Siegel, the advertising and communications manager for Okidata in Mount Laurel, N.J., said on Friday that one reason the account was placed in review was a belief that "creative was not where we wanted it to be," but that Jordan, McGrath subsequently changed the creative and account teams and "showed us they had the capabilities and were where they needed to be."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.51
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.76
3.58
2.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.21
3.99
2.96
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.14
6.94
5.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.41
7.28
6.72
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.20
8.10
7.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.44
6.37
5.91
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ethanol's Cost Far Outweighs the Benefit
To the Editor:
As leaders of energy and transportation research groups, we respectfully suggest that Gov.
E.
Benjamin Nelson of Nebraska needs to watch out for mixing his fuels ("For the Air and the Economy, Try Ethanol," letter, April 7).
Ethanol made from grain requires significant inputs of diesel and gasoline, as well as boiler fuels, for harvesting and processing, inputs that are almost the same as the energy in the gasoline displaced!


Reid to Razorbacks
KAREEM REID, the 5-foot-9-inch blur of a point guard out of St.
Raymond's High School in the Bronx, announced yesterday that he had signed a letter of intent to attend Arkansas, the newly crowned national champions.
Reid chose Arkansas over Providence, Texas and California.


Corrections
A Topic of The Times yesterday incorrectly identified the position for which President Clinton nominated Adm.
Bobby Ray Inman; it was Secretary of Defense.


Digital Equipment
It has been a horrific drop for the Digital Equipment Corporation.
Trading for more than $80 in March 1991, the computer maker's stock price has been falling as its prospects in the mainframe computer market have darkened.
After the company announced wider losses, the price dropped Friday and again yesterday, wiping out about a quarter of its value.


Returns Are In: The I.R.S. Is Buried


Nortek Inc.(NTK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


AIDS Services Cuts Affect Women Too
To the Editor:
New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's deliberation about whether or not to dismantle the city's Division of AIDS Services has rightly met with widespread protests and indignation (news article, April 13).
In a city that leads the country in the number of people afflicted with AIDS, targeting AIDS services to reduce the budget is incomprehensible.


Ukraine's Unsettling Vote
Shrugging off predictions of apathy, Ukrainians turned out by the millions this month to vote in the independent republic's first free parliamentary elections.
They gave scant support to paramilitary extremists.
But 118 Communists and their allies won seats, as did 35 of their moderate nationalist opponents.
Reform-minded centrists fared poorly.
The election could lead to further polarization between a western Ukraine, eager to join Europe, and eastern Ukraine, which talks about rejoining Russia.
And it left a muddle in the middle of the 450-seat Parliament, newcomers with no known party loyalty who could stampede to either pole.


New Criteria For Earnings
The listing of corporate earnings in Business Day now covers only companies that have at least $50 million in quarterly revenues.
Banking and insurance companies, which do not usually report revenues, will be covered in the listing if their total assets exceed $2 billion.


Court Backs Reinstating Of Jeffries to College Post
A Federal appeals court yesterday upheld the reinstatement of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries as chairman of the black studies department at City College but overturned a jury's award of $360,000 in damages from City University, which demoted him after he gave a speech that some considered anti-Semitic and racist.
The court, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, agreed with the Federal District Court ruling that the university violated Dr.
Jeffries's First Amendment rights last year by demoting him because of the content of the speech.
In the speech, which he delivered in Albany in the summer of 1991, he said that Jews were responsible for the slave trade and that Jews and the Mafia conspired in Hollywood to disparage blacks in films.


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co. (LLY:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


If It's Mattingly in April, It Must Be .200
Don Mattingly sounded like an incumbent in an election year.
No change, no change, no change.
He repeated those two words whenever questions were tossed at him, but he was not discussing politics.
Mattingly was talking about hitting, or his lack of hitting in the first month of the season.
Again.
As the Yankees shuffle through another April, Mattingly is enduring another one of those frigid starts that has become a nagging trademark of his career.
He cannot explain why his average over 12 Aprils is 43 points below his career mark of .308.
He does not know why the hits that rattled off his bat in Florida have stopped rattling.
Call it his annual drop in the polls, the leading-hitter polls.


Johnson Controls Inc.(JCI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Universal Foods Corp.(UFC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Beijing Now Admits That Robbers Killed 24 Taiwan Tourists
China acknowledged for the first time on Sunday that 24 tourists from Taiwan found burned to death on March 31 in a pleasure boat on a scenic lake in southern China had been slain.
Prime Minister Li Peng called the assault a "heinous criminal offense" and said China "will seriously punish those criminals."


Federal Signal (FSS:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


4 Israelis Wounded During an Ax Attack on a Bus Near Jerusalem


Temple-Indland (TIN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ndeti and Pippig Run Like the Wind
The course for the Boston Marathon runs from Hopkinton to the city, almost directly west to east.
The wind during today's 98th running of this American sports classic blew steadily at 20 miles an hour or more, also west to east.
So with comfortable temperatures in the 50's and with the wind at their backs, the 9,059 starters seemed sure to have a chance to run fast.
But fast enough for the winning man and the winning women to run the best times in the history of this race?
Yes, that fast.


State Dept. Criticizes White House on Macedonia Ties
In an open rift with the White House, State Department officials contend that the Administration is bowing to pressure from Greek-Americans in delaying a decision to establish full diplomatic relations with the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia.
Several State Department officials complained in interviews that while Washington had recognized the republic, the delay in sending an ambassador there was strengthening Greece's resolve to maintain its trade embargo against Macedonia.
Many officials say the delay is dangerously heightening tensions in the Balkans.


Devils' Rx: 2 Aspirins And Storm The Net
Attack the net with more vigor and create more traffic in front of Sabres goaltender Dominik Hasek.
That's what the Devils want to do to even their opening-round series against Buffalo.
The problem is the Sabres know exactly what the Devils are planning for Game 2 Tuesday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Sabres will be waiting for them, just as they were Sunday night when they jumped to a 2-0 victory in Game 1 of their four-of-seven game series.


Hot Lines Offer Help on Lead
Most deep private wells use submersible pumps, installed inside the well below water.
Shallow wells use a different type of pump which sits on the surface.
Most, but not all, submersible pumps now in use have brass or bronze parts that include lead, and these can release high concentrations of lead into drinking water, especially when new.


MacTavish Is Taking Charge In a Hurry
Sometimes, Brian Noonan's game is this simple.
His teammate of less than a month, Craig MacTavish, was to the left of the net, and Noonan was to the right.
They had both arrived in this place, in the second game of what has so far become an overwhelming Ranger playoff drive, in separate trades made March 21.
Noonan had come from Chicago, MacTavish from Edmonton, and now they were on the same line, sharing the same chance.
When the two came to the Rangers, in two of the five trades that were made the day a first-place team was reshaped, the mass arrivals raised serious questions.
Was there enough time to learn each other?
Could these parts become whole by the playoffs?


Sorting Out Senate Leadership Contenders


Kansas City Power &amp; Light Co. (KLT:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


VLSI Technology Inc.(VLSI:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


By Design; The Legs, Naturally
It looks like black pantyhose is entering the realm of endangered species.
Designers showed lots of bare legs in their spring and summer collections, a logical idea for warm weather, and some also showed bare legs in the recent fall collections, not so practical for women up north when wintry winds blow.
Many more designers, including Calvin Klein, Donna Karan, Isaac Mizrahi and Richard Tyler, showed sheer hosiery.
So don't start worrying about chilblains yet.
What designers are really saying is that they would like women to get away from the heaviness of opaque tights and into hosiery that matches their skin tones.


Dworin's Suitors Make Other Choices
Two agencies that unsuccessfully wooed Steve Dworin have appointed executives to the positions he was offered.
On Friday, the day after Mr.
Dworin, the former president of Deutsch Inc., said he would join Ayer Inc. as chief executive, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York named Bill Muirhead, who recently became chairman and chief executive of Saatchi North America, to the additional position of chief executive at its New York office.


Classical Music in Review
Benita Valente  Soprano Alice Tully Hall
Benita Valente was to have sung duets with her friend and sometime recital partner Tatiana Troyanos on Sunday afternoon, and a new work by William Bolcom was to have been the centerpiece of their program.
When Miss Troyanos died in August, Mr.
Bolcom transformed the work into a memorial, with texts that meditate on death, and a solo viola line standing in for the absent mezzo-soprano.


Review/Television; The Many, Many Steps That Led to Yalta's Table
Reducing all of World War II to the equivalent of a dud firecracker might seem impossible but, by golly, television has managed to do exactly that in "World War II: When Lions Roared," a four-hour movie that NBC is to broadcast this evening from 8 to 10 and tomorrow night from 9 to 11.
What makes this descent into fatal bloat especially puzzling is the lineup of established talent.
The writer is David W. Rintels ("Clarence Darrow," "Fear on Trial," "Gideon's Trumpet"); the director, Joseph Sargent ("The Taking of Pelham One Two Three," "Miss Rose White").
The cast is headed by Bob Hoskins as Winston Churchill, Michael Caine as Joseph Stalin and John Lithgow as Franklin D. Roosevelt, with able support from Ed Begley Jr. as the Roosevelt adviser Harry Hopkins and Jan Triska as Stalin's aide Vyacheslav Molotov.
On paper, perfect.


Rust Int'l(RST:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
There's more than one way to pay an opera director, or so JULIUS RUDEL learned more than 30 years ago when he conducted the American premiere of "The Turn of the Screw" by Benjamin Britten.
"Sometimes we have to be scavengers," he recalled recently as he prepared to conduct a new production of the work tomorrow, Friday and Sunday at the Manhattan School of Music Opera Theater.


Classical Music in Review
Liege Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
A European orchestra not preceded by a particularly big international reputation would do well to copy the strategy employed by the Liege Philharmonic on Sunday afternoon.
First offer a balance between less- and well-traveled repertory; then bring along a singer of substance to help the proceedings along.


Don't Look, but Guess Who Sneaked By the Red Wings
Sharks 5, Red Wings 4
It was San Jose's first playoff game, while the Detroit Red Wings, one of the National Hockey League's original six, were making their 43d post-season appearance.
The night belonged to the Sharks.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, a picture yesterday showing the police training program operated in Puerto Rico by the City University of New York was published in mirror image.
The man with the shotgun should have appeared at the right.


Rochester Telephone (RTC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Newton Unit Executive Quits Apple
The executive that Apple Computer Inc. hired to introduce its Newton handheld computer resigned today, and analysts said he had been forced out by Apple's inability to spur lagging sales of the pen-based machine.
Gaston Bastiaens, a former executive of Philips Electronics, had served as general manager of Apple's personal interactive electronics division, which developed and markets the Newton.
In a statement issued late in the day, Apple said Mr.
Bastieaens was leaving to set up his own business.


Yankees Pay $715,066 to City
For the first time since 1991, the Yankees last week paid the city rent on Yankee Stadium, presenting the Parks Department with a check for $715,066.
"We went up there to get the check," said Joanne Imohiosen, the Parks Department's assistant commissioner.
"I told them not to send it."


METRO DIGEST
SCHOOLS CONSIDER OUTSIDE MANAGEMENT
Undermined by deep fiscal problems and poor academic achievement, the Hartford public school system is considering a radical step: turning over management of all its schools, troubles and all, to a private, for-profit company.
A1.
NIXON HOSPITALIZED AFTER STROKE
Richard M. Nixon suffered a stroke at his home in Park Ridge, N.J., and was taken to the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, a spokeswoman for the former President said.
A12.


GORAZDE POUNDED BY SERB GUNNERS
Serbian nationalist artillery opened fire on the refugee-packed eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde again today as the top United Nations general here warned of a humanitarian catastrophe.
Today's attack marked the third day running that the Serbs have promised a cease-fire, only to break it with early-morning shelling, United Nations officials here said.


Drug Emporium Inc.(DEMP:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Nixon Hospitalized After Having Stroke
Richard M. Nixon suffered a stroke yesterday and was in stable condition last night at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan, a spokeswoman said.
The former President was treated with anti-coagulant drugs at the hospital after being stricken as he prepared for dinner at his home in Park Ridge, N.J.


Wolverine Tube Inc.(WLV:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Celanese Canada (CCL) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The 6-Mile Shelf of Computer Books
COMPUTER books are big business; how big, no one knows.
For circumstantial evidence, wander into one of the chain bookstores and look down the long shelves of books like "DOS for Lovers," "Backpacking a Powerbook" and "Taking Virtual Reality Through the Glass Ceiling," all made-up titles but none an absolutely crazy idea.
"If I had to guess," Paul Hilts, the technology editor of Publisher's Weekly, said in a telephone interview, "they're basically selling in the neighborhood of two to three million books a year in the general computer market." Some computer books are "selling as well as the very best trade paperbacks," said Bob Ipsen, the senior marketing manager at Wiley Computer Books.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: The Bluff That Failed; Serbs Around Gorazde Are Undeterred By NATO's Policy of Limited Air Strikes
In conducting limited air strikes last week to defend the Muslim enclave of Gorazde, Western military commanders played the game the way the Serbs had hoped they would -- and lost.
NATO carried out the first two air strikes in its 45-year history, but Britain lost a jet in a third attempt, two of six American bombs dropped were duds, and the moment of decision turned into one of humiliation.
As Gorazde's defenses crumbled, it was clear that the raids were little more than a symbolic shot across the bow.


Tulum Journal; The Glory That Was Mayan, and a Modern Mess
Within the walls of this ancient Maya stronghold, facing the gemstone sea and sacred structures built long ago, modern Mexico seems blessed with history.
Outside, history is hell.


Review/Theater: Beauty and the Beast; Disney Does Broadway, Dancing Spoons and All
As Broadway musicals go, "Beauty and the Beast" belongs right up there with the Empire State Building, F. A. O. Schwarz and the Circle Line boat tours.
It is hardly a triumph of art, but it'll probably be a whale of a tourist attraction.
It is Las Vegas without the sex, Mardi Gras without the booze and Madame Tussaud's without the waxy stares.
You don't watch it, you gape at it, knowing that nothing in Dubuque comes close.
At an official cost of nearly $12 million -- unofficial estimates run considerably higher -- the Walt Disney Company has recreated on the stage of the Palace Theater its 1991 blockbuster animated feature, right down to the ravenous wolves, the dancing spoons and the enchanted rose that sheds its petals as true love's hopes run low.
Family audiences tired of prancing felines are apt to find this cause for celebration.
Others may look upon the eye-boggling spectacle as further proof of the age-old theory that if you throw enough money at the American public, the American public will throw it right back.


HARTFORD SEEKING A COMPANY TO RUN ITS PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Undermined by deep fiscal problems and poor academic achievement, the Hartford public school system is seriously considering a radical step: turning over management of all its schools, troubles and all, to a private, for-profit company.
The agreement would be the boldest step yet in a burgeoning movement to privatize elements of American public education.
The company, Education Alternatives, based in Minneapolis, is negotiating a contract to manage the district's 32 schools, which serve about 25,000 students.
If approved, the contract would begin this fall and could last five years.
The company would manage a budget of about $214 million a year and its management fee is likely to be 3 to 5 percent a year.


Review/Music; Carlo Bergonzi Sings His American Farewell
Even in a city where vocal recitals are plentiful, concerts that are likely to be remembered as much for the electricity of the atmosphere as for their musical content are few and far between.
Or at least, they usually are.
It was only five weeks ago that Victoria de los Angeles, at 70, set an audience at Alice Tully Hall aflame.
Yet in retrospect, that seemed almost a warm-up for the reception given to Carlo Bergonzi on Sunday evening, when he sang his American farewell recital at Carnegie Hall.
For 50 minutes after the end of the formal program -- punctuated only by five short encores and a brief speech -- a full house applauded, stamped, cheered and shouted for the 70-year-old Italian tenor.
Mr.
Bergonzi basked in the ovation, sometimes standing at center stage with his hands clasped and head bowed, sometimes walking from one end of the stage to the other, waving to his supporters.


Advo Inc.(AD:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates for the third time in three months, to 3.75 percent, trying once again to slow the nation's brisk economic growth before it begins to feed inflation.
The announcement prompted swift criticism from Democrats on Capitol Hill, a sharp fall in stock and bond prices and a large increase by big banks in the rates they charge for many adjustable-rate mortgages and some credit cards.  [ Page A1. ]


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp.(FRE:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rangers Face New Goalie, but Little Else Changes
It really doesn't seem to matter which goalie guards the net for the Islanders against the Rangers in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
It's a case of six against one, a half-dozen against the other.
After the veteran Ron Hextall gave up six goals in a 6-0 defeat in Game 1 on Sunday, Coach Al Arbour replaced him with the rookie Jamie McLennan for Game 2 last night at Madison Square Garden.


Improving Citicorp to Pay Its First Dividend Since 1991
Sharing its improving finances with shareholders, Citicorp announced yesterday that it would pay a quarterly dividend for the first time in two and half years.
Citicorp, the nation's biggest banking company, had suspended payment of dividends in the third quarter of 1991 to rebuild reserves that had been depleted by losses on loans that were backed by commercial real estate and lending to developing countries.


Kaman Corp.(KAMNA:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wabash National Corp.(WNC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Creators Said to Abet Soviet A-Bomb
A new book by a high Soviet intelligence official asserts that the chief Western architects of the nuclear era acted as spies to give Moscow the secrets of the atom bomb.
The accused scientists -- Niels Bohr, Enrico Fermi, George Gamow, J. Robert Oppenheimer and Leo Szilard -- were lions of science who in the 1930's and early 1940's unlocked the atom and went on to create the world's first nuclear bomb in 1945.


Helping Spring Begin to Glow


Market Place; Pep Boys (Manny, Moe and Jack) see their stock climb.
THE Pep Boys -- Manny, Moe and Jack -- have a lot to be smiling about these days.
These cigar-chomping characters, who look like they populate a Dick Tracy cartoon, are the advertising symbols of the Philadelphia-based auto parts retailer that's been bucking the downward push of the market.
Just this month, as the market was tumbling by 30 to 50 points a day, Pep Boys shares were hitting new highs.
What's got the Pep Boys smiling?
The stock has risen by nearly 9 percent since the mid-March, while the stock market in general has fallen by more than 10 percent.
Yesterday, Pep Boys closed at 29 3/8, off 1/8.
What's behind this rise is a company whose fundamentals are, at last, falling into place.
In fact, analysts say Pep Boys' shares, even at these levels, still have upward potential.


Nicor Inc.(GAS:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Some hotel guests will be guinea pigs in tests of the on-screen 'yellow pages' of the future.
ARE the yellow pages still the yellow pages if they don't have pages?
And what exactly is it that you will let your fingers do through a paperless yellow pages?
Those existential questions will no doubt be asked with increasing frequency as more telecommunications companies and other publishers of telephone directories introduce electronic versions.


Experiment in Leaner Government: 64-Page Form Becomes 8
Seven complex forms comprising 64 pages with which poor people request various kinds of Federal help could be reduced to eight pages or fewer under a plan announced today by former President Jimmy Carter.
At Mr.
Carter's Presidential center here, officials from five Federal agencies and the state of Georgia signed an agreement to test the "Georgia Common Access Application," -- a one-time document under which people can apply for Aid to Families with Dependent Children, food stamps, Medicaid, Social Security disability benefits, housing assistance and aid under the Women, Infants and Children program.


Intel Corp.(INTC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Senator Mitchell Enters the Health Fray
Now that he has declined nomination to the Supreme Court, George Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, is charging ahead on health reform.
He has offered Democratic colleagues reasonable changes to President Clinton's bill that would cut costs for employers and taxpayers without sacrificing the goal of universal coverage.
His suggestions are an encouraging sign of flexibility.
But if he is to forge a workable compromise he will need to bring moderate Republicans into the conversation.
Each of Mr.
Mitchell's alternatives would preserve the President's plan to require employers to pay for a share of workers' insurance policies.
But he would trim costs by, for example, tying subsidies to those companies that hire low-paid workers; that's better than Mr.
Clinton's proposal that broadly subsidizes small employers -- which turns out to be more expensive and, perversely, encourages large companies to break up into small pieces to qualify for Federal subsidies.


Observer; Excuses For a Shame
It's mean out here.
Half the country is cheering for a foreign government to go ahead and beat an American, age 18, to bloody pulp because he vandalized cars and signs in Singapore.
This was rotten of him, no doubt, and he is also sentenced to do jail time for it, but it says something about the collapse of American ego when half the country starts cheering for foreign powers to beat up our fellow citizens.


Howard of Michigan To Enter N.B.A. Draft
JUWAN HOWARD, the first of the Fab Five, has become the second to leave Michigan before graduating.
Howard announced yesterday that he would pass up his senior season with the Wolverines and enter the National Basketball Association draft.
JALEN ROSE, another member of perhaps the best freshman class ever in college basketball, is expected to announce his plans today.


BOSNIA UPDATE
In the refugee-packed town of GORAZDE, Serbian nationalists ignored cease-fire promises and continued their attack, while in SARAJEVO, Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the United Nations commander in BOSNIA, warned of a humanitarian catastrophe.
At the UNITED NATIONS, Secretary General Boutros-Boutros Ghali asked the North Atlantic treaty Organization to authorize air strikes to protect all the United Nations-designated "safe areas" in Bosnia, which would expand the United Nations authority to call the strikes.


Inside the Loop, the Game's the Thing
THE game started late.
By first pitch, Sunday morning traffic to and from the Lincoln Tunnel was tearing through the bend in Route 495 above Weehawken Stadium, belching fumes all over the outfield.
"Not a problem," shrugged Armengol Cuevas, president of the Caribe Softball League.
"Not an issue."


Clients Press to Keep AIDS Agency
The woman was 22 years old, pregnant and renting out a single room in a house in Queens when she found out she had H.I.V.
Coming at a time when she was trying to find an apartment for herself and the baby, the news left her in a daze and gave a her a host of new worries, like arranging specialized medical care and counseling.
The head nurse at her hospital sent her to New York City's Division of AIDS Services.


Heavyweights Absorb Early Blows
The former trainer and soon-to-be former wife today intruded on the mental preparations of the champion and challenger in Friday night's heavyweight title fight.
Lou Duva, who used to train Evander Holyfield, the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation king, claimed that Holyfield's reign is in jeopardy.


Zuckerman Postpones Closing Deal for Coliseum
Faced with a deadline yesterday for closing the deal for his purchase of the New York Coliseum, Mortimer B. Zuckerman exercised his right to another delay, this time at the request of city officials.
"The city has asked us to invoke our right to a 55-day adjournment and we did," Mr.
Zuckerman said through a spokesman, Morri Berman.


Extension at Villanova
Villanova Coach STEVE LAPPAS, who led his team to its first National Invitation Tournament championship this year, received a contract extension yesterday through the 1997-98 season.
In Lappas's second season as coach, the Wildcats posted a 20-12 record, the first season since 1987-88 that they won 20 games.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Consider a Ban on Guns Near Schools
In a case with implications for an array of Federal gun control measures, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether Congress has the constitutional authority to ban the possession of guns near school buildings.
The case is an appeal by the Clinton Administration from a Federal appellate court ruling that invalidated the Gun Free School Zones Act of 1990, which makes it a Federal crime to possess firearms within 1,000 feet of a school.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, ruled that Congress had failed to specify that it had the power to enact the law as part of its authority to regulate interstate commerce.


Is It Springtime for Moscow?
To the Editor:
Russia's former finance minister, Boris Fyodorov, sees signs of Western "gullibility" in the recent decision of the International Monetary Fund to extend the second tranche of $1.5 billion to the Government headed by Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin ("Moscow Without Mirrors," Op-Ed, April 1).
In his view, "enemies of reform go against their very nature, curbing credit in order to get the loan"; it would have been wiser for the I.M.F. to have waited until May and made sure of the Government's performance on credit and inflation control.
This judgment is alarmist.


Gtech Holdings Corp.(GTK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 26


Telephone &amp; Data Systems Inc.(TDS:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Keith Wiarda director of marketing and public relations.


UST Inc.(UST:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


McGraw-Hill Inc.(MHP:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Remaking Legislature Wins Praise
The Federal judge who declared Nassau County's government unconstitutional last year today praised the work of a commission designing a new county government.
The judge, Arthur D. Spatt of Federal District Court, also rejected Democrats' complaints that the panel had favored Republicans in creating districts for a new county legislature.


Harland (John H.) Co. (JH:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Criteria For Earnings
The listing of corporate earnings in Business Day now covers only companies that have at least $50 million in quarterly revenues.
Banking and insurance companies, which do not usually report revenues, will be included in the listing if their total assets exceed $2 billion.
In addition, for any company reporting a loss, the listing of corporate earnings will now show the loss per share.


CHRONICLE
A group of ALGER HISS'S friends and admirers celebrated his 90th birthday on Monday night.
Or was the party for his 89th?
No one seemed much concerned about such specificity at a gathering to celebrate the advent of Mr.
Hiss's 10th decade.
"My real birthday is Nov. 11," when he will be 90, Mr.
Hiss said, "but Joe gives this party when he wants to."
He was referring to his friend JOSEPH MACHLIS, a writer, who has given the party for 20 years in his East Side apartment, inviting a core group of some 70 people from the the worlds of arts and politics.


D.R. Horton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Used State Guns Wind Up In Bad Hands, Study Says
At least two dozen guns sold by New York State agencies since 1989 have been confiscated in criminal investigations in several cities, including one involved in two murders in Los Angeles, according to a legislative report released today.
The report by Republicans in the State Assembly raises new questions about the widespread practice by law-enforcement agencies across the nation of selling used and confiscated weapons to help finance the purchase of new, more powerful guns.


Idex Corp.(IEX:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Brian Gormley; Art Center Director, 49
Brian Gormley, executive director of the Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan, Conn., died on Thursday at Norwalk Hospital in Connecticut.
Mr.
Gormley, who lived in Norwalk, was 49.
The cause was cancer, said his brother, Bruce.


Gun Lobby Stoops to Tar Crimefighter
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to a recent advertising campaign, reported by you, attacking the President's crime bill and Representative Charles E. Schumer's record on crime (news article, April 13).
As Attorney General of the United States and a prosecutor for 15 years, I can state unequivocally that I have never met a public official more dedicated to fighting crime than Mr.
Schumer.


Off the Menu
Frazier to Meet and Greet
The dining options near Madison Square Garden are meager indeed.
But one that is getting a higher profile is the Cellar Grill in Macy's, just a block away.
It has a new celebrity partner, Walt (Clyde) Frazier, the former Knicks star, who comments on games for WFAN-AM radio.
He will show up now and then to help tend bar, seat customers and work the room.


PNC Bank Corp.(PNC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pipeline Blast Said to Show Flaws in Rules
The natural gas pipeline that exploded last month in Edison, N.J., was described at a Senate hearing today as starkly vulnerable to trouble -- a 36-inch main that, unnoticed to its owners, had been repeatedly damaged by at least two excavating machines and that, once it burst, could only be turned off by workers twisting a heavy valve 753 times by hand.
The disclosures, in testimony by senior officials from Federal and New Jersey agencies and the pipeline's owner, seem likely to reinforce public pressure on Congress to take action to prevent other accidents on the nation's network of pipelines, which increasingly appears to be governed by an inadequate patchwork of regulations.


Signet Banking Corp.(SBK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wolverine Tube Inc.(WLV:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr 15
Apr 8
Apr 16
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
6.8
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
212.5
213.8
224.2
Distillate stocks
102.1
100.1
97.7
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.9
6.4
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.8
1.6
Crude stocks
338.9
337.1
345.1
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
90.9
88.9
88.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Muslims Only Lose With 'Schindler' Ban
To the Editor:
Re "Islamic Nations Move to Keep Out 'Schindler's List' " (news article, April 7): As a Muslim writer-director I am absolutely disgusted with the banning of Steven Spielberg's film masterpiece "Schindler's List" in such countries as Malaysia for depicting the Jews as " 'stout-hearted' and 'intelligent,' while showing Germans as brutal."


A Top Athlete Repays a Debt
When she was a promising 14-year-old skier desperate for support, Picabo Street was given a critical training grant from the Women's Sports Foundation.
Yesterday, one downhill silver medal later, Street repaid the debt.
Along with more than two dozen other celebrity athletes, she offered a fantasy day of specialized training to anyone who donates $10,000 to the foundation, which has been at the forefront of advocating and financing expanded athletic opportunities for girls and women.
"Here I am finally able to give back," said Street, who appeared at a Manhattan news conference to help kick off the foundation's 20th anniversary membership and fund-raising drive.


Cambrex Corp.(CBM:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wabash National Corp.(WNC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Serbian Soldiers Seize Guns Held by U.N., Then Return Most
Defying a NATO ultimatum, about 50 Serbian nationalist soldiers seized 18 antiaircraft guns from a United Nations weapon-collection site near here today, then turned over most of the guns tonight after threats from Moscow.
The Serbian nationalists also reportedly began releasing United Nations military observers held hostage since last week after NATO aircraft carried out air strikes against Serbs attacking Gorazde.


One Mexican, One Honest Vote
The most critical challenge facing Mexico is to insure that the presidential election in August is considered legitimate.
A crisis of confidence in the election could lead to significant capital flight and pressure on the peso, putting economic recovery at risk.
If the election is deemed fraudulent, moreover, the implicit threat of renewed civil violence, present since the Zapatista rebellion in Chiapas in January, could materialize.


Review/Theater; Comedy of Mannerisms With Adults in Age Only
The two main characters in Quincy Long's deceptively zany comedy, "Shaker Heights," are an eccentric brother and sister who live on the edge of a golf course in the house they inherited from their father.
Buddy Humphreys (Steven Goldstein) is a nerdy, high-strung fussbudget who smokes pot all day and watches television.
For no apparent reason, he insists that he and his sister, Gertrude (Felicity Huffman), practice celibacy.
His austerity program also involves the ritual singing of Shaker hymns celebrating hard work, self-sacrifice and clean living.


G.E.'s Bright New Idea: A Seven-Year Light Bulb
A long-life household light bulb designed to last about seven years in normal use will soon reach the market, the General Electric Company's lighting division said yesterday.
The bulb, known in the industry as an E-lamp because it uses electronic controls, will go on sale in Europe within weeks and in the United States before the end of the year, G.E. said.


Short of Preparation Time? Try Juggling Chores
AN easy way to cut minutes off meal preparation is to move back and forth between washing, chopping and cooking chores.
While one part of the meal is cooking, work on other parts.
This is quite different from traditional meal preparation, which calls for prepping the ingredients in advance.
Combining the chores saves time, but it also requires juggling so that everything comes out on time.
With today's recipes is a game plan for that juggling.
Spinach Fettuccine With Lentil Sauce
16 ounces whole onion, or 14 ounces chopped ready-cut (3 1/3 cups)  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 clove garlic  1 cup red lentils  1 15-ounce can no-salt-added crushed tomatoes  1/2 teaspoon cinnamon  12 ounces fresh spinach fettuccine or linguine  1/4 cup fresh coriander
1 ounce Parmigiano Reggiano, 1/3 cup
1/4 teaspoon salt, optional  Freshly ground black pepper.
1.
Chop whole onion.
Heat oil in nonstick skillet over high heat.
Reduce heat to medium high, and saute onion until it begins to brown.
2. Meanwhile, mince garlic and add to onion.
3. Bring water for pasta to boil in a covered pot.
4.
When onion begins to brown, stir in lentils, tomatoes, cinnamon and 5 cups of water.
Bring to boil.
Reduce heat, cover and cook at a low simmer until lentils are soft but still hold their shape, about 15 to 20 minutes.
5. When water for pasta boils, add pasta, and cook according to package directions.
6. Wash, dry and chop coriander.
7. Coarsely grate Parmesan.
8.
Season lentil sauce with salt, if desired, and with pepper.
When pasta is cooked, drain and top with lentil sauce.
Sprinkle with coriander and cheese before serving.
Yield: 3 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 785 calories, 8 grams fat, 7 milligrams cholesterol, 375 milligrams sodium (before salting), 35 grams protein, 145 grams carbohydrate.
Spring Greens
5 ounces mixed spring greens -- assorted lettuces and watercress, and herbs like basil and oregano  1 tablespoon olive oil  1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar  1 teaspoon Dijon mustard.
1. Wash and dry greens and herbs. Tear greens into small pieces.
2.
In salad bowl, whisk oil and vinegar with mustard.
Add the greens and stir to coat well.
Yield: 3 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 55 calories, 5 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 45 milligrams sodium (before salting), 1 grams protein, 3 grams carbohydrate.
Game Plan: Prepare pasta and lentils through Step 4.
Prepare salad greens and make dressing.
Finish pasta and lentils.
Dress salad.


Collins &amp; Aikman Holdings Corp.(CKGPrA:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 29


Union Camp Corp.(UCC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Senate Approves a 4-Star Rank For Admiral in Tailhook Affair
After an emotional debate about whether the Navy's top admiral should pay for the Tailhook scandal with two of his four stars, the Senate agreed tonight, in a vote far closer than expected, to allow the admiral to cap a 38-year career with full retirement honors.
Pentagon officials, who had expected to slide Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d's rank and pension through the Senate without acrimony, were jolted into a day of frantic lobbying of male senators eager to show that they had grown in sensitivity in the two and a half years since the hearings on Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court.


Reflections On Flowers Of Gorazde
IN Riverside Park yesterday, as a small group gathered to remember the 51st anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, Ruth W. Messinger's thoughts turned to what was happening in Gorazde.
"Remembering what happened in Warsaw helps us express our outrage at what is now happening in Bosnia," said the Manhattan Borough President, referring to the siege of the Bosnian town.


John Nuveen Co. (JNC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dekalb Genetics Corp.(SEEDB:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Maastricht Journal; Drug Floodgates Open, Inundating the Dutch
These days, most clients at the Easy Cafe and the Smoky saloon, places where the police permit the sale of hashish and marijuana, are day trippers from across the border.
Some light up and linger in the half-dark.
Others buy little stashes and leave.
"The skunk is especially good," said a young German who had picked out the potent, locally grown marijuana.
He and his friend each bought the maximum allowance -- enough for about two dozen cigarettes.


Wheelabrator Technologies Inc.(WTI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


High Court Ruling Sharply Curbs Suits On Securities Fraud
The Supreme Court, sweeping aside years of lower court precedents as well as a longstanding policy of the Securities and Exchange Commission, today sharply limited lawsuits that charge accountants and other outside professionals with taking part indirectly in a securities fraud.
The 5-to-4 decision barred a common type of securities fraud suit, and was written so broadly as to cast doubt on the S.E.C.'s authority to bring such cases as well.


Taking On Corruption in Spain


Kroger Co. (KR:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Lift the Embargo
Just last month, the United States presided at the creation of a new Bosnian Federation.
Today, we are presiding at its destruction.
Our lack of resolve and loss of credibility make us accomplices to a Serbian conquest, not architects of a better settlement.
The peace process begun with hope in Washington is about to go to hell in Gorazde.
In the face of fresh Serbian outrages against civilians and United Nations peacekeepers, President Clinton has steered a neutral course among the "warring parties." The results are morally, politically and militarily indefensible, with disastrous consequences not just for Bosnia but for a stable, democratic Europe and the viability of NATO and the U.N. (Yesterday there were indications that he was reconsidering this course.)


Prices Rise for 30-Year Bond as Traders Reconsider Fed's Move
The ripples in the pond began to subside yesterday, one day after the Federal Reserve raised short-term rates for the third time this year.
But investors remain mindful that the central bank may have more stones to throw.
Short-covering in early trading helped to move Treasury prices up off their early lows, as the release of February merchandise trade data caused some economists to shave their estimates for economic growth in the first quarter of this year.


NATO Weighs a U.N. Plan To Strike Six Bosnia Sites
NATO officials today began urgent consideration of a request by the United Nations Secretary General to authorize air strikes in defense of all six United Nations-designated "safe areas" in Bosnia, with the allies divided on a step many of them fear would make NATO a combatant in the war.
With one previous strategic success, in forcing an end to the siege of Sarajevo by Bosnian Serb fighters two months ago, NATO military planners in Brussels began considering whether allied air power should be used to protect the five other "safe areas," including beleaguered Gorazde, from Serbian attack.


Torchmark Corp.(TMK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
The New York Stock Exchange tables in Business Day on Saturday and in the Business section on Sunday misstated Friday's prices for Johnson &amp; Johnson stock.
It closed at $39.25, up 25 cents for the day and $1.875 for the week.
The lowest trade on Friday was $38.875 and for the week was $38.50.


Public Service Enterprise Group Inc.(PEG:N) reports earnings for 12mos to Mar 31


Paine Webber Group Inc.(PWJ:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wary of Entrenchment in the Ranks, Colleges Offer Alternatives to Tenure
For his last nine years at the University of Missouri, Prof.
Nicholas DiMarco had tenure -- careerlong job security.
But recently, after moving to Webster University in St.
Louis, he gave up a chance for tenure in exchange for an unusually generous sabbatical allowance -- one semester with full pay every five years.
"I wanted to be able to do something outside of the academic setting, and more frequent sabbaticals meant more time to write," said Professor DiMarco, who teaches management at Webster, a small liberal arts university.


Continental Bank Corp.(CBK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Brooke Group Ltd. (BGL:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


This Finishing Stretch May Be Finishing the Knicks
It was the Knicks' biggest test so far this season, and they failed.
So after last night's alarming 87-84 loss to the Atlanta Hawks at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks' hopes of winning the Eastern Conference race look remote.
The Knicks, though, face other problems.
Anthony Mason was upset after the game because Pat Riley benched him for the entire second half.
Instead of using Mason, who was an integral part of New York's 15-game winning streak, Riley gave 19 minutes of playing time to Charles Smith, who continued to struggle with 6 points and 7 rebounds on 2-for-8 shooting.
So with three games left in their regular season, the Knicks must deal with a slump and bruised feelings before the playoffs begin.


Striped Shorts Allowed
Representatives of the embassies of the 23 nations sending teams to the World Cup will begin a mini World Cup tournament in Washington this weekend that will follow the same draw as their national teams.
The World Cup Diplomatic Tournament will begin Saturday and culminate in a championship match May 21 on the Ellipse behind the White House.


CHRONICLE
Is there no end to Kennedy weddings?
ROBERT F. KENNEDY JR., 40, and MARY RICHARDSON, 34, were married on Friday aboard a boat on the Hudson River near Stony Point, N.Y.
The ceremony, which followed a Roman Catholic Mass, was performed by Justice DONALD N. SILVERMAN of the New York State Supreme Court in White Plains.
Friends and relatives, including Mr.
Kennedy's two children, Robert 3d, 9, and Kathleen, 6, celebrated at a picnic lunch on the Shannon, the research vessel for Hudson Riverkeeper, an environmental organization for which Mr.
Kennedy is a lawyer.
He also works for the Natural Resources Defense Council and is a professor at the Pace University School of Law.


One Rwandan's Escape: Days Hiding in a Ceiling, a Bribe and a Barricade
An American friend of one of Rwanda's leading human rights workers had all but given up her colleague for dead in the massacres that swept Kigali, the Rwanda capital.
But the Rwandan woman managed a hair-raising escape by hiding in her ceiling and giving a soldier a $700 bribe.
The two friends were talking on the telephone on April 7 about the latest surge of violence in Rwanda when Monique Mujawamariya, the Rwandan, told her American friend, Alison DesForges, that she had to hang up because soldiers who had just shot and killed several of her neighbors were outside her door.


CNB Bancshares Inc.(CNBE:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Birmingham Steel Corp.(BIR:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Scott Paper Co.(SPP:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Refurbishing of Port Gets a BIG Helping Hand


Wells Fargo &amp; Co. (WFC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Teppco Partners L.P.(TPP:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Barkley to the Rescue as Suns Stall Sonics
Suns 122, SuperSonics 116
Charles Barkley took over the game in the final two minutes last night, leading Phoenix to a 122-116 victory over Seattle in the last regular-season meeting of the Pacific Division's two top teams.
Phoenix snapped visiting Seattle's five-game winning streak and extended its own victory streak to five.
The Suns also stayed even with San Antonio in the race for the No. 3 seed in the Western Conference.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about President Clinton's 1967 Mustang misstated the means by which it reached an auto show in Concord, N.C., in some editions.
It was carried by truck, not flown.


ZULU PARTY ENDS BOYCOTT OF VOTE IN SOUTH AFRICA
In a last-minute turnabout that immeasurably sweetened South African hopes for a peaceful birth of democracy, Zulu nationalist leaders agreed today to call off what had threatened to be a calamitous election boycott.
With only seven days remaining until the elections ending white rule, Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, grinning broadly alongside Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk at a news conference, announced that his Inkatha Freedom Party would be included on the ballots for a new National Assembly and for provincial legislatures.


KeyCorp (KEY:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Dance; A Hopper Named Peter Joins the Royal Hoofers
The English do have a thing about animals -- fortunately.
It would be inconceivable for the French, for instance, to present a ballet like "Tales of Beatrix Potter" as the Royal Ballet from London did over the weekend at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here.
Somehow, there is less than a Gallic ring to the idea of grown men dancing around a stage as Peter Rabbit or Squirrel Nutkin.
But there is a natural English charm to a ballet that features an oversize dollhouse in which two mice throw some crockery around.
In this ballet, the prima ballerina is a hedgehog in a gingham dress who picks her way daintily over a cleverly simulated hill-and-dale setting.


Making a Case for Antioxidants
IN the last few years, the word "antioxidant" has moved rapidly from the domain of chemists and biochemists into common use, at least among health-conscious Americans.
Millions of people concerned about preventing heart disease and cancer and staving off the ravages of age have turned to antioxidant nutrients like vitamins C and E, beta carotene and selenium as if they provided a protective cloak against both self-inflicted and environmental insults.
Medical researchers, too, have jumped on the antioxidant bandwagon, undertaking huge studies to see whether and how well antioxidants might guard against the damage wrought by such noxious influences as cigarette smoke, fatty diets, air pollution and a host of inescapable carcinogens.


Books of The Times; Explorers in the Wilds but With Modern Trends
The Cage
By Audrey Schulman
228 pages. Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill. $17.95
We are in the age of the ecological thriller: tales about humans who test their mettle and their morals in a wilderness threatened by technology and commerce.


Creative Director At Benetton Quits
Oliviero Toscani, the creative force behind advertising for the Italian apparel company Benetton, has resigned in a dispute about Colors, a magazine the company publishes.
But Benetton, seeking to play down the dispute, said it would not accept or reject his resignation.
Mr.
Toscani, 53, has created some of the most controversial images in recent advertising history, exploiting the shock value of photography and interest in social and political issues to reap enormous publicity for Benetton's clothing and retail stores.
Among the campaigns that drew outcries and outrage around the world were print ads showing actors dressed as a priest and a nun kissing, an AIDS patient at the moment of his death, multicolored condoms unfurled like balloons and the bloodied clothing of a sniper victim in Bosnia.


Ground Round Restaurants Inc.(GRXR:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


CLINTON SUPPORTS WIDER AIR STRIKES AGAINST THE SERBS
President Clinton today approved a proposal for the wider use of NATO air power to protect Gorazde and other United Nations-designated "safe areas" in Bosnia and Herzegovina, senior Administration officials said.
They said the President had directed his advisers to begin consulting immediately with European allies.
The United States will also explore ways to tighten economic sanctions against Serbia, which is supplying the Bosnian Serbs who are threatening Gorazde, the officials added.
The harder look at sanctions comes even as the Russians and Europeans are calling for a meeting with the United States and the United Nations on a timetable for eventually lifting them.


Integra Financial Corp.(ITG:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Grand Valley Gas Co.  (GVGC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Officer in Shooting Is Dismissed
William Lozano, the officer whose shooting of a black motorcyclist touched off three days of rioting here in 1989, was dismissed from the Police Department today for what the Police Chief described as breach of duty in the incident.
In a letter of dismissal, Chief Calvin Ross told Mr.
Lozano, "You intentionally discharged your firearm in the direction of the motorcycle, which resulted in the vehicle's operator being shot, the vehicle crashing and both the vehicle's operator and passenger expiring."


Mayor to Offer Plan to Assist Minority Firms
Three months after eliminating the most powerful part of an affirmative- action procurement program intended to aid companies owned by women and members of minority groups, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is expected to announce a new, more modest initiative today to aid the same companies and other small businesses.
Under the plan, to be administered by the Department of Business Services, city procurement officials are to solicit bids for all city work from small companies and from those owned by women and members of minority groups.
The work put up for bids is to include jobs that in the past have been deemed too small to warrant bids from more than five companies.


Food Notes
The Morels of Spring
Fresh morels are to spring as white truffles are to autumn.
But unlike truffles, which are imported from Italy, most of the morels on the market are gathered in this country, mainly in the Pacific Northwest, the northern Midwest and the Middle Atlantic regions.
They should be available for at least a month.
This year's crop of morels, which have deeply crinkled, pointy caps, has been limited by the amount of cold, wet, snowy weather.
Although prices can change from day to day, in many of the markets they are as low as they have been in previous years.
Look for small dark-brown morels for the most intense flavor.
White morels, which are actually beige, have a more delicate flavor.
Large morels are good when stuffed.


Gridlock at Enemy Net: Devils Storm Sabres and Even the Series
The Devils increased their playing tempo more than a notch or two.
They forechecked relentlessly.
They created traffic jams in front of Dominik Hasek, the superb Buffalo goaltender.
In other words, New Jersey put into tonight's game all the elements it had failed to establish in the opening game of their playoff series with the Sabres.
And it paid off. Just barely.


Equifax Inc.(EFX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Watsco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rwanda Forces Shell Stadium Full of Refugees
Rwandan Army troops in Kigali today shelled the national stadium, where more than 5,000 Rwandans had sought refuge, United Nations and Red Cross officials said.
At least 10 people were reported killed and hundreds wounded.
The stadium, where the refugees had been trapped for more than a week without food, was barraged by at least 30 artillery shells this morning, and shelling and small arms fire continued around the stadium throughout the day, the officials said.
The Red Cross said it had managed to evacuate 33 seriously wounded people from the stadium and distributed 25 tons of food there.


Yeltsin Warns Bosnian Serbs To Stop Assault on Gorazde
Furious that, despite all promises, the Bosnian Serbs have continued their fierce assault on the Muslim enclave of Gorazde, President Boris N. Yeltsin warned Serbian leaders today to stop their assault immediately or face grave consequences.
"Despite all the efforts of Russia, the United Nations and the world community, the conflict is on the verge of a very dangerous escalation," Mr.
Yeltsin said tonight.
"The leadership of the Bosnian Serbs should stop attacking Gorazde and leave the town."


Keane Inc.(KEA:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Backer Spielvogel To Change Its Name
Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, as expected, is changing its name to Bates Worldwide, effective in June.
"There's a great residual memory of Bates around the world as a global agency," Michael Bungey, the agency's chief executive, said last week.
"The reason we have a brand name is to signify we have a global operation." The names of several local offices have not been determined, he added, though likely choices are Bates U.S.A. or Bates BSB in America and Bates Dorland in Britain.


Justin Industries Inc.(JSTN:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Donohue Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Israel Seizes Hundreds of Arabs Linked to Militant Group
Israel struck back today at the Muslim group that recently carried out a series of lethal bus attacks, rounding up several hundred Palestinians linked to the Islamic Resistance Movement, known as Hamas.
It was the largest mass arrest in the occupied territories since more than 400 accused Islamic militants were seized in December 1992 and deported to Lebanon, an action that had also followed a burst of killings.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DANAHER CORP., Washington, extended its tender offer of $17.75 a share for outstanding shares of Mark Controls Corp., Skokie, Ill., to midnight Monday.
DREW INDUSTRIES, White Plains, said it planned to spin off its Leslie Building Products Inc. unit to shareholders on a share-for-share basis.


Review/Opera; Second Chances Aren't
P.
D.
Ouspensky, a crusty Russian philosopher who allied himself for a time with the mystic G. I. Gurdjieff but died awash in frustration and alcohol in 1947, may seem an odd prophet for the New Age.
Yet he is evidently so regarded: even his profoundly pessimistic novel, "Strange Life of Ivan Osokin," begun before he met Gurdjieff in 1915 and long available from Penguin on its literary merits, has migrated to Penguin's New Age line, Arkana.
So it is no surprise to find the tale fitted out with kicky music by Peter Gordon and a jaunty libretto by Constance Congdon in the opera "The Strange Life of Ivan Osokin," at La Mama.


Comdata Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Union Carbide Corp.(UK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Heroin Trail: A Record Deal for an Agent
There was a seasoned undercover agent, the authorities said, plus two drug dealers from Turkey, a multimillion shipment of heroin, a "bust" and a Brooklyn cabdriver who thought it was all a movie.
In the end, the authorities said it was the biggest sale of heroin ever to an undercover agent in New York City.
When the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration seized 23 kilograms (about 50 pounds) of pure Turkish heroin in midtown Manhattan on Monday, the sting capped a monthlong investigation that began with a tip from Ankara.
The Turkish National Police and the D.E.A.'s bureau in the Turkish capital told agents in New York City that dealers had smuggled a large load of heroin to the city and were looking for buyers.


Lebanon to Try 2 Iraqi Diplomats in Killing
Lebanon said today that it would try two Iraqi diplomats it believes were directly involved in the killing last week of an Iraqi dissident in Beirut.
Chief Public Prosecutor Munif Oweidat said the Iraqi cultural attache here, Mohammed Kadhem, and the commercial attache, Khaled Khalaf, "will be tried in Lebanon for killing Sheik Taleb al-Suhail al-Tamimi."


California Microwave Inc.(CMIC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


VWR Corp.(VWRX:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nixon's Condition Worsens After Stroke, His Doctor Says
A day after a stroke left him partly paralyzed and unable to speak, former President Richard M. Nixon took a turn for the worse and was in critical condition last night.
"One has to say that his prognosis is guarded," Dr.
Fred Plum, the chief neurologist at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, said at a news conference.
He said Mr.
Nixon suffered from "prominent brain swelling" and partial paralysis of the right side of his body, and that the next one to three days were critical.
Such swelling is common in stroke victims, Dr.
Plum said, and is considered serious.


Gun Sweeps: No Model for Cities
The danger to public housing tenants from marauding drug gangs and rampant gunfire is so obvious and seemingly so intractable that normally sensible public officials are grasping at unconstitutional means to deal with it.
The Chicago Housing Authority has resorted to wholesale police sweeps of entire apartment buildings.
And now President Clinton, in an otherwise sound program to increase public safety, offers a remedy of highly dubious constitutionality.
Two weeks ago, Judge Wayne Andersen in Chicago's Federal court declared unconstitutional the Chicago sweeps -- room-by-room weapons searches undertaken without search warrants or even probable cause to obtain warrants.
A moderate Republican appointed by President Bush, Judge Andersen agreed that the dangers to innocent citizens were real.
But he rejected the authority's defense of urgent necessity.
He noted that all of the sweeps occurred at least two days after violence broke out and that even in an emergency the searchers needed probable cause.


Coleman Propels Nets to 4th Straight
The 76ers, headed toward their third straight lottery, kept hanging around the playoff-bound Nets for most of the game tonight at the Spectrum until Derrick Coleman took matters into his own hands.
Coleman had a triple double -- a game-high 31 points, 12 rebounds and 10 assists -- to power New Jersey to a 115-110 victory, its fourth straight triumph.
The Nets remain in seventh place in the playoff race, a half game behind the Indiana Pacers, who defeated the Bullets tonight.


St. Paul Bancorp (SPBC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


York International Corp.(YRK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Merck Posts Solid Results For Quarter
Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, reported yesterday that earnings rose 10 percent on strong sales in the first quarter, the first full quarter since Merck acquired Medco Containment Services, the big managed-care drug distributor.
Merck said that after adjusting for the Medco acquisition, sales on a comparable basis rose 19 percent.


Don't Write Off Rwandan Violence as Ethnic; Uganda Shares Blame
To the Editor:
Uganda's army-dominated Government shares indirect responsibility for the deaths of Rwanda's President Juvenal Habyarimana, its prime minister, United Nations peacekeepers, President Cyprien Ntaryamira of Burundi and for plunging their two countries into uncontrolled ethnic violence (front page, April 7).


For Leetch, The Game Is Stops, Not Goals
Behind the stars of any team pursuing a championship, there must be a core of players who perform the seemingly insignificant tasks.
While Adam Graves, Mark Messier and Mike Richter have been applauded for their mighty contributions, they are not the only reasons the Rangers have coasted past the Islanders in the first two games of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Overshadowed but hardly overlooked is defenseman Brian Leetch, one of those core players who pounces on every opportunity and whose role is undignified, unheralded.
But Leetch is no less responsible for the two-game lead the Rangers will take into Nassau Coliseum Thursday night for Game 3.
He is one of the quiet laborers who gives the team substance.


Humana Inc.(HUM:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Betti H. Salzman; U.N. Worker
Betti Hellinger Salzman, who worked at the United Nations for 30 years, died on Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was in her 80's.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said Ann Phillips, a daughter.


Gun Lobby Stoops to Tar Crimefighter; Schools as Safe Havens
To the Editor:
Re "The House Tackles Crime" (editorial, April 13): You welcome the House of Representatives' interest in using school buildings as after-hours "safe havens" for at-risk youngsters, implying the Senate bill is silent on this point.
The community schools proposal originated in the Senate and was included in the Senate crime bill passed last year.


RESULTS PLUS
GYMNASTICS  Shcherbo Eliminated  The defending all-around champions Vitaly Shcherbo and Shannon Miller had mixed fortunes as the world gymnastic championships opened yesterday in Brisbane, Australia.
Shcherbo, winner of six gold medals at the 1992 Olympics, was the leading qualifier for the final of the men's floor exercises, but was eliminated from the pommel horse event when he slipped and fell from the apparatus.
Miller, 17, from Edmond, Okla., who won three gold medals at last year's world championship, was the fourth qualifier for the vault, but was only ninth in the uneven bars event. (AP) DIVING  New Citizen Qualifies  KongZheng Li, a four-time Chinese Olympian in his first performance as an American citizen, qualified for the men's 10-meter platform finals yesterday in the U.S.
Indoor Diving Championships in Minneapolis.
The 34-year-old Li also had two pupils -- Bryan Gillooly and Mark Ruiz -- reach the finals.
David Pichler of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., seeking the first platform title of his 10-year career, had 541.59 points to lead qualifying for Saturday's finals.
TENNIS  Agassi Exits Quickly  Andre Agassi was upset by Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia, 1-6, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday in the first round of the Monte Carlo Open.
"I felt like I was in control of the match and I was winning so handily," Agassi said.
"Then I got impatient." The actress Brooke Shields, who accompanied Agassi to Monte Carlo, was at courtside.(AP) YACHT RACING  Yamaha Leagues Ahead  The Japanese-New Zealand yacht Yamaha opened up a lead of 210 nautical miles yesterday over its nearest Whitbread 60 Class rival, Intrum Justitia, on the fifth leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race.
Yamaha also widened its overall advantage to 131 miles over Switzerland's Merit Cup, a Maxi-Class boat. (AP)


Provident Bancorp (PRBK:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Zilog Inc.(ZLOG:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Honeywell Corp.(HON:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Zuckerman to Sue Transit Agency and the City
Despite his decision on Monday to postpone closing on the sale of the New York Coliseum, Mortimer B. Zuckerman moved ahead yesterday with a court suit against the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the city, saying the contract was not valid because they had failed to satisfy contract conditions.
Mr.
Zuckerman, who has a contract to build a 2.1 million square-foot complex on the Coliseum property, said yesterday that he did not withdraw his suit because the postponement on Monday made no difference in the matters before the court.


2 Groups Draw Battle Lines Over School Board Election
Just as it did last year in New York City, Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition plans to immerse itself in next month's school board elections in Westchester County and champion candidates who believe that sex education should stress abstinence and that prayer should be allowed in classrooms.
In response, a group of 25 suburban civil liberties and reproductive- rights organizations banded together today to fight that effort, and it will, in similar fashion, inform voters of candidates' views on virtually the same themes.


Harris Corp.(HRS:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Looking to regain momentum, Levi Strauss dresses up Dockers men's wear with a new look.
EXECUTIVES of Levi Strauss &amp; Company, seeking to avoid being denuded in an increasingly competitive men's clothing market, are changing their Dockers in significant ways.
Since 1986, when the Dockers brand of casual men's slacks, shirts and shorts first appeared on store shelves, it has become one of the most successful apparel lines ever: achieving retail sales of $1.5 billion annually, ranking No. 1 in market share in men's sportswear and gaining particular popularity among freer-spending men from 25 to 49.


CHRONICLE
Senator GEORGE J. MITCHELL of Maine, the retiring majority leader, yesterday announced his engagement to HEATHER MACLACHLAN, the managing director of a sports marketing company in New York City.
Ms.
MacLachlan is a business associate and former girlfriend of ION TIRIAC, the volatile Romanian tennis player nicknamed "Count Dracula." The 35-year-old Ms.
MacLachlan has never been married.
Mr.
Mitchell, 60, was divorced in the late 1980's.
No date has been set for the wedding.


Excerpts From Supreme Court Opinions on Sex as Jury-Selection Standard
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in J.E.B. v.
T.B., holding that the Constitution prohibits discrimination in jury selection on the basis of sex.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote the majority opinion, which was joined by Justices John Paul Stevens, David H. Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Sandra Day O'Connor, who also wrote a concurring opinion.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy concurred separately.
Justice Antonin Scalia wrote a dissenting opinion that was also signed by Justice Clarence Thomas and Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, who also filed his own dissenting opinion.
FROM THE DECISION By Justice Blackmun
In Batson v.
Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986), this Court held that the Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment governs the exercise of peremptory challenges by a prosecutor in a criminal trial.
The Court explained that although a defendant has "no right to a 'petit jury composed in whole or in part of persons of his own race,' " . . . the "defendant does have the right to be tried by a jury whose members are selected pursuant to nondiscriminatory criteria." Since Batson, we have reaffirmed repeatedly our commitment to jury selection procedures that are fair and nondiscriminatory.
We have recognized that whether the trial is criminal or civil, potential jurors, as well as litigants, have an equal protection right to jury selection procedures that are free from state-sponsored group stereotypes rooted in, and reflective of, historical prejudice. . . .


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
CINCINNATI REDS -- Acquired Eddie Taubensee, catcher, from the Houston Astros for Ross Powell and Marty Lister, pitchers.
Placed Joe Oliver, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Saberhagen Gets a Reward for His Grit
When the night started, Bret Saberhagen looked shaky and vulnerable, like a pitcher due for a loss in a game gone wrong.
Everything the Padres hit -- even a groundout to the mound -- left an echo when it came off the bat.
Saberhagen allowed three runs on five hits in his first inning and probably would have been in a deeper hole had he not had a little luck.
He left the field angry, his head hanging down.


Ecolab Inc.(ECL:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Great Western Financial Corp.(GWF:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Roger Sperry, a Nobel Winner For Brain Studies, Dies at 80
Dr.
Roger Wolcott Sperry, an eminent student of the brain and a winner of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, died on Sunday in Pasadena, Calif.
He was 80 and lived in Pasadena.
The cause of death was a heart attack, following a degenerative neuromuscular disease, said Jay Aller, a spokesman for the California Institute of Technology, where Dr.
Sperry was the emeritus Board of Trustees Professor of Psychobiology.


Reviews/Music; Old, Old Orchestra Steps Out With a New Face
When the Dresden Staatskapelle went on its first concert tour, Shakespeare was 11 years old and Kepler had yet to discover the laws of planetary motion.
But the orchestra's current tour, in more mundane times, is no mere road trip.
It is the Dresden's first visit to the United States with its current music director, Giuseppe Sinopoli; it is also an attempt to reaffirm the orchestra's achievements as it adjusts to life in post-Communist Germany.
So there was a certain gravity to its first concert in Carnegie Hall on Monday night (its second was last night).
The curious thing was that though the Dresden is probably the oldest organized group of musicians in the world, it seemed to be seeking its voice.
In fact, under Mr.
Sinopoli's direction the orchestra sounded much less experienced and coherent than either the Vienna or the Berlin Philharmonic, merely striplings by comparison, which have also passed through town in recent months.


Executive Changes
CBS BROADCAST GROUP, New York, a unit of CBS Inc., promoted Joe Abruzzese, its senior vice president of network sales, to executive vice president of sales for the CBS Television Network; David Poltrack, its senior vice president of planning and research, was promoted to executive vice president, and George F. Schweitzer, senior vice president of marketing and communications, was promoted to executive vice president.
DONALDSON, LUFKIN &amp; JENRETTE SECURITIES CORP., New York, named Christopher Stanwich and George Marshman managing director and vice president, respectively.
They both previously held similar positions at Lehman Brothers, New York.
At Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, Mr.
Stanwich and Mr.
Marshman will join the corporate bond department and establish a global United States dollar floating-rate note desk.
RODMAN &amp; RENSHAW CAPITAL GROUP INC., Chicago, named John Hague executive vice president and director of internal audit.
ROHR INC., Chula Vista, Calif., named Laurence A. Chapman senior vice president and chief financial officer.
UNITED STATES BANKNOTE CORP., New York, appointed Ron K. Glover president and chief operating officer.


GTE Corp.(GTE:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


HIGH COURT BARS SEX AS STANDARD IN PICKING JURORS
The Supreme Court today essentially completed a revolution in jury selection by ruling that the Constitution's guarantee of equal protection bars the exclusion of potential jurors on the basis of their sex.
The 6-to-3 decision, written by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, extended to sex the same constitutional analysis that the Court applied to race in a landmark ruling eight years ago.
In that decision, Batson v.
Kentucky, the Court barred prosecutors from using their peremptory challenges to remove black jurors in criminal trials of black defendants.


First Tennessee National Corp.(FTEN:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"Discrimination in jury selection, whether based on race or on gender, causes harm to the litigants, the community, and the individual jurors who are wrongfully excluded from participation in the judicial process." JUSTICE HARRY A. BLACKMUN.  [ A1:1. ]


Keystone Financial Inc.(KSTN:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Critic's Notebook; Death Sings Along With Grunge
By one of those odd coincidences, three leading Washington grunge bands came to New York City the week after Kurt Cobain's suicide.
The Melvins, who were Mr.
Cobain's mentors in their shared hometown of Aberdeen, Wash., performed on Thursday night at the Limelight.
Mudhoney, from Seattle, appeared Friday night at Irving Plaza and opened on Sunday for Seattle's top band, Pearl Jam, at the Paramount.
None said anything directly about Mr.
Cobain's death.
But they didn't have to, because so many of their songs, written long before the grim fact, said it for them.
And atop Pearl Jam's amplifiers, there were votive candles.


Personal Health
THOSE who are looking for quick fixes for their bad health habits, or who simply want an inexpensive insurance policy, received disappointing news last week when a large study of lifelong smokers in Finland revealed no apparent protection against lung cancer or cardiovascular disease from daily supplements of the antioxidant nutrients vitamin E or beta carotene or both.
As if that were not distressing enough, the study also suggested that some harm might result from daily supplements of beta carotene, which was previously considered harmless in megadoses many times higher than those needed to prevent nutritional deficiencies.
Smokers who took 20 milligrams of beta carotene each day developed 18 percent more lung cancers than those who were given vitamin E or a dummy pill, and those who took 50 milligrams a day of vitamin E had a slightly higher rate (which was not statistically significant) of hemorrhagic stroke.


C.I.A. Head Sees More Spy Cases Ahead
The nation's top intelligence official said today that major espionage investigations are under way at the Central Intelligence Agency and elsewhere in the Government, prompted by information from the archives and former agents of defunct Soviet and Eastern European spy services.
R.
James Woolsey, the Director of Central Intelligence, said that "a large number of leads with respect to people who undertook espionage during the cold war, in this country and in other countries, in several parts of the American Government," is under investigation.


Westamerica Bancorp (WAB:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Timken Co.(TKR:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Three-Star Secret: It's the Ingredients
IT is not easy being hailed as the greatest chef of your generation -- diners arrive with magnifying glasses, looking for cracks.
But Alain Ducasse, 37, of the restaurant Louis XV in the Hotel de Paris in Monte Carlo, appears to take it all in stride.
In 1990, Mr.
Ducasse became the youngest chef ever to win three stars from the Michelin Guide.
And how did he do it?
The real gastronomic genius is apparently Mother Nature.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Senator Harry Reid's withdrawal from the race for Senate majority leader in favor of Senator Tom Daschle misspelled the first and last names of Mr.
Daschle's press secretary.
She is Ranit Schmelzer.


AIDS Mothers' Undying Hope
DOWNSTAIRS, the mothers of adult children with AIDS talked of doctors, drug trials and T-cell counts.
Upstairs, the mothers whose children had died of the disease talked of cremations, burials and patches on a memorial quilt.
When they were not talking, they were weeping, upstairs and downstairs, on those Tuesday nights in the small brick building in Greenwich Village.
The saddest nights were the ones just after a death.
Leaving the downstairs group, the grieving mother would climb a steep, narrow flight of stairs with a dim light at the top, to join the others.


Jail for Gorman Thomas
The former Milwaukee Brewers slugger GORMAN THOMAS was sentenced yesterday to 15 days in jail for drunken driving and bail jumping.
Thomas, 43, pleaded no contest in Waukesha County (Wis.) Circuit Court to bail jumping.
Thomas, who lives on Kiawah Island, S.C., has avoided Wisconsin since a warrant was issued for his arrest in 1992 after he failed to show up for a 10-day jail term for drunken driving.
District Attorney PAUL BUCHER then issued the misdemeanor bail jumping charge against him.


Daniel Rudman, 67; Studied Hormones and Aging
Dr.
Daniel Rudman, an endocrinologist and nutritionist who devoted his research to the well-being of the frail and elderly, died on Sunday in Froedtert Memorial Lutheran Hospital in Milwaukee.
A resident of that city, he was 67.
The cause was complications after brain surgery, according to the Medical College of Wisconsin, where he had worked since 1988.


Ohrenstein Will Give Up His Senate Post in Albany
After a 34-year legislative career that began with a crusade for reform and faded with a corruption scandal, Manfred Ohrenstein, the State Senate minority leader for 20 years, announced today that he would give up his seat at the end of the year.
The 68-year-old legislator said at a news conference in the Capitol this afternoon that he decided that "it was simply time to move on." He said he would remain active in Democratic politics on both the local and national levels and would continue to work at his Manhattan law firm, Ohrenstein &amp; Brown.


Compass Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Baldor Electric Co. (BEZ:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Safeway Inc.(SWY:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Pacific Telesis Group (PAC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tire Factory Shuts Doors In Dispute Over Safety
In an unusual legal tussle that temporarily threw 1,100 employees of an Oklahoma tire factory out of work, the owners of the plant abruptly closed it yesterday rather than follow a Labor Department directive to improve safety procedures there.
But tonight, after obtaining a judicial restraining order that for the moment blocked the directive from taking effect, the company reopened the plant and told its workers to report for the regular 11 P.M. shift.


Deposit Guaranty Corp.(DEPS:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BMC Industries (BMC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Le Cirque Turns 20, and Remembers a 1974 Price; For Those Looking for a Bargain, a Chance for World-Class People-Watching, Too
Marie Losciuto of Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, remembers the moment she heard that Le Cirque, a rococo haven for expense-is-no-object movers and shakers in Manhattan, was going to serve a three-course lunch for only $12.75 a person.
Faster than you can say "1" and "212," she had the telephone in her hand and was making a reservation.
The maitre d'hotel wrote her in for Monday at 11:45 A.M.
Mrs.
Losciuto, a 68-year-old retired apparel-industry sample maker, ordered the lamb.
Her husband had the veal.
For dessert, they both had the bread pudding.
"That, I've had elsewhere," she said.
"In England, they make a beautiful bread pudding. But I was really very impressed with this."


Tobacco Industry Tries A New Pitch: Openness
As Federal, state and local governments intensify their opposition to smoking, the tobacco industry has stepped up its public response in a strategy to show that cigarette companies are not the monsters that lawmakers portray them to be.
With newspaper advertisements to rebut claims that cigarettes are laced with extra nicotine, an unusual collaboration to disclose ingredients and easier access to officials for reporters, industry executives say they have adopted a more open and aggressive approach to gaining public trust.


TRW Inc.(TRW:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article on April 13 about health care, under the label "The Basics of Care: A Periodic Report on National Health Issues," referred incorrectly to people who have less primary and preventive care than those who are insured.
They are the uninsured.


Reebok International (RBK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fruit of the Loom Inc.(FTL:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sun-Starved Residents Revel in Warmth of One of First Sunny Days
From the sun-dappled fields of Rutgers University to Long Island's sandy North Shore beaches, winterworn residents of the New York area languished in the unabashed springtime of today, and spoke of redemption and rebirth after the trials of a punishing winter.
The temperature at Newark International Airport peaked at 86 degrees, while in Central Park the high was 84, well below the 1976 record of 92 but more than warm enough to have New Yorkers reveling in one of the first sunny days of spring.


METRO DIGEST
SERGEANT SHORTAGE HURTS SUPERVISION
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said that patrol officers are often inadequately supervised because their sergeants, the first line of defense against police corruption, are overwhelmed by paperwork and scattered thinly.
A1.
RECORD SEIZURE IN HEROIN ARREST
There was a seasoned undercover agent, two drug dealers from Turkey, a multimillion shipment of heroin, a "bust" and a cabdriver who thought it was all a movie.
In the end, the authorities said it was the biggest sale of heroin ever to an undercover agent in the city.
B4.


Bankers Trust and Citicorp Report Large Trading Losses
Traders at Bankers Trust and Citicorp bet wrong in world markets in the first quarter of 1994 -- a rough period for many investors -- and posted large losses in their trading activities for their own accounts, according to earnings reports released yesterday.
The specific numbers were not disclosed, but analysts estimated each bank's loss at about $150 million.
While Bankers Trust had confirmed market reports of trading losses, the large losses at Citicorp were a surprise.


Mellon Bank Corp.(MEL:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fibreboard Corp.(FBD:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Giuliani Says Lease for Tennis Center Expansion Is Under Review
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that administration officials were reviewing the long-term lease for the expansion of the National Tennis Center in Queens, which Mayor David N. Dinkins signed last year to keep the United States Open in New York City for at least the next 25 years.
Mr.
Giuliani has repeatedly criticized parts of the lease with the United States Tennis Association, which puts on the tennis tournament in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park each summer.
During the mayoral campaign and transition, he repeatedly urged Mayor Dinkins not to sign the accord, saying it would tie his and future mayors' hands for years.


Split Coalition In Japan Picks A New Premier
Leaders of Japan's ruling coalition settled today on Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata as the next Prime Minister but remained divided over policies to end the recession and reopen trade talks with the United States.
Mr.
Hata's selection was assured when his remaining rival, a former Foreign Minister, Michio Watanabe, withdrew.


Liberty National Bancorp-Ky.  (LNBC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Piano Debut, an Emerging Romanticism
Versatility was undoubtedly among the qualities for which Amir Katz won both the Casadesus International Piano Competition in Cleveland and the Maria Canals Competition in Barcelona, Spain, last year.
The pianist, a 20-year-old Israeli who studied in Tel Aviv and London, began his New York debut recital on Monday evening at Alice Tully Hall with an account of Bach's Toccata in D (BWV 912) that was so crisply articulated and clear-textured that a listener could reasonably have typecast him as a Classicist.
Yet at the end of the Bach, a Romantic undercurrent emerged in the form of a Mendelssohnian rhythmic bounce.
And a more thunderous variety of Romanticism prevailed in the rest of the program.
A Scriabin group was as misty and temperamental as the Bach was transparent.
Mr.
Katz seemed entirely comfortable with the heated chromaticism of the Poem in F sharp (Op. 32, No. 2) and the thick, wayward textures of both the "Black Mass" Sonata (Op. 68) and the Fantasy in B minor (Op. 28).
The music, though fully under control, retained its exploratory spirit.


Theater in Review
Teibele and Her Demon  Playhouse 91 316 East 91st Street Manhattan Through May 1 By Isaac Bashevis Singer and Eve Friedman; directed by Daniel Gerroll; set and lighting by Paul Wonsek; costumes by Tzili Charney; sound by Douglas J. Cuomo; production stage manager, D. C. Rosenberg; general manager, Steven M. Levy.
Presented by the Jewish Repertory Theater, Ran Avni, artistic director; Edward M. Cohen, associate director, in association with the 92d Street Y.


Strong Evidence in a Cancer Debate
A NEW carefully designed study, the largest of its kind to date, has found no evidence that breast cancer is caused by pesticide residues that accumulate in body fat.
The new finding, published in today's issue of The Journal of the National Cancer Institute, comes amid a heated debate about the possible role of environmental contaminants in causing breast cancer.
A recent report from the New York State Health Department found that women who had lived on Long Island in the vicinity of chemical plants were more likely than others to develop breast cancer after menopause.
This report, which has not yet been reviewed by other experts, did not establish a cause-and-effect relationship between chemical pollution and cancer.


Review/Television; A Victim's Family Visits South Africa's Morass
Amy Biehl was the 26-year-old Fulbright scholar who was stabbed to death by a mob last summer in Guguletu, a black township near Cape Town.
To her killers, Don Kladstrup reports on tonight's affecting edition of "Turning Point," she was a hated white face.
Their slogan: "One settler, one bullet!" In fact, she was an opponent of apartheid and an admirer of the African National Congress and had been working to prepare voters for the elections that are to be held next week.
The camera accompanies members of Ms.
Biehl's family on a visit to South Africa, in search of understanding, consolation, reconciliation.
There they meet black friends of their daughter, black political leaders including Nelson Mandela and black victims of white violence and oppression.
They are shaken by the conditions in the squatter camps into which millions of the country's blacks are crowded.


S3 Inc.
S3 Inc., a maker of specialized computer chips whose shares had traded at more than $20 as recently as November, saw its share price drop precipitously yesterday.
The company reported quarterly earnings that were below analysts' estimates.


INSIDE
Nixon's Condition Worsens The former President, partly paralyzed on his right side and unable to speak because of a stroke, was returned to intensive care.
His prognosis was called guarded.
Page A14.
Israel Arrests Militants
Israel arrested several hundred Palestinians linked to a militant group after a series of attacks, but the action did not appear to affect talks on Palestinian self-rule.
Page A7.
French War Crimes Verdict
The first Frenchman to be found guilty of crimes against humanity during World War II was sentenced to life in prison for ordering the execution of seven Jews.
Page A3.
Ellison's Second Novel
For 40 years after "Invisible Man" was published, there was one question: When would Ralph Ellison's second novel be published?
The answer is soon, maybe.
Page C13.
First Verdict in King's Suit
A jury ordered the city of Los Angeles to pay Rodney King $3.8 million in compensatory damages for his 1991 beating by officers.
It will now consider punitive damages.
Page A16.


First Security Corp.(FSCO:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Eating Well
SOMETHING very important was lost last week in the furor over the findings that certain vitamin supplements may not only fail to help, but may also hurt.
Buried in the report was the suggestion that a good diet may reduce the risk of chronic disease: a diet of nutrients from food, not pills.
The study set out to determine whether the antioxidants vitamin E and beta carotene, which converts in the body to vitamin A, reduce the risk of heart disease and certain cancers.
The subjects were an unhealthy population of 29,000 Finnish men over 50 with many risk factors: they were generally overweight, had used tobacco heavily and for long periods, and had high cholesterol levels and high intakes of fat and alcohol.


Thomas Ends on Injury
ISIAH THOMAS tore his Achilles' tendon last night in what was almost certainly the final National Basketball Association game of his career, a 132-104 loss to the Orlando Magic in Auburn Hills, Mich.
Thomas will go out as the Pistons' career leader in points, assists, steals and games played.


Albank Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Trade Gap Continues To Widen
The nation's trade deficit soared in February to its worst level in six years, as the United States, with a strong economy, went on a worldwide buying binge while its weaker trading partners bought less merchandise off American shelves.
The Commerce Department reported today that the trade deficit in goods and services was $9.71 billion in February, up sharply from January's imbalance of $6.64 billion.
The deficit in goods alone rose by one-fifth, to $13.89 billion, while America's traditional surplus in services like tourism, brokerage, investment banking, insurance and film rentals dipped about 11 percent, to $4.18 billion.


SPS Transaction Services Inc.(PAY:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Residential Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Woman, 74, Shot After Struggle in Her Garage
A 74-year-old woman who walked with a cane was pistol-whipped and shot yesterday in her garage on a quiet street in Whitestone, Queens, when she struggled with a man who robbed her and then escaped in her car.
Shot once in the stomach, the woman, Constance Vieira, lifted herself from the floor and crawled to a garage telephone to call for an ambulance.
After surgery at the New York Hospital Medical Center of Queens, physicians reported her condition as fair.


Standard Products Co.(SPD:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ackerley Communications (AK:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Book Notes
Almost Identical Twins
There is no doubt about it: In her recent novel, the Indian writer Indrani Aikath-Gyaltsen copied long passages from "The Rosemary Tree," a novel published in 1956 by the English novelist Elizabeth Goudge.
In fact, Ms.
Aikath-Gyaltsen's novel, "Cranes' Morning," (Ballantine Books) is shockingly similar to "The Rosemary Tree," identical in some parts except for certain cosmetic details.
For instance, Chapter 8 of "The Rosemary Tree" begins: "The morning dawned calm and lovely. From her bed Harriet could see the hills beyond the river, the woods and the sky." And Chapter 8 of "Cranes' Morning" begins: "The morning dawned calm and lovely. From her bed Vidya could see the hills beyond the river, the woods and the sky."


Corrections
An article on March 18 about Hillary Rodham Clinton's commodity trades misstated benefits that the Tyson Foods company received from the state of Arkansas.
Tyson did not receive $9 million in loans from the state; the company did benefit from at least $7 million in state tax credits, according to a Tyson spokesman. (The error was also reflected in an article on March 19 about President Clinton's defense of his wife's investments in an interview with news agency reporters; in an article on March 30 about the White House's disclosure of how much Mrs. Clinton had invested in 1978 in the commodities trades, and in an editorial on March 31.)


Rival Co.(RIVL:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


House Votes Tough Measures As It Starts Push on Crime Bill
House members took up a $17 billion anticrime bill in earnest today, decided it was too kind to criminals, then voted in droves for lifetime prison sentences and more prisons and against a measure they feared might slow executions.
Most notably, the lawmakers significantly expanded a popular proposal, dubbed "three strikes and you're out," which would impose lifetime prison terms on criminals with three convictions for major Federal crimes.


Regal-Beloit (RBC:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jets Sign Brian Hansen, Former Browns Punter
The Jets signed punter BRIAN HANSEN, an unrestricted free agent from Cleveland, yesterday.
The terms of the three-year contract were not disclosed.
The Jets put themselves in the market for a new punter when they decided not to retain LOUIS AGUIAR, their starter for the last two seasons.
Aguiar, who is also an unrestricted free agent, was criticized for his directional punting, in which kicks go out of bounds inside the 20.
The short punts did not endear him to Jets fans, but he said he was following the dictates of the special teams coach, AL ROBERTS, who was dropped in January.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.(OCF:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In School
Often in recent years the Cornell administration has tried improving racial and ethnic integration in its undergraduate dorms.
Cornell's West Campus has always been overwhelmingly white, while two-thirds of the minority students living in dorms are on North Campus.
This is by choice.
Incoming freshmen state their housing preference.
"I wanted a black residence," says Allison Myatt, a black freshman from Houston who lives on North Campus in an all-black dorm.


Inland Steel Industries (IAD:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Abbott Finds New Tormentor: Jay Buhner
Ken Phelps.
As two monstrous home runs soared beyond the left-field fence last night, the second as lightning flashed in the distance, the fans at Yankee Stadium had more than enough time for their trivia torture: Who was the stocky left-handed designated hitter who was supposed to make enough of a difference in the 1988 pennant race to send Jay Buhner away?


Towers Financial Head Faces New Charges
Steven Hoffenberg, the failed New York financier who is facing securities fraud charges in New York in connection with what prosecutors call a $450 million Ponzi scheme, was indicted yesterday by a Federal grand jury in Chicago on charges of looting two small insurance companies in Illinois in 1987.
The 13-count indictment, the latest in a string of legal troubles confronting Mr.
Hoffenberg and the Towers Financial Corporation, his bankrupt company, was announced by United States Attorney James B. Burns.
It accused Mr.
Hoffenberg "and others," who were not identified, with misappropriating $3 million from the United Fire Insurance Company and the Associated Life Insurance Company, both based in Des Plaines, Ill, and both now defunct.


Macy's Chief Stands by Plan
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that it would submit a revised plan of reorganization on April 29 as scheduled after dissident board members on Monday threatened to step in with a bid of their own for the bankrupt retailer.
A minority of the Macy board, led by Laurence A. Tisch, said that it was prepared to act if a reorganization plan valued the company below what they believed it was worth.
In reaction, Macy's chairman and chief executive, Myron E. Ullman 3d, said the majority of the board continued to endorse the principles of a Macy's plan presented in March.


La Quinta Inns (LQI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


VLSI Technology Inc.(VLSI:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Carolina Freight Corp.(CAO:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Supreme Court sharply limited lawsuits that accuse accountants and other outside professionals of taking part indirectly in a securities fraud.  [ Page A1. ]


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.(MNI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Public &amp; Private; Real Pain
It was not surprising, watching "60 Minutes" Sunday night, to learn that Andy Rooney had never heard of Kurt Cobain or the band Nirvana.
It was not surprising that Mr.
Rooney, who has made a career as a camera-friendly curmudgeon, took issue with ripped jeans and was perplexed by grunge.
And it was not even surprising that, speaking of Mr.
Cobain's suicide at the age of 27, Mr.
Rooney brought to the issue of youthful despair a mixture of sarcasm and contempt.
After all, that has long been the attitude their elders have brought to the pain of those far younger than they: in Mr.
Rooney's words, "What would all these young people be doing if they had real problems like a Depression, World War II or Vietnam?"


Wine Talk
POPULAR wisdom holds that California chardonnays don't last, and for the most part, popular wisdom is right on the dime.
Where chardonnay is concerned, anyway.
There are some glorious exceptions.
Joel Fleischman, an educator and fellow wine writer, was recalling a few such exceptions the other night.
Some years ago in St.
Helena, Calif., we took part in a tasting of 30-year-old chardonnays that were still in superb condition.


Death of a Writer
Ralph Ellison died last Saturday.
He was 80 years old and was trying to finish his second novel.
His first, "Invisible Man," has become one of those classics that must live with the disadvantage of being required in high school or college -- and described as "seminal" -- which means it is too often read out of duty and forgotten.
The novel, about alienation and being black in America, is a coming-of-age story, told through the eyes of a young black man adrift in America.
It remains one of the most important novels about race and the lives of black Americans ever written.


Can Master of Menace Master His Talents?
The message from a rap song on the back of Michael Moorer's black T-shirt was menacing and meant to incite:
"U Have the Right 2 Remain . . . Violent!"


Union Electric Co.(UEP:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ceridian Corp.(CEN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Balkan Update
Bosnian Serb soldiers outside SARAJEVO seized anti-aircraft guns from a United Nations-guarded weapons collection site yesterday and set them up near their barracks at LUKAVICA.
The Serbs began freeing United Nations military observers held hostage since last week, when NATO aircraft struck against Serbs attacking Gorazde.
Serbian artillery continued to attack the United Nations-designated "safe area" of GORAZDE.
In MOSCOW, President Boris N. Yeltsin warned Serbian leaders to stop the assault.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS; Times Company Profits Climb by 62% in Quarter
The New York Times Company reported a 62 percent increase yesterday in its first-quarter earnings, which rose to $17.7 million from $10.9 million a year earlier largely because of stronger results at The New York Times.
But the percentage increase per share was much smaller, with earnings rising to 17 cents, from 14 cents in the 1993 quarter, because there are more shares outstanding after the company's acquisition of The Boston Globe in late 1993 in a deal that mainly involved stock.
The company did not break out the contribution of The Globe to profits.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
At Newark Airport, I picked up a customer who comes from a small town in Tennessee.
During the drive to my office in Bayonne, he told me over and over again how cold and impersonal the New York area was, compared with the friendly and idyllic life found in Tennessee.
At the toll plaza at Exit 14A of the New Jersey Turnpike, the toll taker leaned out and asked how I was doing, how were the wife and kids, how had the house held up during the winter, etc., etc.
After we had exchanged pleasantries for several minutes I drove off.


New York Program to Catch Truants Needs Some Extra Muscle
To the Editor:
As a retired attendance teacher (truant officer), I applaud the recognition, albeit belated, of New York Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's staff of the relationship between truancy and delinquency (news article, April 7).


Northeast Federal Corp.(NSB:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline


UJB Financial Corp.(UJB:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New Judge Moves to Take Control of Youth's Custody Case
A New Jersey judge today ordered that the complex custody feud swirling around a 15-year-old Jewish boy be transferred to his court immediately from New York State.
Judge Birger M. Sween ruled that New Jersey Family Court was the proper forum to resolve the dispute between the parents of Shai Fhima Reuven and an Orthodox rabbi in Rockland County, N.Y.


Shortage of Sergeants Is Said To Hamper New York Police
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that New York City patrol officers are often inadequately supervised because their sergeants, the first line of defense against police corruption, are overwhelmed by paperwork and scattered too thinly.
Mr.
Bratton said in an interview that his view was based on his own observations and on a study prepared for him by a management consultant.
The Commissioner assigned the consultant to review the management structure of the department and the attitudes of police officers and brass.
Prepared as the current scandal surrounding corruption in a Harlem police precinct was about to unfold, the study concluded that the department's effectiveness was badly hampered by the attitudes of its members and that the internal investigative apparatus was stretched beyond its ability.


Swift Transportation Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Advanta Corp.(ADVNA:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rose Opts for N.B.A.
As expected, JALEN ROSE became the third member of Michigan's vaunted Fab Five to leave school early, announcing yesterday that he would skip his senior year to enter the National Basketball Association draft.
"I've been thinking about doing this for all my life," Rose, a point guard, said at a news conference in Ann Arbor, Mich.
"Now is the chance I have to do it. I'm going to make the most of it."
Another member of the Fab Five, JUWAN HOWARD, announced Monday that he would bypass his senior season to play in the N.B.A.
With the departure of Rose and Howard, only JIMMY KING and RAY JACKSON now remain from the all-freshman lineup that started for Michigan in the National Collegiate Athletic Association championship games in 1992. (AP)


Sports of The Times; Riley Goes By the Book: His Book
FOR one moment -- for just one stinking, hopeful, misguided second -- I entertained the notion that Pat Riley was losing it.
The pomade in his hair was losing its hold.
The crease in his slacks was losing its razor's edge.
He was flipping out.
He was being human.
It was a delightful prospect.
Three years of perfectly managed behavior -- all for a good cause, you understand: the Knickerbockers' winning The Big One for a richly deserving New York -- were being tempered by one wild, dark rage of bitter temper and brooding self-doubt.
I could only hope so.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.75
6.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.69
3.70
2.84
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.74
3.76
2.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.20
4.21
2.91
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.14
5.86
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.36
7.41
6.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.17
8.20
7.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.44
5.92
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Union Bank (UBNK:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Extra Picks For 2 Teams
The Philadelphia Eagles and the Arizona Cardinals were each granted an additional draft pick yesterday as final compensation for the loss last year of two free agents: Reggie White, who went from the Eagles to the Packers, and Tim McDonald, who jumped from the Cardinals to the 49ers.
The Eagles, who have the 14th pick in Sunday's draft, were given a special 29th pick at the end of the first round.
The Cardinals, who have the 10th pick, were awarded the 65th choice over all.


An Industry Group Hires a New Chief
The Association of National Advertisers has hired a longtime marketing executive to succeed DeWitt F. Helm Jr. as president and chief executive, effective on May 1.
The board of the association selected John J. Sarsen Jr., 52, at a meeting last week in Washington.
His appointment comes nearly a year after Mr.
Helm unexpectedly disclosed that he would resign the position he had held for 10 years.
Since Mr.
Helm left in November, his duties have been handled on an interim basis by Harry E. Davis, a former chairman of the association, which represents the nation's consumer-product marketers.


Mark Stonewall's 25th
To the Editor:
William Safire's "Anniversary Waltz" (April 14) omits another important anniversary of events that occurred, as will the commemoration, in New York, unlike the Normandy invasion, the Tiananmen Square massacre or the moon landing.
I refer to the Stonewall Rebellion, which launched the modern lesbian and gay liberation movement 25 years ago this June 28 in Greenwich Village.
This June the Stonewall anniversary will be commemorated with the world's largest amateur sporting competition, the Gay Games, and with what may be the largest demonstration ever held at the United Nations.
THOMAS M. KEANE  Stanford, Calif., April 14, 1994


Northern Trust (NTRS:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fore! Tour Is in Need Of New Zing and Boom
With roughly one-third of the 1994 season already gone, a troubling trend has developed on the PGA Tour.
Most of the talented young American players are missing in action, either injured or uninterested or, perhaps, both.
We have endured spring without Fred Couples, Paul Azinger and Phil Mickelson -- all waylaid by physical problems.
Payne Stewart has decided to absent himself for several weeks to recover his motivation.
John Daly has played poorly since teasing us with a comeback debut in early March, when he tied for fifth at the Honda Classic.
Davis Love 3d is foundering, a man in search of misplaced promise.
Corey Pavin hasn't threatened since winning at Los Angeles in February.


Chemical Waste Management Inc.(CHW:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lee Enterprises (LEE:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sweet Settlement in South Africa
The deal struck Tuesday in Pretoria has mercifully removed a hazardous roadblock to a democratic transition in South Africa.
In return for face-saving concessions, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi and his Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party will now take part next week in the country's first election open to candidates and voters of all races.
This substantially eases but does not eliminate the threat of further bloodshed, especially in Natal Province, the Zulu stronghold.
Mr.
Buthelezi had demanded but did not get a postponement of the April 26-to-28 vote.
He did obtain a promise from President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela to preserve the legal position of the Zulu King, Goodwill Zwelethini, and to have foreign mediators consider some measure of future autonomy for KwaZulu, a tribal homeland that legally disappears after the election.


Did Ralph Ellison Leave a 2d Classic?
"Invisible Man" was published in 1952, won the National Book Award a year later and propelled its author, Ralph Ellison, to the front rank of 20th-century American writers with frightening velocity.
Small wonder then that for the next 40 years Mr.
Ellison found himself, in virtually every interview, fending off an inevitable question: When will the second novel be finished?
This was a question that Mr.
Ellison, who died on Saturday at the age of 80, deflected with a laugh or, annoyed, refused to discuss.
The real answer, in recent years, was soon, much sooner than anyone outside Mr.
Ellison's close associates suspected.


Jefferies Group Inc.(JEFG:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Reliance Electric (REE:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sprint Corp.(FON:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Hangar's Flight Into the Future


Threatening Waters of Spring


HBO &amp; Co. (HBOC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chrysler Profit Surges to $938 Million
The Chrysler Corporation said today that it earned record profits on record revenues in the first quarter as sales of pickups, mini-vans and sport utility vehicles soared.
Narrowly exceeding the expectations of increasingly bullish auto industry analysts, Chrysler's earnings jumped to $938 million, or $2.55 a common share, up 77 percent from the quarter a year ago, excluding one-time charges.


Goals and Goaltenders Worrying the Islanders
Over in Rye, the Rangers met, perhaps to gloat, but certainly not to practice.
As Don Maloney, currently the harassed and embarrassed general manager of the Islanders, observed, his former club had kicked off this playoff series against the Islanders by playing a pair of flawless games.
What was there left for them to practice, Maloney wondered aloud before gritting his teeth, squaring his shoulders, and venturing into the sepulchral Islander locker room to find out just what his own team intended to do about regrouping from its matching pair of 6-0 defeats.


Wrong Way to Control Spending
An "entitlement cap" -- putting a tight ceiling on spending for huge programs like Social Security and food stamps -- has been approved by the Senate in an amendment now before House-Senate conferees.
Though non-binding, the vote is nonetheless important because the idea is gathering political momentum.
It is likely to come up for a vote in the House later this year and be reviewed by a bipartisan commission that will report to the President by Dec. 1.
The impetus for the cap is understandable.
Entitlement spending is the fastest-growing part of the Federal budget.
But a cap is ill advised.
The one embraced by the Senate would apply a hatchet where a scalpel would do better.
The misdirected whacks would knock out health-care bills that promise universal coverage and needlessly threaten programs that are not pushing up the deficit.


VF Corp.(VFC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Carlisle Cos. (CSL:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


N.F.L. Is Out to Get the Quarterback
A year ago, the first two players chosen in the National Football League draft were quarterbacks -- Drew Bledsoe by the New England Patriots and Rick Mirer by the Seattle Seahawks.
Both became starters, which is unusual for rookies, and both made excellent progress week by week.
The N.F.L. draft comes around again Sunday and Monday, and again two quarterbacks -- Heath Shuler of Tennessee and Trent Dilfer of Fresno State -- are ranked near the top.
Both will probably be gone by the fifth or sixth pick of the first round.
The next quarterback may not be drafted until the third or fourth round.


Don't Write Off Rwandan Violence as Ethnic
To the Editor:
Clifton R. Wharton Jr., in "The Nightmare in Central Africa" (Op-Ed, April 9), talks about "tribes and cultures whose only common heritage, unless held in check by a brutal dictatorship, is warfare against one another." "There may be some truth to this view," he says, and goes on to cite the "ancient hatreds  [ that ]  . . . also lie behind the struggle in several former Soviet republics and of course in Bosnia." This is a deplorable view that is not only faulty but dangerous.


Washington Mutual Savings Bank (WAMU:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Theater in Review
American Enterprise  Playhouse 46 at St.
Clement's Church 423 West 46th Street Clinton Through Saturday By Jeffrey Sweet; original songs by Mr.
Sweet; incidental music and vocal arrangements by Michael Vitali; directed by Patricia Birch; set by Richard Finkelstein; costumes by Brent Griffin; lighting by John McLain; sound by Matt Elie; additional vocal arrangements, Betsy Riley; musical director, Ms.
Riley; production stage manager, Heather J. Hamelin.
Presented by the New York State Theater Institute, Patricia Di Benedetto Snyder, producing director.


Poor and Black Patients Slighted, Study Says
Seriously ill Medicare patients who are black and poor receive worse care than other equally sick Medicare patients in every type of hospital in America, a new study has found.
But the disparity is far less serious in big city teaching hospitals, where a majority of elderly black Medicare patients go for treatment, the researchers said.
Because those hospitals provide better care than other types of hospitals, poor black patients paradoxically end up getting care that is just as good as that provided to other groups over all.


Duper Joins C.F.L.
MARK DUPER, a wide receiver for 12 years in the National Football League before being cut last year by Miami, Cincinnati and Philadelphia, has signed a contract to play for the Canadian Football League's Shreveport Pirates, the team announced yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed. (AP)


Theater in Review
AmeriKa  La Mama 74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday Inspired by Franz Kafka; text by Maria Guevara, Michael Carley, David Letwin, Phil Pardi, Holiday Reinhorn and Rainn Wilson; directed by Ms.
Guevara; music by Ralph Denzer; sets by Chris Muller; costumes by Constance Hoffman; lighting by Jennifer Tanzer; production manager, Bruce Kennedy; stage manager, Michele Minnick.
East Coast Artists, presented by LaMama E.T.C.


Banc One Corp.(ONE:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AES Corp.(AESC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Empire State Corp.(FES:A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Loyola Capital Corp.(LOYC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Notification in Implant Case
A Federal district judge today announced a notification program intended to reach more than a million women around the world who have received silicone breast implants and may be eligible for compensation under a proposed $4.25 billion settlement with implant manufacturers.
Speaking at a news conference here, the judge, Sam C. Pointer Jr., said that the program's purpose was to identify implant recipients so that they could receive information on the terms.


General Public Utilities Corp.(GPU:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Toys Now, Computers Tomorrow?
Will video-game machines be the supercomputers of tomorrow?
Or, put another way, will Microsoft's software hegemony be supplanted by Sonic the Hedgehog software?
Questions of that sort are troubling some computer designers and executives, who are wondering whether the personal computer industry may be ripe for a fall -- soon to be overtaken by $250 video-game players and computerized boxes for the television set-top.
Consumer devices that Nintendo, Sega and Sony plan to introduce over the next year will outstrip the processing power of the fastest desktop computers from Apple and I.B.M., and the speediest personal-computer chips from Intel and Motorola.


Group Sues School Districts Over Civic Service Programs
Questioning the constitutionality of public school programs that require students to perform community service, a libertarian group filed suit today against a Westchester County school district that requires high school students to perform 40 hours of such work to graduate.
Public school districts in about half the states have set up such programs, saying they foster a sense of civic duty and provide students with practical experience in a variety of fields.


E. B. McMenamin, Administrator, 82
Edward B. McMenamin, a retired administrator for the Federal Government and in the private sector, died on Monday at a Manhattan apartment where he and his wife were staying.
A former resident of Manhattan, he was 82 and lived in Bridgehampton, L.I.
He had been in declining health for three years, said Joan Stitt McMenamin, his wife of 41 years.
She retired in 1992 as headmistress of the Nightingale-Bamford School in Manhattan.


Wheeling-Pittsburgh Corp.(WHX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ferro Corp.(FOE:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Market Place; A victory for those who 'aid and abet' in securities fraud cases.
ENFORCING the laws against securities fraud got harder yesterday.
In a decision that stunned many securities lawyers, the Supreme Court threw out what had been a settled concept -- that people who merely "aid and abet" securities fraud can be held liable in private civil lawsuits.


Health Management Associates Inc.(HMA:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sovereign Bancorp Inc.(SVRV:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lakehead Pipe Line Partners L.P. (LHP:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Teen-Ager Resigned to Singapore Caning
The father of the 18-year-old American sentenced to be flogged here for vandalism said today that his son had given up all hope of avoiding the punishment, even though the teen-ager continues to insist that he is innocent.
"He has no hope at all," the father, George Fay, an Ohio businessman, said in a telephone interview from Ohio.
"He's prepared. He told his mother in the prison today that he's prepared for the caning."


Times Reaches Tentative Accord With Guild
The New York Times reached a tentative contract agreement yesterday with its biggest union, the Newspaper Guild of New York.
If ratified by the guild, the contract would leave The Times with contracts through the year 2000 with all of its 12 unions.


Environmental Factors to Be Calculated in G.D.P.
In a bow to Earth Week, the Commerce Department announced today that it would publish in early May the first results of its long-gestating effort at environmental accounting: a "green" tabulation of gross domestic product.
The project, believed to have been first proposed in the Ford Administration and formally under way since 1992, seeks to show the interaction of the economy and the environment and to ultimately allow better assessment of the country's standard of living and its sustainability.


Frank Talk by Clinton To MTV Generation
Put President Clinton in a room with 200 teen-agers and you learn some intriguing things:
The President's favorite brand of running shoe is New Balance.
He has never stopped Chelsea from wearing a specific outfit to school, although the two have "had a lot of general conversations about clothing."


Rodney King Is Awarded $3.8 Million
A jury told the City of Los Angeles today to pay Rodney G. King $3.8 million in damages in compensation for his beating by police officers in 1991.
In the next phase of Mr.
King's civil suit, to begin immediately, the jury will hear more testimony to determine whether any of 14 current and former police officers who were at the scene are liable for punitive damages in addition to today's award.


Senate Minority Leader Decides to Step Down


Theater in Review
Hide Your Love Away The Ballad of Brian Epstein  Actors' Playhouse 100 Seventh Avenue South, at West Fourth Street Greenwich Village By Kevin Scott; directed by Leonard Foglia; set by Michael McGarty; costumes by Markas Henry; lighting by Betsy Finston; sound by One Dream Sound; dialect coach, Ralph Zito; production stage manager, Bruce Greenwood; executive producer, Steven M. Levy.
Presented by the Eclectic Theater Company, in association with the Liverpool Production Company and Peter Breger.


Frenchman Convicted of Crimes Against the Jews in '44
Almost 50 years after he ordered the execution of seven Jews while he was serving in a pro-Nazi militia, Paul Touvier today became the first Frenchman to be found guilty of crimes against humanity during World War II.
Now a frail 79-year-old suffering from prostate cancer, Mr.
Touvier was sentenced to life imprisonment.
He showed no visible emotion as Judge Henri Boulard announced the verdict, which the 12 members of the jury reached after five and a half hours of deliberation.


AT DINNER WITH: Katarina Witt; Firepower Off the Ice
The moment arrived during dinner at our table for two when I looked across to Katarina Witt and said, "Katarina, tell me, what kind of man do you like?"
The figure skater, who has captivated judges and spectators alike with her both sizzling and poignant programs, met my eyes.


Home Shopping Network (HSN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rohm &amp; Haas Co.(ROH:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Film; The Bergmans Are United in a Family Project
"Sunday's Children" was shown as part of the 1993 New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 3, 1993.
The film opens today at the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
"Sunday's Children," a new Swedish film, is a gorgeous, richly poignant memoir written by Ingmar Bergman but directed by his son Daniel as his first feature.


Toys Now, Computers Tomorrow?
Will video-game machines be the supercomputers of tomorrow?
Or, put another way, will Microsoft's software hegemony be supplanted by Sonic the Hedgehog software?
Questions of that sort are troubling some computer designers and executives, who are wondering whether the personal computer industry may be ripe for a fall -- soon to be overtaken by $250 video-game players and computerized boxes for the television set-top.
Consumer devices that Nintendo, Sega and Sony plan to introduce over the next year will outstrip the processing power of the fastest desktop computers from Apple and I.B.M., and the speediest personal-computer chips from Intel and Motorola.
Most personal computer makers scoff at the notion that they could be unseated by such consumer gadgets.
'The personal computer industry isn't going to slow down any time soon,' said Bob Metcalfe, publisher of Infoworld, a personal computer newspaper. 'They're all in the business of slitting each others' throats while performance skyrockets.'
But some industry experts recall the hubris of the big mainframe computer companies 15 years ago.
In those days, most mainframe giants dismissed the PC as a hacker's toy unsuitable for business use -- only to watch brash new personal computer makers win the hearts and desktops of Corporate America and a college dropout from Seattle named Bill Gates ascend to the industry summit.
Most mainframe makers have since failed or withdrawn from the field, and the remaining leader, the International Business Machines Corporation, is making money from its PC's while trying to wring profits from a mainframe business that seems to be drying up quickly.
But now, personal computer makers may be no more able to take advantage of the fastest computing technologies than were mainframe computer vendors a decade ago.
'I'm struck by the quandary personal computer makers are in,' said Howard Lincoln, chairman of Nintendo of America.
His company plans next year to offer its $250 Project Reality video-game player, which will surpass the computing performance of even the most powerful personal computers.
Besides games with interactive, TV-quality video and sound, the Project Reality player will also act as a communications device, over cable television networks.
And in terms of its ability to manipulate large amounts of data, the Project Reality player will be able to operate more powerfully than the original Cray 1 supercomputer, which astounded the computing world with its speed in 1976.
'If you put something this powerful and this cheap in the market,' Mr.
Lincoln said, 'what happens to everybody else?' Applications Raised Demand
Demand in the personal computer industry was heightened by the creation of new applications -- spreadsheets, word processing, electronic mail; it did not simply take over old mainframe functions like payroll processing and customer billing.
And now consumer electronics companies, which have already sold millions of video-game machines, are developing systems that they hope will soon offer a broad range of consumer applications for which personal computers hold no particular edge.
And this home market is potentially much larger than the $66 billion annual market for personal computers.
'This is the last frontier,' said Jim Clark, the former chairman of Silicon Graphics Inc., a leading maker of powerful computer-graphics work stations that can cost $10,000 or more.
Mr.
Clark recently left Silicon Graphics to form his own company, which is seeking alliances with consumer electronics companies to make computerized devices that would sell for a few hundred dollars. 'We're talking about creating true consumer computers,' he said.
These new consumer machines go beyond being faster and cheaper to represent a much more fundamental transformation.
'The trend is for the fastest to also be the smallest and cheapest,' said John Moussouris, cofounder of Microunity, Inc., a Silicon Valley chip maker. 'This will continue to disrupt the computer industry to a greater degree than the auto disrupted the horse and buggy, or the calculator disrupted the slide rule.'
Personal computer executives deny that the new class of video-game machines and set-top 'interactive TV' players will be a threat, contending that they are highly specialized machines without the flexibility of the personal computers and without the range of software applications that suits PC's for a variety of professional, home-office and leisure activities.
But the new technology renegades say that increasingly, like its mainframe predecessor, the personal computer industry is too bound to its huge installed base of products to make radical shifts toward new technology.
Indeed, today's personal computer industry is even more wedded to a narrow set of 'architectures' than was the mainframe business.
There were seven competitors to I.B.M. in the 1960's and 1970's; today there are only two basic personal computer designs: machines based on Intel chips and Microsoft operating systems, and machines based on Apple Computer designs.
Today's consumer-oriented computing devices, by contrast, are free to follow where computing technology wants to lead.
In the past computers were used almost exclusively for calculation and control.
Now a new wave of computing is shifting the focus to communications.
Supercomputing power is being harnessed to make home machines simple to use and to make it easier for people to communicate with each other through video, sound and data.
Long Learning Curve
That will represent a departure from the personal computer, which despite great strides toward 'user friendliness,' still requires considerable time and effort to learn to use.
'The conventional computer industry is going to be the funky, behind-the-times part of the business,' said Charles Ferguson, a consultant based in Cambridge, Mass.
He predicts that the transition will present a new opportunity for Asian electronics giants. 'The design and software will be overwhelmingly America,' he said. 'But it's also going to be the Japanese and Koreans who will manufacture this stuff.'
Also helping drive computing into the consumer-products realm is the inexorable trend in chip technology.
For more than three decades, the number of transistors squeezed onto a single silicon chip has doubled approximately every 18 months.
In the 1970's the world's fastest computers had more than 100,000 chips; by the end of the 1990's the fastest machine will be on a single chip.
All of this can make for strange chip fellows.
Several years ago, when designers at Kendall Square Research, the supercomputer maker, set about manufacturing their newest processor chip, they chose the same Sharp Electronics factory line in Japan that produces the control chips for the Sharp Wizard 'personal organizer' which sells for less than $500.
And currently, looking to stay at the top of the supercomputer race, Cray Research has secretly turned to Microunity to provide microprocessors for its fastest massively parallel supercomputers.
But Cray will have to share the chips with makers of television set-top boxes and videophones.
Microunity's superchip is planned to execute a billion operations a second, more than 10 times Intel's fastest Pentium processor.
On the software side, economics seems to be pulling toward the consumer market.
In 1993 Sonic the Hedgehog II, the standard bearer for Sega's line of home video games was a $400 million software best seller, dwarfing almost all of the most popular business software titles for personal computers.
Does this mean that the likes of NBA Jam will be the 'killer application' of the 90's, as Lotus 1-2-3 was for personal computing in the 80's?
It is too early to say.
But certainly, big money-makers like these are providing the financial wherewithal for creating a new industry, said Bruce Lupatkin, a financial analyst at Hambrecht &amp; Quist, a San Francisco-based investment firm.
'The next 10 years in computing,' Mr.
Lupatkin said, 'are going to be driven by automating the consumer experience.'


WMX Technologies Inc.(WMX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COLLEGE LACROSSE
Syracuse
A crowd of 8,854 in the Carrier Dome last night saw the Orangemen hand Loyola its first defeat with a convincing 16-10 victory over the Greyhounds from Baltimore.
Loyola had been the only remaining unbeaten team in Division I and was ranked No. 1 in the Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association poll.


1 of 2 Boys in Brick-Throwing Case Is Released
A police officer who was hit in the face with a brick in Queens remained hospitalized yesterday as one of two boys who were charged in the Monday attack was released from jail.
Julio Esteves, 14, who investigators say threw the brick, was held last night and will face charges of assault and reckless endangerment, and will be prosecuted as an adult, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a spokesman for the Police Department.
He said Mr.
Esteves's cousin, Jason Rivera, 15, was released and would not be prosecuted.


Rebound for Broadcast TV; Cable Viewership Is Steady
The three big broadcast television networks have concluded their strongest season since cable television began to cut significantly into the broadcast audience in the early 1980's, network executives said yesterday.
The overall share of the audience controlled by CBS, ABC and NBC grew slightly, with no growth in the share of audience that was watching cable channels over the same period -- Sept. 20 through Sunday night.


Hawaiian Electric Industries (HE:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


8 More Homers at Boston's Flyaway Park
Red Sox 13, Athletics 5
Is it the wind, or the warm weather?
Is the ball different?
Is the pitching lousy, or are the hitters better?


Couple in Hoax: Strangers Even at Home
In this remote French-speaking village, where there is one bar, one general store, one church and 650 souls, New York is viewed as a place where it would be easy to get lost.
And so people here have not seemed particularly surprised that Joseph Bales and Helene Lemay went to New York to try to hide the death of their baby by making up a kidnapping hoax.
Certainly, it would have been difficult to keep such a secret in St.
Romain, a 3 1/2-hour drive from the nearest major city, Montreal.
"Everybody sees things, knows everyone," Normand Tremblay said, speaking through an interpreter.
Mr.
Tremblay is a forest worker who lives across a muddy ditch from the two-story cinder-block house where Mr.
Bales and Ms.
Lemay had lived for nearly four years.
Odd Jobs and Nutrition Courses
Mr.
Bales, 33, who did odd jobs, and Ms.
Lemay, 31, who gave correspondence courses in nutrition, were viewed by their neighbors as a strange and secretive pair.
While most people here are constantly visiting one another's houses, they kept to themselves.
"We were the closest people to them, but we didn't know them," said Marie-Michele Saint-Jean, a retired teacher who lives up the road from the house the couple had rented at the edge of a field that is still frozen at this time of year.


The Pop Life
The Nevilles Go Home
The Neville Brothers have just released a new album, "Live on Planet Earth" (A&amp;M), their first live recording in more than a decade.
And they're tuning up to lead off their hometown's 25th annual New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival on Friday.
They will share the stage with the South African musicians Hugh Masekela and Miriam Makeba and the pop-reggae group Third World.
The brothers, Art, Charles, Aaron and Cyril, are to roll into New York on June 2 to perform at Summerstage in Central Park.


What Winter?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SOUTH AFRICA BOYCOTT CANCELED  Zulu nationalist leaders in South Africa called off a boycott of the first all-race elections, greatly increasing hopes for a peaceful transition to democracy there.
A1  CLINTON BACKS BOSNIA MOVE  President Clinton supported a proposal to broaden the use of NATO air power to protect United Nations "safe havens" in Bosnia.
A1


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Michigan National Corp.(MNCO:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Stocks End Day Mixed; Dow Off 0.60
In seesaw trading and with heavy volume, the stock market closed mixed yesterday as traders persuaded themselves that another rate increase by the Federal Reserve Board was imminent.
Traders had some basis for believing so.
In a California speech reported around 1 P.M., Eastern time, yesterday, Robert Parry, president of the Federal Reserve Bank in San Francisco and a proponent of higher rates, said, "We still have a way to go" in fighting inflation.


Universal Foods Corp.(UFC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In the Zulus' Heartland, Jubilation Over Vote Role
Most South Africans here in the Zulu heartland of Natal Province reacted jubilantly today to the news that the Inkatha Freedom Party had ended its boycott of the elections next week, and they predicted the agreement would almost certainly lessen the threat of election-related violence.
Since mid-March, when Zulu nationalists led by Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi furiously appealed for an election boycott, the black townships and villages of Natal have erupted in killings and house-burnings.


Journal; Mommy Horror Show
Mother's Day is less than a month away, but already this is a less than vintage season for the traditional Hallmark image of Mother.
Open season is more like it.
This week New Yorkers were treated to the bizarre tale of Helene Lemay of Quebec, who, with her husband, mobilized the entire city to search for her allegedly kidnapped 10-week-old daughter -- only to admit soon after that the baby had not been abducted near Central Park, but was dead and buried back home.


U.S. Youth Asks Singapore to Spare Him a Caning
Bolstered by new words of support from President Clinton, an 18-year-old American sentenced here to six lashes with a rattan cane for vandalism made a final plea today for mercy.
Lawyers for the teen-ager, Michael Fay of Dayton, Ohio, delivered the formal petition for clemency to President Ong Teng Cheong, who is expected to announce within several days whether Mr.
Fay will be spared the flogging, a punishment that leaves permanent scars and often causes prisoners to go into shock.


Peggy D. Pinn, 65, An Educator in TV
Peggy D. Pinn, an educator at Howard University and the founder of a television and film training program for minority students, died on April 6 at Shady Grove Hospital in Rockville, Md.
She was 65 and lived in Rockville.
The cause was a stroke, said Sigrid Sanders of Manhattan, a friend.
Mrs.
Pinn was born in Brooklyn and earned a bachelor's degree in education from City College and a master's degree in educational technology from Howard, in Washington.
After writing columns for The Amsterdam News and The Queens Voice, she worked in the news and public-affairs department at CBS-TV and on the production staff of the PBS series "Black Journal."


Kendall International Inc.(KEN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Kaydon Corp.(KDON:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Moving Ahead on the Coliseum
The week has brought another delay and another lawsuit in the negotiations between New York City and Mortimer Zuckerman over the Coliseum site at Columbus Circle.
This comes at a time when the Giuliani administration has devised yet another plan that might save millions for Mr.
Zuckerman.
Endless negotiations, lawsuits and now the appearance of political favoritism have made this into a deal that every responsible citizen and officeholder must view with alarm.
The public's best interest can be clearly stated: Mr.
Zuckerman and his company, Boston Properties, should go ahead with the development deal they agreed to -- or else forfeit their $33.8 million letter of credit.
That would free the city and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which owns the property, to seek other developers, who might submit more imaginative proposals and, most importantly, offer a premium price for a premium piece of public land.


Hectic Day Of Trading For Stocks
Yesterday was a baffling day on Wall Street.
For months, the stock market has followed the bond market, in lock step, up and down, but mostly down.
Yet when bonds rallied yesterday, stocks plunged, as good signals from the bond market alternated with bad signals elsewhere.
When stock traders become baffled, they tend to sell.
And they sold yesterday in unusually hectic trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 21.11 points, to 3,598.71.
The broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index also fell, but less precipitously -- 0.58 point, to 441.96.
The Nasdaq composite index, heavy with battered technology stocks, continued its steep drop of the last week or so, falling 7.33 points, to 705.52.


Historical Society Head Resigns and Is Replaced
The New-York Historical Society announced yesterday that its interim co-chairman, Wilbur L. Ross Jr., has resigned.
He will be succeeded, beginning today, by Miner H. Warner, a trustee of the society since 1985 and the president of Public Resources International, a company that advises foreign governments on revamping their debts.
"The society is in the final stages of recruiting a new chief executive," Mr.
Ross said yesterday of his abrupt departure, "and there was a feeling that the society ought to now think through who should be the permament leadership for the institution." He said the sudden resignation of his co-chairman, Herbert S. Winokur Jr., last week "provoked the board to re-examine the whole structure." The dual chairmanship ends with Mr.
Warner in the job.


Corrections
A review on Monday about "Honor Thy Father and Mother," a Fox television movie about the Menendez murder case, misattributed some of Ronald L. Soble's coverage of the case.
Mr.
Soble covered the early stages of the case as a reporter for The Los Angeles Times.
But he left the newspaper before the trial, which he covered as co-author of a book, "Blood Brothers," on which the Fox movie was based.


Attacker of Queens Woman, 74, Is Linked to 6 Other Robberies
The same man who pistol-whipped, robbed and shot a 74-year-old woman outside her home on Tuesday has also robbed six other persons in Queens, including four elderly people, in the last four weeks, the police said yesterday.
With Constance Vieira of Whitestone recovering from a gunshot wound to the stomach and a blow to the head with the butt of a gun, the police yesterday appealed for the public's help in finding her attacker.


F.C.C. Moves to Auction Portions of the Airways
The Federal Communications Commission took its first step today toward auctioning off pieces of the nation's airwaves, clearing the way for the sale of licenses for advanced messaging and interactive video services by this summer.
Agency officials also said today that they intended to hold the first auctions for advanced pocket-telephone services before the end of the year, a move intended to allay industry criticisms that the agency is moving too slowly in drafting its rules.


In Washington, Au Pairs Are Bipartisan Choice for Child Care
Dale and Sharon Karraker of Laurel, Md., are both employees of the Department of Defense, in jobs that require periodic Government background checks.
They are also the parents of two boys, 2 years old and 9 months old.
Fourteen months ago, they watched with the rest of the nation as President Clinton withdrew his nomination of Zoe Baird for Attorney General because she had failed to pay Social Security taxes for a Peruvian couple who cared for her child.
Two weeks later, they saw the President's next nomination for Attorney General, that of Judge Kimba M. Wood, drown in Ms.
Baird's wake, even though Judge Wood's hiring of an illegal alien for child care was technically legal.


For Eastern Germans, Life Isn't Much Better
To the Editor:
"Why are death rates soaring in the old Soviet bloc?" asks Nicholas Eberstadt in "Marx and Mortality: A Mystery" (Op-Ed, April 6).
He finds particularly hard "to explain the leap in eastern Germany, where unification has led to major improvements in living standards. . . ."


Corrections
An article yesterday about New York State's policy of selling used or confiscated guns misidentified the authors of a 1993 report on the subject.
They were Republican members of the State Assembly, not Democrats.


Bronx Infant Hit by Bullet
Stray gunfire hit a 7-month-old boy about 12:20 P.M. yesterday in the north Bronx, the police said.
The infant, Trust Tate, was in stable condition last night at Montefiore Medical Center after surgery to his left arm.
He was being pushed in his stroller by his grandmother, Franzia Tate, on the outskirts of the Edenwald Houses, at East 225th Street and Laconia Avenue, when a man shot at another man and missed, said Lieut.
Thomas J. Sbordone, a spokesman for the Housing Authority police.
"The grandmother heard several gunshots and she heard the baby crying," he said.
"She looked in the stroller and saw his left arm was bleeding." He said that the Tates were behind the intended victim.


Where Earth Tones Are the Music of Design
AS Earth Day approached, Fabien Baron, a graphic designer and the creative director at Harper's Bazaar, sat back in his Corbusier-furnished penthouse office on West 57th Street, put on a tape of Van Morrison's "Hymn to the Silence" and leafed through a large box of photographs, nature studies and views of a desolate landscape.
In just a few weeks, he will pack his bags and go there, leaving behind his drafting tables, his layouts and clients like Calvin Klein and Issey Miyake to fend for themselves for a few weeks.
Twelve hours from Manhattan, he will watch from a lumbering prop plane for the twin volcanos that dominate the barren topography of Pantelleria, a nine-mile-long speck in the Mediterranean between Sicily and Tunisia.


'Carousel' Misses 2 Shows
Yesterday's performances of the musical "Carousel" at the Vivian Beaumont Theater were canceled because of the illnesses of both Michael Hayden, who plays the leading male role of Billy Bigelow, and his understudy, Duane Boutte.
Merle Debuskey, the show's press representative, said yesterday that the status of tonight's performance was still uncertain.
Information about refunds or ticket exchanges is available from Tele-Charge at (212) 239-6200.


General Dynamics Corp.(GD:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Weirton Steel (WS:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Balkan Update
At a news conference in WASHINGTON, President Clinton appealed to Americans, Russia and allies in Europe to support use of wider air power to prevent Serbian advances against "safe areas" in BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA.
Currently NATO is pledged to fully defend only one safe area, SARAJEVO -- unless it invokes the protection of United Nations peacekeepers, as it did in GORAZDE's case last week.
But the NATO allies agreed provisionally at a meeting in BRUSSELS yesterday to use air strikes to protect any safe area in Bosnia that comes under heavy attack if asked to do so by the United Nations.
A formal decision was deferred.


Review/Recital; A Violinist Tests Limits In Music Of Her Time
The history of the violin is partly a history of liberation: liberation from technical constrictions, styles, attitudes.
Composers and players have always been challenged to push at the limits of this compact collection of wire and wood, to make it do something it has never done before.
It was seen as the instrument of angels in the 18th century, of the Devil in the 19th, of the irrational and inexpressible in the 20th.
In a remarkable debut recital on Tuesday night at Merkin Hall, presented by the League of Composers/ ISCM, the nation's oldest organization devoted to contemporary music, Mari Kimura set about pushing virtuosically at any boundaries that might still exist.
Ms.
Kimura's teachers have included Joseph Fuchs, Roman Totenberg, Toshiya Eto and Armand Weisbord.
She has studied composition with Mario Davidovsky at Columbia University and has played widely at international festivals.
Her interest, though, is not in the traditional repertory, but in the most recent attempts at liberation from it.
With a relaxed agility and a mastery of 20th-century bowing and plucking techniques, Ms.
Kimura created a series of musical worlds at the border of the technically possible.


Franklin Electric (FELE:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Travelers Inc.(TRV:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Television; Confessions of a Former Alarmist
Here's a how-de-do!
A network news special that makes light of the perils on which network news specials thrive.
ABC's "Are We Scaring Ourselves to Death?" is a sharp expose of exposes about crime, pollution and other television favorites.
Leading the charge is a repentant sinner.
In a mea culpa before an audience at Seton Hall University, John Stossel, who made his reputation as a consumer-affairs reporter, admits to having played up such transient worries as train accidents, lawn chemicals and coffee makers.
But he has found the light and now maintains that in addition to raising blood pressures, the incessant scaremongering feeds public misapprehension and leads to the misallocation of public money.


Bridge
Although New York City has had some of the world's strongest players since the birth of the game, it has never won the Grand National Team title since that event was instituted more than two decades ago.
That may be remedied in July, for the metropolitan area will be represented in national playoffs in San Diego, Calif., by a world-class foursome: Jim Cayne, Alan Sontag, Larry Cohen and David Berkowitz.
The Cayne team won the area final, played on Sunday at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, by 19 imps.
The losers were Jim Sampson, Simon Erlich, Glenn Milgrim, Ken Jacobs, Gene Prosnitz and Bill Rosenbaum.


Treasuries Continue Improvement for 2d Day
The prices of Treasury securities gained for the second consecutive day yesterday as the market continued to improve after a selloff on Monday caused by the Federal Reserve Board's third interest rate increase of the year.
Gerald A. Guild, senior manager in charge of fixed-income securities at Advest Inc., said the market had suddenly realized that the economy was not as strong as expected, "as evidenced by the very large trade deficit numbers on Tuesday." He added, "The weakening of the economy would benefit the bond market because inflation would not be a consideration."


Dentsply International Inc.(XRAY:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rock-Tenn Co.(RKTN:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Howard University Is Stung By Portrayal as Anti-Semitic
For the second time in recent months, Khalid Abdul Muhammad of the Nation of Islam delivered a fiery speech at Howard University about the plight of blacks and the sins of whites, particularly Jews, while the audience of 1,500 cheered wildly.
But when someone asked during the rally on Tuesday how many in the audience were Howard students, no more than 50 hands were raised.
The moment crystallized the problem that Howard University faces: how to deal with a small but vocal group of students who have transformed the image of the 126-year-old university.


High Cost for Low-Tech Pipelines; U.S. Weighs Requiring Motors to Close Valves Like Edison's
The Texas Eastern Transmission Corporation monitors its 10,000 miles of natural-gas pipelines with an elaborate 24-hour computer system that can detect the slightest change in pressure anywhere along the network.
So why did such a technologically sophisticated company have to resort to sending workers to twist a leaden wheel 753 times to shut off the gas pouring from the main that exploded last month in Edison, N.J.?
That question goes to the heart of one of the most pressing issues raised by the disaster: regulations and equipment that seemed appropriate when pipelines were laid decades ago in isolated areas seem dangerously outdated now that heavily populated communities have sprung up around them.


Apartment Workers Pass Strike Deadline As Talks Continue
Negotiators for the owners of 2,800 residential buildings and the union representing their service employees resumed bargaining last night and continued talking past a midnight strike deadline.
Dennis Sheehan, the spokesman for Local 32B-32J of the Service Employees International Union, said shortly after midnight that both sides had decided to keep negotiating.
The union did not set another deadline.


Pact Reached in Beach Erosion Project
Property owners on erosion-ravaged Dune Road have reached agreement with Federal, state and Suffolk County officials on a $32 million project to rebuild their beaches and reconstruct jetties blamed for robbing them of sand.
The project, which also entails building a 13-foot-high dune from the westernmost jetty to Moriches Inlet, will clear the way for property owners to rebuild summer homes that were washed away or damaged by waves.


Bard (C.R.) (BCR:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Events: Quilts, a Tour, Art and Architecture
New York State Quilts  Museum of American Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 977-7298.
Twenty-four quilts from the New York Quilt Project, an archive of more than 6,000, some dating from the 18th century, will be on display from Saturday through Sept. 11.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Free.


10 Jail Guards Are Charged In Smuggling
Ten guards at the Westchester County Jail were charged today with smuggling food, vodka, cash and what they thought was cocaine to prisoners in exchange for bribes of up to $1,000 and favors like a trip to Atlantic City.
One guard was charged with giving an inmate a universal key to the prison's handcuffs and leg shackles and promising him a cellular telephone so the inmate could plot an escape out an unguarded exit door.
Confirming movie scenes of mobsters getting special treatment in jail, Joseph A. Greco, who supervises the local inspector general's office of the United States Justice Department, said some of the prisoners were members of organized crime.


Clorox Co. (CLX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Higher Rates Bring On a Shrug
It will cost an extra $200 a month, but Kipp and Andrea Good are going to buy a house anyway, even though the recent spike in interest rates has made their move to the Westchester suburbs of New York City more expensive.
There are a lot of Americans out there like the Goods, who have been caught as long-term interest rates have shot up more than a percentage point since February.
But economists reckon that most consumers will, as the Goods have done, shrug off the higher rates that have sent the stock and bond markets into a tailspin.


INSIDE
New Fears on North Korea
The U.S.
Secretary of Defense said the North would soon remove enough fuel from a reactor to make four or five new nuclear weapons.
Page A7.
Financing Welfare Overhaul
Clinton aides are considering raiding programs for veterans and farmers to pay for a welfare plan.
Page D24.
Living With Higher Rates
Many consumers are expected to shrug off the higher interest rates that have unnerved the markets, and some may even benefit.
Page D1. 10 Jail Guards Charged
Ten guards at the Westchester County Jail were charged with smuggling food, vodka and what they thought was cocaine to prisoners.
Page B1.
Giuliani on Religion
Mayor Giuliani said civic tolerance must include acceptance of the right to express religious views.
Page B1.


A Blessed Haunted Plot, This England
Trevor Newton, the white-haired, 52- year-old night porter at the Naval and Military Club, seems a solid, feet-on-the-ground type.
But try telling him that there's no such thing as a ghost, and his eyes widen so that his visage is transformed into a sepulchral mask and he leans forward to lower his voice conspiratorially:
"If anyone had said to me there's such a thing -- never, no way would I have believed it. But I know what I saw. I saw it, and it was frightening."


SERB GUNNERS HIT GORAZDE HOSPITAL AND REFUGEE SITES
Serbian nationalist forces shelled and rocketed refugee centers, the city hospital and an adjacent apartment building used to shelter the wounded today in Gorazde, a town the United Nations has designated a "safe area." The attacks killed 44 people and wounded 137, aid workers in the area reported.
"The hospital staff are in shock and unable to continue working -- patients abandoned," an aid worker reported, adding that four hospital staff members were critically wounded and seven others less seriously hurt.


Consolidated Freightways Inc.(CNF:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Barrick Restaurants (ABX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co.  (AHM:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


PFIZER INC. (PFE:N)
Pfizer Inc. said yesterday that its net income increased 12.5 percent, to $370.7 million, in the first quarter.
The gain reflected the effects of a $28.8 million pretax charge against earnings in the first quarter of 1993.
Earnings per share increased 17 percent, to $1.18, about 4 cents higher than most analysts had projected.
After excluding the 1993 charge, net income rose 6 percent and earnings per share increased 10 percent.


Bench Time Frustrates Mason
On the surface Anthony Mason was reciting the party line today.
But it was easy to see that the Knicks' 6-foot-7-inch forward was still upset a day after he was benched for the second half of New York's 87-84 loss to Atlanta at Madison Square Garden.
"As far as I'm concerned, I don't carry baggage," Mason said after a quick shoot-around.
"It's done and over with. I'd be just as disappointed if it happens again, but there's nothing you can do. We'll see what happens the next game."


Fox Team Adds Pitts
Fox Sports yesterday hired RON PITTS, a former cornerback for the Buffalo Bills and the Green Bay Packers, continuing the fledgling sports division's policy of taking a risk on relatively unknown or untried football commentators.
Pitts, who called some college football games for ABC last season, is the son of ELIJAH PITTS, the former Packers running back.
Fox has also hired former players such as ANTHONY MUNOZ and TIM GREEN as game analysts and HOWIE LONG as an analyst for its hourlong pre-game studio show.


Tunnel Series? It Might Break Into Playoff Light
Watch out, everybody.
It seems as if the Nets and the Knicks are on a collision course for their second Lincoln Tunnel playoff series.
Who would have thought such a playoff matchup was possible when the Nets started the season with a lineup that was almost totally revamped?
Drazen Petrovic had died in an auto accident in Germany.
Sam Bowie was traded to the Lakers for Benoit Benjamin.
Chris Dudley took less money than the Nets offered just to get out of town and join Portland.


Still in Critical Condition, Nixon Has Swelling in Brain
In the second full day after suffering a paralyzing stroke on Monday, former President Richard M. Nixon remained in critical condition last evening, with swelling in his brain continuing to threaten his life, officials of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center said.
The swelling, a potentially fatal complication of a stroke, results when damaged arteries begin to break down and fluid leaks into the brain tissue.
This leakage further damages cells that have already been harmed by lack of oxygen when the stroke occurred.
The amount of swelling, or cerebral edema, is generally directly related to the seriousness of the stroke.


Smith Can't Ignore Boos as Knicks Enter Crunch Time
It has reached the point where the booing begins before Charles Smith can do anything to silence it.
It echoes through Madison Square Garden, prompted by Smith's past failures, perceived and real, and gains momentum as the Knicks' small forward combats tentativeness, rustiness, a sore knee -- not to mention the opposing players.
If the game ends in a Knick loss, as have six of the last nine, the booing resonates afterward as an audible symbol of frustration in this, Smith's most frustrating of seasons.


City Begins Enforcement Of Food Cart Restrictions
In a clash that led an army of food vendors to marshal their carts along Fifth Avenue yesterday, New York City has begun a new crackdown on vendors operating in areas that the city has declared off limits.
Officials say that they are simply stepping up enforcement of a 10-year-old rule, and that they began with consultations with vendors and other business owners last year.
The rule bans food vendors from certain congested areas, including swaths of Fifth Avenue, while permitting them in others.


Sharks Are Blanked By Red Wing Rookie
Red Wings 4, Sharks 0
The rookie goaltender Chris Osgood, making his first appearance in a National Hockey League playoff game, turned in a sharp performance as the Red Wings defeated the San Jose Sharks, 4-0, last night in Detroit to even their four-of-seven-game Western Conference series at 1-1.
It was the first playoff shutout by a rookie Detroit goalie since Terry Sawchuk blanked the Montreal Canadiens, 2-0, March 1, 1951.
But it was Osgood's second shutout of the Sharks this season.


Deane W. Lord; Harvard Official, 67
Deane W. Lord, a public relations official at Harvard University for 35 years, died on Tuesday at Youville Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Lord, who lived in Cambridge, was 67.
The cause was cancer, said a university spokesman.


Northrop Corp.(NOC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Critic's Notebook; When France Goes Into a Straussian Trance
France's obsession with the music of Richard Strauss this season started out innocently enough in Paris, in series by the Theatre du Chatelet and the Orchestre de Paris.
But like some medieval dancing madness it spread, unstoppably, to other Paris musical institutions, like the Bastille Opera, and then to the Lyons Opera.
Now the French Strauss frenzy has peaked and, perhaps, spent itself with three operatic productions: "Salome" at the Bastille, the original version of "Ariadne auf Naxos" here in Lyons and, most notably, "Die Frau ohne Schatten" at the Chatelet.
The Bastille's "Salome" came first (from Feb. 5 to March 7) and can be passed over most quickly.
This was an effort to recreate the synergy of the most successful production of the Bastille Opera's brief history, the collaboration between the conductor Myung-Whun Chung and the stage director Andre Engel in Shostakovich's "Lady Macbeth of Mstensk." But fire didn't strike twice.


The Fallacy of an L.I.R.R. 'Black Rage' Defense
To the Editor:
So the lawyer William Kunstler wants to use a "black rage" defense for Colin Ferguson, the accused Long Island Rail Road murderer; a defense theoretically justifying violence, regardless of how abominable, as vengeance for 400 years of black oppression.


A Sign of Nature's Power


Japanese Beer Drinkers Get Something New: Discounts
In Japan's Parliament these days, just about everyone claims to be a reformer, eager to give consumers a break from the astronomical prices that the Government spent the previous four decades encouraging.
But the best place to witness the real reform working through the economy may be the supermarket, the legislature of consumer tastes.
Specifically, look down the beer aisle.
In recent days several of Japan's largest supermarket chains have made headlines and challenged the cartel-like arrangement that has kept beer prices high by offering a revolutionary concept: discounts.


Chinese Are Cleared
Twenty-five Chinese athletes, including the world's top female distance runners, have passed random drug tests.
CHRISTOPHER WINNER, spokesman for the International Amateur Athletic Federation, confirmed yesterday in Monte Carlo, Monaco, that 21 women and 4 men submitted to unannounced tests on March 7-8 in Beijing.
The urine samples were sent to the accredited laboratory in Huddinge, Sweden, and all proved negative, Winner said.
It was the third visit by federation drug testers to China this year.
The tests are part of the federation's worldwide random doping-control program.


Texas Radio Groups Add 11 Stations
MBD Broadcasting and Chancellor Communications, both based here, announced today that they had agreed to acquire 11 radio stations owned and operated by American Media Inc. of San Francisco for $150 million in cash.
The separate transactions by the companies, if approved by the Federal Communications Commission, would represent one of the largest radio deals since the F.C.C. relaxed restrictions on radio station ownership in 1992.
The new rules allow investor groups to own more AM and FM stations, both nationally and in particular markets, than they could before.


Owens-Illinois (OI:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Services for Lewis Thomas
A memorial service for Lewis Thomas, who died on Dec. 3, is to be held next Wednesday at 4 P.M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street.
Mr.
Thomas was president of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center and dean of the medical schools at New York University and Yale.


Crawford &amp; Co. (CRD.A:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Schering-Plough Corp.(SGP:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Blunder Over Iraq: Hopes That Died
Second Lieut.
Laura Ashley Piper could have been a walking billboard for military recruitment.
Fluent in Russian and German, a champion rugby player, she was a 25-year-old Air Force officer on the fast track who jumped at a challenge the way children jump at ice cream.
Col.
Jerald L. Thompson, 48, of the Army spoke 10 dialects of Arabic and had received dozens of medals for battlefield heroics in a career dating from the Vietnam War.
But most of all, friends recalled his stoutness of heart, like the compassion he showed to a young American soldier in the Persian Gulf war whose gun accidentally discharged and killed a fellow soldier.


Frozen Food Express Industries Inc.(FFEX:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TJ International (TJCO:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Face in the Gallery Of Picasso's Muses Is Given a New Name
A leading Picasso scholar says that hundreds of paintings and drawings made by the artist during the 1920's were inspired by an infatuation with the American socialite and jazz-age luminary Sara Murphy, and are not, as has long been thought, idealized figures or depictions of the woman who was Picasso's wife at the time, Olga.
Among the works is the Neo-Classical masterpiece "Woman in White" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The assertion that some kind of romance took place between Picasso and Sara Murphy is made by William Rubin, the Picasso scholar and former head of the department of painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art, in "The Pipes of Pan: Picasso's Aborted Love Song to Sara Murphy," an article to be published in the May issue of the magazine Art News.


Sheldon Gitelman; Bank Executive, 64
Sheldon Gitelman, a banker in New York and Washington for 20 years, died on Tuesday at his home in Washington.
He was 64.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Natalie.


Genuine Parts (GPC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Universal Health Services Inc.(UHS:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  SERBS POUND HOSPITAL IN GORAZDE  Gorazde's relief centers reeled as Serbian nationalists pounded a hospital and refugee shelters in the Bosnian town with shells and rockets, aid workers said.
The hospital staff was reported to be in shock.
A1


Review/Music; A Lesson Learned by a Master at His Own Knee
Public master classes are usually opportunities for young musicians to glean interpretive secrets and practical pointers, and for ticket-holding eavesdroppers to be reminded of the detailed shaping and, ideally, soul-searching that inform a performance.
How the master benefits in this transaction is usually less clear.
There is public relations value in looking sage and magnanimous, of course, and musicians who teach speak of learning from their students.
But it's all very nebulous.
Hermann Prey, however, came away from his master class on Schubert's "Winterreise" at the 92d Street Y on Tuesday evening with something more specific: an idea that may change, or at least clarify, his own interpretation of the 24-song cycle.
Mr.
Prey has been singing "Winterreise" since 1951, and he opened this year's installment of the Y's Schubertiade with it on Sunday evening.
But he was anxious about the class, he said, and was unable to sleep.
When he did doze off, he dreamed about Schubert's tempos.


DEMOCRATS PRESS FOR A COMPROMISE ON CHINESE TRADE
The leading Democratic advocates of a tough policy toward China are working with the White House on a compromise that would include limited sanctions but allow a considerable amount of trade to continue if China fails to meet all the human rights objectives laid down by the Administration.
This approach could be critical in helping President Clinton find a face-saving way to salvage his China policy.
The President is reluctant to choke off commerce with the world's fastest-growing economy by totally withdrawing Beijing's most-favored-nation trade status.
But he is equally loath to back down on his threat to do so if China does not satisfy the human rights demands the Administration set as its condition for renewal of the trade status on June 3.


Floor Covers With the Feel Of Nature
A CENTURY ago, spring was the time for Victorians to roll up the Oriental rugs and bring out the sisal.
Spring is still sisal season.
Large carpet showrooms routinely hold spring sales of sisal, coir, seagrass and other floor coverings woven from natural vegetable fibers.
For nearly a decade, wall-to-wall sisal (pronounced SIGH-sul) and coir (KOY-er) have created neutral but textured floors, perfect backdrops for area rugs.
But now, the growing natural-fiber family encompasses a wide range of colors, weaves, styles and blends, including sisals dyed coral and plum and combinations like jute and wool, which is easier on bare feet than scratchy sisal.


Health Reform 'Providers' Would Aid the Poor
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to "A Sneak Attack on Health Reform" (editorial, April 11).
I have considered labeling your position as "A Sneak Attack on the Poor and the Voiceless." In the editorial, you refer to a provision in the Ways and Means health subcommittee's bill on health reform regarding essential community providers.
You incorrectly label this provision as an "any willing provider" provision.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about plans to develop a closed Fairchild Republic Company hangar in Long Island misstated the site.
It is in Farmingdale.


I.M.F. Tosses Bouquet to Russia: $1.5 Billion
The International Monetary Fund gave the Russian Government a much-sought vote of confidence today and approved a $1.5 billion loan that had been delayed for months because of fears that Moscow was not committed to aggressive economic reform.
The move, which is expected to pave the way for billions of dollars more in aid to Russia, is surprising because just three months ago officials of the monetary fund were criticizing Russia's economic policies after several top supporters of free-market policies quit the Government.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about developments in Bosnia referred incorrectly in some editions to a United Nations headquarters struck by Serbian artillery fire.
It was in the eastern town of Gorazde, not in the capital, Sarajevo.


Guiding Bank of Mexico To Newly Won Respect
Through the first few rocky months of 1994, the Bank of Mexico loomed as Mexico's financial bulwark, stubbornly defending the peso against several runs in the face of a guerrilla uprising in Chiapas state, the kidnapping of a millionaire businessman and the assassination of a presidential candidate.
In the process, the central bank impressed international investors with the way that Mexico's financial institutions have performed under pressure.
The Bank of Mexico has assumed a more independent identity since April 1, when it became constitutionally autonomous.
For now, most economic analysts see the bank's new autonomy as positive.
Separating the authority that prints money from the Government that spends it makes investors sleep soundly.
Debate Over Devaluation
However, the bank's independence is likely to be tested by the pressure on the Mexican peso and the mounting debate over whether it should be devalued.
Over the last month, investors pulled more than $3 billion in capital out of Mexico.


25 Arrested on Immigrant-Smuggling Charges
Federal agents arrested 25 Turkish and Chinese immigrants in New York City and on Long Island yesterday and charged them with participating in an elaborate scheme to smuggle immigrants, obtain fraudulent documents and import illegal goods.
Nineteen of the immigrants were taken into custody at a Traveler's Lodge at Kennedy International Airport where, a Federal agent said, they showed up with completed immigration forms and expected to obtain permits for permanent residence, commonly known as green cards.
They were arrested instead.


Review/Pop; When the Power Costs More Effort
At 78, Frank Sinatra shows the effort behind his singing.
There's grain in his voice, and phrases aren't always rounded off.
Now and then, he forgets a line; between songs, his patter is no longer suave.
But none of that mattered on Tuesday night at Radio City Music Hall, where Mr.
Sinatra is appearing through Sunday.
Mr.
Sinatra made love songs glow with romance, found all the swing in uptempo tunes and gave his favorite saloon song, "One for My Baby," a sense of remembered tragedy.
Mr.
Sinatra chooses songs from what he calls "the best standards," most of them from the days before rock.
They are songs about an ideal love, untouched by conflict or raunch, or songs about the pain of losing such bliss.
As a younger man, Mr.
Sinatra sang them with the unassailable confidence of postwar America, sure of his power and his ideas.


Kasler Holding Co. (KAS:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


COMPANY BRIEF
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Wayne, Pa., has acquired Advanced Office Products Inc. of Wheat Ridge, Colo., for undisclosed terms.
BANK OF BOSTON CORP., Boston, agreed to purchase a $2.5 billion mortgage-servicing portfolio from Meridian Mortgage, a subsidiary of Meridian Bancorp Inc., Philadelphia, for approximately $29 million.


Tokyo Journal; Among Blossoms in the Dust, a Premier Departs
By the time thousands of Japan's elite arrived today in their long limousines, their military uniforms and their best spring kimonos for the annual Prime Minister's Cherry Blossom Party, most of the blossoms had fallen, and so had the Prime Minister.
It was, in short, a protocol officer's worst nightmare: just hours after the Government mailed out 7,000 much-sought-after invitations from the Prime Minister and Mrs.
Morihiro Hosokawa, the host suddenly resigned, under a still-mysterious cloud of financial impropriety.


'Beast' Sets Sales Record
Despite mixed-to-negative reviews, "Beauty and the Beast," the Walt Disney Company musical that opened on Monday, sold $603,494 worth of tickets at the Palace Theater on Tuesday, breaking the one-day Broadway sales record, the show's producers announced yesterday.
The previous record, $548,460, was set by the musical "Tommy" at the St.
James Theater on June 7, 1993, the day after it won five Tony Awards.


Essay; General Shilly-Shali
When a President is bereft of an organizing principle, policy is made by personalities.
The dominant person in national security affairs, especially regarding Bosnia, has been Gen.
John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.
That was a surprise because "General Shali," a refugee from Poland at age 8, is in no way overbearing.
He is a good soldier, well liked in the service and among European diplomats; presiding over the drawdown of U.S. forces in Europe was widely thought to be his career-capping job.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  FAX BRINGS ARREST OF NUMBERS SUSPECT For 30 years, Raymond Marquez was a thorn to law-enforcement agencies and a legend to countless gamblers in Harlem and East Harlem.
With a clientele whose wagers ranged from a dime to more than $1,000 a day on numbers games, Mr.
Marquez, nicknamed Spanish Raymond, built a gambling empire that raked in about $30 million a year, the authorities say.
Much of the case that resulted in his arrest, they said, stemmed from one mistake: his use of a fax to get daily reports on his illegal gambling profits from Manhattan to his vacation retreat in Fort Lauderdale.
A1.
DARING ROBBERIES BAFFLE POLICE Two well-dressed men have shown an unusual combination of precision and ruthlessness, pulling off seven armed jewel robberies during the last year, shooting and wounding three victims and taking $320,000 worth of diamond rings.
B3.


Howard Otway, 72; Ran Revival Theater
Howard Otway, an actor, author and singer who was the owner and director of Theater 80 St.
Marks, the longest continuously running movie house devoted exclusively to revival films in New York City, died on Monday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 72 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was emphysema, said his wife, Florence.


Life Technologies Inc.(LTEK:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BANKAMERICA CORP. (BAC:N)
The BankAmerica Corporation, the country's second-largest banking company, reported yesterday that earnings rose 6 percent, to $513 million, in the first quarter.
The company earned $1.27 a share, exceeding the $1.23 a share that many Wall Street analysts had expected.
Its profitability was still meager, as measured by a return on equity of 13 percent, which is low for the banking industry.


Rommel Was Never A Nazi Party Member
To the Editor:
Field Marshal Erwin Rommel was not a "prominent Nazi" as stated by Phil-Heiner Randermann in "Would Germans Elect Hitler's Daughter?" (letter, April 12).
Winston Churchill referred to him in the House of Commons as a "great soldier," and he did not join the Nazi Party.


A New Strategy for Welfare Overhaul
As President Clinton finalizes his proposal to overhaul the welfare system, his aides are pursuing a new financing strategy to avoid deep cuts in programs for the poor.
The strategy would raise small amounts of money by cutting programs for veterans and affluent farmers and raising taxes for some investors.
The move is intended to answer critics, including some of the President's closest allies, who contend that deep cuts in programs for the needy would hurt the very people the welfare plan seeks to help.


Outboard Marine Corp.(OM:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Occidental Petroleum Corp.(OXY:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
It was the tribute of tributes to MICHAEL R. MILKEN when PRESIDENT CLINTON surprised the 250 guests at a dinner at the "21" Club in New York on Tuesday.
"You tell Mike hello," the President said to ROSEY GRIER, the former football player, who was at the other end of the speaker phone.
"He's got a lot of energy. I tell you I'm impressed. He makes me look like a piker. He makes me look like I'm on vacation, he's got so much energy."


A New York Chief At Campbell Mithun
George Guimaraes, chairman and chief executive of the New York office of Publicis/Bloom, is unexpectedly leaving the agency, effective May 4, to take the new position of president and chief executive of Campbell Mithun Esty's New York office.
At Campbell Mithun, Mr.
Guimaraes, 49, will succeed Tony Wainwright, 60, who was moved to the new position of chairman.
The change in management comes less than a month after Campbell Mithun lost its important Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation account after eight and a half years.


Daring Robberies in Elegant Locales Baffle Police
Sgt.
Timothy J. Barry, the supervisor of the Robbery Identification Program at the 19th Precinct on Manhattan's East Side, knew the tip was a long shot, but as he put it the other day in his windowless cubicle on 67th Street, "We have to check out everything -- we'd look like fools if we didn't check one out and it turned out to be the guy.' "
"The guy," in this case, is actually two well-dressed men who have showed an unusual combination of precision and ruthlessness, pulling off seven armed jewel robberies during the last year, shooting and wounding three victims and making off with $320,000 worth of diamond rings.
In the most recent holdup, last month in the Vera Wang Bridal House on Madison Avenue and 76th Street, the robbers shot a couple from Maryland in front of their children, seriously wounding both parents.


Bengals Listening to Offers, But Wilkinson's Their Man
It happens almost every spring.
In the days before the National Football League draft, many teams try to move up in the selecting order to get the college superstar of the year.
This year, that superstar is Dan Wilkinson, a 6-foot-4-inch, 315-pound defensive tackle from Ohio State.
The Cincinnati Bengals own the first choice in the draft and seem likely to keep it and take him.
But at least four teams are trying to package players and draft choices to induce the Bengals to trade the first choice.


New in Congress, but a Powerful Friend of Drug Companies
In a concession to the biotechnology industry and its supporters on Capitol Hill, the chairman of a major Congressional committee decided today to drop President Clinton's proposal for a Federal agency to review the "reasonableness" of new drug prices.
The chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, Representative John D. Dingell, said the proposal "should not be included as part of any comprehensive health care reform," and he vowed to oppose it throughout the legislative process.


Clemens Twirls Two-Hitter As Red Sox Shut Out A's
Red Sox 2, Athletics 0
Roger Clemens threw the 36th shutout of his career, holding the Athletics to two hits and striking out 10 as the Boston Red Sox defeated Oakland, 2-0, last night at Fenway Park.
Scott Cooper's sacrifice fly in the seventh ended a scoreless battle between Clemens and Steve Karsay, and John Valentin followed two pitches later with a home run over the left-field wall for Boston's second run.


Paul Bruce Dowling; Beautification Group's Founder, 67
Paul Bruce Dowling, the founder and executive director of the America the Beautiful Fund in Washington, died on Sunday at Arlington Hospital in Arlington, Va.
Mr.
Dowling, who lived in Arlington, was 67.
The cause was heart disease, said his wife, Nanine Dowling.


Coghlan Calls It Quits
EAMONN COGHLAN of Ireland, who this winter became the first masters runner (aged 40 and up) to break the four-minute mile barrier, has canceled his spring season and announced his retirement from competitive track and field.
"The pain is too great," said Coghlan by phone from Dublin, speaking of a lingering injury to his upper right leg.
Coghlan, 41, ran through the pain to a 3:58.15 on the Harvard indoor track on Feb. 20.
Coghlan will continue to run for fitness and devote his energies to fund raising for the Children's Medical and Research Foundation of Our Lady's Hospital in Dublin.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Announced the resignation of Ted Haracz, vice president of marketing.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Activated John Battle, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Gary Alexander, forward, on the injured list.


Texas Opens Door for Death-Row Appeals
Texas's top criminal court today opened a major new avenue for convicted murderers to present belated evidence of their innocence.
Ruling in the case of a death-row inmate who was scheduled to be executed next month, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals said he was entitled to a hearing on his claim that new testimony from witnesses who did not appear at his trial could exonerate him.


Alfa Corp.(ALFA:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Chrysler
The Chrysler Corporation's stock nearly doubled to more than $62 in February as institutional investors flocked to it as a strong, economically sensitive stock.
But as the outlook for interest rates has darkened, investors have abandoned the stock, which fell yesterday in the heaviest trading of the year.


An Exposition for the Over-50 Population
WHEN she was 60 years old, Evelyn Nef of Washington, a former executive secretary of the American Sociological Association and the author of several books on the Arctic, decided to become a psychotherapist.
At 65, she graduated and got her first Social Security check the same year.
She is now 80, still practicing and writing her autobiography.
"When I was 50, I thought my life was over," she said.
"Little did I know the best years of my life were still ahead of me."


Morton International Shares Tumble
Shares of Morton International Inc. plummeted more than $10 yesterday, even though the maker of salt, automobile air bags and specialty chemicals reported better-than-expected results for its fiscal third quarter.
But analysts said that Wall Street apparently focused on a statement by S. Jay Stewart, Morton's chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Stewart said that the company was doing so well that its full-year earnings per share "could slightly exceed the top end" of its previously announced fiscal year 1994 earnings projection range of $4.10 to $4.40 a share.


Islanders Hoping to Display More Muscle
Of course, the Islanders will make lineup changes for Game 3 of their first-round Stanley Cup playoff series against the Rangers Thursday night.
Following two 6-0 embarrassments at Madison Square Garden, they are most likely to show up at Nassau Coliseum with at least two new faces in the lineup and one, behind a mask, who will be returning after a brief absence.
Judging by alignments at practice today, Dean Chynoweth will play his first game on defense, in place of Scott Lachance.
And David Chyzowski will play left wing instead of Jan Kaminsky.
As for the masked goalies, it is very likely that Coach Al Arbour will return Ron Hextall to guard the net in place of Jamie McLennan.


As Shells Fall in Central Africa, Outlook for Rwanda Is Bleak


Colgate-Palmolive (CL:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Alltel Corp.(AT:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Garden Q&amp;A
Walking Onions
Q.
I've heard about a "walking onion." Can you tell me what it is? -- Geoffrey Cameron, Burlington, Vt.


Defense Chief Says North Korea Could Soon Build 4 A-Bombs
Secretary of Defense William Perry said this morning that North Korea was "within weeks" of removing enough fuel from its largest nuclear reactor to make four or five new nuclear weapons.
He added that "it is critical" that international inspectors be permitted into the country to monitor the operation.
For more than a year American officials have been closely watching the reactor, fearful that a new harvest of spent fuel could give the North the raw material to turn the few weapons it may now possess into a much larger arsenal.


Caterpillar Inc.(CAT:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


IDB Communications Plans To Buy Peoples Telephone
IDB Communications Group Inc. is expected to announce an agreement on Thursday to buy the Peoples Telephone Company for stock worth an estimated $266 million.
"We see it as a first step in a U.S. domestic expansion strategy," Jeffrey Sudikoff, IDB's chairman, said in a telephone interview.


A Spring Show on a Walk in the Park


Inspecting the Capital's Other River


Winn-Dixie Stores (WIN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 6


Becton Dickinson &amp; Co.  (BDX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Woman Buried, Mystery Lingers In Emergency Room Fumes Case
Gloria Ramirez was buried today, surrounded by friends, family and the camera crews who have become an ever present reminder of the strange and still unexplained circumstances of her death.
It has been two months since Ms.
Ramirez, 31, died on an emergency room gurney, while fumes, emanating perhaps from her body or blood samples, felled six emergency room workers.
Ms.
Ramirez, who had recently been diagnosed as having cervical cancer, was taken to Riverside General Hospital complaining of chest pains.


Nalco Chemical Co.(NLC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mets Relievers Once Again Waste Kent's Clutch Hitting
If Jeff Kent is the Mets' constant miracle man, then the bullpen is the team's recurring Achilles' heel.
For the second time in three games, the Mets relievers wasted a gritty effort from the offense -- and a clutch hit from Kent -- with late-inning mistakes that cost the Mets a victory.
Tonight, Kent put the Mets ahead with a run-scoring double in the top of the seventh inning, only to see Mike Maddux blow the lead in the bottom of that same inning and them Jose Offerman led off with a double and scored in the bottom 11th to give the Dodgers a 6-5 victory at Chavez Ravine.


Seagram Seen Raising Stake
The Seagram Company has increased its holding in Time Warner Inc., to nearly 15 percent, the maximum amount of stock it has indicated it intends to acquire, people with knowledge of the transaction said yesterday.
A Seagram spokesman declined to comment; the company would not have to file such a purchase with the Securities and Exchange Commission until early May.


Sprint Executive Is Leaving
The Sprint Corporation said yesterday that Jorge L. Rodriguez, who as the vice president of marketing and advertising has been the architect of its consumer communications campaigns, would leave the company for what it called "an undisclosed venture."
In a statement, Thomas E. Weigman, vice president of multimedia and strategic services for Sprint in Kansas City, Mo., said the unexpected departure of Mr.
Rodriguez, who has worked on Sprint's marketing for more than seven years, would not affect the company's relationship with its primary agency, J. Walter Thompson San Francisco, or its campaigns, which feature the actress Candice Bergen and carry the theme


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is selling $150 million of step-up medium-term notes due in 1999 at 100 to yield 6.625 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The issue is callable in one year.
If the issue is not called, the coupon steps up to 6.875 percent, then annually to 7.125 percent, 7.625 percent and 8.125 percent.


House Votes to Allow Death-Row Appeals Using Race-Bias Data
By a startlingly slim margin, the House decided today to let future death-row prisoners use statistical evidence of racial bias in past executions to prove in court that their own death sentences were motivated by discrimination.
The action, on an amendment to Democratic anti-crime legislation, would effectively apply to executions the same sorts of numerical yardsticks long used to support charges of racial bias in housing, hiring, credit and other civil rights arenas.
And it would utterly undo existing law, which, since a 1987 Supreme Court ruling, has made such statistics all but irrelevant in death-row appeals.


Locke and Sea Mining
To the Editor:
William Safire, in his discussion of who owns the mineral wealth of the seas (column, "LOST at Sea"), conveniently overlooks the moral limit placed by John Locke on the acquisition of property.
Locke argued that in making parts of the natural world our own, we must leave "enough and as good" for others.


Tryouts Begin for Female Sailors
The guide on the tour boat cruising San Diego Bay was going through his spiel Tuesday about harbor attractions.
Over the loud speaker, he pointed out America  , the 75-foot sailing yacht that won the America's Cup races here in 1992.
"That's the boat that won the whole shebang," said the announcer.
"Now if you look over there on deck, you will see it's being run by females."


Praxair Inc.(PX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bankers Trust Cites Losses Of $49 Million From Trading
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation said yesterday that its traders who invest the bank's own money lost $49 million in the first quarter after taxes and expenses.
The banking company released its earnings on Tuesday and indicated that there was a trading loss.
Yesterday, it provided analysts with additional information on that loss.


Sports of The Times; Build It And They Will Come
IN the serene setting of the White House Rose Garden, President Clinton and some of the nation's most influential government and health officials came together yesterday to talk about the well-being of the nation's children.
To a person, each spoke with amazement and chagrin about the fact that kids, especially in urban and rural areas, are needlessly being put in danger because immunization programs that could ward off childhood diseases routinely fail to reach anywhere from two-thirds to 50 percent of America's children.


Rayonier Inc.(RYN:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Many Americans Flunk Pop Science Quiz
A majority of American adults do not know that humans evolved from animal species or that the Sun and Earth are in the Milky Way galaxy.
And one-third think that humans and dinosaurs existed at the same time, according to a new nationwide survey on scientific literacy among adults.
The survey, conducted by Louis Harris &amp; Associates and the American Museum of Natural History and released yesterday, found that despite years of efforts to improve science education in public schools, American adults possess a low level of literacy in science.


Milan
AFTER a few days of nonstop touring through the Salone Internazionale del Mobile furniture show and in design showrooms in Milan, Italy, last week, visitors were more than ready for a little levity.
There were lots of witty furnishings to seduce and entertain, providing a subplot to the otherwise restrained show.
Call it form follows fun.
Luca De Padova's small showroom and retail shop, called Zoltan, offered a lively selection of tables, fanciful lamps and cutout screens.
At Alessi's polished shop, where the walls and floors are covered in granite, everyday objects looked as if they had just jumped off a cartoonist's drawing pad.


AT HOME WITH: Edward Gorey; A Little Blood Goes a Long Way
INSIDE the sprawling Cape Cod house, vines creep through cracks in the wall around a picture window.
Casually, Edward Gorey identifies the invasive plant as . . . poison ivy.
How apt for the creator of "The Beastly Baby" and "The Loathesome Couple," the artist behind the macabre animated opening credits for the "Mystery" series on public television.


AT&amp;T CORP. (T:N)
The AT&amp;T Corporation -- which officially changed its name yesterday from the American Telephone and Telegraph Company -- reported first-quarter profits of $1.09 billion, or 80 cents a share.
The increase, which was slightly above analysts' expectations, contrasted with a loss in the 1993 first quarter of $6.83 billion, or $5.07 a share, when results were reduced by huge one-time charges.
Revenues at the nation's biggest long-distance company climbed 5.3 percent, to $16.56 billion, with stronger demand for both long-distance service and telecommunications equipment.


Arvin Industries Inc.(ARV:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Yale Program to Strengthen New Haven Offers University's Employees Money to Buy Homes
In an effort to stabilize New Haven's impoverished neighborhoods, Yale University said today that it would give its employees $20,000 if they buy homes in the city before January 1996.
The employees would receive $2,000 a year for 10 years.
The program is open to any Yale employee who works more than 20 hours a week, the university said.


Books of The Times; The Conflicting Lessons of Vietnam
The War Within  America's Battle Over Vietnam  By Tom Wells  Illustrated. 706 pages.
University of California Press. $30.
Nearly two decades after the end of the Vietnam War, the shelf of books about the longest war in American history continues to grow.
We turn to the new books not for nostalgia but because Vietnam provides perspective on when and why our armed forces should or should not be used.
The authoritative private Center for Defense Information in Washington tells us there are 24 "hot" wars around the world today.


BELL ATLANTIC CORP. (BEL:N)
Fueled by a rebounding economy and strong demand for cellular telephones, the Bell Atlantic Corporation reported yesterday that net income jumped 17.1 percent in the first quarter to $389.2 million, or 89 cents a share.
After excluding one-time expenses for the first quarters of 1993 and 1994, the Philadelphia-based regional Bell company said that its net income had climbed 12.3 percent while revenues rose 6.6 percent, to $3.37 billion.


Record Is Obstacle
CLIFF GUSTAFSON, the University of Texas coach, would like to enjoy tying Southern Cal's ROD DEDEAUX for career college baseball victories.
But he can't.
His Longhorns are trying to break a slump and make the playoffs, and he doesn't want any added pressure on the team when his players attempt to give him the record Friday night.


Cuomo Faults Lawmakers In Budget Lag
In his strongest words yet on the issue, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo lashed out today at state legislative leaders for failing to end their impasse over the $33 billion state budget, now three weeks late.
At a news conference hastily arranged after the Legislature had adjourned for the weekend, Mr.
Cuomo told reporters that the leaders had seriously jeopardized the state's chances of having its bond ratings, now the lowest in the country, upgraded this year.
Lower bond ratings increase the cost of borrowing by the state.


Accounts
*
Whataburger Inc., Corpus Christi, Tex., to the Marketing Continuum, Dallas, tohandle the restaurant chain's account, previously at the Richards Group, Dallas.Billings were estimated at $8 million to $10 million.
Glamour Shots Licensing Inc., Oklahoma City, to Richards/Gravelle, Dallas, to handle the franchised fashion photography studio's account, previously atBarkley &amp; Evergreen Advertising, Shawnee Mission, Kan.
Billings were estimatedat $3 million to $5 million.


Belo (A.H.) Corp.(BLC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Face in the Gallery of Picasso's Muses Is Given a New Name
A leading Picasso scholar says that hundreds of paintings and drawings made by the artist during the 1920's were inspired by an infatuation with the American socialite and jazz-age luminary Sara Murphy, and are not, as has long been thought, idealized figures or depictions of the woman who was Picasso's wife at the time, Olga.
Among the works is the Neo-Classical masterpiece 'Woman in White' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The assertion that some kind of romance took place between Picasso and Sara Murphy is made by William Rubin, the Picasso scholar and former head of the department of painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art, in 'The Pipes of Pan: Picasso's Aborted Love Song to Sara Murphy,' an article to be published in the May issue of the magazine Art News.


Calmat Co. (CZM:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Schools Are Target of Budget Ire After Cuts by Trenton
For months, Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman has been telling New Jerseyans that local property taxes are their responsibility, not hers.
On Tuesday a scant turnout of voters apparently acted on that message, rejecting school budgets and their higher taxes in almost half the state's school districts.
According to the New Jersey School Boards Association, a very light turnout of about 15 percent of eligible voters approved 51.6 percent of proposed school operating budgets, the lowest approval rate in two decades.
Statewide, more voters voted against new school spending plans than voted for them.
All but a handful of the proposed budgets included spending increases and corresponding tax increases.
A total of 285 local budgets were approved and 268 were rejected.


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (BGE:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fieldcrest Cannon (FLD:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sysco Corp.(SYY:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Banks' Securities Trading Makes Comptroller Fearful
In a sharp policy shift, the Clinton Administration's top bank regulator expressed alarm today that the nation's biggest commercial banks were taking too many risks in trading stocks, bonds, foreign currencies and other financial instruments.
He said new regulatory limits might be needed.
The official, Eugene A. Ludwig, the Comptroller of the Currency, criticized two related but distinct approaches banks have taken to expand their securities trading as traditional corporate lending operations have withered.
One approach involves increasingly speculative trading operations; the other involves derivatives, which are complicated contracts that allow traders to bet on the direction of future price changes in stocks, bonds, currencies and other financial instruments.


Lotus Shares Plunge 12.2% Despite 74% Profit Increase
Despite what analysts deemed a strong first-quarter report yesterday from the Lotus Development Corporation, investors sent the company's shares tumbling.
The software maker, famous for its Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet package and hot-selling Notes communications software, saw its stock price plummet 12.2 percent yesterday as investors were apparently displeased with the company's revenue growth.


Federal-Mogul Corp.(FMO:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sonoco Products Co.(SONO:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Executive Changes
ABEX INC., Hampton, N.H., appointed Richard D. Power vice president and chief financial officer.
FIRST CITIZENS FINANCIAL CORP., Silver Spring, Md., named Herbert W. Jorgensen chairman and chief executive of the company and its subsidiary, Citizens Savings Bank.


New Head for Photo Center
The International Center of Photography has chosen Willis Hartshorn to be its director, it was announced yesterday.
Mr.
Hartshorn, now the deputy director for programs, will succeed Cornell Capa, the photographer who founded the center in Manhattan in 1974 and has headed it ever since.
Mr.
Hartshorn, 43, has worked at the center in various capacities since 1982.
He was selected after a search that began last May when Mr.
Capa, who is 76, announced he would retire this June.


Clinton Urging NATO Attacks To Deter Serbs
President Clinton appealed today to the American public and to Russia and the European allies to support his call for a major expansion of NATO's military role in trying to stop the fighting in Bosnia.
With the eastern Bosnian Muslim town of Gorazde all but overrun by Serbian forces, Mr.
Clinton acknowledged that his policy to date had proved inadequate.
He said it was time for the United States and its allies to make the Serbs "pay a higher price" for continued violence.


O'Neal Scores 53 In Quest For Title
Magic 121, Timberwolves 101
Shaquille O'Neal, taking aim at the National Basketball Association scoring title, poured in 53 points last night -- the highest total in the league this season -- to lead the Magic to a 121-101 victory over the Minnesota Timberwolves in Orlando, Fla.
O'Neal began the night trailing San Antonio's David Robinson by three-tenths of a point per game for the league's top scoring average.
He had 34 in the first half, and his career-high and franchise-record 53-point total moved him into first place with a 29.34 average with two games left in the regular season.


No Headline
"Laura would have been the first to blast the notion of blame. She knew what she was doing. She knew the  danger. She was there to  protect the Kurds. And I  think she's a hero." -- DAN PIPER, whose daughter, a second lieutenant, was killed over Iraq last week.  [ A16:1. ]


Vendors Protest a Crackdown by the City


Brocco, No Longer Ailing, Has an 'Awesome' Drill
Brocco, the West Coast's leading candidate for the Kentucky Derby, solved one problem yesterday.
He worked out at Churchill Downs and was cleared by the track's veterinarian to leave the "disabled list" and renew his pursuit of Holy Bull.
"I watched him work," reported the veterinarian, Mitzi Fisher, "and I saw nothing wrong. It was an awesome work on this track."


Mead Corp.(MEA:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Many consumers are shrugging off the higher interest rates that have sent the stock and bond markets into a tailspin, and some may even benefit from the increases.  [ Page D1. ]
Home construction snapped back in March from midwinter doldrums as builders broke ground at a rate 12.1 percent faster than February's, the Commerce Department reported.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
A report by Reuters in the Company News column of Business Day in some editions on Tuesday, about the Boise Cascade Corporation's plans to expand its Office Products Distribution division, misstated details of the expansion.
Besides acquiring the Reliable Corporation, the Boise Cascade division is also acquiring Capitol Office Products of Atlanta.
Capitol is not a unit of Reliable.


Once Again, U.S. Indicts Towers Financial Head
A Federal grand jury in New York yesterday charged Steven Hoffenberg, the failed New York financier, with conspiring to defraud thousands of investors of more than $450 million during a six-year period, and of obstructing efforts by securities regulators to investigate his activities.
Mr.
Hoffenberg was scheduled to be arraigned this morning in United States District Court in Manhattan.
His lawyer, Jeffrey C. Hoffman, declined to comment on the charges, saying he would make "a significant statement" about his client's defense after the hearing.


Singapore's Drug Policy Cuts Addiction
To the Editor:
I have just returned from a fact-finding trip to Singapore.
The aim was to study first hand the drug policy of this city state.
During my stay, I did not observe any of the features of a totalitarian regime, which were reported April 10, and which I experienced first hand as a youth in occupied France (1940-44) where imprisonment or deportation to death camps punished the mere expression of dissent.


Saint Subber, Theater Producer And a Neil Simon Partner,76
Saint Subber, the theatrical impresario who produced Neil Simon's most important early hits on Broadway, died on Tuesday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 76.
The cause was heart failure, said Arthur Greene, his acountant and business manager.


Lockheed Corp.(LK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


CHRONICLE
Ms.
Kazarnovskaya has nothing on the Tokyo String Quartet, which had its own tense moments this week.
The quartet boarded a plane in Denver on Sunday morning, bound for a matinee concert and reception in Detroit, but the plane was grounded because of a fuel leak.


Georgia Gulf Corp.(GGC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sears Forms Venture to Create Cosmetics Line
Watch out, Estee Lauder, Elizabeth Arden, Lancome and Revlon.
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company is going into the beauty business.
The giant retailer announced yesterday that it had formed a joint venture to develop and market a line of cosmetics that will be sold in Sears stores and through direct-marketing efforts.
Sears's partner in the venture is Pierre Rogers, who is leaving the French cosmetics company Lancome, where he was president of its vast American business for the last three years.


Musing on Religion, Giuliani Extols His Vision of Tolerance
In a wide-ranging speech on religion and politics, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said last night that civic tolerance must include acceptance of people's right to express religious views, whether liberal or conservative -- including opposition to gay marchers in the St.
Patrick's Day parade.
The thought was part of a highly personal address, delivered at a memorial for the late Rabbi Marc H. Tanenbaum, in which the Mayor discussed the importance of religious values and, in particular, how Roman Catholicism had provided the moral structure for his life.


Bosnia: A Promising Package
If the new military and diplomatic moves announced by President Clinton yesterday afternoon win endorsement from NATO and Russian leaders, they will constitute the most promising international initiative yet to bring the two-year-old Bosnian war to a workable diplomatic settlement.
The package includes proposals for extending the kind of NATO air threats that now protect Sarajevo to the other five U.N.-declared protected cities, tightening enforcement of international economic sanctions against Serbia and taking unspecified steps to better coordinate U.S., European and Russian diplomacy.
Formal NATO endorsement of the package is considered likely and Russian approval is at least a strong possibility.


Furniture Throws A Romantic Curve
Teen-agers wearing cow and bull costumes were standing on street corners passing out leaflets on the glories of leather furniture.
They were joined by a man wearing a fabric-covered sandwich board that looked like a mattress.
But the 69,000 visitors to the Spring International Home Furnishings Market in High Point, a small city reveling in magnolias, dogwood and apple trees in full bloom, weren't there just to buy everyday furnishings.
At the nine-day market, which opened to the trade last Thursday, the 2,100 exhibitors were selling romance in the shape of furniture.
Consumers will see the furniture in stores in six months.
Unlike fashion shows, where the clothes shown on the runway are usually adapted for the stores (hemlines drop, for example), the furniture industry delivers to the stores what it shows at the market.


A Face in the Gallery of Picasso's Muses Is Given a New Name
A leading Picasso scholar says that hundreds of paintings and drawings made by the artist during the 1920's were inspired by an infatuation with the American socialite and jazz-age luminary Sara Murphy, and are not, as has long been thought, idealized figures or depictions of the woman who was Picasso's wife at the time, Olga.
Among the works is the Neo-Classical masterpiece 'Woman in White' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
The assertion that some kind of romance took place between Picasso and Sara Murphy is made by William Rubin, the Picasso scholar and former head of the department of painting and sculpture at the Museum of Modern Art, in 'The Pipes of Pan: Picasso's Aborted Love Song to Sara Murphy,' an article to be published in the May issue of the magazine Art News.


Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.  (BMY:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Board of Education Chops 7 From Its Own Staff
Winds of austerity are pummeling the New York City school system as the Mayor and the schools chancellor trim the bureaucracy, and yesterday a chilly draft even blew through the 11th floor of Board of Education headquarters in Brooklyn, where the seven board members have their offices.
The seven members voted unanimously to eliminate seven of the 39 full-time positions on the board's own staff.
Two of the positions had been vacant, and the other five employees facing layoffs were eligible to apply for severance packages, said Robert Terte, a board spokesman.


Augat Inc.(AUG:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rosenbach to Canada
The Arizona Cardinals released quarterback TIMM ROSENBACH from his contract so he could sign as a free agent with Hamilton of the Canadian Football League, the Cardinals announced yesterday.
Rosenbach retired before the 1993 season, saying he wanted to compete in rodeo.
He also said he wanted to finish his degree at Washington State.


Senator Assails L.I.R.R. Chief as Out of Touch
The president of the Long Island Railroad may be unable to fulfill his responsibilities because he is habitually away from New York, the chairman of the State Senate Transportation Committee contended yesterday, as contradictory accounts emerged of where the president, Charles W. Hoppe, spends his off-duty hours.
Mr.
Hoppe was at his home near Washington, during a storm on Feb. 10-11 that crippled his railroad.
A report issued last Thursday by the inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, parent of the L.I.R.R., cast doubt on Mr.
Hoppe's account that he remained at his home in Arlington, Va., because ice and snow made travel impossible.
He had gone to Washington to meet with a Federal labor official about an impending railway strike, he said, and he could keep in touch with his office from his house.


No Headline


Beverly Enterprises (BEV:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Home Building Shows a Brisk Recovery
Home construction snapped back smartly in March from midwinter weather doldrums as builders broke ground at a rate 12.1 percent faster than February's, the Commerce Department reported today.
Last month's annual pace of 1,473,000 new dwellings was somewhat brisker than expected and embraced all regions of the country, though half the advance was concentrated in the Midwest.


Uncommonly Restful Garden Days
For gardeners who would like to exchange a few days of weeding and watering for days of horticulture talks and meanderings through a nursery's gardens, White Flower Farm in Litchfield, Conn., is offering four Saturday seminars.
Each will include lectures by two horticulturists, lunch and a guided tour.
At the first seminar, on May 14, two garden designers, Joe Eck and Wayne Winterrowd, will speak about their garden in Readsboro, Vt., over the course of four seasons.


DEAN WITTER, DISCOVER &amp; CO. (DWD:N)
Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company said yesterday that its net income for the first quarter rose 54 percent, to $209.5 million, or $1.23 a share.
The company's credit card and stock brokerage units both performed well.
Philip J. Purcell, Dean Witter's chairman, said in an interview that the profits in the credit card business were surprisingly high.
"The lower credit write-offs and revenue increases proved more positive than we had expected, but the trends in the basic business were what we expected," he said.


The White House Is Becoming 'Green'
PRESIDENT CLINTON has a new "Golden Carrot" refrigerator, the most energy-efficient model in the country, said Catherine R. Zoi, deputy director and chief of staff of the White House Office of Environmental Policy.
President and Mrs.
Clinton and their daughter, Chelsea, now also have recycling bins so they can do their own sorting.
Old lighting fixtures in the White House and the Old Executive Office Building have been replaced with energy-efficient models.
Water conservation devices have been installed throughout both buildings and even in the sprinkler system on the grounds.
And skylights that had been painted or soiled over time have been cleaned and revamped to illuminate and warm stairwells in the Old Executive Office Building.


C.I.A. Head Says He Misspoke On Possible Espionage Cases
The Director of Central Intelligence said today that he was wrong when he said there were many espionage cases that would be brought against people within the Government.
The Director, R. James Woolsey, had said in a televised interview on Tuesday that there "absolutely" would be "a fair number of espionage cases" against people at several different Government agencies.
He repeated the assertion several times.


Apache Corp.(APA:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Blacks and Whites Wonder, Will Apartheid's Wrongs Now Be Reversed?
The last time power changed hands in South Africa, the winning party celebrated here by evacuating and bulldozing what was, in gilded memory, a vibrant, multiracial neighborhood, a South Africa that might have been.
When all 58,000 blacks had been loaded on trucks and driven away to a segregated township that would become Soweto, the apartheid zealots of the National Party, still dizzy with their victory in the 1948 elections, fumigated the land and built little stucco-covered cottages for the middle-class Afrikaner electorate.
They called it Triomf -- "Triumph."


Muckler's New System Has Worked for Sabres
With such offensive weapons as Pat LaFontaine, Alexander Mogilny, Dale Hawerchuk and Craig Simpson, the Sabres were destined to be one of the most menacing teams in the National Hockey League this season.
But after 16 games, LaFontaine underwent reconstructive surgery on his right knee and, shortly thereafter, Simpson was sidelined with recurring back problems.
Both were lost for the season.
So, it seemed, were Buffalo's playoff chances.


Allies Give a Provisional Yes to Air Strikes on the Serbs
The NATO allies gave a provisional yes today to a request from the United Nations Secretary General, backed by President Clinton, for authorization to ask for air strikes to protect "safe areas" in Bosnia from attacks like the Serbian nationalist assault on Gorazde.
Currently, NATO is pledged to defend only one of the safe areas, Sarajevo.
It conducted limited air strikes last week against Serbian attackers near the safe area of Gorazde, but only to protect United Nations forces there, not to defend the safe area itself.


Giants' Young Returns In Time for the Draft
He has lost 40 pounds, which surely makes his doctor happy.
He goes home a little earlier and has accepted his physician's advice to take it easier this month.
So after "a tough winter," Giants General Manager George Young is ready to face what could be a tougher spring.
Young went back to work two weeks ago after spending several days in the hospital last month.
According to several people close to the situation, his illness -- he won't say what the doctors told him -- forced him to consider retirement after this season.
Yesterday, Young looked good and was his usually robust and humorous self.


Raychem Corp.(RYC:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Economic Scene; Controlling world population growth: where to put the money.
THE world's population is expected to double by 2050, with most of the increase in countries that can ill afford to feed or educate more children.
And many -- probably most -- people think they know what to do about it.
The historian and futurist Paul Kennedy, for example, writes that "the only practical way to insure a decrease in fertility rates and thus population growth is to introduce cheap and reliable birth control."
In fact, the widespread view that what stands in the way of population stability is the lack of a perfect contraceptive is no longer taken seriously by researchers.
Establishment demographers, including John Bongaarts of the Population Council, acknowledge that family planning can have only a "limited impact on population growth." And some economists would go further.


Jewish Teen-Ager Fights Return to His Parents
The 15-year-old Jewish boy at the heart of a custody fight testified today he was dissatisfied with the religious life style his parents provided during a four-day stay with them in March.
The complaints by the youth, Shai Fhima Reuven, that his surroundings from March 17 to 21 did not allow him to be as strictly observant of his faith as he wished came at a hearing that opened in New York Family Court here amid an intriguing flurry of legal cross-currents and a high-stakes, high-pressure atmosphere.


Health Reform 'Providers' Would Aid the Poor; Benefit to Patients
To the Editor:
Your opposition to "any-willing-provider" legislation (editorial, April 11) is seriously misguided.
This reform, which is aimed at an increasingly common insurance abuse, would benefit not just health care providers but, more importantly, their patients.
An example from my own practice:


Brooklyn's Jones Packs Punch in Schools
Junior Jones isn't in Bushwick any more.
Not far from a 12-foot statue of Caesar Augustus, Jones, a ruler in his own right, stared up at Caesars Palace.
He is still in awe.


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric Co.(PCG:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


'So Little Leadership'
Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the retiring Chief of Naval Operations, had quite a quartet of defenders in his fight to save his four stars, and the pension that goes with them: the President, the Navy Secretary, the Defense Secretary and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Even so, he almost lost the battle; seven angry women understood what those four men seemingly did not.
In failing to thoroughly investigate the seamy Tailhook convention of 1991, Admiral Kelso failed his command.
The seven women were United States Senators, who met this week with 91 male colleagues to vote on whether the admiral should cap his career with full retirement honors.
They relied on logic, Navy protocols and the findings of the Navy's own judge, Capt.
William T. Vest Jr., who concluded that the admiral had lied about his own activities at Tailhook '91, and then used his rank to impede the investigations.
"It is appalling to me," Senator Patty Murray said, "that thirty admirals, two generals and three reserve generals attended Tailhook '91, and not one of those individuals exercised the responsibility of their command. And Admiral Kelso was at the top of that chain of command. So much authority, so little leadership."


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the first-quarter earnings of The New York Times Company referred incorrectly to a projected figure of $160 million.
It is the expected depreciation and amortization expense for the year, up from $129 million in 1993.
The company says it does not issue projections for operating profit.


Open Increases Prize Money
Citing a desire to make its tournament, the one the tennis stars rank last on the popularity list of the four Grand Slams, more "player-friendly," the United States Tennis Association's president, J. Howard (Bumpy) Frazer, announced yesterday that the 1994 United States Open would offer a record $9,360,100 in prize money.
Winners of the men's and women's singles events will each receive $550,000 for their two-week efforts, an increase of $15,000 from last year.
Frazer also announced that the U.S.T.A., which has already spent $27 million in architects' and filing fees for its controversial $180-plus million expansion of the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, expects to receive construction bids for the project from eight contractors by May 9.


Tambrands hopes a smaller version of the Tampax tampon will lift its flagging fortunes.
BELEAGUERED Tambrands Inc., one of the most troubled name-brand consumer marketers, is hoping an innovative new product will help revive its flagging fortunes.
Beginning in September, Tambrands plans a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign by BBDO New York -- its largest introductory effort ever -- for Tampax Lites, a smaller version of its Tampax tampon.
It provides less absorbency for days when a woman's menstrual flow is lighter and she might use a sanitary pad or shield, products Tambrands does not market.


The Massacres in Rwanda: Hope Is Also a Victim
Tiny Rwanda has never been strategically significant in world politics.
But for more than two decades this poor, overpopulated central African country has been a successful laboratory for foreign aid.
Its small size, cooperative government, relative lack of corruption and excellent roads, telephone systems and electric utilities attracted hundreds of millions of dollars to test development projects and made the country largely dependent on international generosity.


RESULTS PLUS
GYMNASTICS  Shcherbo Qualifies for Three Finals  Vitaly Shcherbo, winner of six Olympic golds in 1992, recovered his poise to take center stage at the world championships yesterday in Brisbane, Australia.
Shcherbo, of Belarus, qualified for this weekend's individual finals for the parallel bars, vault and horizontal bars.
Shcherbo's relaxed mood was in sharp contrast to his petulant display on Tuesday when he angrily stormed out of the arena after a spectacular fall from the pommel horse.
In the women's event, the defending world champion, Shannon Miller of the United States, declared fit to compete in Brisbane only three weeks ago after a stomach muscle injury, easily qualified for floor exercise and beam finals on Sunday.
A compatriot, Dominique Dawes, overshadowed her teammate, qualifying higher in both disciplines. (Reuters) TENNIS  Little Trouble for Stich and Edberg  Michael Stich and Stefan Edberg, the top two seeds at the Monte Carlo Open, breezed to straight-set victories yesterday over Spanish players.
Stich needed 68 minutes to dispose of Jordi Burillo, 6-3, 6-3.
Edberg used only 54 minutes to defeat Alberto Costa, 6-1, 6-2.
Edberg meets another Spaniard in the third round, Alex Corretja, who eliminated 16th-seeded Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, 6-3, 6-4.
The defending champion, Sergi Bruguera, defeated a fellow Spaniard, Javier Sanchez, 6-1, 6-3. (AP)


Swelling in the Brain Is Threatening Nixon
The former President remained in critical condition, battling a swelling in the brain, a potentially fatal complication of the stroke he suffered on Monday.
The condition, cerebral edema, can put pressure on the brain stem and compromise many of the body's vital functions.
Article, page A12.


Multimedia Inc.(MMEDC:NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Market Place; QVC hopes a new channel will make it the Gap of TV shopping.
IF Barry Diller, the chairman of QVC Network, has his way, a popular shopping mall T-shirt slogan -- "Get out of my way, I'm shopping" -- could become obsolete.
Mr.
Diller is hoping that an even broader audience than already watches QVC will soon shop with the network without budging from their homes.
Next month, Mr.
Diller will start Q2, a shopping channel aimed at consumers who are younger and more active than those who buy from QVC Network, the company's primary service.


No Lead Is Safe, but Yankees Escape With Victory
As one imperfection led to another and the zany game reached its final moments, the question bounced from one dugout at Yankee Stadium to the other: Can anybody here save this game?
The Seattle Mariners are the only American League team that has not earned a save this season, and when that distinction continued last night, Manager Lou Piniella responded by assaulting a telephone in the dugout after a four-run eighth inning -- with all of them unearned -- had given the Yankees a 7-4 lead against Mariner reliever Bobby Ayala.


Newell Co.(NWL:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Faxes Produce Numbers Arrest In Harlem Ring
For 30 years, Raymond Marquez was a thorn to law-enforcement agencies and a legend to countless gamblers in Harlem and East Harlem.
With a clientele whose wagers ranged from a dime to more than $1,000 a day on numbers games, the authorities say Mr.
Marquez, whose nickname is Spanish Raymond, built a gambling empire that raked in about $30 million a year.


Stanley Works (SWK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Harper's and Health Lead National Magazine Awards
Harper's Magazine won three 1994 National Magazine Awards yesterday, topping Health magazine, which had two awards, and nine other magazines with one each.
The prizes, announced at a luncheon at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, are the most coveted awards in the magazine industry.
The prize for general excellence for magazines with circulation of more than one million went to Business Week for three articles, including one that was put together in 24 hours on the failed merger of Bell Atlantic and TCI.
The award was accepted by Stephen B. Shepard, the magazine's editor in chief.
Mr.
Shepard was also the ceremony's co-host as the outgoing president of the American Society of Magazine Editors.
The awards are sponsored by the society and administered by the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism.


CHRONICLE
LYUBA KAZARNOVSKAYA was about to go to bed on Tuesday night when the phone rang.
It was CHARLES RIEKER at the Metropolitan Opera, with an urgent message for the singer, a backup for CAROL VANESS.
Miss Vaness felt ill during the third act of "Otello," in which she was singing Desdemona, and could not continue.
"I had just told my husband that it's 10:20, so they've probably started the fourth act and I can go to sleep," Ms.
Kazarnovskaya said.
Instead, she jumped into a taxi and less than 15 minutes later found herself on stage at the opera house in costume and wig but minus full makeup.


Compaq's Earnings Double, Surpassing Expectations
The Compaq Computer Corporation reported first-quarter earnings yesterday that surpassed Wall Street's expectations and showed that the company was setting the pace for profitability and sales growth in the personal computer industry.
Compaq's profit for the quarter more than doubled, to $213 million, compared with $102 million in the first quarter of 1993.
Its revenues increased 41 percent, to $2.3 billion, from the quarter a year earlier.


Dr. Carl Pfaffmann Dies at 80; Psychologist Explored the Senses
Dr.
Carl Pfaffmann, a physiological psychologist who explored the senses of smell and taste and their pathways in the brain, died on Saturday at the Wadsworth Glen in Middletown, Conn.
He was 80 and lived in Middletown.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said a spokesman for Rockefeller University, where he served as its first Vincent and Brooke Astor Professor.


Nominee Seen for Fed Seat
President Clinton's senior economic advisers tentatively plan to recommend that he nominate a University of California economist, Janet L. Yellen, to the Federal Reserve Board, a senior Administration official said tonight.
Robert E. Rubin, the head of the National Economic Council, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, reached a consensus at a meeting late Tuesday, the official said.


Health Reform 'Providers' Would Aid the Poor; A Vulnerable Group
To the Editor:
The editorial "A Sneak Attack on Health Reform" (April 11) calling a section of the Clinton health care plan a "multibillion-dollar giveaway to major manufacturers" unfairly characterizes a provision designed to guarantee affordable health insurance to non-working, middle-income Americans age 55 to 64.


Great Lakes Chemical Corp.(GLK:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Royce Perez Blackburn; Musical Performer, 69
Royce Perez Blackburn, one of the Blackburn Twins who appeared in musicals, on television and in films, died on April 14 at his home in New Ipswich, N.H.
He was 69.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Robin Blackburn Ellis.


Mattel Inc.(MAT:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Financial Management Corp.(FFM:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sundstrand Corp.(SNS:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.75
6.25-6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.71
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.72
3.74
2.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.17
4.20
2.90
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.02
7.08
5.85
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.32
7.36
6.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.13
8.17
7.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.41
6.45
5.92
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Handshakes After Games Return as Schools Relent
Battered by bad publicity, the administrators of a suburban high school sports league have retreated from a policy that banned formal handshakes at the end of sporting events.
The purpose of the ban, instituted last month in the Marmonte League in Ventura County, had been to avoid the violence that is increasingly becoming part of professional and amateur sports.
The handshakes, school officials said, often touched off fistfights.


Enrollment Teams Hunt The Forgotten Corners
Election canvassers are venturing from dawn to night these days across the nation's great scattering of ramshackle black housing camps, arriving like post-colonial missionaries to hurriedly enfranchise the vast hidden underclass of apartheid's legacy.
"These are our people -- this is our vote," Mike Tukai declared passionately as he canvassed on behalf of Nelson Mandela in a cinder-block barracks tucked down a back road here where nine black miners on their lunch-hour nervously awaited him.


Minority Business Chiefs Uneasy Over City-Contract Plan
Minority and women business owners responded skeptically yesterday to a new city procurement system intended to aid their companies and other small businesses, saying it does not go far enough in filling the void left by the elimination of a more aggressive affirmative-action contracting program.
The new system, described by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani at a news conference yesterday, is aimed at opening up the bidding process for thousands of small city contracts, enabling more businesses owned by women and minorities to participate.


Athenian Games
Rarely has a state visit threatened to do more damage to American interests than that of the Greek Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, which begins today.
President Clinton should publicly reproach Greece for its economic embargo against the Republic of Macedonia and get a firm commitment that the Greek leader will stop coddling Serbia.
The Greeks are upset over Macedonia's name, which they consider the exclusive property of their northernmost region, over its constitution, which promises protection for Macedonians outside its borders, and over its flag, which contains the Hellenistic 16-pointed star.
Mr.
Papandreou's predecessor as Prime Minister, the conservative Constantine Mitsotakis, played on the dispute to retain his thin parliamentary majority.
But Mr.
Papandreou, with a healthy advantage in the parliament, doesn't have that excuse.


California Nears Competition Among Electricity Suppliers
California took a significant step today toward opening its electric services market to competition in what experts say could become a national model involving billions of dollars in rate payments.
The state Public Utilities Commission voted unanimously to formulate rules under which eventually all consumers could shop for low electric rates within and outside the state, rather than being tied to a local utilities company.


Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp.(DNB:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


MCN Corp.(MCN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Critic's Notebook; Ingmar Bergman Adds to the Mosaic Of Autobiography
"From an early age onward," Ingmar Bergman writes about himself, "it was said that 'Ingmar has no sense of humor.' " He writes this in a deadpan manner many comedians would envy, by way of explaining why, in 1951, he happily directed commercials for soap called Breeze.
"They rescued me from a severe financial setback," he says of the television spots, adding that they "were made in good spirits. One can even overlook the fact that they promoted a soap that practically tore the skin off your body." Ah, the unknown Bergman.
He is everywhere in "Images: My Life in Film," a series of wry, lucid, ofter harsh reflections on his life's work that was published in Sweden in 1990 but appeared in English translation only three months ago.
New though it is, "Images" is not the most recent of Mr.
Bergman's books to appear here, and it is certainly not the last word on the little Ingmar, "considered sullen and too sensitive." It is not easy to keep up with his literary output since he stopped directing feature films in 1982.
"Sunday's Children," an exquisite autobiographical film about his boyhood, was written by Mr.
Bergman and directed by his 32-year-old son, Daniel.
It is now at the Film Forum in the South Village.
And Ingmar Berman's novel of "Sunday's Children" has just been published as well.
In the hands of most former film makers, the novel might be a watered-down version of the movie.
But "Sunday's Children" is as elegant, honest and emotinally brutal as "Fanny and Alexander"; though its scope is slender, this brief novel is a perfectly shaped treasure that stands among the finest work of Mr.
Bergman's career.
The freshness of "Sunday's Children" in both forms is amazing, because Mr.
Bergman has written this story before.
It exists nearly whole, in subject and shape, in the next-to-last chapter of "The Magic Lantern" (1987), the first of the autobiographical books that have made Mr.
Bergman, now 75, one of the most alluring writers of recent years.
In "The Magic Lantern," one July the young Ingmar accompanies his father, Erik, from their country house to a nearby village where Erik Bergman, a minister, is to preach.
Ingmar is a Sunday's child, according to folklore, able to see fairies and other visions.
He takes the trip with his father by ferry and bicycle, and recalls seeing in the church a stained-glass window depicting "Death leading a dance to the Dark Lands, wielding his scythe like a flag." - a picture that would become the final scene of "The Seventh Seal" and one of the most famouse Bergman images of all.
Comically, Ingmar's older brother, Dag, promises to pay him for eating a live worm, then reneges on the offer after the boy with the notoriously fussy stomach has swallowed the creature.
These are major incidents in "Sunday's Children," too.
More striking, that chapter in "The Magic Lantern" includes flashes forward in time to the adult Ingmar Bergman visiting his elderly, widowed father.
Their relationship is one of fear, anger, coldness.
In expanded form, those forward flashes become the harsh emotional underside of the lyrically beautiful "Sunday's Children," on screen and on the page.
"I am forever living in my childhood," Mr.
Bergman writes in "Images." As the details of those July days echo from memory through "The Magic Lantern" on to "Sunday's Children," they hold the key to the art of Mr.
Bergman's memoirs.
He keeps returning to his past, reassessing it, distilling its meaning, offering it to his audience in dazzling new shapes.
In "Sunday's Children," the young Ingmar is an 8-year-old called Pu (on screen played by the golden-haired, wide-eyed Henrik Linnros).
He is a serious child who both loves and hates his father and is already troubled by the idea of death.
When film and novel flash ahead to 1968, the 50-year-old Ingmar is still angry and intransigent on his visits to Erik.
In a dizzying swirl of connections between father and son, the middle-aged Ingmar isplayed on screen by Per Myrberg, who looks nothing like the real Mr.
Bergman.
But his father is played by Thommy Berggren, who as he ages looks quite a bit like Ingmar Bergman today.
Judging the adult Ingmar harshly, Mr.
Bergman has made "Sunday's Children" a huge gesture of reconciliation to his now-dead father.
It is also a great gift to his son. (It is easy to speculate that Mr. Bergman's ramshackle personal life, with eight children spread among four wives and one lover, might make usch gestures especially prized.) Daniel Bergman mad children's films and worked for television before filming "Sunday's Children," his first feature.
When the project was conceived, father and son agreed that Ingmar would write without consulting his son, and Daniel would direct without his father's help.
Ingmar Bergman stayed away from the set of "Sunday's Children."
The importance of teh screenplay is suggested gy the vast difference between "The Best Intentions," the rich, trenchant 1991 film about his parents that was written by Ingmar Bergman and directed by Bille August, and the sprawling fiasco of "The House of the Spirits," the current film written and directed by Mr.
August.
Only the luxurious scenery in those two films is similar.
In "Sunday's Children," too, capturing the graceful picturesque quality of two days in the country is the easy part.
Daniel Bergman's cinematographer, Tony Forsberg, even substituted for Sven Nykvist on "Fanny and Alexander" for a few weeks when Mr.
Nykvist got the flu.
But Daniel Bergman has done more than create a pretty film that echoes his father's lyricism.
Daniel and his actors capture the tormented emotions beneath the picturesque summer in the country.
Pu is a darling, sympathetic little boy.
"Shut your mouth, Pu," his Uncle Carl says.
"You look stupid with you mouth open." The comment is repeated by Pu's nanny and by Day, but you have to return to "Magic Lantern" to discover why Pu's mouth is always gaping.
Adenoid probglems caused the young Ingmar to breathe through his mouth, "which made me look stupid," Mr.
Bergman writes.
Pu is also preternaturally serious, like the famously humorless little Ingmar.
Both film and novel rely on his relentless questions.
Pu keeps asking "What?" like a nervous tic.
When a servant tells a ghost story about a local watchmaker who hanged himself, the tale becomes a fantastic set piece on the page and an eerie black-and-white vision on screen.
The watchmaker kills a demonic gradfather clock and a small, fully formed woman who lives inside it.
Later, Pu goes to the place where the watchmaker killed himself and asks in a dream, "When will I die?" The watchmaker answers, "Always," and idea that the film maker has carried with him throughout his career.
Similar though the two versions of "Sunday's Children" are, each makes a unique contribution to the grand mosaic of the Bergman biography.
On screen, the adult Ingmar's coldness is more visceral; in the novel the connections between past and present are stronger and more resonant.
When Pu sits on the edge of the ferry and dangles his feet in the water, his father swats him on the head in fury, which leads directly to a flash forward.
"What did I do wrong?" the aged father asks, having discovered his dead wife's diaries, which call their marriage "a life-fiasco." The adult Ingmar coldly, even cruelly, tells his father how frightened the family was of his anger.
Then he walks away.
The scene returns to Pu and his father, who apologizes for pulling the child away from his dangerous perch on the ferry so violently.
"I was scared," he says.
"When you're scared, you get angry." The explanation goes back to "The Magic Lantern" and to the heart of the Bergman family's anger and unhappiness.
Pu, having overheard his parents arguing, fears that his father will leave; Erik fears losing his wife; over the years, Ingmar's anger becomes implacable.
Mr.
Bergman deftly positions his leaps in time to reflect backward and forward, so the present illuminates the past and the past explains the present.
On screen, when the camera returns from 1968 to Pu's boyhood, the flashes forward almost seem to have been prophetic visions of this Sunday's child.
On the page, the effect is the opposite, as the voice of Ingmar Bergman today is heard shaping his past.
On their way home from the sermon, Pu and his father are caught in a storm.
The father puts his coat around Pu, and the story jumps ahead to Erik Bergman's deathbed.
Erik whispers a blessing on his son, who is unable to understand what his father is mumbling.
As the story returns to the past.
Erik once more puts his coat around Pu, echoing the gesture of blessing.
"Sunday's Children" itself is a blessing that Ingmar Bergman has bestowed on Daniel.
This son had the good sense and talent to appreciate the gift and turn it into an enduring Bergman film.
On Screen and Page
"Sunday's Children," directed by Daniel Bergman from a screenplay by Ingmar Bergman, is playing at the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
Tickets: $7.50.
Screening times and information: (212) 727-8110.
Here is information on the books by Ingmar Bergman mentioned in the accompanying article.
"THE BEST INTENTIONS: A NOVEL" (Arcade Publishing, 298 pages, $22.95).
"IMAGES: MY LIFE IN FILM" (Arcade Publishing, 439 pages, $27.95).
"THE MAGIC LANTERN: AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY" (Penguin Paperback, $10.95).
"SUNDAY'S CHILDREN: A NOVEL" (Arcade Publishing, 153 pages, $16.95). The Winter's Tale
By William Shakespeare; directed by Adrian Noble; set by Anthony Ward; lighting by Chris Parry, recreated for the tour by Mike Gunning; music by Shaun Davey; movement by Sue Lefton; sound by Paul Slocombe, recreated for the tour by Michael McCoy; music director, Roger Hellyer.
The Royal Shakespeare Company presented by the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Harry Lichtenstein, president and executive producer.
At the Brooklyn Academy of Music Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Camillo . . .
Paul Jesson Polixenes . . .
Julian Curry Leontes . . .
John Nettles Hermione . . .
Suzanne Burden
Paulina . . .
Gemma Jones Autolycus . . .
Mark Hadfield Mamillius . . .
Jeremy Levitsky Old Shepherd . . .
Jeffery Dench Florizel . . .
Barnaby Kay Perdita . . .
Phyllida Hancock


Abroad at Home; Clinton On South Africa
"It's amazing," President Clinton said.
"Think of it contrast what we see in Gorazde with what we see about to happen in South Africa.
"I believe that if the  [ South African ]  election comes off well, it will send a message around the world that there is another way to deal with these problems. If it can be done in South Africa, how can you justify the old-fashioned killing and fighting and dying over a piece of land . . . in other places?"


Singapore Orders 12 Lashes for Hong Kong Youth


On My Mind; Bomb, Bill, Bomb
After more than a year of cogitation, President Clinton has revealed his strategy for peace in Bosnia: bombbomb.
I can't get it through my head that he really wants to go down in history, forever down, as Bomber Bill.
Will that be what it all amounted to, all the idealistic Clintonianism?
Just bombs away, without ever putting a peace plan on the table?
That's it?


NYNEX CORP. (NYN,N)
The Nynex Corporation said yesterday that earnings fell 14 percent for the first quarter as a result of a decline in revenues.
The company reported earnings of $290.6 million, compared with $331.1 million for the quarter a earlier before a $123.5 million charge for a change in accounting.
The company said its profits were hurt by a 1.4 percent decline in revenues, largely as a result of a $300 million reduction ordered in December by the New York State Public Service Commission.
The company said $78 million of that ordered cut came in the first quarter.


Noranda Inc.(NOR) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Devils Stop Power Play But Lose Nicholls
The Devils squeezed out another 2-1 triumph over the Sabres, even though they lost Bernie Nicholls, a key player on offense and on the penalty-killing unit.
Nicholls bruised his left knee in the first period and missed the last two periods.
Stephane Richer and Tommy Albelin scored the goals tonight.
But the keys to New Jersey's victory were the Devils' ability to kill five of six penalties and the goaltending of Martin Brodeur.


Nucor Corp.(NUE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Gooden and Relievers Knocked Around
The Mets needed Dwight Gooden to pitch into the late innings tonight at Dodger Stadium.
Weak in general and disastrous of late, the Mets' bullpen was depleted after an 11-inning nightmare on Wednesday night.
Gooden was not able to oblige.
After facing the minimum over the first three innings, Gooden allowed 13 of the next 19 Dodger batters to reach base over the next two and one-third innings, and six runs would score before Manager Dallas Green swallowed hard and called the bullpen.


Southern New England Telecommunications Corp.(SNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; With a nudge and a wink, campaigns hint at the forbidden and the new to sell common products.
IT'S daring!
It's tantalizing!
It's sinful!
It's outrageous!
It's a gum?
A juice drink?
Breaded chicken?
A growing number of advertising campaigns are portraying the products they promote as forbidden fruit, shiny apples in Madison Avenue's own version of the Garden of Eden.
The humorous television commercials and print advertisements liken the act of buying, wearing or consuming these products to rebellious behavior that is guaranteed to outrage and annoy overbearing authority figures and narrow-minded opponents of progress.


Westinghouse Electric Corp.(WX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nixon in a Deep Coma as Brain Swelling Worsens
Former President Richard M. Nixon slipped into a deep coma and was near death last night, three days after suffering a devastating stroke, officials at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center said.
A two-sentence statement issued by the hospital yesterday afternoon said the 81-year-old Mr.
Nixon was resting comfortably, but it provided no other details about his condition or whether he remained in an intensive-care unit.
No further statements were issued as of 1 A.M.


Restaurants
When the White House announced that it had appointed a new chef and that he was a man, there were gasps in kitchens across America.
Professional chefs had been convinced that the next person to take charge of the care and feeding of the First Family would be a woman.
That woman, they thought, would be Anne Rosenzweig.
Ms.
Rosenzweig, who has been the chef and owner of Arcadia since it opened 10 years ago, seemed like an obvious choice.
An early champion of American cooking, she is a tough and articulate person who has devoted herself to the causes of small farmers and female chefs.
She was also instrumental in the rejuvenation of the "21" Club.
The thought of having someone so passionate and intelligent in the White House kitchen was exciting.
Still, I have to admit that when it turned out she was not the final choice, I heaved a selfish sigh of relief; it's nice to know that Ms.
Rosenzweig will be staying in New York.


Books of The Times; Past Imperfect but Preferable to the Present
Stealing Time
By Mary Grimm
196 pages. Random House. $19.
In "The Life of the Body," one of the strongest stories in this impressive new collection, two sisters are discussing the man they both had an affair with in their youth.
"You know what it was about Roman?" one asks.
"It's because he was from before, from then." The other thinks: "She was right, of course. He had the attraction of belonging to our shared past, like the front porch of our old house, or the clothes and makeup we traded, the street light we parked under when we came home from dates."


E.P.A. Says a Smoking Ban Is Worth the Cost
The Clinton Administration estimated today that the benefits of banning smoking in all public places in the United States would outweigh the costs by at least $39 billion a year.
The report by the Environmental Protection Agency also estimated that more than one million smokers might quit immediately if such a ban, as proposed in a House bill now before the subcommittee on Health and the Environment, became law.


Helping to Take Old Wives Seriously
Juggling elements as disparate as ghost stories and golf jokes, the curling-iron skills of black hairdressers and the cultural ramifications of protecting New York City's watershed, the New York Folklore Society has made its way to the celebration of its 50th year.
The society, an early leader in the movement to nurture regional folklore, began in 1944 as a volunteer organization of academics, amateurs and aficionados who gathered to share legends and songs.
It has evolved into a clearinghouse for information on folk culture from all over the state.


House Adopts Crime Legislation To Build Jails and Hire Officers
The House today passed its anti-crime bill, a politically fetching package of tougher penalties and bigger prisons and more prevention programs.
Congress seems likely to vote a final version into law by Memorial Day, when the summer campaign season gets under way.
The vote was 285 to 141.
It came after a week of debating and amending increased the bill's stated cost to about $27.9 billion for the rest of the decade -- $13.5 billion for new prisons, $5.3 billion to hire 50,000 new local police officers and to expand Federal law enforcement, and $9.2 billion for crime prevention and drug treatment.


Critic's Notebook; Ingmar Bergman Adds to the Mosaic Of Autobiography
A profoundly uncertain sky looms over the kingdom of Sicilia in the Royal Shakespeare Company's touring production of "The Winter's Tale," at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Painted in expressionist swirls and strata, in colors that shift from cerulean blues to somber grays, it is as changeable as life itself, promising serenity and portending storms.
We may be in the land of fantasy, but it is a fantasy deeply rooted in a very real, universally felt sense of cosmic flux.
The great strength of Adrian Noble's staging of this late Shakespearean romance is its ability to fold its seemingly disparate elements into a gloriously symmetrical whole.
It slights neither the disturbing darkness of the play's first acts nor the sunny ebullience of the pastoral scenes, but it leavens each with comic and potentially tragic elements that inextricably link the two parts.


A Sure Way to Draw a Crowd


Cobb to Join the Packers
The free agent running back REGGIE COBB agreed to terms on a two-year contract with the Green Bay Packers, according to The Milwaukee Sentinel.
The deal is worth a minimum of $2.2 million, the newspaper said.
Cobb was a 1,000-yard rusher for Tampa Bay in 1992. (AP)


Kent Accepts Nothing but Perfection
It started out as a father and son ritual.
Alan Kent would ask for perfection, and Jeff Kent would try to deliver.
Maybe it would be a math test, or some homework, or a Little League game that Jeff pitched.
Maybe it would be something as simple as a faucet that needed to be fixed.
Always, though, the performance was expected to be flawless.
The lawn had to be mowed neatly, the weeds pulled by hand, the sides edged, the area around the sprinklers carefully clipped.
The workbench was to be kept spotless and organized, each tool put back in its place.
Jeff Kent can remember days when he failed to live up to his father's expectations.
Those lessons still stand.


Edward Neaher, 81, U.S. Judge For 2 Decades in Brooklyn, Dies
Judge Edward R. Neaher, who served on the Federal District Court in Brooklyn from 1971 until 1988, died on Tuesday at the Bethesda Rehabilitation and Nursing Center in Chevy Chase, Md.
Judge Neaher, who lived in Washington, was 81.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his daughter, Rosemary Niehuss.


Chubb Corp.(CB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cummins Engine (CUM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Bosnia Protest at U.S. Mission to United Nations


Home Video
Creating Demand
Above all a marketing operation, home video saves its best creative thinking for moving product.
For studios with movies to sell, creating a strategy occasionally leads to a tactic called the moratorium, otherwise known as putting a movie away for a while.


May It Please the Public; Lawyers Exploit Media Attention as a Defense Tactic
Almost as soon as William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby took over the defense of Colin Ferguson, the man charged with murdering six Long Island Rail Road commuters, they got on the horn.
In short order they held a news conference, appeared on talk shows and wrote an op-ed article in The Daily News, telling anyone who would listen that they would introduce a "black rage" insanity defense for their client.
This month, Nassau County prosecutors, complaining that the lawyers had violated a state ethics rule, asked a judge to order both sides to stop speaking about the case to the news media.
Judge Donald E. Belfi granted the request temporarily, while he considers Mr.
Kunstler's challenge to it.


Allied Signal Inc.(ALD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
COOPER ROLLS, Houston, the joint venture of Rolls-Royce P.L.C. and Cooper Industries, said it had received orders for gas compressors worth $39 million.
BIOMEDICAL WASTE SYSTEMS INC., Boston, said it had registered 9.5 million common shares with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Peter B. Seaman; Executive, 42
Peter B. Seaman, a real-estate sales executive, died on Saturday in Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
Mr.
Seaman, who lived in Greenwich, was 42.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Nancy.


Using Surprise Strategy, Kevorkian's Lawyers Seek Acquittal
Lawyers for Dr.
Jack Kevorkian said today that they would ask a judge to acquit him of charges of violating Michigan's ban on assisted suicide on the ground that the patient died in a county other than the one specified in the charges.
The disclosure of the surprise defense strategy came on the opening day of testimony in Michigan's first assisted-suicide trial.
Before today, the case seemed likely to be a straightforward test of whether a jury would be willing to convict Dr.
Kevorkian under Michigan's suicide law, which three other county judges have ruled unconstitutional since it took effect in February 1993.


CHRONICLE
In more family news, ROSEANNE ARNOLD apologized yesterday to her husband, TOM ARNOLD, and said she was dropping the divorce suit she filed on Monday, The Associated Press reported.
In a statement released by a spokesman for her publicists, PMK, she said that she had let "outsiders, nasty gossip and lies finally break me down and leave me reeling."


Reviews/Film; 'Bad Girls' Showing Off Such Good Costumes
"Bad Girls," a decorative western about female outlaws, has all the legitimacy of Cowpoke Barbie with a lot less entertainment value.
Conceived most enthusiastically as a fashion statement, it busily works endless corsets, bloomers, chaps, gun belts and cute hats into an otherwise entirely uninvolving plot.
The only good news is the casting: Madeleine Stowe, Andie MacDowell, Mary Stuart Masterson and Drew Barrymore are the glamorous wranglers who play prostitutes -- or "harlots," in the screenplay's quaint argot -- on the run.
When the film begins, they are all working in the same brothel.
And they flee together when one is accused of murder.
Once they're home on the range, they hatch a plan to run away to Oregon and manage a sawmill.
Here's a line you won't soon forget: "We sold our bodies; why can't we sell some wood?"


Philip Morris Chief Upbeat
Despite a growing clamor in Washington for greater regulation of the tobacco industry, the chairman and chief executive of the country's largest cigarette maker said today that he did not expect any new laws to be enacted that would tighten controls on the industry.
The prediction by Michael A. Miles was made at the Philip Morris Companies' annual shareholders meeting, at which many shareholders asked questions about the company's position on domestic tobacco issues.


Going Down With His Precinct
He got the call from the chief of patrol at 11 A.M.
He was told that several officers in his precinct were about to be arrested on corruption charges and that he had been relieved of his command.
The transfer to a desk job at headquarters was not a reflection on his performance as commanding officer of the 30th Precinct, he was told.
But as Capt.
John W. Seymour left the squat brick and stone station house in Harlem after being in charge for 18 months, he felt sick.
When he went home and told his wife, he said, she was devastated.


Art in Review
Frank Auerbach
Marlborough Gallery  40 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through April 30
This is the British artist Frank Auerbach's first New York show in 12 years, and he returns to the city very much as he left it, a painter of existential darkness touched by light.
The 40-odd paintings include rapidly brushed portraits and several vertiginous views of Mornington Crescent, the location of Auerbach's London studio and once the haunt of such eminent Victorians as Charles Dickens and Walter Sickert.


Allegheny Power System Inc.(AYP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Petrie Stores Plans Deal in Toys Shares
The Petrie Stores Corporation announced a complex plan yesterday to separate its 1,700 women's clothing shops from its $1.4 billion stake in Toys "R" Us and pass the value of that stake on to shareholders free of tax consequences.
Petrie holds the 40.4 million shares of Toys "R" Us that Milton J. Petrie, its founder and chairman, began accumulating in 1978, when the stock, allowing for splits, effectively traded for pennies.
Shares of Toys "R" Us rose 75 cents, to $33.75, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, while Petrie shares gained $1.375 to close at $25.625.


Prayer for Russia: Hoping Economy Can Stabilize
The decision by the International Monetary Fund on Wednesday to grant Russia a long-delayed $1.5-billion loan is important recognition that the new centrist Government, even without its best-known reformers, is working to slow inflation and stabilize the economy.
But the decision is also a kind of prayer that the Government can adhere to its tight policy on spending despite growing pressure to ease up.
In a politically volatile Russia, fear of unemployment looms larger than concern about inflation.


Islanders Get a Goal; Rangers Get 3d Victory
Come-from-behind is the wrong kind of hockey to play against the Rangers, a team that's been given every reason to believe itself invincible in its lopsided series against the Islanders.
Tonight the Islanders, already victimized by a pair of 6-0 losses that rated as the team's worst playoff defeats, managed to score a goal on the hitherto impermeable Mike Richter.
But that was far from sufficient artillery to spoil what is shaping up as a Ranger march toward a playoff destiny denied them for the last 53 seasons.


When Overreaching Is an Asset


Review/Theater; Romantic Dreams In the Heartland
WITH the passing years, William Inge gets smaller.
One of the three big dramatists of the 1950's, along with Tennessee Williams and Arthur Miller, today he seems a gifted but minor regional playwright.
While he wrote evocatively about small-town people, their modest yearnings and the claustrophobia of their landlocked lives -- all of which he had experienced firsthand -- he lacked Mr.
Miller's moral strength and Williams's poetic wildness, qualities that might have transported his plays beyond their time and place.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Charges that Joseph Jett executed an elaborate scheme to create $350 million in phantom profits, inflate his own bonus and conceal $100 million in losses while he was a top trader at Kidder, Peabody are a nasty twist in the plot of what was apparently a Horatio Alger tale for the 1990's.  [ Page D1. ]


Corrections
An article in Business Day on April 7, about the role of the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges in the R. H. Macy &amp; Company bankruptcy case, gave an incomplete description of the clients of Martin J. Bienenstock, a Weil partner, in another bankruptcy case.
In that case, involving the National Gypsum Company, Mr.
Bienenstock represented a creditors' committee composed primarily of senior and trade creditors with a minority of junior creditors; he did not represent just the junior creditors.


Sax Is Released by White Sox
The Chicago White Sox requested waivers yesterday on STEVE SAX for the purpose of granting him an unconditional release.
Sax, 34, was on rehabilitation assignment at Class AA Birmingham, where he batted .318 in seven games. (AP)


Smith Corona Corp.(SCO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tibor de Nagy Memorial
A memorial tribute to the art dealer Tibor de Nagy is to be held on Monday at 4 P.M. at the Hungarian Consulate, 227 East 52d Street, Manhattan.
Among those scheduled to speak are the poet John Ashbery and the painters Grace Hartigan and Larry Rivers.
Mr. de Nagy, who had a gallery in Manhattan for more than 40 years, died on Dec. 25 at 85.


Phelps Dodge Corp.(PD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Court Rules That Silver May Go Back to Owner
The Appellate Division of State Supreme Court upheld a Manhattan jury in ruling yesterday that Hungary's and Croatia's claims to ownership of the trove of silver artifacts known as the Sevso Hoard were "without merit" and that the silver may be returned to its owner, Lord Northampton, an English marquess.
The decision affirms the verdict by a State Supreme Court jury in November that the two Governments had failed to prove the 1,400-year-old silver had been unearthed in either of those countries and taken abroad by Spencer Douglas David Compton, the Seventh Marquess of Northampton.


McDonald's Corp.(MCD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lawyers Debate Rifkin's Sanity In Trial's Opening Arguments
The opposing parties in the murder trial of Joel Rifkin moved quickly today to lay out the challenge facing the jury: to decide whether Mr.
Rifkin, who has admitted killing 17 women and methodically disposing of their bodies, was legally insane.
"The defendant is a very bright guy, with very high intelligence," the prosecutor, Fred Klein, said in his opening statement.
"He was well aware of the consequences of his actions.


Accounts
*
Thoroughbred Racing Associations, New York, to Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle the account, representing 49 race tracks in North America.
Billings were not disclosed.


Review/Art; For the New Galleries of the 90's, Small (and Cheap) Is Beautiful
IN the art world of the 1990's, necessity is still the primary impetus for invention.
As the market contracts and the big 80's-style art galleries dwindle, small unorthodox galleries are increasingly evident at the bottom and around the edges of the downtown scene, not just in SoHo but in the East and West Villages and Brooklyn.
Overseeing these venues is a motley generation of "starving dealers," as one of their number wryly put it: young artists, newly arrived wannabe dealers, former gallery directors and even former gallery owners forced to close down larger-scale businesses.
All of them are bent on finding low-cost ways to get the relatively inexpensive work of young or unknown artists before the public -- if only for a few hours a week -- and they're helping to redefine the way art is exhibited.


Knight-Ridder Inc.(KRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Southwest Airlines (LUV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gillette Co. (G,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No College Credits, and No Problem
When 40-year-old Edward J. Nicoll enters Yale Law School in the fall, he will not be the oldest student ever admitted there; a retiree set that record before him.
Nor will he be the first to have left an executive suite and the world of finance -- he heads a discount brokerage firm -- for Yale Law's classrooms.
He will not even be the school's first student to have herded sheep for a living.
But people with long memories in admissions say Mr.
Nicoll will be the first person ever admitted to a leading law school who has no college credits, indeed no college experience at all.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about schoolchildren's viewing of a penguin that was part of a traveling exhibit from the Busch Gardens and Sea World in Tampa, Fla., misidentified the site of the visit.
It was Public School 163 on West 97th Street, not the Children's Museum of Manhattan.


CSX Corp.(CSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Serbs Again Shell Gorazde; Dozens Killed
Serbian nationalists continued to pound Gorazde with rockets and artillery today.
Government leaders said the Serbs had warned that a United Nations convoy would not be allowed to reach the shattered town unless its defenders surrendered the east bank of the river that divides the town.
Two Serbian tank shells killed 10 to 20 people in an apartment building in Gorazde that was being used to shelter the wounded, a United Nations aid worker reported by radio from the eastern Bosnian town.


Review/Architecture; Urban Dreams, Urban Realities
Bernard Tschumi is a Morris Lapidus who thinks that he's a Walter Gropius.
Like Lapidus, the legendary designer of Miami Beach hotels, Mr.
Tschumi has an uncommon flair for glamorous architectural images.
But he has managed to hobble this talent by styling himself as a cultural revolutionary.
Like Gropius, founder of the Bauhaus, Mr.
Tschumi seems to think that his designs can alter the reality as well as the look of urban life.
Unfortunately, to judge from "Bernard Tschumi: Architecture and Event," a show of six projects now on view at the Museum of Modern Art, Mr.
Tschumi has come to feel that the look of things has taken reality's place.
Unlike many architecture shows, where the main event -- the building -- is missing, this one, organized by Terence Riley and Anne Dixon, puts Mr.
Tschumi's best face forward.
The Swiss-born architect, dean of the architecture school at Columbia University since 1988, has built only one major project to date, the 165-acre Parc de la Villette in Paris, shown at the museum in a model, drawings and photographs.
Otherwise, his work (surveyed in a hefty 634-page book, published by MIT Press to coincide with the exhibition) has been largely confined to paper.


City Wants Appraisal Made of Coliseum Site
New York City officials have given the Metropolitan Transportation Authority a deadline of Monday to decide whether to join it in having an appraisal made of the Coliseum site, whose fate is part of a complicated struggle involving the city, the M.T.A. and the developer, Mortimer B. Zuckerman.
In a letter, John S. Dyson, Deputy Mayor for Finance and Economic Development, informed the M.T.A., which owns the site, that if the agency does not go along with the appraisal, the city will proceed alone.


New Neiman Marcus Head Is Named
In a corporate shuffle that highlights the dearth of merchandising talent at the high end of retailing, the Neiman Marcus Group said yesterday that it had selected Burton Tansky, chairman and chief executive of Bergdorf Goodman, to head the Neiman Marcus department store group.
Steven C. Elkin, president and chief operating officer of Bergdorf, which operates two exclusive specialty stores in Manhattan, Bergdorf Goodman and Bergdorf Goodman Men's, will replace Mr.
Tansky on May 1.
And Dawn Mello, who left Bergdorf in 1989 to join the Italian retail and apparel company Guccio Gucci S.p.A., will return to her former post as Bergdorf president.


The Wisconsin Report
A drive to increase student attendance at Wisconsin football games fostered "a laissez-faire policy" toward enforcing rules in the stands, according to a report released yesterday in Madison on a crowd surge that injured dozens after the Badgers upset Michigan on Oct. 30.
While declining to assess blame, the report faults the Wisconsin athletic department for not encouraging police and guards to crack down on alcohol consumption and students throwing objects. (AP)


Review/Film; So True About Those Idle Hands
"Brainscan" makes a case for the long, hearty camping trip as it tells what happens to 16-year-old Michael (Edward Furlong), a boy who clearly spends too much time indoors.
The decor of Michael's room involves a toy noose hanging from the ceiling, horror and heavy-metal artifacts, abundant audio, video and computer equipment and a special chair in which Michael can sit when he feels like having his senses blasted by any of the above.
The film is about what happens when Michael tries out "the ultimate experience in interactive terror," and tests the limits of technohorror as a spectator sport.
Goaded by an equally horror-crazed friend (Jamie Marsh), he decides to try the video game of the title.
And he expects nothing life-altering when the Brainscan CD-ROM arrives in the mail.
But the game lures Michael into committing what may or may not be real acts of murderous violence.
It also makes him the plaything of the Trickster (T. Ryder Smith), a smirking, foppish villain whose manner suggests an aging rock star on a very bad day.


Used Incorrectly, Cards Bill Subway Riders Double Fare
Some subway riders who swipe their new fare cards improperly through turnstile slots, then try again at another turnstile, have been charged twice, New York City transit officials said yesterday.
The officials said the double billing occurs when riders slide their cards too quickly or incompletely through the slots, thus failing to open the turnstile bars.
Mistakenly assuming that the turnstile is broken, the riders move to another turnstile without heeding a sign that lights up and says: "Please swipe here again."


CMS Energy Corp.(CMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


I.B.M. Posts A Solid Profit For Quarter
I.B.M. reported surprisingly strong first-quarter profits yesterday, prompting a wave of buying on Wall Street that increased the company's stock price nearly 12 percent.
The better-than-expected results are partly a sign that the cost-cutting program devised by Louis V. Gerstner Jr., who became chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation 12 months ago, is on schedule.
But what most surprised analysts was that the erosion of I.B.M.'s large-computer business greatly slowed and that the company's international operations had strong sales, even in areas of economic weakness like Western Europe. 'A Blowout Quarter'
The company reported net income for the first quarter of $392 million, or 64 cents a share.
By contrast, it lost $399 million, or 70 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.


Stanley R. Klion, 70; Was Vice Chairman Of Accounting Firm
Stanley Ring Klion, a management consultant and retired executive vice chairman and chief operating partner of Peat Marwick International, one of the world's largest accounting and management-consulting firms, died on Monday at White Plains Hospital.
He was 70 and lived in Greenwich, Conn.
The cause was complications from cancer treatment, his family said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.S.
WANTS NATO ULTIMATUM  The U.S. is proposing that NATO issue an ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs warning them to cease attacks on Gorazde.
Washington also wants more NATO control over any military intervention in Bosnia.
A1  Gorazde continued to come under fierce attack by Serbs.
A12


Sports of The Times; Riley's Playoff Pep Talk
EVEN though the Knicks won't regroup for the playoffs until next week, Pat Riley has delivered his first pep talk: his indefinite suspension of Anthony Mason.
By itself, Mason's quoted criticism of Riley doesn't seem to deserve a suspension.
Mason was griping about his minutes on the court, as almost all National Basketball Association players do sooner or later, quieter or louder.
As Riley surely did when he was a player.


U.S. TO ASK NATO FOR AN ULTIMATUM AGAINST THE SERBS
The United States is proposing that NATO issue an ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs to stop attacks on Gorazde and move their heavy weapons away from the town or face air strikes, American and allied officials said today.
United States officials said they expected the alliance to issue the demand, the focus of urgent consultations this week, on Friday unless a diplomatic breakthrough is reached to end the attacks on the predominantly Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia.


Playoff Tickets on Sale
Tickets for the Nets' first home game in the National Basketball Association playoffs go on sale at 9 A.M. today at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena box office, at Ticketmaster outlets and by phone.
The tickets, priced at $22, $18 and $15, may be ordered by calling the box office at (201) 935-8900 or the following Ticketmaster numbers: (212) 307-7171, (201) 507-8900 and (609) 520-8383.
The first Nets home game of the three-of-five-game, first-round series will be Game 3.
The round's first two games will be held at the site of the Nets' opponent, which is yet to be determined.


The Spoken Word
DARRYL PINCKNEY, Universalist Church, 160 Central Park West, at 76th Street.
The author of the novel "High Cotton" reads from his work.
Today at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $8.
Sponsored by the Writer's Voice.
Information: (212) 875-4124.
GORDON PARKS, Neuberger Museum of Art, Performing Arts Center, State University College at Purchase, 735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase, N.Y.
The photographer and film maker discusses how the personal backgrounds of photographers influence their work; part of the Yassen Lecture Series on Film and Photography.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Admission: $12.
Information: (914) 251-6200.


Dow Utilities
For three consecutive sessions, the Dow Jones utilities average has risen sharply, portending, at least for the analysts who believe in the index, a fall or a stabilization of interest rates.
But other analysts have their doubts about the predictive power of the index, an average of 15 utility stocks, including Consolidated Edison.


3 Private Bronx Schools to Get Yellow Buses and a New Service
Come fall, school bus service for 1,100 students at some of New York City's elite schools in the Bronx will roll into a new era.
The familiar red, white and black Liberty Lines Express buses that now transport students between the Bronx and Manhattan are to be replaced by yellow buses, and a new company.


Perkin-Elmer Corp.(PKN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Riley Fires Back and Suspends Mason Indefinitely
The moment Anthony Mason questioned Pat Riley for benching him Tuesday night and then further questioned Riley's definition of offense, he had to know retaliation was headed his way.
Riley's response to Mason's jabs was swift.
He suspended Mason indefinitely for what he called conduct detrimental to the team.


SmithKline Beecham (SBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Child Well-Being Depends on Families
To the Editor:
"Endangered Children" (editorial, April 15) shows the central weakness in today's family policy debate: our unwillingness to insist upon any connection between the problems described and the solutions proposed.


A Free Spirit With Fiscal Clout
Assemblyman Herman D. Farrell Jr. had just been named chairman of the influential Ways and Means Committee, and the gravity of it all was starting to sink in: the impact on the $62 billion state budget, the weighty obligation to his colleagues, the setting of another racial precedent.
Asked how he felt, Mr.
Farrell paused to reflect, searching for words to express his emotions adequately.
Finally, he found them: "Whoopee! Whoopee!"


Northwest Airlines Corp.(NWAC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Christopher Lynch, Irish Tenor, 73, Dies
Christopher Lynch, an Irish tenor who sang on the "Voice of Firestone" shows on radio and television, died on April 15 at his home in Worcestershire, England.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, said Fred Manning, a family friend.


McKesson Corp.(MCK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Critic's Notebook; Ingmar Bergman Adds to the Mosaic Of Autobiography
"From an early age onward," Ingmar Bergman writes about himself, "it was said that 'Ingmar has no sense of humor.' " He writes this in a deadpan manner many comedians would envy, by way of explaining why, in 1951, he happily directed commercials for soap called Breeze.
"They rescued me from a severe financial setback," he says of the television spots, adding that they "were made in good spirits. One can even overlook the fact that they promoted a soap that practically tore the skin off your body." Ah, the unknown Bergman.
He is everywhere in "Images: My Life in Film," a series of wry, lucid, ofter harsh reflections on his life's work that was published in Sweden in 1990 but appeared in English translation only three months ago.
New though it is, "Images" is not the most recent of Mr.
Bergman's books to appear here, and it is certainly not the last word on the little Ingmar, "considered sullen and too sensitive." It is not easy to keep up with his literary output since he stopped directing feature films in 1982.
"Sunday's Children," an exquisite autobiographical film about his boyhood, was written by Mr.
Bergman and directed by his 32-year-old son, Daniel.
It is now at the Film Forum in the South Village.
And Ingmar Berman's novel of "Sunday's Children" has just been published as well.
In the hands of most former film makers, the novel might be a watered-down version of the movie.
But "Sunday's Children" is as elegant, honest and emotinally brutal as "Fanny and Alexander"; though its scope is slender, this brief novel is a perfectly shaped treasure that stands among the finest work of Mr.
Bergman's career.
The freshness of "Sunday's Children" in both forms is amazing, because Mr.
Bergman has written this story before.
It exists nearly whole, in subject and shape, in the next-to-last chapter of "The Magic Lantern" (1987), the first of the autobiographical books that have made Mr.
Bergman, now 75, one of the most alluring writers of recent years.
In "The Magic Lantern," one July the young Ingmar accompanies his father, Erik, from their country house to a nearby village where Erik Bergman, a minister, is to preach.
Ingmar is a Sunday's child, according to folklore, able to see fairies and other visions.
He takes the trip with his father by ferry and bicycle, and recalls seeing in the church a stained-glass window depicting "Death leading a dance to the Dark Lands, wielding his scythe like a flag." - a picture that would become the final scene of "The Seventh Seal" and one of the most famouse Bergman images of all.
Comically, Ingmar's older brother, Dag, promises to pay him for eating a live worm, then reneges on the offer after the boy with the notoriously fussy stomach has swallowed the creature.
These are major incidents in "Sunday's Children," too.
More striking, that chapter in "The Magic Lantern" includes flashes forward in time to the adult Ingmar Bergman visiting his elderly, widowed father.
Their relationship is one of fear, anger, coldness.
In expanded form, those forward flashes become the harsh emotional underside of the lyrically beautiful "Sunday's Children," on screen and on the page.
"I am forever living in my childhood," Mr.
Bergman writes in "Images." As the details of those July days echo from memory through "The Magic Lantern" on to "Sunday's Children," they hold the key to the art of Mr.
Bergman's memoirs.
He keeps returning to his past, reassessing it, distilling its meaning, offering it to his audience in dazzling new shapes.
In "Sunday's Children," the young Ingmar is an 8-year-old called Pu (on screen played by the golden-haired, wide-eyed Henrik Linnros).
He is a serious child who both loves and hates his father and is already troubled by the idea of death.
When film and novel flash ahead to 1968, the 50-year-old Ingmar is still angry and intransigent on his visits to Erik.
In a dizzying swirl of connections between father and son, the middle-aged Ingmar isplayed on screen by Per Myrberg, who looks nothing like the real Mr.
Bergman.
But his father is played by Thommy Berggren, who as he ages looks quite a bit like Ingmar Bergman today.
Judging the adult Ingmar harshly, Mr.
Bergman has made "Sunday's Children" a huge gesture of reconciliation to his now-dead father.
It is also a great gift to his son. (It is easy to speculate that Mr. Bergman's ramshackle personal life, with eight children spread among four wives and one lover, might make usch gestures especially prized.) Daniel Bergman mad children's films and worked for television before filming "Sunday's Children," his first feature.
When the project was conceived, father and son agreed that Ingmar would write without consulting his son, and Daniel would direct without his father's help.
Ingmar Bergman stayed away from the set of "Sunday's Children."
The importance of teh screenplay is suggested gy the vast difference between "The Best Intentions," the rich, trenchant 1991 film about his parents that was written by Ingmar Bergman and directed by Bille August, and the sprawling fiasco of "The House of the Spirits," the current film written and directed by Mr.
August.
Only the luxurious scenery in those two films is similar.
In "Sunday's Children," too, capturing the graceful picturesque quality of two days in the country is the easy part.
Daniel Bergman's cinematographer, Tony Forsberg, even substituted for Sven Nykvist on "Fanny and Alexander" for a few weeks when Mr.
Nykvist got the flu.
But Daniel Bergman has done more than create a pretty film that echoes his father's lyricism.
Daniel and his actors capture the tormented emotions beneath the picturesque summer in the country.
Pu is a darling, sympathetic little boy.
"Shut your mouth, Pu," his Uncle Carl says.
"You look stupid with you mouth open." The comment is repeated by Pu's nanny and by Day, but you have to return to "Magic Lantern" to discover why Pu's mouth is always gaping.
Adenoid probglems caused the young Ingmar to breathe through his mouth, "which made me look stupid," Mr.
Bergman writes.
Pu is also preternaturally serious, like the famously humorless little Ingmar.
Both film and novel rely on his relentless questions.
Pu keeps asking "What?" like a nervous tic.
When a servant tells a ghost story about a local watchmaker who hanged himself, the tale becomes a fantastic set piece on the page and an eerie black-and-white vision on screen.
The watchmaker kills a demonic gradfather clock and a small, fully formed woman who lives inside it.
Later, Pu goes to the place where the watchmaker killed himself and asks in a dream, "When will I die?" The watchmaker answers, "Always," and idea that the film maker has carried with him throughout his career.
Similar though the two versions of "Sunday's Children" are, each makes a unique contribution to the grand mosaic of the Bergman biography.
On screen, the adult Ingmar's coldness is more visceral; in the novel the connections between past and present are stronger and more resonant.
When Pu sits on the edge of the ferry and dangles his feet in the water, his father swats him on the head in fury, which leads directly to a flash forward.
"What did I do wrong?" the aged father asks, having discovered his dead wife's diaries, which call their marriage "a life-fiasco." The adult Ingmar coldly, even cruelly, tells his father how frightened the family was of his anger.
Then he walks away.
The scene returns to Pu and his father, who apologizes for pulling the child away from his dangerous perch on the ferry so violently.
"I was scared," he says.
"When you're scared, you get angry." The explanation goes back to "The Magic Lantern" and to the heart of the Bergman family's anger and unhappiness.
Pu, having overheard his parents arguing, fears that his father will leave; Erik fears losing his wife; over the years, Ingmar's anger becomes implacable.
Mr.
Bergman deftly positions his leaps in time to reflect backward and forward, so the present illuminates the past and the past explains the present.
On screen, when the camera returns from 1968 to Pu's boyhood, the flashes forward almost seem to have been prophetic visions of this Sunday's child.
On the page, the effect is the opposite, as the voice of Ingmar Bergman today is heard shaping his past.
On their way home from the sermon, Pu and his father are caught in a storm.
The father puts his coat around Pu, and the story jumps ahead to Erik Bergman's deathbed.
Erik whispers a blessing on his son, who is unable to understand what his father is mumbling.
As the story returns to the past.
Erik once more puts his coat around Pu, echoing the gesture of blessing.
"Sunday's Children" itself is a blessing that Ingmar Bergman has bestowed on Daniel.
This son had the good sense and talent to appreciate the gift and turn it into an enduring Bergman film.
On Screen and Page
"Sunday's Children," directed by Daniel Bergman from a screenplay by Ingmar Bergman, is playing at the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, South Village.
Tickets: $7.50.
Screening times and information: (212) 727-8110.
Here is information on the books by Ingmar Bergman mentioned in the accompanying article.
"THE BEST INTENTIONS: A NOVEL" (Arcade Publishing, 298 pages, $22.95).
"IMAGES: MY LIFE IN FILM" (Arcade Publishing, 439 pages, $27.95).
"THE MAGIC LANTERN: AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY" (Penguin Paperback, $10.95).
"SUNDAY'S CHILDREN: A NOVEL" (Arcade Publishing, 153 pages, $16.95). The Winter's Tale
By William Shakespeare; directed by Adrian Noble; set by Anthony Ward; lighting by Chris Parry, recreated for the tour by Mike Gunning; music by Shaun Davey; movement by Sue Lefton; sound by Paul Slocombe, recreated for the tour by Michael McCoy; music director, Roger Hellyer.
The Royal Shakespeare Company presented by the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Harry Lichtenstein, president and executive producer.
At the Brooklyn Academy of Music Opera House, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
Camillo . . .
Paul Jesson Polixenes . . .
Julian Curry Leontes . . .
John Nettles Hermione . . .
Suzanne Burden
Paulina . . .
Gemma Jones Autolycus . . .
Mark Hadfield Mamillius . . .
Jeremy Levitsky Old Shepherd . . .
Jeffery Dench Florizel . . .
Barnaby Kay Perdita . . .
Phyllida Hancock


Clinton Asks for Help on Environment


Sterling Forest: Will Park Be Realized?
The fate of Sterling Forest, the rugged private woodland 40 miles northwest of New York City that has been envisioned as a vast public park for hiking and fishing, is still undecided, a year after parties to the negotiations said it would be resolved any day.
A House of Representatives subcommittee has been promising to hold hearings on a bill by Congressmen from New York and one from New Jersey to allocate $35 million toward the purchase of the 17,500-acre forest, which borders on Harriman and Bear Mountain State Parks.
But given the competing claims for other Federal land purchases, enactment of any bill seems remote.


Smith International (SII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hannaford Brothers Co.  (HRD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Justice Department Defends Handling Of Rockwell Case
The Justice Department, after intense scrutiny and criticism of its handling of a case against Rockwell International for environmental crimes at the Rocky Flats nuclear bomb plant, said yesterday that the decision not to push for tougher penalties was "a proper exercise of prosecutorial discretion."
An internal report, in which the department essentially exonerated itself, rejected the idea that there was any political pressure to go easy on the company, which ran the plant from 1975 to 1989, or the Department of Energy, which owns the plant.
Rocky Flats, which is 15 miles northwest of downtown Denver, has polluted air, water and soil with plutonium, a highly toxic material and with cancer-causing chemicals.
The plant once assembled plutonium "triggers" for bombs.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a master class for musicians misidentified the singer being coached by the German baritone Hermann Prey.
He was Nathaniel Watson, a baritone, not Carl Halvorson, a tenor.


Kaliningrad Journal; Is the City, Eerily, Acquiring a German Accent?
For half a century, Kaliningrad had no past.
It was captured by the Red Army in 1945 and held as war booty: the city's 700-year history as Konigsberg, capital of East Prussia, was never even mentioned in the Great Soviet Encyclopedia.
Even manhole covers bearing the emblem of the ruined German city were removed.
This ruthless self-denial still haunts Kaliningrad, now an isolated outpost of a shrunken Russia.
Perched on the Baltic coast, just a few hours' train ride from the Polish port of Gdansk, Kaliningrad -- a region with a population of 900,000 -- finds itself separated from the rest of the Russian Federation by more than 600 miles and two independent countries, Lithuania and Belarus.


Philips Interactive Picks Rubin Postaer
Philips Interactive Media, which produces software for compact disk-interactive systems, said yesterday that it had selected Rubin Postaer &amp; Associates of Santa Monica, Calif., to handle its account, previously handled by Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. of New York and an in-house team.
Billings were estimated at more than $15 million.
Stephen M. Race, senior vice president of marketing at Philips Interactive in Los Angeles, said Rubin Postaer was awarded the account after a review that began late last month.
The other finalists, he added, were Foote, Cone &amp; Belding and Goldberg Moser O'Neill, both of San Francisco.


Krone to Return in 30 Days
The blue truck nosed onto the grass outside Barn 23 at Belmont Park yesterday morning at 6 o'clock, and JULIE KRONE hopped out.
It was eight months since she took a violent spill in a collision at Saratoga, eight months since a team of surgeons inserted 2 metal plates and 14 screws into her right ankle to hold it together.
Krone, 31, exercised two of SCOTTY SCHULHOFER's easy horses.
No formal workout, just a light gallop for Uncharted Waters and Vel Vel.
When she got back to the barn from the exercise rides, she plopped down on a bench, all 100 pounds of her on a 4-foot-10-inch frame, and predicted she would be back in about 30 days.


Kimberly-Clark Corp.(KMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pilgrim's Pride Corp.(CHX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Critic's Choice; Of Character And the West
Long before the revisionist western was a glint in Clint Eastwood's eye, there was John Ford.
He established the character-driven western with his classic "Stagecoach" in 1939, and by 1956 was probing the moral ambiguities of the frontier in "The Searchers," a film that seems deeper with every viewing.
To celebrate the 100th anniversary of Ford's birth, the Museum of Modern Art is presenting "John Ford, 1894-1973: An American Master," a series of films from the museum's collection that will run through May 6.
This weekend's highlight is a new print of "The Searchers." Beloved by western fans and cineastes, this is the John Wayne movie for people who think they don't like John Wayne.
As Ethan Edwards, a former Confederate soldier, Wayne goes on an obsessive yearslong search for his niece (Natalie Wood; even Ford wasn't perfect at casting), who had been abducted by Indians.
When he finds her, all his certainty about good and evil -- and all moviedom's certainty about cowboys and Indians -- is subjected to fierce moral scrutiny.
As in his other great westerns, Ford doesn't stint on action here, or on the grand landscape of Monument Valley.
"The Searchers" will be shown tonight at 8 and Sunday afternoon at 2 P.M.


Landstar System Inc.(LSTR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


ServiceMaster L.P.(SVM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Heat Clinches Berth at Hawks' Expense  The Miami Heat clinched the second National Basketball Association playoff berth in franchise history and hurt Atlanta's bid for the top-seeded position in the Eastern Conference by beating the Hawks, 94-89, last night.
The loss at Miami cut to one-half game the Hawks' lead over the Knicks and the Chicago Bulls in the race for the best record in the conference.
All three have 25 losses; Atlanta has one game remaining and the Knicks and the Bulls two each.
The team that earns the No. 1 seeding will play No. 8 Miami in the first round. (AP) Hornets 95, Celtics 89: Charlotte's playoff hopes ended in Boston despite the Hornets' victory over the Celtics, in which Alonzo Mourning had 21 points and 11 rebounds.
Miami got the final Eastern Conference post-season berth by beating Atlanta.(AP)


Diner's Journal
When Liver Seduces
When you bring a piece of steak back to the office after a lunch out, you expect to see your co-workers gobble it up.
But when you come back bearing leftover liver, you would be unwise to expect an enthusiastic response.
It is a tribute to the new team at Colombe d'Or that the liver they grill, thick chunks served with carrots and parsnips, is so seductive that the leftovers disappeared in three seconds flat.
I have never had better liver.
There are other nice new things about the old restaurant, now that Joseph Scalice and Wayne Nish of March are in charge.
The rooms are being spruced up and the menu is being revamped with a Provencal twist.
This is one of the few places in America where you can get the socca of Nice, a hearty pancake made of chickpea flour; Mr.
Nish served it wrapped around a ratatouille filling and topped with goat cheese.
Mr.
Nish's soupe de poissons was also memorable: robust and filled with flavor.


Father Shoots Son In Dispute in Queens
A 34-year-old Queens man was shot and critically wounded by his father last night in what the father described as a dispute over the son's addiction to drugs, the police said.
The victim, Ronald Robertson, was taken to Mary Immaculate City Hospital where he was undergoing surgery late last night for gunshot wounds in his torso, the police said.


Corrections
April 22, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final
A picture caption yesterday with an article about Rwanda misidentified the group responsible for shelling a stadium on Tuesday, killing 40 refugees.
As the article pointed out, the shells were fired by the Rwandan Army, not by rebel forces.


Wegerle Expected to Play
The United States soccer team expects forward ROY WEGERLE to recuperate from his latest arthroscopic knee surgery in time to participate in the first round of the World Cup, Coach BORA MILUTINOVIC said yesterday.
Wegerle, 30, is regarded as the best forward on the team. (AP)


MCI COMMUNICATIONS CORP. (MCIC,NMS)
The MCI Communications Corporation reported yesterday that its first-quarter earnings rose more than 38 percent, to $209 million, from the same period a year ago while its revenues increased 14.6 percent, to $3.2 billion.
The No. 2 long-distance carrier earned 36 cents a share in its first quarter, a penny more than the consensus estimate by industry analysts.


Dramatic Rise, and a Nasty Fall
To all appearances, Joseph Jett's life was a Horatio Alger tale for the 1990's.
Studious, from a small town in the Midwest and armed only with brains and drive, he pulled himself to the top of Wall Street, commanding a trading desk and earning $9 million in a single year.
The fact that this dramatic rise was by an outsider in the clubby world of finance made his story even more of a classic tale of individual triumph.
But this week the plot took a nasty twist.


Review/Ballet; A Large Room Filled With Energy and Tenderness
Scapino Rotterdam may be the oldest ballet company in the Netherlands but on the evidence of Ed Wubbe's "Kathleen," presented on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, the troupe is full of youthful spit, polish and pizazz.
The dancers are good-looking and well-trained, and they move with the supple urgency of fish surging upward out of water for a moment's gleaming taste of sun.
And "Kathleen," a full-evening work performed to music by Godflesh and Ruben Stern, is a mostly exciting and persuasive dance experience.
The piece bears a passing resemblance to works presented recently by O Vertigo Danse, which performed last week at the Joyce, and Onafhankelijk Toneel of Rotterdam, seen in January.
The action takes place in a large room from which it is difficult to imagine any exit.
Sartre still reigns, even in this post-deconstructionist era.
There are suggestions of a plot or situation, most of which sink beneath the choreographic repetition.
The air is heavily portentous.


New Curbs on Sale of Mutual Banks
Concerned that insiders have reaped huge profits by selling mutual savings banks to other banks or investors, the Treasury Department issued new regulations today that bar such profits at federally chartered savings institutions and impose many other limits.
The new rules show some similarity to the restrictions that the New York State Banking Department imposed in January on the Green Point Savings Bank of Flushing, Queens.
State regulators ordered Green Point not to proceed with planned grants of $40 million in stock and more in options for its management and trustees when it sold stock in January.


Review/Film; Young, Black and Confused In the Complicated 1970's
If you crossed the 1970's sitcom "Good Times" with "Dirty Dancing" and threw in a vintage beach-party movie, you might end up with a film like "The Inkwell," a serious comedy that frantically dashes about in an elusive search for coherence.
A rowdy farce one minute, a political tract the next, the movie eventually turns into an improbable coming-of-age drama that strains for a poignancy it never begins to evoke.
The movie is the second feature by the young director Matty Rich, who made such a promising debut with his grim semi-autobiographical film "Straight Out of Brooklyn." It looks like a classic case of a talented young director bamboozled by the exigencies of Hollywood commercialism along with his own inexperience.


Uncovered Short Sales Hit Highs at 2 Exchanges
Short-selling activity, usually done as a bet that stock prices will fall, continued to climb in the month that ended April 8, the New York and American Stock Exchanges reported yesterday.
The Big Board reported that the total short position in its stocks -- the number of shares borrowed and sold short, but not yet covered by repurchasing the shares -- rose 3.5 percent, to a record 1.37 billion shares.
At the Amex, the short position rose 4.4 percent, to a record 112.7 million.


Abolishment of Welfare: An Idea Becomes a Cause
A decade ago, when an obscure intellectual named Charles Murray first proposed abolishing welfare, the idea was so radical that even he would not fully embrace it.
He wrote that he was simply conducting a "thought experiment" by suggesting that poor women and children should be left to fend for themselves, without Government aid.


Why Aren't Guns Regulated Like Cars?
To the Editor:
While many are quick to condemn the proliferation of firearms in our society, Bob Herbert offers sound proposals to deal with the problem ("Out of Control," April 6).
As a government prosecutor for the last 13 years, I have seen New York undergo a metamorphosis due to the handgun.
Mr.
Herbert's proposals are a good beginning, but more needs to be done.


Air Products &amp; Chemicals (APD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Amoco Corp.(AN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


MCCAW CELLULAR GIVES DISCOUNT TO NEW YORK CUSTOMERS
McCaw Cellular Communications said yesterday that it would begin a discount program for cellular customers in the New York area on calls they make anywhere between Boston and Washington.
Under the offer, subscribers who sign up for a basic plan costing $89.95 a month will no longer have to pay "roaming" fees of $3 a day when they take their cellular telephones outside their local area.
The company also said it would reduce the cost of calls between Boston and Washington to 45 cents a minute from 99 cents.
But subscribers will still have to pay long-distance charges on top of the cost of the cellular calls.


Leon Talalay, 75, Chemical Engineer


Fearing Domination by Blacks, Indians of South Africa Switch Loyalties
There was nothing obviously threatening about the three black women who knocked on Neele Rajoo's door last month and said they were looking for work.
Although she had no use for another housekeeper, Mrs.
Rajoo, a 46-year-old shop clerk of Indian descent, offered them a seat and some water.
"They were very well dressed and very educated and spoke perfect English," Mrs.
Rajoo said.


Sounds Around Town
A Tatum Protegee
Dorothy Donegan, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at West 67th Street, (212) 873-3200.
Even as she moves into her 70's, the pianist Dorothy Donegan remains one of a kind.
As a child, her skills so impressed the great jazz pianist Art Tatum that he gave her lessons, and she can still keep listeners on the edges of their seats with her unpredictable roller-coaster rides, which draw on whatever crosses her mind.
Even her longtime New York accompanists -- the bassist Jon Burr and the drummer Ray Mosca -- often seem in danger of falling off the Donegan Express.
Although no longer as volcanic as she once was, Miss Donegan still has a strong stomping foot that pounds home the beat to even a casual listener.
She plays tonight and tomorrow night at 8:45 and 10:45 and Sunday night at 8:15 and 10:15.
The music charge is $23.50 tonight and tomorrow night, $17.50 on Sunday.
There is no minimum.
JOHN S. WILSON Back to an Old Stand
Barbara Carroll, Bemelmans Bar, Hotel Carlyle, 76th Street and Madison Avenue, (212) 744-1600.
Barbara Carroll is now in her 16th season of playing piano surrounded by the drawings of Ludwig Bemelmans, in a room that was named for the cartoonist and musician long before Miss Carroll arrived there.
Earlier, in the 1950's, she had established another room as her home base: the Embers on 52d Street when it was known as Swing Alley.
Despite these long runs, her playing has remained fresh and adventuresome; she has moved through new areas of jazz after starting as a be-bop disciple of Bud Powell and has also extended her performances to reveal a warm singing personality.
She plays and sings tonight and tomorrow night from 9:45 until 12:45 A.M.
There is a $10 music charge but no minimum.
J.
S.
W.
Drummer-Influenced Sax
Richie Cole Quintet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, Manhattan, (212) 533-7900.
The fact that the alto saxophonist Richie Cole has been influenced by both the drummer Buddy Rich and another alto player, Phil Woods, accounts for much of the power of his virtuoso style.
From 1969 through 1972, he was in Buddy Rich's Big Band, a group that carried out explosive ideas set off by Mr.
Rich's drums.
The influence of Phil Woods started in Cole's high school years, providing a basis for the saxophonist's lively, positive attack.
His current quartet is made up of Bobby Enriquez on piano, Vic Juris on guitar, Ed Howard on bass and Vic Jones on drums.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 8, 10 and midnight; on Sunday, at 8 and 10.
There is a $20 cover charge and a $10 minimum.
J.
S.
W.


Dr. Seuss Rights Are Sold
Living Books, a joint venture of Broderbund Software Inc. and Random House Inc., has purchased the multimedia rights to the classic children's books of Dr.
Seuss, among the most pursued in the publishing and computer industries.
The final contracts were signed this week by Living Books and Audrey Geisel, the widow of the author, Theodor S. Geisel.
Mrs.
Geisel represented Dr.
Seuss Enterprises L.P., which owned the rights.


Treat Haitians Fairly
The angry blast yesterday by President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti at the Clinton Administration's diplomacy and its treatment of would-be refugees was not very diplomatic.
But on the refugee issue at least, Mr.
Aristide's complaints are on the mark.
Using Coast Guard cutters to turn back Haitians trying to flee their violent and tormented country is cruel and discriminatory.
U.S. law requires a hearing for anyone claiming asylum.
But there is a catch.
Courts have ruled that applicants must reach U.S. jurisdiction before they can avail themselves of this right.
Obstacles deliberately placed in their path make that harder for Haitians than for others.
Now, with progress toward a diplomatic solution in Haiti stalled and terror there rising, Washington has a moral obligation to end this discrimination against desperate people.


ITT Corp.(ITT:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hershey Foods Corp.(HSY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Officer Is Released on $2 Million Bail in Corruption Case
Alfonso Compres, the police officer facing the most serious corruption charges among the 14 officers from the 30th Precinct in Harlem taken into custody, was released yesterday on $2 million bail.
During the investigation of the 30th Precinct, Mr.
Compres told an informer that he was trying to obtain dual citizenship in the Dominican Republic, and Federal authorities said they were concerned that he might try to flee.
A Federal complaint said Mr.
Compres also told the informer that he could "spend five years in jail and would come out of jail with money."


Corrections
A map yesterday with an article about a beach erosion project in West Hampton Dunes, L.I., described the site of a proposed 13-foot-high dune incorrectly.
It will run from the western end of existing jetties to Moriches Inlet -- roughly the western half of the length shown.


Ryder System Inc.(R,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Shots Left, Shots Right, Hextall in the Middle
One wonders how well Ron Hextall sleeps at night.
Does he just see them coming?
That endless barrage of Rangers, with their shots left, shots right, shots head-on.
One wonders whether Ron Hextall will be around next year.
Despite flashes of brilliance this past season, one wonders whether Hextall will just be remembered as a sparring partner for the Rangers.


George Greenspan; Industrialist Was 93
George Greenspan, a retired textile manufacturer and philanthropist, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 93.
The cause was leukemia, his family said.


For Racial Justice in Executions
The House of Representatives took a modest step yesterday toward curing one of capital punishment's most offensive features: racial bias in determining who dies.
Even as the House voted to add dozens of new death penalties to the lawbooks, it included the Racial Justice Act in the House version of the omnibus crime bill.
A slim majority of the House, even those moved to authorize executions, are clearly uncomfortable with the racially discriminatory way in which death penalties are often decreed and carried out.
For example, of more than 230 executions for murder since 1976, only one was of a white for killing a black.
The House conferees should now firmly demand the Senate's agreement to this provision in negotiations to reconcile their differing crime bills.


PPG Industries(PPG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rome Prizes Awarded at White House
Hillary Rodham Clinton helped the American Academy in Rome, an overseas center for research and independent study, celebrate its 100th anniversary today by noting how different the 1994 winners of the academy's fellowships were from the first group.
The winners in 1894, Mrs.
Clinton said at a ceremony in the East Room of the White House, were "young, single white men studying the classics." Now, the First Lady said, recipients of the fellowships, the Rome Prizes, are men and women who will study a great variety of subjects in the arts and humanities during their stays in Rome, where the academy maintains an 11-acre campus.


The Next Champion?


No Headline
A Department of Transportation traffic enforcement agent who was driving with a suspended license struck and critically injured an 8-year-old girl yesterday afternoon at an intersection in St.
Albans, Queens, the police said.
The agent, identified as 27-year-old Kim Hankins, was on duty and behind the wheel of a department car when she struck the child at the intersection of 201st Street and Murdoch Avenue about 3 P.M., said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Review/Opera; Ghost Tale With Sexual Undertones
The plot of Benjamin Britten's "Turn of the Screw," which is being given a deft, handsome production at the Manhattan School of Music this weekend, is very similar to that of Henry James's story.
A governess has come to an isolated English estate to care for two children.
She soon suspects that they have been sexually corrupted by her predecessor and a manservant, both of whom have died, both of whom seem to have returned as ghosts to haunt their once innocent charges.
The composer and his librettist, Myfanwy Piper, undercut the ambiguity cultivated by James; in the opera these ghosts are as real as their corruptive effects.
At the beginning of the second act they triumphantly sing a line from Yeats: "The ceremony of innocence is drowned."
But from that moment on, as the opera proceeds through its compact, beautifully orchestrated scenes, ambiguities begin to accumulate and the work itself begins to seem a strange ceremony of innocence.
We begin to doubt some perceptions of the Governess, whose melodic lines echo and anticipate the singing of the demonic servant, Quint.
The score, which turns church bells ominous and nursery rhymes into signs of corruption, sometimes seems as if it is being strained through the Governess's psyche.
Britten's ceremony marks not the dissolution of innocence in the children, but the growth of an uncertainty that innocence is even possible.


INSIDE
Settlement In A.T.M. Case
The biggest regional network of automated teller machines agreed to open its system to rivals, thus avoiding prosecution by the Justice Department on monopoly charges.
Page D1.
Plotting Welfare's Demise
Talk of reforming welfare by getting rid of it is threatening a growing consensus for proposals to make people work for benefits.
Page A14.
A Trader's Rise and Fall
Charges of misdeeds against a top Kidder, Peabody trader are a nasty twist in the plot of an apparent Horatio Alger tale for the 1990's.
Page D1.
Ads Misled Pregnant Women
A judge in San Diego ruled that a center operated by abortion opponents misled women by advertising free tests and counseling.
Page A15.
Publicity for the Defense
As more and more defense lawyers in big trials take their cases to the news media, judges are increasingly moving to silence them.
Page B1.


BellSouth Corp.(BLS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


On Stage, and Off
On Finding Just the Right Ending
The 50th anniversary of Arthur Miller's debut on Broadway was celebrated on Wednesday with a noon reception in the downstairs lounge at the Booth Theater.
The occasion was a modest acknowledgment of the achievement of a playwright who has seen 12 of his plays in Broadway houses since "The Man Who Had All The Luck" opened -- and closed, after five performances -- at the Forrest Theater in November 1944.
"I decided I'd never write another play after that," Mr.
Miller, who is 78, told a gathering of a few dozen friends (and about as many photographers) while he blinked at flashbulbs.


ARCO Chemical Co. (RCM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AMERICAN EXPRESS CO. (AXP,N)
The American Express Company reported yesterday that its first-quarter earnings from continuing operations rose 18 percent amid record profits in its travel division.
The travel-services, charge-card and finance company earned $317 million, or 62 cents a share, from continuing operations, compared with $268 million, or 53 cents a share, in the year-earlier period.


Major Provisions of the Crime Bill
POLICE Senate: Authorizes $8.9 billion to put 100,000 new police officers on the nation's streets over the next five years.
House: Grants $3.45 billion for the hiring and training of 50,000 police officers over the next six years.
House leaders have said they will accept the Senate figure.
President's Position: Supports the Senate provision.


CHRONICLE
Yearning to emote on a soap opera?
ROBIN STRASSER, the wickedly devious Dorian Lord on ABC's "One Life to Live," will teach a two-day seminar on "Acting for the Four-Camera Proscenium: Creating and Keeping Your Dream Role on Daytime Television." It will be tomorrow and Sunday at the Charles Ludlam Theater, 1 Sheridan Square.
"I was looking for a way to raise money for Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS in a more involved and personal way than putting on a sequined dress and showing up for a benefit," said Ms.
Strasser, who has been acting for 30 years.
"I thought, 'I don't sing, I don't dance. What can I do to generate some money?' "


Senator Seeks to Limit Arbitration of Bias Claims
Spurred by news reports that more and more companies are requiring employees to submit claims of discrimination to binding arbitration, legislation has been introduced in the Senate to ban the practice.
The bill, introduced by Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, would make it illegal for companies to discharge or refuse to hire, promote or increase the pay of workers because they refuse to agree in advance to submit bias claims to binding arbitration rather than filing suit.


TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INC. (TXN,N)
Texas Instruments Inc. said yesterday that stronger demand for its semiconductors had raised first-quarter net earnings 65 percent, to $134 million, or $1.41 a share.
At the company's annual meeting yesterday, the board voted to increase the annual dividend to $1 a share from 72 cents.


Team Holyfield Has A One-Sided Feel to It
The warrior king, Evander Holyfield, is surrounded by a compliant entourage.
On Madison Avenue, they would be called yes-men.
And that raises perhaps the only question for Friday night's heavyweight title fight, in which Holyfield defends his titles against Michael Moorer: What happens when the going gets tough?
What reserves, emotional and physical, will the champion have to draw on?
In other words, who will prod him?


Art in Review
Allen Ruppersberg
Jay Gorney Modern Art  100 Greene Street (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through April 30
The California-born Conceptual artist Allen Ruppersberg has built a career on obsessively collecting secondhand words and images.
His characteristic ploy is to show them in bulk -- walls of letters, old movie stills, posters, and in one case the entire text of Oscar Wilde's "Picture of Dorian Gray" handwritten on stretched canvases -- all to suggest the glut of throwaway stuff that makes the world go round.


Peres and Arafat in Talks to Complete Accord
The Israeli Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, are meeting in Bucharest, the first high-level contacts between the two sides in almost three months, to advance talks on the final differences holding up the self-rule agreement for Gaza and Jericho.
The two men, who met on Wednesday and today and are expected to hold further talks, were guarded about what they had accomplished.
But Mr.
Arafat called the sessions "important."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  REPORT SAYS POLICE OFTEN LIE UNDER OATH
Police officers often make false arrests, tamper with evidence and commit perjury on the witness stand, according to a draft report of the mayoral commission investigating police corruption.
A1.


Becker and Family Threatened
BORIS BECKER is under police protection after his manager received calls from a man threatening to kill Becker and his family, the police in Munich said yesterday.
Becker, a three-time Wimbledon champion and one of Germany's biggest sports idols, skipped this week's tournament in Monte Carlo, Monaco, pleading injury.
A Munich police spokesman, BERND FINK, said a man telephoned Becker's manager five times in March threatening "a fearful blood bath" of Becker's family and the family of Becker's manager, AXEL MEYER-WOLDEN. (AP)


New View of Peril From A-Plant Emissions
A team of Government-sponsored scientists said today that deliberate releases of radiation four decades ago from the Hanford nuclear weapons plant in southeast Washington exposed thousands more people over a much larger region than previously thought.
Culminating seven years of research that cost the Government $26 million, the scientists recalculated the doses absorbed from the plant's huge radiation releases in the 1940's and 50's.
The Government, which did not admit to the emissions until it responded to public pressure in 1986, first estimated those doses in 1990.


Reading Drive Enlivens Public School Libraries
The elementary-school library is not just for story hour anymore.
At Public School 198, on Farragut Road in East Flatbush, librarians are building what is thought to be the city's first collection of African-American art, history and literature tailored for elementary-school pupils.
At P.S. 7, on Kingsbridge Avenue in the Bronx, the school librarian helped a nine-year-old pupil research the medieval era at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Inspired, he went home and made a knight's helmet from an empty cereal box.


For Children
This year, Earth Day (officially today) has spawned two buzzwords in New York City: cleanup and green-up.
The celebration has spread from one big bash at a single location into neighborhoods, parks and even homes. (The New York City Department of Sanitation is offering to pick up hazardous household waste. Information: (212) 219-8090.) Here are some events scheduled this weekend. 'Clean-Ups and Green-Ups'
Various New York City parks  Recommended for all ages  Tomorrow


Burlington Northern (BNI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


New York Police Often Lie Under Oath, Report Says
New York City police officers often make false arrests, tamper with evidence and commit perjury on the witness stand, according to a draft report of the mayoral commission investigating police corruption.
The practice -- by officers either legitimately interested in clearing the streets of criminals or simply eager to inflate statistics -- has at times been condoned by superiors, the report says.
And it is prevalent enough in the department that it has its own nickname: "testilying."


Fingerhut Cos. (FHT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1





Anti-Abortion Center's Ads Ruled Misleading
A judge in San Diego ruled yesterday that an anti-abortion center misled women when it advertised free pregnancy tests and pregnancy "options counseling."
The judge said that the center must tell every caller that its counseling is "from a Biblical anti-abortion perspective," and that it neither performs abortions nor provides abortion referrals.


Teledyne To Pay Big Fine to U.S.
In one of the largest payments ever by a military contractor to settle whistle-blower lawsuits, Teledyne Inc. agreed today to pay $112.5 million to settle two lawsuits by former employees who accused the company of defrauding the Government.
Today's settlement is the latest in a series of suits against military contractors brought under the whistle-blower provisions of the Federal False Claims Act, which allows people who come forward with information on procurement fraud to recover 15 to 25 percent of any settlement won by the Government.


TV Weekend; A Coming-of-Age Classic, Remade but Not Updated
There is no pressing need for another film version of "The Yearling," by Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings.
The 1946 movie starring Gregory Peck, Jane Wyman and Claude Jarman Jr. holds up just fine, as I discovered about three years ago in the company of a rapt 6-year-old.
But, seldom cowed by a movie classic, television plunges ahead.
A new adaptation of "The Yearling" can be seen on Sunday on CBS.
This time, Peter Strauss plays Penny Baxter, a struggling homesteader in central Florida in the 1930's. (Filming was done entirely on location near Charleston, S.C.) Jean Smart plays his wife, Ora, a woman shaken by the deaths of three of her four children.
Wil Horneff is 12-year-old Jody, the remaining son, enduring the sometimes painful process of growing up.
When his father is bitten by a snake, Jody is forced to kill a doe and use its liver to draw out the snake venom.
The doe's fawn later becomes the boy's adored pet and an important player in a bitter family crisis.


Georgia-Pacific Corp.(GP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Aristide Condemns Clinton's Haiti Policy as Racist
After months of waiting for President Clinton to take firm action to restore him to power, the exiled President of Haiti, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, denounced the Clinton Administration today and said its policy toward Haitian refugees was racist and was contributing to a holocaust there.
In an apparent effort to placate Father Aristide, senior Administration officials told him later in the day that the White House planned to step up pressure on the military leaders who ousted him.
But the revised policy failed to satisfy six Congressional critics, who were arrested after they staged a sit-in in front of the White House.


Lakers Need a Star More Than a Coach
"Bill, who's the best player you've seen this season?"
The question for Bill Bertka, longtime assistant coach of the Los Angeles Lakers, was a setup, a perfect lob to the front of the rim.


RABIN HINTS PEACE COULD COST GOLAN
Fueling widely held assumptions that he is ready to speed up Israel's negotiations with Syria, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said today that for peace with the Arabs he was ready to uproot Jewish settlements, including those on the Golan Heights.
While it was not the first time that Mr.
Rabin had raised the possibility of dismantling settlements, whether on the Golan Heights or in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, his remarks to sometimes-skeptical kibbutz leaders were his most unequivocal on the subject to date.


Perez Answers All Those Questions
Those sirens never really stop sounding once the words "pitcher" and "surgery" pass one another too closely.
The best that can happen is that their urgency is eliminated, gone if not forgotten, much like the way Melido Perez has distanced himself from his painful past.
Perez kept the Bronx peaceful yesterday, free of any late-inning crises, by pitching the Yankees to a methodical 4-2 victory over the Seattle Mariners in a game that was much like the afternoon -- brisk and free of storms.


Guinier's Electoral Reforms Would Undermine American Ideal; Asian-American Voters
To the Editor:
For New York City's Asian-American community, Lani Guinier's ideas could be relevant (The Week in Review, April 3).
Although the Asian-American population is more than half a million, no Asian-American has ever been elected to the City Council or the State Legislature.


CHRONICLE
It was not a club or a hotel or a trendy dining room that drew IAN SCHRAGER in the predawn hours yesterday.
It was a delivery room in New York Hospital, where his wife of two months, RITA NORONA-SCHRAGER, gave birth to a 6-pound, 5-ounce daughter about 11 A.M.
The child is named SOPHIA BLANCHE SCHRAGER after Mr.
Schrager's late mother.


Textron Inc.(TXT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.25-6.75
6.25-6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.71
2.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.71
3.72
2.82
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.17
4.17
2.91
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.89
7.02
5.85
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.21
7.32
6.74
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.02
8.13
7.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.33
6.41
5.92
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Times Mirror Co.(TMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Colombian Drug Trafficker Implicates Haitian Police Chief
A former member of a Colombian drug cartel testified today at a Senate hearing that Haiti's powerful police commander, Lieut.
Col.
Joseph Michel Francois, collaborated in shipping tons of cocaine to the United States during the 1980's.
American drug enforcement officials and supporters of Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, have long asserted that members of the military regime that overthrew him in 1991 are involved in the cocaine trade.
But the testimony today from Gabriel Taboada, a convicted cocaine smuggler, is believed to be the first sworn public statement by a drug trafficker that a senior member of the current regime has conspired to ship cocaine.


National Re Corp.(NRE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Memory Therapy Has Its Limits in Courtroom
To the Editor:
"There is a growing recognition of the untrustworthiness of statements made by witnesses, at present the basis of so many judgements in Courts of Law." So wrote Sigmund Freud in 1906, anticipating the consensus in present-day psychology and the controversies in psychotherapy and the legal system (front page, April 8).


Government Securities Drop in Yield for 3d Day
Yields of government securities fell yesterday for the third straight day, as inflation concerns eased in the bond market amid signs that economic growth this year may not be as strong as some have forecast.
While some economists are expecting growth this year to be as much as 4 percent, up from 2.8 percent last year, other analysts note that evidence so far this year shows inflation is still subdued.
Consumer prices rose three-tenths of 1 percent last month and 2.5 percent for the 12 months that ended in March, below last year's increase of 2.7 percent.
Producer prices rose two-tenths of 1 percent in the same period, and at a similar pace in 1993.


Veterans Will Bow Heads at Anzio Too
To the Editor:
Although neither Germany nor Italy will take part in the 50th anniversary commemoration of the Normandy invasion in June, German unhappiness over its exclusion provides a contrast with Italy's plan to celebrate a similar anniversary this year: on June 4, 1944, the Allies drove the Germans from Rome.


Stocks Soar, Ending Slump; The Dow Rises 53.83 Points
The stock market surged yesterday in extremely heavy trading after a three-day slump that had decimated many technology stocks.
The market was aided by a strong rally in the bond market and powerful first-quarter earnings by I.B.M. and other blue-chip stocks.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 53.83 points, to 3,652.54, and the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 rose 6.77 points, to 448.73.


Nellcor Inc.(NELL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Market Place; Picking utility winners in the future may be more difficult.
A PLAN approved by the California Public Utilities Commission on Wednesday to open the state's utility companies to much greater competition will have an impact on utilities nationwide.
The decision is the first concrete move on a concept of open competition -- known as retail wheeling -- that has been worrying both utility executives and analysts acutely since last fall.
But until Wednesday it was mostly an academic debate.


A Receiver, Achiever and Survivor in One
About this time of year in the National Football League, the top college players are measured by their times in the 40-yard dash, their vertical leaps and how many times they can lift 225 pounds.
Charles Johnson, a receiver from Colorado, did well enough in those categories to be the consensus choice as the best player at his position heading into the college draft on Sunday.
The Jets, who have the No. 13 pick in the first round and are looking for a top-flight receiver, are interested in Johnson.


Art in Review
Mike and Doug Starn
Leo Castelli Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through May 7
In their latest photo extravaganzas, which they call spectroheliographs, Mike and Doug Starn evoke rituals of solar worship and astronomical observation.
A series of wall-size constructions sandwich giant transparencies of the sun's disk with images that include blowups of Petrus Christus's "Portrait of a Lady" from about 1470, a picture of an open copy of Dante's "Paradiso," a newspaper article about Shinto sun-goddess worship, astronomical photographs, and images of clouds and deserts.


A Town's Leaders Stand Accused (but Stand Tall)
County Judge Jose Luis (Pepe) Guevara, the most powerful official in this remote county on the Mexican border, has been indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of aiding international drug smugglers.
So has the county sheriff.
So has the county clerk.
But asked if local government is now in turmoil, Judge Guevara drapes a friendly arm around the sheriff, Romeo R. Ramirez, and shakes his head to indicate a vigorous no.
He won renomination in the Democratic primary last month, he points out -- just three weeks after his indictment.
He is completing his first four-year term as judge after being county treasurer.


Zulu Leader Enters Campaign With Gusto
After months of boycotting South Africa's first all-race elections, Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, the Zulu nationalist leader, jumped into the campaign with gusto today, denouncing the African National Congress as a "dangerous revolutionary organization run by Communists."
Two days after he agreed to have his Inkatha Freedom Party added to the ballot in next week's election, Chief Buthelezi delighted a partisan crowd in Enseleni, a small township in troubled Natal Province, with his mocking denunciations of what he called the congress plan to introduce "central government tyranny."


Antiquarian Book Fair
Rare books, manuscripts, maps and illustrations are to be exhibited by more than 100 dealers this weekend at the Antiquarian Book Fair at the Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue, at 66th Street.
The fair is sponsored by the Antiquarian Booksellers Association of America.
There will be free appraisals from noon to 3 P.M. on Sunday.
Hours: Today, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $10 each day or $20 for a three-day pass.
Information: (212) 777-5218.


Ashland Oil (ASH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A.T.M. Case On Monopoly Is Settled
The nation's biggest regional network of automated bank tellers agreed today to open its system to new rivals, thereby avoiding prosecution by the Justice Department on charges that it attempted an illegal monopoly.
Justice Department officials accused Electronic Payment Services Inc., which operates the MAC network of tellers in New Jersey and five other states, of having engaged in practices that inflated the cost of automated teller machine transactions by $100 million in 1993.


Clubs' Economic Data Are Turned Over to Union
Labor representatives of major league baseball's club owners took a significant step yesterday in the plodding negotiations with the Players Association for a new collective bargaining agreement.
Lawyers turned over to the union the first set of the clubs' economic information that was promised when the two sides began their negotiations more than six weeks ago.


CHRONICLE
The show must go on in fashion as well as in the theater.
CAROLINE SIMONELLI and her husband and business partner, Don Simonelli, had planned to show their fall women's fashion collection on Wednesday, but Mr.
Simonelli died two weeks ago of complications resulting from asthma.
The arrangements had been made, the invitations sent out.
"I decided there was no choice but to go ahead," Mrs.
Simonelli said.
"We had a dream and it was beginning to come true. He would have wanted me to carry on."


Ford Revamps With Eye on the Globe
The Ford Motor Company today announced its most sweeping reorganization in more than 25 years, in a bid to compete better in the coming decades not only in its established European and North American markets, but in the potentially huge car and truck markets developing in Asia.
At the end of the year, Ford's North American Operations and Ford of Europe will vanish, merging into a single operating unit, Ford Automotive Operations, with global reach.
Ford's Asian-Pacific and Latin American Operations will remain separate at least until the other, more extensive operations are merged, Ford officials said.


Art in Review
Alex Harris and Carole Gallagher
International Center of Photography Midtown  1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street  Through June 19
Two very different views of the American Southwest are offered at the midtown branch of the International Center of Photography.
Alex Harris presents color photographs of northern New Mexico, while Carole Gallagher examines the impact of atmospheric nuclear testing on the people of Nevada and southern Utah.


Service Union And Buildings Reach Accord
Apartment house owners and the union representing doormen, porters and handymen reached a tentative agreement on a new three-year contract yesterday, averting a strike that would have left front desks, elevators and garbage in the hands of tenants or temporary workers.
Union leaders and officials from the owners' bargaining group, the Realty Advisory Board on Labor Relations, said that wages and other economic issues were the main sticking point in the all-night bargaining session.


Bowater Inc.(BOW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Inside Art
Museum Seeks Tenant
There's not exactly a "For Rent" sign outside the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum's SoHo branch, but it is looking for a tenant to increase its income.
Ideally, Guggenheim officials say, the museum would like to sublet nearly 10,000 square feet of street-level space on Broadway that now houses the bookstore and part of the entrance.
The tenant might also use part of the basement next to the museum's new tea boutique, called the T Room.
The museum would move its bookstore to the Mercer Street side of the ground floor and retain all the existing exhibition space on both the ground floor and the level above.
"It would be an enormous gain for the museum without compromising exhibition space," said Catherine Vare, a museum spokeswoman, who added that the institution wasn't ruling out future expansion.


Security Council Votes to Cut Rwanda Peacekeeping Force
In another retreat for the United Nations, the Security Council voted unanimously tonight to cut back the beleaguered peacekeeping force in Rwanda from some 1,700 at present to about 270, despite protests from human rights groups who fear that the move will only increase the carnage there.
Diplomats here say that the decision came after the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, told the Council that the force should either be substantially strengthened so it can restore order or reduced to a symbolic size.


New York's Rent-a-Governor
Serving as governor of New York would be job enough for most people.
But not for Mario Cuomo.
To supplement the official $130,000 salary paid by state taxpayers, newly released tax returns show, Mr.
Cuomo collected an additional $211,000 last year in a lucrative sideline -- moonlighting on the paid lecture circuit.
That was an average of $17,583 for each of 12 speaking engagements.
The previous year he did even better -- grossing $273,000 from 14 for-profit public speaking gigs.


Playtex Products Inc.(PYX:N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Murray Moves Up On Home Run List
Indians 10, Twins 6
Eddie Murray homered from both sides of the plate for a major league-record 11th time and moved into 20th place on baseball's career home run list yesterday, leading the Cleveland Indians past the Minnesota Twins, 10-6, in Minneapolis.


Puget Sound Power &amp; Light (PSD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Without Roy, Canadiens Are Barraged
Bruins 6, Canadiens 3
Ron Tugnutt, playing goal for Montreal after Patrick Roy was hospitalized with appendicitis, allowed three first-period goals as the Boston Bruins beat the Canadiens, 6-3, last night in Montreal for a 2-1 series lead.


In Trenton, 'Take Me Out to the Ball Game' Will Be a Shorter Trip


Illinois Tool Works (ITW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Guinier's Electoral Reforms Would Undermine American Ideal
To the Editor:
Has anybody read "The Federalist Papers" lately?
Lani Guinier and your Week in Review do not seem to have done so ("Guinier Ideas, Once Seen as Odd, Now Get Serious Study," April 3).
One of the seminal ideas proposed by Madison in the Tenth Federalist paper is that the formation of permanent factions could not be prevented without curtailing liberty.
Therefore, the pernicious effects of faction had to be controlled.


New York State Electric &amp; Gas (NGE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Squeeze the Dealer
The Brady law, bans on assault weapons, higher license fees for gun dealers -- lawmakers are outdoing each other trying to fight the plague of guns on America's streets.
But while all this legislation may make it harder to get guns legally, it will do almost nothing about what may be our most terrifying urban problem: violence by teen-agers with guns.
In most big cities, it's already illegal for juveniles to buy and carry guns.
So kids get their guns, for less than retail, from flourishing black markets.
Even if Congress went all the way and banned handguns, the prohibition might still have scant effect on the illegal trade.


APPLE COMPUTER INC. (AAPL,NMS)
Apple Computer Inc. reported yesterday that its earnings fell 84.3 percent, to $17.4 million, in its second fiscal quarter, despite increased revenues and unit shipments.
But the company said that sales of its new Power Macintosh models, introduced in March, were ahead of plan and partly compensated for slowing sales of older machines.
Apple's earnings of 15 cents a share were well below the consensus estimate of Wall Street analysts, which was 22 cents.
That did not account for a debt offering in February that cost about 5 cents a share.


First Data Corp.(FDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Central &amp; Southwest (CSR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


North Korea Moves to Use Fuel for Bomb
North Korea has told the International Atomic Energy Agency that it plans to remove nuclear fuel from its biggest reactor by early next month, a step that will enable it to greatly expand its nuclear weapons arsenal unless the material is placed under strict international inspection.
The agency said that it had received a letter from North Korea this week saying that international inspectors would be permitted to witness the extraction of the spent fuel at the nuclear site at Yongbyon.
But the letter said nothing about permitting inspectors to take samples and conduct tests that would allow them to track the material and verify that it is not diverted to weapons projects.


MGIC Investment Corp.(MTG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Shelter Offers Battered Women a Way Out
Evelyn Ramirez never met Anne Scripps Douglas, but she thinks she knows well the story of the 47-year-old heiress to the Scripps newspaper fortune.
Ms.
Ramirez said she was abused by the man she lived with.
But unlike Mrs.
Douglas, who died six days after she was found battered and unconscious in her Bronxville home, Ms.
Ramirez survived.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE FLOWERING PEACH," National Actors Theater, Lyceum Theater, 145 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A revival of Clifford Odets's 1954 play, starring Eli Wallach and Anne Jackson; directed by Martin Charnin.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $47.50.
Information: (212) 239-6280.
"POUNDING NAILS IN THE FLOOR WITH MY FOREHEAD," Minetta Lane Theater, Minetta Lane, Greenwich Village.
Eric Bogosian's one-man show.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $37.50.
Information: (212) 307-4100.


Fair Food Vending in Midtown
How much food vending to allow in midtown Manhattan?
That question confronts every government in New York City, and now it is Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's turn.
His decision to strictly enforce regulations that prohibit vending on many midtown streets has infuriated vendors, annoyed their customers and delighted store owners.
Food vendors are not like street peddlers of other merchandise.
Merchandise peddlers can be a terrible nuisance; they clutter sidewalks, interfere with traffic and block doorways to established stores.
Moreover, they make for vastly unfair competition because peddlers who sell those scarves, watches and T-shirts are often unlicensed and rarely pay taxes.


Imperial Oil (IMO,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Theater; Shakespearean Romance With Malice and Matter
A profoundly uncertain sky looms over the kingdom of Sicilia in the Royal Shakespeare Company's touring production of "The Winter's Tale," at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Painted in expressionist swirls and strata, in colors that shift from cerulean blues to somber grays, it is as changeable as life itself, promising serenity and portending storms.
We may be in the land of fantasy, but it is a fantasy deeply rooted in a very real, universally felt sense of cosmic flux.
The great strength of Adrian Noble's staging of this late Shakespearean romance is its ability to fold its seemingly disparate elements into a gloriously symmetrical whole.
It slights neither the disturbing darkness of the play's first acts nor the sunny ebullience of the pastoral scenes, but it leavens each with comic and potentially tragic elements that inextricably link the two parts.


Review/Art; Painterly Synthesis of a Wanderer's Life
What are we to do with our maverick artists, the ones who once had their moment of glory, who may even have lived in the vicinity of greatness for a while before they wandered off or were left behind by fashion?
The answer in the case of Joseph Stella (1877-1946) is: Look at him closely, for there is more in his career than meets history's roving eye.
Thanks to a retrospective of this artist's work, lovingly organized by Barbara Haskell and opening today at the Whitney Museum of American Art, it is possible to do exactly that.
The figure who emerges is to some degree a familiar one.
The pioneering American modernist, the link between a provincial New York and the European avant-garde, is here.
So is the painter whose image of the Brooklyn Bridge remains a classic icon of Machine Age aspiration.


Sounds Around Town
Tenor Sax Plus Three
David Murray, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, near Sheridan Square, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
One of jazz's most powerful tenor saxophonists is appearing in a quartet featuring John Hicks on piano, Fred Hopkins on bass and Andrew Cyrille on drums.
Mr.
Murray's quartets are always distinctive as they swing their way through his poplike compositions.
Mr.
Murray is performing new material he has written, from film scores to collaborations with Bob Weir of the Grateful Dead.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9:30, 11:30 and 1; and on Sunday at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $15 admission, with a $10 minimum tonight and tomorrow and an $8 minimum on Sunday.
PETER WATROUS Jazz Album of the Week
Javon Jackson, "When the Time Is Right," Blue Note, CD, $10.99.
Javon Jackson, a young tenor saxophonist who has spent time in the jazz trenches, having worked with Art Blakey and Freddie Hubbard, has put together one of the best albums of the year so far.
Produced by the singer Betty Carter, it's full of smart touches, including unaccompanied saxophone cadenzas, duets, a vocal and some heated chase choruses featuring the alto saxophonist Kenny Garrett.
Jazz albums often suffer from the lack of an arranger's conception, but "When the Time Is Right" has Mr.
Jackson's graceful and historically astute improvisations placed against bass and drums, or the sound of Jacky Terrasson's piano.
And the ambling, distinct tempo of "Sweet and Lovely" indicates that thought has been given where it's often not; the album is a model of what can be done within the confines of an idiom.
P.
W.


No Headline
"I don't want to sacrifice a generation of kids, but I'm also saying, 'Let's remember folks, the conditions that children are living in now are dreadful,"' SENATOR JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN, whose bill would let states experiment with abolishing welfare payments.  [ A14:6. ]


Balkan Update
GORAZDE continued to come under fierce attack yesterday by Bosnian Serb forces.
Relief workers there reported that more than 400 people had been killed in the Serbian offensive since it began three weeks ago.
The Bosnian Government in SARAJEVO said Serbian forces had demanded that it surrender the east bank of the DRINA RIVER or that they would prevent a United Nations convoy from reaching the besieged eastern town.


Gotti Prosecutor Is Backed By Moynihan for Judgeship
A prosecutor who played a central role in sending John Gotti, the notorious Mafia boss, to prison for life was among four people recommended yesterday by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan for Federal judgeships in New York.
President Clinton is considered highly likely to nominate the recommended candidates, whose approval is subject to Senate confirmation, which is also considered likely.


Someone Tell the Isles The Damage Is Done
The Islanders can still do plenty of damage to the Rangers in their first-round Stanley Cup playoff series.
By losing the fourth game at Nassau Coliseum on Sunday, a distinct possibility, the Islanders can deprive Ranger management of Game 5 revenues at Madison Square Garden on Monday night and force Ranger players to go stale while waiting a week for the next opponent.
If they keep hitting the Rangers with their sticks, the Islanders could injure them and weaken them for Round 2.
Neil Smith, the Rangers' president and general manager, met with Brian Burke, the league's senior vice president, after last night's game, showing him tapes of various alleged fouls.


Danaher Corp.(DHR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Belfast Appeals Court Overturns Conviction in Killing of Soldier
An appeals court here today overturned a 19-year-old murder conviction against Paul Hill, who spent nearly 15 years in prison for two Irish Republican Army attacks that he insisted he never committed.
The decision was the latest rebuke to the British police for mishandling high-profile terrorist cases in which innocent people have gone to jail.


Con Ed to Increase Electricity Rates By 1.1% on May 1
The Consolidated Edison Company of New York will raise its electricity rates on May 1 by $55.1 million, or 1.1 percent, the company said yesterday.
The bill of a typical apartment dweller in New York City using 300 kilowatt-hours a month will rise to $51.26 from $50.52, and the bill of a Westchester customer using 450 kilowatt-hours a month will rise to $71.05 from $70.05, the utility said.


At the Bar; After two decades' labor, a chronicle on the life of perhaps the finest judge ever.
Hanging on Prof.
Gerald Gunther's office wall here at Stanford Law School is Philippe Halsman's 1957 portrait of Learned Hand, maybe the most famous photograph ever of a judge.
It shows Hand, four years before his death at the age of 89, with his chiseled features, bushy eyebrows, close-cropped hair and intense eyes, staring off contemplatively.
"That was the human being I was trying to capture: a human being who knows sadness and tragedy and self-doubts and flaws, the kind of person whom I remember," Mr.
Gunther said the other day.
"All of his reflectiveness, his shaky self-esteem, his melancholy come through for me in that picture."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., Louisville, Ky., is selling $150 million of notes due in 2024 at 100 to yield 8.36 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The issue, which is putable in 10 years, is rated A-3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Breastfeeding Can Act as Transmitter of H.I.V.
To the Editor:
Jane E. Brody's articles advocating breastfeeding and delineating its many benefits to both women and their babies were excellent (Personal Health, April 6).
However, there is one very serious negative effect of breastfeeding that requires attention because of its potentially life-threatening consequences.


Japan's Coalition Forges Policy Platform
After two weeks of the messiest succession battle here in decades, Japan's governing coalition hammered out an ambiguous policy platform early this morning, clearing the way for the election of Tsutomu Hata as Prime Minister and continuing the halting process of change that began last summer.
Mr.
Hata, now the Foreign Minister, and the other conservative members of the coalition patched together a compromise with the Socialists on the two crucial issues, an increase in the 3 percent national sales tax and cooperation with the United Nations in halting North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons program.


Union Pacific Corp.(UNP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Growing Proof of Other Worlds Out There
After so many ephemeral promises of stunning discovery, here today and then explained away, scientists now feel sure that they have unqualified proof of the existence of other planets far beyond the solar system.
New, more precise observations have at last convinced a growing number of astronomers that such a planetary system has been found about 1,500 light-years away in the Virgo constellation, and this time the phenomenon is for real.


Peter Hackes; Broadcaster, 69
Peter Hackes, whose daily radio program for retired Americans, "Mature Focus," has been broadcast by several hundred radio stations for the last seven years, died on Sunday at Georgetown University Hospital.
He was 69 and lived in Washington.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Jessie Hackes.


Rozier Opts for the Pros
CLIFFORD ROZIER, Louisville's All-American center, said yesterday that he will forgo his senior year to enter the National Basketball Association draft.
The 6-foot-9-inch Rozier, who is certain to shift to forward in the pros, said he expects to be chosen in the top 15 on June 29.
Rozier, the Metro Conference player of the year, led Louisville to a 28-6 record and to the final 16 of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament. (AP)


Corrections
An article on Dec. 20, 1990, about a bribery case against the president of the United Hospitals Medical Center in Newark included incorrect references supplied by the New Jersey Attorney General's office about the involvement of Mandel Klinger, an insurance agent.
A recent letter from an assistant attorney general points out that Mr.
Klinger did not plead guilty to bribery or other charges, and the case was closed without the filing of any charges against him.


Spiegel (SPGLA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


One Fox Joins Another As Johnson Gets Deal
Now that Jimmy Johnson has graciously chosen to spend part of his coaching sabbatical working as a football studio analyst this fall for Fox Sports, the former Dallas Cowboys coach needs a slogan for his season of TV work:
"How 'bout them insights!"
"How 'bout them Telestrations!"
"How 'bout my money!"


Havana Journal; Economy Fading Fast, but Not Castro
For Cuban officialdom, it was more of what they see as three decades of undeserved hostility.
For the emigres gathered here for a major conference, it was a desperate attempt to scare them off from an important visit.
For the sworn enemies of this country's Communist Government, it was a long-dreamed-of chance for change.
In the end, though, it seems to have turned out to be nothing more than a hoax.


Managed Care Is Supermarket Medicine
To the Editor:
Having been told by my colleagues of the near certainty that the insurance companies have targeted New York City for conversion to managed care, I made inquiry as to the payment to the primary care doctor -- the so-called gatekeeper whose presence is essential to the plan.
The fee to this doctor is $5 to $10 a month per patient, that is, between $50 and $120 a year.
His responsibility is the health of that individual, which to me means an annual evaluation and examination, 24-hour call, all hospital care and the coordination of the individual's health care.


Amgen Inc.(AMGN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Housing Police Union Reaches Tentative Contract Agreement
The Giuliani administration and the housing police union announced a tentative agreement yesterday on a 39-month contract that provides modest wage and benefit increases for the 2,000-member force, largely tracking the settlement the Dinkins administration reached with the largest municipal unions in early 1993.
If ratified, the contract would provide an overall wage increase of just over 7 percent, plus a lump-sum payment of $2,000 for all officers on the payroll during 1992.
The agreement is retroactive to October 1991 and runs through the end of 1994.


'Sorry' as a Political Weapon in the TV Age
Hillary Rodham Clinton said she was influenced to hold her first formal news conference as First Lady when she read that Eleanor Roosevelt had held more than 340 news conferences during her White House years.
"Now, Mrs. Roosevelt only invited women reporters," Mrs.
Clinton said today, smiling.
"I don't think I could get away with that."


Gates/FA Distributing Inc.(GAFA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dr. Sidney Werner, 84, Dies; Researched Graves' Disease
Dr.
Sidney Charles Werner, who advanced the modern understanding of Graves' disease, died on Thursday at a nursing home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 84.
The cause was pneumonia, his family said.


BJ Services Co. (BJS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about a 1.1 percent increase in Consolidated Edison's electricity rates misstated the starting date of the increase.
It was April 1, not May 1.


U.S. Lets 400 Haitians in Florida; Denies Policy Change
A group of 406 Haitians crammed aboard a wooden freighter off the Florida coast was brought ashore here today by the Coast Guard, immediately making the members eligible to seek political asylum.
The Clinton Administration denied that the rescue represented a change in its policy of forced repatriation of Haitian refugees.
In Washington, a State Department spokesman said the 271 men, 126 women and 9 children aboard the 65-foot vessel had been allowed to land in the United States only because of the "extraordinary circumstances in this case." Coast Guard officials here said they took the refugees aboard the cutter Mohawk only after the Haitian ship drifted into American territorial waters and because violence had broken out on board and many passengers needed medical attention.


No Headline
His resilience and his diligent desire to give something back to this country and to the world provide a lesson for all of us about maintaining our faith in the future. -- PRESIDENT CLINTON, on Richard M. Nixon.  [ 13:5. ]


Ethyl Corp.(EY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Williams Cos.(WMB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Senate Votes New Job-Training Program
The Senate has approved and sent to President Clinton a plan to give the states $300 million a year through 1999 to design job training programs for students who do not plan to attend college.
The voice vote, which follows the House's 339-to-79 vote in favor of the program, came on Thursday after brief but pointed disagreements among senators about the value of the program.


Cincinnati Gas &amp; Electric Co.  (CIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Independence Bancorp Inc.(INBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Service Corp. Int'l(SRV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
Federal Reserve Nominees
President Clinton nominated two economists to the Federal Reserve Board who may seek to slow interest rate increases.
Page 39.
New Heavyweight Champion
Michael Moorer captured a 12-round majority decision over Evander Holyfield, the defending W.B.A. and I.B.F. champion.
Page 33.


RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp.(RN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Clinton nominated two economists to the Federal Reserve Board whose philosophies suggest that they may seek to temper the pace at which the central bank raises interest rates to fight inflation.
The nominations allow the President to put his stamp on an institution run entirely by Republican appointees.  [ Page 39. ]
The Administration is taking the first steps to restrict imports of Canadian wheat and barley into the United States, a move that intensified a dispute over wheat.  [ 39. ] Markets
Kidder, Peabody discharged another trader for concealing losses, in a sign that broader problems were emerging on the securities firm's trading desks.  [ 39. ]
Stocks closed essentially unchanged, as the bond and stock markets tracked each other within a narrow range after the nominations of two economists to the Fed.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.86 points, to 3,648.68.  [ 40. ]
Prices of Treasury securities slipped after a three-day rally.
The 30-year bond was down 4/32 , to 888/32 , to yield 7.22 percent, up slightly from Thursday, but down 6 basis points for the week.  [ 48. ]
Crude oil prices jumped to a five-month high as traders said an expected rebound in the world economy could draw down supplies while production stagnates.  [ 47. ]
The dollar was steady against leading currencies as traders waited to see whether world economic leaders meeting on Sunday would try to curb the recent rise of the Japanese yen.  [ 47. ] International
Brazil's auto industry is undergoing a $12 billion modernization intended to put Brazilian-made cars on streets around the world by the end of the decade.
Last year, Brazil produced a record 1.4 million cars, leapfrogging over Italy and Mexico to become the world's 10th-largest car maker.  [ 39. ] Companies
About 300 airlines may get their flight schedules bumped from Apollo, the airline industry's computer reservations system, if they do not become full participants in the network.  [ 38. ]
Exxon and Mobil reported stable earnings for the first quarter in the face of falling crude oil prices.
Increased profits for refined products made up for much of the falloff in income from exploration and production.  [ 41. ]
Liz Claiborne hired Paul R. Charron, executive vice president of the VF Corporation, to be its chief operating officer and vice chairman, potentially resolving the issue of corporate succession that has bedeviled the apparel company.  [ 41. ]
Shares of Unisys plunged after the computer company said its first-quarter revenues had dropped nearly 12 percent, well below analysts' expectations.  [ 41. ]
Duracell and Intel announced standards for a battery with a chip that tells portable computers, cellular phones, camcorders and similar devices exactly how much charge they have left.  [ 41. ]
Prudential Securities settled charges of securities law violations with California, which had been the lone holdout to the firm's broad settlement of fraud charges with regulators.  [ 51. ]
Your Money
Japanese stock prices have gained despite the country's political instability, a sour economy and an overvalued currency.  [ 37. ]
Investors in some favorite mutual funds have learned a hard lesson: There are not always ready buyers for the funds' holdings, especially when times get tough.  [ 37. ]
Mortgage life insurance policies may not be the bargains they appear to be.
Other types of insurance can usually achieve the same result at far less cost, consumer groups say.  [ 37. ] .
Easy-to-use software offers expert help to get a handle on the vast number of variables that affect retirement plans.  [ 38. ]


Wilkinson Theorem Perplexes Bengals
Two days before the National Football League draft, Bengals General Manager Mike Brown says he hasn't received any offers that would tempt Cincinnati to give up the No. 1 pick.
"Up to this point, we're inclined to keep it," Brown said yesterday.


Crossland Federal Savings Bank (XLND) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Music; Solving a Monteverdi Opera Before Presenting It
Early opera makes its greatest appeal to musicians and listeners with the freest spirits.
With Verdi or Wagner operas, one might quibble about editions and details, but the composers' fully orchestrated scores are solid foundations on which performances can be built.
But with Monteverdi and his contemporaries, surviving scores present the music in shorthand, with instrumentation and scoring niceties left to circumstance, and fragments of competing versions clouding the picture.
The questions "What should be done here?" and "How?" can be daunting for musicians used to being guided by the composers' expressed wishes.
The student singers and musicians of the Juilliard Opera Center have been puzzling over Monteverdi's 1642 opera, "L'Incoronazione di Poppea," with musicological prodding from Gary Wedow (who, in turn, based his realization on Alan Curtis's 1990 edition of the work) and staging by Frank Corsaro.
They presented their solution on Wednesday night and last night, and will do so again tomorrow afternoon at the Juilliard Theater.


Harris Bankcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Very Short Trip Down Memory Lane for Ojeda and Darling
It could have been an intriguing reunion of two former Mets from the 1986 champions, but it looked more like two struggling pitchers who could not have helped the hapless Mets of 1993.
If Bob Ojeda and Ron Darling considered dining together after the game last night, both would have probably canceled because of queasy stomachs.
Their fond memories would have been clouded by what happened at Yankee Stadium.
In a dual display of pitching that even Bob Murphy would have had an arduous time uttering something positive about, both Ojeda and Darling were wild with their stuff, were whacked around by batters and were walking to the clubhouse long before the game was decided.
Ojeda departed in the third inning after allowing four runs and Darling left in the fourth after giving up six runs; there were no happy recaps for either.


Q &amp; A
Investing Systematically
How does dollar cost averaging differ from value averaging? FRANK LEVY, Roslyn, L.I.


State Street Boston Corp.(STBK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Charter One Financial (COFI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jones Gets Job Done To Give Mets a Lift
In the dugout before the game, Bobby Jones watched Luis Rivera smack a batting-practice ball over the right-field wall at Candlestick Park.
It did not make him happy.
Rivera is no power hitter, and the sight of him hitting a homer -- even in practice -- made Jones rise from his seat to make an uneasy check of the stadium winds.
Jones didn't need to worry.
He gave the San Francisco Giants next to nothing to work with tonight, and it was his Mets' teammates who were hitting the home runs.
Jeromy Burnitz and David Segui each smacked homers to right off San Francisco starter Mark Portugal.


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc.(PHBK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Drugs Lead To a Shooting In a Family
A mother so fearful of her crack-addicted son that she turned beseechingly to the police, a father so worried that his son would destroy the family that he shot him six times -- those are the snapshots that emerged yesterday, hours after Michael Robertson was arrested and charged with trying to kill his 34-year-old son, Ronald, in the living room of their home in Jamaica, Queens.
The son remained in critical condition yesterday at Mary Immaculate City Hospital.
The father was in custody, facing charges of attempted murder.
And other family members stayed sequestered inside their white two-story frame house at 156-13 110th Avenue, where a long, private ordeal came to a public end on Thursday night.


Morrison Knudsen Corp.(MRN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bancor Latinoamericano de Exportaciones S.A. (BLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Knicks Need Some Magic to Be East's Best
The Knicks tonight kept alive their chances of finishing with the best record in the Eastern Conference.
Taking command in the second half, New York cruised to a 125-85 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks at the Bradley Center.
The Knicks got a major favor from the Celtics.
Boston defeated the Bulls, 104-94, in double overtime at Chicago Stadium.


UST Corp.(USTB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE 37th PRESIDENT; Text of President Clinton's Statement on Nixon's Death
Following is a transcript of the statement last night by President Clinton, as recorded by The New York Times, on the death of former President Richard M. Nixon:
It is my sad duty to report to the people of the United States that Richard M. Nixon, who served as our 37th President, died this evening in New York City at 9:08 P.M., with his family at his side.


Mueller Industries(MLI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


CHRONICLE
What might have happened if BARBRA STREISAND had been a bit more polite to PRINCE CHARLES when they met, in 1972?
"Who knows, if I had been nicer to him I could have been the first real Jewish princess: Princess Babs," she mused to a London concert audience this week, the Press Association reported.


Hovnanian Enterpr (HOV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Man in the News; Cautious Leader in Japan: Tsutomu Hata
Anyone who steps into Tsutomu Hata's apartment will see instantly that it is the dwelling of a typical Japanese "salaryman" -- three cramped rooms, with a washing machine jammed in by the front door and a combination living room, dining room and kitchen piled high with books and papers.
Indeed, part of Mr.
Hata's popularity can be explained by the fact that he lives today much as he did when he was a bus-tour operator in the 1960's, before he became what he calls "an accidental politician."


Standard Register (SREG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Kysor Industrial Corp.(KZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Total Petroleum N.A.(TPN,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


For Greeks, It Is More Than a Name
In a country where opposing parties tend to disagree loudly on virtually everything, the Macedonia issue has created a Greek chorus that sings in unison.
The resurgence of the dispute, a Balkan evergreen since the days of the Ottoman Empire, has brought forth almost identical statements from political leaders accustomed to accusing each other of perfidy on slight provocation.


CHRONICLE
How do tap dancers say farewell? With their feet, course.
Tomorrow evening, stalwarts of the tap world will gather at the Steps Studio at Broadway and 74th Street to pay tribute to Jan Mickens, who died around New Year's.
BETTINA SLUSAR, the managing director of Steps and an organizer of the tribute, said: "He died of AIDS and was not found for several weeks. There was never an official announcement, and no one knew until the news just seeped out. People were very upset that he had died alone, and they felt they had never had a chance to say goodbye."


LSI Logic Corp.(LSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Varian Associates Inc.(VAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


HILLARY CLINTON TAKES QUESTIONS ON WHITEWATER
Moving to silence her critics, Hillary Rodham Clinton held a highly unusual news conference today in which she offered a calm and determined explanation of her financial dealings and an apology for the way the White House has handled questions about them.
Seated casually in the State Dining Room at the White House under the portrait of a pensive Abraham Lincoln, Mrs.
Clinton said she was setting aside her desire for a "zone of privacy" to set the record straight on commodities and real estate investments that she and Bill Clinton made while he was Attorney General and Governor of Arkansas.


Advest Group (ADV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Unisys First-Quarter Results Cause Shares to Plummet
The Unisys Corporation, despite reporting its 10th consecutive profitable quarter, got a bad reception on Wall Street yesterday when it announced that its first-quarter revenues had dropped by nearly 12 percent, well below analysts' expectations.
Shares of Unisys plunged $2.50, to $11.50, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange after the computer company, which is based in Blue Bell, Pa., reported revenues of $1.69 billion, down from $1.91 billion in the comparable quarter a year earlier.


Wilmington Trust Corp.(WILM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cold Choices in Rwanda
What looks very much like genocide has been taking place in Rwanda.
People are pulled from cars and buses, ordered to show their identity papers and then killed on the spot if they belong to the wrong ethnic group.
Thousands of bodies have already piled up, and the killing continues despite the presence of 1,700 United Nations peacekeepers.
The wider horror is that the world has few ways of responding effectively when violence within a nation leads to massacres and the breakdown of civil order.
The U.N.
Security Council threw in the bloodied towel when it decided unanimously Thursday to cut back the blue-helmeted force to 270 soldiers in Kigali, the Rwandan capital.
However morally unsettling, the pullout fairly reflects the unwillingness of most U.N. members to recruit a force big enough to stop a genocidal conflict.
Most troubling of all is the uncertain fate of thousands of Rwandans who sought the protection of U.N. peacekeepers.


Bridge
A dark horse squad has taken the lead in the prestigious Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship after five rounds of play.
Jerry Goldberg of Yonkers, Bob Jaffe of Long Island City, Queens, and Jane Dillenberg, Nancy Kalow and Jeff Rothstein, all of Manhattan, form the only unbeaten team and are awaiting an opponent from the losers' bracket.
Playing April 13 at the Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, the Goldberg team, originally seeded 22d in the field of 34 teams, won by more than 90 imps against a strong group led by Charles Reich of Manhattan.
In the diagramed deal a bad trump split was heavily punished.


Ukraine Olympians Dedicate Rink Site
Oksana Baiul and Viktor Petrenko, the Olympic skating champions from Ukraine, seemed surprised by the size of the crowd gathered for the groundbreaking of this town's Olympic-size skating center.
More than 1,200 people gathered at the rink site for a glimpse of the skating stars, who are scheduled to move here this fall and train at the new rink.
The $5 million skating center is being built 4 miles north of the Simsbury town center off Route 10, 12 miles northwest of Hartford, in a clearing behind two weathered tobacco barns.


Greater New York Savings Bank (GRTR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Show Goes On As 'Phantom' Star Restarts 'Carousel'
In a rare and highly theatrical conjunction of misfortune and last-minute improvisation, illnesses suffered by both the male lead of "Carousel" and his understudy forced the cancellation of four performances of the sold-out Broadway musical this week and sent producers on a frantic search for a substitute.
Now they've found one: the Phantom of the Opera.


Dime Savings Bank of New York (DME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Music; Meeting With the Many Beethovens
Behind our image of Beethoven the architect stand others: Beethoven the obsessed, for example, and Beethoven the slightly mad.
The Fantasia (Op. 77), with which Ursula Oppens began her Carnegie Hall piano recital on Wednesday night, has indeed a hallucinogenic quality, a kind of inspired incoherence that achieves direction only with considerable time and effort on the composer's part.
A swooping scale; silence (what to do next?); lyrical snippets; nervous syncopated repetitions; disjointed key changes; more of all the above, again and again.
The five stalwart sharps of B major rescue us at the end as Beethoven arrives at his other lifelong obsession, the theme and variations form.


SCEcorp (SCE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CROWN HEIGHTS CASE FOLLOWS TEEN-AGER For most of the last 15 months, Lemrick Nelson Jr., an 18-year-old high-school student with a piercing gaze and a hint of a mustache, lived anonymously and quietly in a suburb of Atlanta.
The setting contrasts sharply with Crown Heights, Brooklyn, where he was acquitted of the 1991 stabbing death of a Hasidic student.
But his past came back to trouble him when aggravated assault allegations -- and continuing investigations into the Crown Heights stabbing -- refocused attention on him.
Page 28.
DRUGS LEAD TO A SHOOTING IN A FAMILY A mother so fearful of her crack-addicted son that she turned beseechingly to the police, a father so frustrated that he shot his son six times -- these are the snapshots that came out after Michael Robertson was arrested and charged with trying to kill his 34-year-old son Ronald in the living room of their home in Jamaica, Queens.
Page 29.
EX-NEWSMAN TO HEAD CITY BROADCASTING Steve Bauman, a 51-year-old publishing executive and former television newsman, was appointed by Mayor Giuliani to succeed Thomas B. Morgan as president of the embattled municipal broadcasting system.
Page 29.
TENTATIVE CONTRACT FOR HOUSING POLICE The Giuliani administration and the housing police union announced a tentative agreement on a 39-month contract that provides modest wage and benefit increases for the 2,000-member force.
Page 29.
The police released a photograph of a suspect in a series of armed robberies in Queens.
Page 29.
REGION  ARRESTS BREAK DRUG NETWORK "I've got a terrible headache," the dark-haired man complained to his friend over the phone from a highway gas station in Westchester County.
"This is turning out to be one of the worst days of my life." Before Wilfredo Schery could put down the phone, narcotics investigators were handcuffing him and arresting him on charges of being the manager of a cocaine-distribution ring in the New York metropolitan area.
Page 30.
CRUSADER FIGHTS FOR SIMPLER SPELLING All his life, Edward Rondthaler has had a love-hate relationship with the English alphabet.
Like such ideological forefathers as George Bernard Shaw, Theodore Roosevelt and Andrew Carnegie, he wants to clear up the whims of spelling by adopting a more phonetic version of English, one where words are written as they sound.
Thus a "generous piece of celery" would be spelled "jenerus pees of selery." Page 30.
STATE WARNS AGAINST EATING SPORT FISH Concerned about increased concentrations of PCB's showing up in fish, the New York State Department of Health issued warnings on eating sport fish -- an approach that one environmentalist described as "better safe than sorry." Page 30.
JUDGE LIFTS BAN ON LAWYER COMMENTS Warning lawyers on both sides to follow a state ethics rule, the judge hearing the Colin Ferguson case nonetheless turned aside a request from prosecutors to issue a flat-out ban on remarks to the news media.
Page 28.
Two Olympic skating champions are to move to Connecticut and train at a new rink.
Page 28.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 29


Wrong Number for Net Fans
Hundreds of fans seeking to purchase tickets to Nets playoff games by telephoning the Byrne Meadowlands Arena box office yesterday morning wound up connected to the office of an insurance company in New Jersey instead.
In a release distributed by the team on Thursday and published in yesterday's sports section of The New York Times, as well as in other newspapers, the Nets announced that playoff game tickets would go on sale at 9 A.M. and could be obtained by dialing the Nets' box office in East Rutherford.
The trouble was, the number listed had one digit incorrect, the Nets said yesterday.


Home Savings Bank (Fla.) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Schlumberger Ltd.(SLB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Pigeon's Lament: Go Fly a Kite


Mediation Set For Teamsters And Truckers In Walkout
Taking a tentative step toward the settlement of a 17-day strike against a consortium of trucking companies, officials with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters agreed today to Federal mediation but stopped short of calling drivers and other union members back to work.
The union's decision came in response to a letter from Federico F. Pena, the Secretary of Transportation, and Robert B. Reich, the Secretary of Labor, who argued that the lack of progress in the talks was disrupting the normal flow of goods around the country and particularly threatened freight to Alaska and Hawaii.


Vulcan Materials Co.(VMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE 37th PRESIDENT; RICHARD NIXON, 81, DIES; A MASTER OF POLITICS UNDONE BY WATERGATE
Richard Milhous Nixon, the 37th President of the United States, who was the only President in more than two centuries of American history to resign from office, died last night at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 81 years old and lapsed into a deep coma on Thursday morning after suffering a stroke on Monday.


New Talks With the Rebels Expected Soon in Mexico
After several weeks in which efforts to end the rebel uprising in Chiapas seemed to be unraveling, Indian rebels and the Government's negotiator say that the conditions for peace have now improved and that talks could resume in a matter of weeks.
Leaders of the Zapatista National Liberation Army are expected as soon as Saturday to announce the date and place for a new round of negotiations on the political settlement to end the peasant uprising, which started on Jan. 1.


Duriron Co. (DURI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar


Obituary Tomorrow
The announcement of Mr.
Nixon's death came too late for a complete obituary to be included in this edition.
It will be published tomorrow.


Fund American Enterprises Holdings Inc.(FFC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Giving Cats a Chance For Their Other 8 Lives
THE cats were everywhere.
Some rested in cages, but most moved freely through the fifth floor walk-up on the West Side.
They climbed on the empty bookshelves and stalked each other through the empty kitchen cupboards or slinked over the upholstered furniture.
"I think we must have about 120 here," said Pat Haldeman, the tall, 48-year-old woman who secured and outfitted the apartment as something of a clandestine sanctuary for the stray cats she and her accomplices have rescued from streets and alleys.


Corrections
A brief report in the Events column in The Home Section on Thursday about a discussion on architecture to be held on Monday, sponsored by the New York Chapter of the American Institute of Architects, misstated the group's telephone number.
It is (212) 683-0023.
Because of incorrect information supplied by the group, the report also misstated the cost of admission to the event.
It is $10, or $5 for institute members, students and teachers.
It is not free.


BC Telecom International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Looking to Make the Right Moves


Armor All Products (ARMR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Observer; Waiting for a Purpose
The little girl ran up and sat on her grandfather's lap, saying, "Dear, dear Granddaddy, tell me how it was in your days."
"Well," said the old fellow, leaping from his rocker and hurling the dear child across the room and into a faraway sofa before resettling in his chair, "in the old days you could let your dear little grandchildren sit on your lap and not have to worry about being locked up for child abuse."


Rebuilding Woes Abound At Elmhurst Hospital, Too
At first glance Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens and Kings County Hospital Center in Brooklyn seem to belong to different cities.
Though both are worn and outdated, construction workers swarm daily around Elmhurst, building annexes, tearing out obsolete six-bed rooms and putting in modern nursing centers on each floor.
There is nothing of the sort at Kings County; a billion-dollar plan to replace the crumbling hospital building is stalled after years of mismanagement and is at least two and a half years behind schedule.


The Hata Paradox
Tsutomu Hata, chosen by Japan's ruling reform coalition to be the next prime minister, is a veteran insider of Tokyo's corrupt old politics turned crusader for clean government and electoral reform.
He represents the right wing of the ruling coalition, but espouses far more radical change than his liberal and Socialist allies.
He is a longtime political follower now chosen to lead Japan.
Yet behind the paradoxes of Mr.
Hata's career is an underlying logic that reflects the changes now at work in Japanese society.
His selection augurs well for the future of Japan's reform agenda and its relations with the United States.


Whitney Holding reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


COMPANY NEWS: Time for a Charge; A Battery That Tells When It Feels Worn Out
Duracell International Inc. and the Intel Corporation have announced standards for a battery with a chip that tells portable computers, cellular phones, camcorders and similar devices exactly how much charge it has left.
Computers will be able to use the information to cut power use when needed, according to Duracell.
The chip keeps track of 34 parameters, including how long the battery has been sitting unused, how often it has been charged and discharged and how high a temperature it has experienced.
The chip also reports when a cell within the battery is getting weak.


Some Fund Prices Are Educated Guesses
One by one this year, some of America's favorite mutual funds have plunged: emerging markets funds, municipal bond funds, technology sector funds and, most recently, a handful of highly rated mortgage securities funds.
What these disparate funds have in common is that there are not always ready buyers for their holdings, especially when times get tough.
During times of market turmoil, securities that do not attract a lot of willing buyers will drop especially sharply.
Many will never change hands at all.
That presents a big problem for mutual funds, which must assign prices to their portfolios every day, and can be a concern for investors who want to buy or sell a fund at the best price.


Manville Corp.(MVL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TransCanada Pipelines (TRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Albany International Corp.(AIN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Transactions
Baseball American Leaue  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Sent Mackey Sasser, catcher, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League for a 20-day injury rehabilitation assignment.
National League HOUSTON ASTROS -- Optioned Roberto Petagine, first baseman, to Tucson of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled John Hudek, pitcher, from Tucson.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Recalled Dan Miceli, pitcher, from Buffalo of the American Association.
Optioned William Pennyfeather, outfielder, to Buffalo.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CHICAGO BULLS -- Activated Bill Cartwright, center, from the injured list.
Placed Corie Blount, forward, on the injured list.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed Earl Cureton, forward, to a contract for the remainder of the season.
Football National Football League DENVER BRONCOS -- Released Greg Kragen, nose tackle.
DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Dave Krieg, quarterback.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Reggie Cobb, running back.
Canadian Football League HAMILTON TIGER-CATS -- Named Issac Wright equipment manager and strength coach.
SHREVEPORT PIRATES -- Signed Eros sanchez, quarterback.
Arena Football League MASSACHUSETTS MARAUDERS -- Signed Doug Adkins, defesive specialist.
MIAMI HOOTERS -- Signed Jim Bishop, lineman.
TAMPA BAY STORM -- Signed Steve Rhem, offensive specialist.
Hockey International Hockey League HOUSTON AEROS -- Named Peter Dineen director of player personnel; Terry Ruskowski coach; and Todd Sharrock director of media relations.


Mieczeslaw Maneli, Law Professor, 72
Prof.
Mieczeslaw Maneli, an expert on international law and political science, died on April 9 in New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 72 and lived in Forest Hills.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


LADD Furniture (LADF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


New South Africa Is Hoping To Channel Its Youth Power
Among the perverse boons of apartheid is a strong history of young South Africans, forced to be wiser than their years, who took to the streets and became the protest core of two decades of resistance and strikes.
But now the advent of democracy would put this volatile youth power back in the bottle by playing down the need for protest, restoring academic responsibility to traumatized schoolrooms and setting the voting age at 18 -- a source of great dissatisfaction among this nation's many young activists as South Africa faces its historic free elections next week.


Texas Utilities (TXU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Roy Still Questionable For Canadiens' Game 4
Canadiens goaltender PATRICK ROY remained hospitalized with a mild case of appendicitis for another day yesterday, and it was still not known whether he would be able to play in Game 4 of Montreal's playoff series against the Boston Bruins tonight.
Roy's condition was much improved, the Canadiens' team physician, Dr.
DOUG KINNEAR, said in a statement.
Kinnear said Roy had resumed eating solid food and would remain hospitalized in Montreal for another 24 hours.
His condition will be re-evaluated today.


'Boot Camps' Safer and Cleaner Than Prisons
To the Editor:
While your news article "Prison Boot Camps Prove No Sure Cure" (April 10) raises relevant questions about the program, especially regarding the relative recidivism rates of its "graduates," it overlooked one of the principal benefits of shock incarceration: that among New York State's 68 correctional facilities it provides the most decent living and working conditions for inmates and prison staff.
Most of New York's prisons are warehouses whose primary purpose is to store convicted criminals far away from mainstream society.
These facilities are often characterized by high levels of tension,frequent violent incidents among inmates and between inmates and staff, and widespread chemical abuse including the use of needles or needle substitutes to inject drugs.


Giddings &amp; Lewis (GIDL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Sun Co.(SUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Liz Claiborne Names (Anoints?) Operating Chief
Liz Claiborne Inc. announced yesterday that it had hired Paul R. Charron as its chief operating officer and vice chairman, potentially resolving the issue of corporate succession that has bedeviled it.
Mr.
Charron is executive vice president of the VF Corporation.
While some people in the garment industry and on Wall Street regarded the appointment as an anointment, others said it did little to answer the question that has been hanging over Liz Claiborne: Who will replace Jerome Chazen, the 67-year-old longtime chairman and chief executive?


Valley National Bancorp (VLY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.N. Says Serbian Leaders Agree to Accept a Cease-Fire
Confronted by the imminent threat of NATO air strikes around Gorazde, Bosnian Serbs agreed today to a cease-fire effective on Saturday and the withdrawal of their heavy weapons from the Gorazde area, a senior United Nations official said.
Yasushi Akashi, the top United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia, announced the accord after a 10-hour meeting in Belgrade with President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and the political and military leaders of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic and Gen.
Ratko Mladic.


New England Business Service Inc.(NEBS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Serb Troops Press Gorazde, Ignoring NATO Ultimatum
Serbian nationalists blanketed Gorazde with artillery fire and launched fresh infantry assaults into the eastern Bosnian town tonight, ignoring a new United Nations Security Council resolution and a NATO ultimatum demanding their withdrawal, United Nations officials and ham radio operators said.
There was no indication that the announcement late tonight in Belgrade, in which the Serbian leadership agreed to yet another cease-fire, had produced any effect on the ground in Gorazde.


Monsanto Co.(MTC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Baybanks (BBNK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Results Plus
N.H.L.
Stars Push Blues to Playoff Brink  Paul Cavallini scored on a power play at 8 minutes 34 seconds of overtime as the Dallas Stars beat the St.
Louis Blues, 5-4, to take a commanding 3-0 lead in their first-round National Hockey League playoff series in St.
Louis last night.
The Stars' third power-play goal of the game came with the Blues' Petr Nedved in the penalty box for holding.
Cavallini took a shot that deflected off the Blues' Brendan Shanahan but he got the puck right back and beat Curtis Joseph with 40-foot drive for his first goal of the playoffs.
Cavallini, a former Blues player, added a second-period assist and has a goal and five assists in the series.
The Stars, who won despite getting outshot by 48-31, go for the sweep in Game 4 tomorrow night in St.
Louis. (AP) GYMNASTICS  Miller Wins World All-Around Title  Shannon Miller of the United States completed two spectacular vaults tonight to win her second straight women's all-around title at the world gymnastics championships, in Brisbane, Australia.
Miller needed to score 9.775 with her two vaults to win, and she scored 9.812.
She totaled 39.274 points for the four disciplines in retaining the title she won last year at Birmingham, England.
It was a remarkable performance considering that Miller, 17, from Edmond, Okla., injured a stomach muscle last month and missed two weeks of training.
Lavinia Milosovici of Romania won the silver medal with a score of 39.236, 0.038 behind.
Dina Kochetkova of Russia was third at 39.125. (AP) SOCCER  Demotion Ruling Stuns Marseilles  The European soccer champion, Olympique Marseilles, was demoted yesterday to the second division of the French League next season for bribing three players on a rival team to throw a game last May.
"This is a very grave decision," said the Marseilles financial director, Alain Laroche.
"This is just crazy." The French Football Federation's sanctions culminated the 11-month-old scandal, which had already resulted in European soccer officials preventing the club from defending its 1993 European Champions Cup title. (AP) GOLF  Elements Have Nothing on Springer  Mike Springer found the birdies a little harder to come by yesterday in the Greater Greensboro Open in North Carolina, but the three he achieved were just enough to give him a comfortable lead.
Springer shot a three-under-par 69 for an 11-under-par 133 and a four-stroke lead.
It was quite windy, drizzling and the temperature was 49 degrees by the time the field completed the second round at Forest Oaks Country Club.
Ed Humenik shot a 65 for a 137 total. (AP)
TENNIS  Former Soviet Rivalry Is Updated  Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine and Yevgeny Kafelnikov of Russia will renew their rivalry on the tennis court today.
Instead of battling for a Soviet junior prize, though, they will play in the semifinals of the $1.7 million Monte Carlo Open in Monaco.
Both won quarterfinal matches in contrasting fashion yesterday.
Medvedev upset Jim Courier, 6-7 (5-7), 7-5, 7-6 (7-3), in 3 hours 19 minutes.
Kafelnikov, who earlier beat Andre Agassi and Michael Stich, needed only 1:27 to beat David Rikl of the Czech Republic, 7-6 (7-1), 6-3. (AP)


Corestates Financial (CFL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


And the New Champion: Moorer, by Decision in 12
Michael Moorer, patient, strong, and left-handed, won Evander Holyfield's heavyweight titles tonight.
Moorer, the first southpaw to win the sport's biggest crown, captured a 12-round majority decision and had the fans here at Caesars Palace alternately shouting, "Moorer!" and "Holly!"


People's Bank (Conn.) (PBCT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Buying Insurance to Pay Off a Mortgage: Often No Bargain
Concerned about their families' financial security, many homeowners buy insurance policies that will pay off the mortgage when they die.
These policies, known as mortgage life insurance, appear inexpensive at first blush.
Premiums are as low as $30 a month (for nonsmokers in their 30's) on a $100,000 mortgage and are simply added to the monthly mortgage payment.


Sumitomo Bank of Calif. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Seton Hall Signs Guard
Seton Hall announced its first signing of the spring yesterday, as LEVELL SANDERS of Jamaica High School in Queens agreed to enroll on an athletic scholarship this fall.


Alliance Capital Management L.P. (AC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rangers Are Bracing For a Bruising Game 4
With the Rangers comfortably ahead of the Islanders by 3-0 in their first-round Stanley Cup playoff series, the conversation today turned to peripheral issues.
Would the Islanders try to avenge their humiliation by attacking the Rangers with sticks and fists and nasty words in Game 4 Sunday afternoon at Nassau Coliseum?


Struggling to Put the 'Ortho' Back in Orthography
All his life, Edward Rondthaler has had a love-hate relationship with the English alphabet.
It earned him a living running a business that designed typefaces, but he has come to find the alphabet a fickle thing, its hundreds of inconsistencies truly bothersome.
The letter "o," he says with the mildest exasperation, sounds differently in the words "bomb," "tomb" and "comb." And the "ch" sound is spelled differently in "church," "match," "righteous," "structure" and "question."


Ice Cream Philanthropy
Lest readers perceive a hidden conflict of interest, this editorial concerns an ice cream shop that gave out free cones when it opened for business a few steps from The Times's front door.
The cones were great.
The shop's significance is greater.
It is a Ben &amp; Jerry's "Partnershop," one of five that the ice cream producer has established with nonprofit organizations, where most or all of the profits go to the nonprofit's program.
The oldest, Youth Scoops in Ithaca, N.Y., opened in 1987.
The newest opened this month at the corner of Eighth Avenue and West 43d Street, a block from Times Square in one of New York City's downscale neighborhoods.


Westcorp Inc.(WES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Metamorphosis of the Brazilian Car Industry
Emerging from a 20-year protectionist cocoon, Brazil's automobile industry is undergoing a $12 billion modernization intended to put Brazilian-made cars on streets around the world by the end of the decade.
With Brazilian consumers snapping up new models, production has jumped by 52 percent since 1990.
Last year, Brazil produced a record 1.4 million cars, leapfrogging over Italy and Mexico to become the world's 10th-largest car maker.


Managed Care Is Supermarket Medicine; Doctors' Ethical Bind
To the Editor:
The editorial "Sneak Attack on Health Reform" (April 11) attacks "any willing provider" provisions in health care plans, under which any provider willing to accept a plan's fees and standards must be accepted by the insurance plan.
You say that this "innocent-sounding" provision would undermine cost and quality controls.
The truth is that these provisions are essential to protect quality of care.
You assume insurance companies are interested in providing cost-effective, good-quality care.
My experience as a practicing psychologist tells me otherwise.
Insurance companies are indeed motivated to minimize costs (that is, benefits paid out) -- this increases profits.
But they have no incentive to maximize quality -- that often costs money.
The result is that they often exclude highly trained and experienced providers who they think may prescribe more expensive treatment, and allow in mediocre practitioners who they think will be more compliant with the company's wish to save money.
Similarly, "medical necessity," the standard by which the companies determine whether to pay for treatment, is generally defined in a highly restrictive and self-serving way.
In mental health treatment, the area with which I am familiar, brief, inexpensive and inadequate treatment is often all that is approved, when more extensive treatment is necessary.


Public &amp; Private; To the Grand Jury
Offered for your consideration: two incredible stories. One of them is true.
Either a police officer is a serial rapist of black men, or a group of livery van drivers have conspired in a form of payback the likes of which New York City has never seen.


For Retirement Advice, Fire Up Your Computer
PEOPLE who are retiring now can expect to live 25 to 30 years.
That's quite a change from the 1960's, when most Americans worked until age 65 and died by age 70.
To make today's longer retirements a time of financial freedom, a great deal of planning is needed.
Fortunately, expert help is available in the form of easy-to-use software.


Interstate Power (IPW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tandem Computers Inc.(TDM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Faces Turned to Crimson; Strike at Harvard Club Is Embarrassing, at the Least
Predictability is a cherished hallmark of a good city club.
All is familiar; no unpleasant surprises.
The oyster man knows your tastes: two clams with your plate of oysters.
On your 49th birthday, the maitre d' hotel remembers.
The Harvard Club of New York City is such a place.
Even in summer, a whiff of wood smoke lingers in its paneled rooms.
Fresh flowers arrive twice weekly.
Crimson is everywhere.
On the menu, popovers and hasty pudding.


Johnson Worldwide Associates Inc.(JWAIA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Drug Network Is Arrested After Code Is Deciphered
"I've got a terrible headache," the dark-haired man complained to his friend over the phone from a highway gas station in Westchester County.
"This is turning out to be one of the worst days of my life."
Those words uttered recently by Wilfredo Schery were more prophetic than he realized.


Teledyne Inc.(TDY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cobb Jumps to Packers
The Green Bay Packers signed a free-agent running back, REGGIE COBB, from Tampa Bay yesterday.
The Packers did not release terms of the deal, but some reports said Cobb agreed to a two-year contract worth $2.2 million.


Allied Holdings Inc.(HAUL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mayor Names New Chief Of Broadcasting Agency
Thomas B. Morgan has resigned as president of New York City's embattled municipal broadcasting system, and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday appointed Steve Bauman, a 51-year-old publishing executive and former television newsman, to succeed him.
Mr.
Morgan, who submitted his resignation to Mr.
Giuliani two days ago, had presided over the radio stations WNYC-AM and WNYC-FM and the UHF station WNYC-TV since April 2, 1990.
He had been appointed to the $87,000-a-year post by Mayor David N. Dinkins.


MGM Grand Inc.(MGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Savings of Florida reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE 37th PRESIDENT: REACTION; In Death as in Life, Nixon Provokes Strong Passions
In life, Richard Nixon was loved or hated with a special ardor by those who knew him best and dealt directly with him on political matters and matters of state.
His death did not cool that ardor.


New England Electric System (NES,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.69
3.70
2.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.74
3.71
2.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.19
4.17
2.92
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.92
6.89
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.22
7.21
6.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.02
8.02
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.33
5.93
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Shawmut National (SNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pope &amp; Talbot (POP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Treasury Prices Decline On Technical Factors
Prices of Treasury securities slipped yesterday, following a three-day rally.
Traders said that with the absence of new economic news to respond to, bond trading was, for the most part, technically driven.
The naming of Alan S. Blinder and Janet L. Yellen as President Clinton's first two appointments to the Federal Reserve Board had no immediate impact on bond prices since news had been leaked in advance.


Sports of The Times; The Cut Man Who Wasn't There
For want of a $25,000 cut man, maybe the world heavyweight championship was lost.
With blood still dripping from above his left eye, Evander Holyfield agreed that the cut had been a "big factor" in being dethroned as the two-thirds heavyweight champion by Michael Moorer last night in a majority 12-round decision.


Seafirst Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Doctor Loses His License In Abortions
In the best of times, Dr.
Thomas W. Tucker is under a lot of pressure.
The principal abortion doctor in this part of the South, he routinely attracts pickets and protesters, travels with an armed bodyguard and enters his clinics wearing a bulletproof vest.
These are not the best of times.
Dr.
Tucker, a compact 50-year-old who travels thousands of miles between his four clinics here and in Alabama, had his license suspended late tonight, after two days of hearings before the Mississippi State Board of Medical Licensure.
He has been accused of unprofessional and unethical conduct by medical boards in both Mississippi and Alabama, and faces criminal investigations in both states prompted by the deaths of several patients.


First American Corp.(FATN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Jazz; Room to Reinterpret, and to Roar
The jazz program at Carnegie Hall is so erratic that its personality is really a handful of personalities.
A few weeks ago it put on a catastrophic blues program, a misguided collection of players and pejorative ideas about blues that indicated those in charge didn't have much of a grasp of who is capable of what in the jazz world.
Not a good thing for a jazz series.
Then along comes Thursday night's concert, "The New Legacy," which did what the jazz program has done best: introduce unheralded, talented arrangers; allow gifted improvisers room to sell their wares, and let a fine big band roar.
The show was meant to pair young musicians with older ones, and it opened with "New Orleans Joy," a piece by the trumpeter and arranger Randy Sandke that brought together four tunes loosely associated with the city of the title.
He was joined by three other trumpeters, Doc Cheatham, Nicholas Payton and Jon Faddis.
Mr.
Sandke is one of the more miscast musicians working in jazz.
He's often written off, unfairly, as a swing revivalist.
But he can play virtually any jazz idiom, and as an arranger he brought modernist dissonances, bitter and astringent, to the piece.
He also flashed lush reed writing, and roiling, shouting polyphony.


Great Lakes Bancorp (GLBC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Music Notes; Metropolitan and Kirov Operas Discuss a Creative Alliance
When Valery Gergiyev, the artistic director of the Kirov Opera, was in New York recently to conduct "Otello" at the Metropolitan Opera, he and Joseph Volpe, the Met's general manager, discussed the possibility of collaboration, or at least cooperation, between the two companies.
The plan is vague at the moment, Mr.
Volpe said in an interview this week, but so far there has been talk of lending, or even giving, the Kirov some of the Met's old productions.
The Met, on the other hand, might borrow the Kirov's chorus for productions of Russian works.
"This started out over lunch," Mr.
Volpe said, "when Gergiyev began explaining to me all of the financial problems the Kirov was facing, and how hard pressed they are to keep things going. And it occurred to me that there are some productions in the Italian repertory that we'll be replacing, perhaps the Kirov would be interested in them. So we had another meeting and looked at photos of the productions."


Spiegel (SPGLA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Southern New England Telecommunications Corp.(SNG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Crown Hts. Case Follows Youth to Atlanta
For most of the last 15 months, Lemrick Nelson Jr., an 18-year-old high school student with a piercing gaze and a hint of a mustache, lived anonymously and quietly, according to most -- unremarkably and unremarked upon.
He attended Shamrock High School, in a suburb of modestly priced homes just northeast of Atlanta, he worked most evenings frying fish and chips at the fast-food restaurant Captain D's, and he returned home to a sprawling apartment complex of identical charcoal-gray frame buildings and tree-lined walkways.


Pulte Corp.(PHM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dow Edges Down 3.86; Nasdaq Index Rises 3.82
The stock market closed essentially unchanged in normal trading yesterday, as both the bond and stock markets tracked each other within a narrow range following President Clinton's nominations of two economists for the Federal Reserve Board.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.86 points, to 3,648.68, and the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index fell 1.10 points, to 447.63.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index continued its recent rise, gaining 3.82 points, to 722.56.


NATO WARNS SERBS TO CEASE ATTACKS OR FACE BOMBINGS
The NATO allies warned Bosnian Serb forces on Friday that they would face air strikes against heavy weapons and "other military targets" within a 12.4-mile radius of the center of the besieged eastern Bosnian city of Gorazde unless they immediately stopped their attacks.
Early this morning, NATO extended the same protection to four other United Nations-designated "safe areas" in Bosnia if Serbian forces attacked them or massed heavy weapons there.
But the militarily critical situation was in Gorazde, where the allies gave the Serbs until 2:01 A.M. local time Sunday (8:01 P.M. today, Eastern time) to pull their forces back 1.9 miles from the center of the city, allow free access to its 65,000 mainly Muslim refugees by United Nations forces, relief convoys and medical teams, and permit medical evacuations.


Soldier Killed Over Iraq Is Buried


Dreyfus Corp.(DRY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Century Telephone Enterprises Inc.(CTL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


State Issues Warnings On Eating Sport Fish
Concerned about increased concentrations of PCB's in fish, the State Department of Health issued warnings today on eating sport fish that one environmentalist described as a "better safe than sorry" approach.
The Health Department said most people should not eat more than half a pound a week of fish taken from any freshwater body in the state, including the Hudson River and New York Harbor.
It added that women of childbearing age and children under 15 should not eat any fish taken from any contaminated body of water.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COLEMAN CO., Wichita, Kan., completed the purchases of a Minnesota-based maker of air compressors and the manufacturing assets of a Brazilian company that makes camping equipment.
Terms were not disclosed.
GENERAL DYNAMICS CORP., Falls Church, Va., said it had won a $116 million contract from the Army to supply more than 11,000 combat radios.


Secret Spy Satellite to Be Launched Today
The National Reconnaissance Office, the nation's largest and most secretive intelligence service, plans to launch a new spy satellite on Saturday that is the most expensive electronic-eavesdropping equipment ever built, Pentagon officials and private analysts say.
Almost everything about the launching is secret, including the name of the satellite, its cost and its mission.
But analysts outside the Government say that the satellite's primary mission is to eavesdrop on Russia and that its cost exceeds $1.5 billion.


Rostenkowski Seeks Tax Increase To Pay for Health Care Overhaul
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, today called for a "broad tax increase" to finance some of the cost of health care and said employers should pay much of the cost of their workers' premiums.
The Illinois Democrat, one of the half-dozen most influential members of Congress on health care, said he felt that additional money was needed because he doubted the Clinton Administration's estimates about cost savings.
But he said he did not want to pursue a new tax like a value-added tax.
Rather, he said he preferred expanding "a tax that is already on the books."


Commonwealth Edison Co.  (CWE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Religion Notes
Environmental Religion  In honor of yesterday's celebration of Earth Day, more than 50,000 churches and synagogues were sent packets of material on how to teach about the environment and implement programs to protect it.
The information was sent by the National Religious Partnership for the Environment, an interfaith group in Manhattan, and included suggestions on things like composting, recycling and looking for environmental principles in the Bible.


American Management Systems Inc.(AMSY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Other Victories Of Arkansas's Coach
To the Editor:
A footnote to your editorial "The Underside of the Final Four" (editorial, April 7): Arkansas's coach, Nolan Richardson, may be doing an even better job than you think.
Raw numbers can be deceptive.
Of 16 black players Mr.
Richardson has recruited to play at Arkansas prior to this year, only two have graduated to date.
Six others, however, are playing professional basketball: three in the N.B.A., one in the C.B.A., one in Italy, another in the Netherlands. (And even without today's inflated salaries, what athlete wouldn't try pro ball if he could?) Four more of Mr.
Richardson's former players are currently enrolled in degree-granting programs at the University of Arkansas.
One owns a Fayetteville moving company; another has realized his lifelong dream of becoming a Memphis firefighter.


'Hit Him!' Ex-Officer Says His Sergeant Ordered Him
Timothy E. Wind, the former rookie police officer who was twice acquitted in the beating of Rodney G. King, has taken the witness stand for the first time, in Mr.
King's civil suit, and in two days of testimony struck directly at fellow officers.
" 'Hit him! Hit him!' " he said his superior, Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon, ordered, even after Mr.
King, a motorist who was stopped after a high-speed chase, had been struck repeatedly.


Corrections
An article on the Health page on Wednesday about the benefits of antioxidant nutrients incorrectly described the basis of an interim finding that taking beta carotene reduced the risk of serious cardiovascular events like heart attacks and strokes.
It involved a subgroup of 333 male doctors with a history of heart disease, not the entire 22,000 who are part of a continuing study.


Central Hudson Gas &amp; Electric Corp.(CNH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Clinton and Greek Leader Discuss Balkan Tensions


CHRONICLE
So many people turned up for a party to honor GIAN CARLO MENOTTI at the Italian Consulate on Thursday evening that some guests had to wait outside, organizers had to rustle around for extra wine and the entertainment had to be repeated.
"I was astonished and very moved," the 82-year-old composer said.
"I thought people in New York had forgotten me, and I was delighted." The party, with about 900 guests,was given by ALBERTO BONIVER, the Italian consul general, and FURIO COLOMBO, the director of the Italian Cultural Institute.


Republic New York Corp.(RNB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bonds in Most Categories Take a Pounding
Investors are getting real-life lessons in bond risk, mostly interest rate risk, which has pounded nearly all bond funds this year.
Worldwide bonds have succumbed to smaller-than-expected declines in German interest rates, political upheaval in Mexico and tremendous dives by bourses in emerging markets.


Standard Federal Bank (SFB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Portland General Corp.(PGN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Types of Perjury Common Among Police Officers Are Detailed
They are called "turnover arrests." A police officer arrests a suspect but has plans for the weekend and doesn't want to spend the next day in court.
So he asks his partner not only to take credit for the arrest, but to take the witness stand in front of the grand jury as well.
As mundane as the motivation is, the resulting testimony nevertheless amounts to perjury.
And turnover arrests, according to prosecutors and defense lawyers in the city, are only one example of a prevalent form of corruption in the New York City Police Department.


Olin Corp.(OLN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NATO Plans to Hurt Serbs, Not Send a Political Signal
NATO plans to carry out punishing air strikes if the Serbs fail to stop their attacks on Gorazde to demonstrate that the alliance is capable of making them pay a heavy price, Pentagon officials said today.
The objective of the raids would not be to send a political signal, Pentagon officials said.
That policy, tried when NATO carried out its pinprick strikes last week, was discredited when Serbian forces continued their assaults.


Maytag Corp.(MYG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AmSouth Bancorp (ASO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Kellogg Co. (K,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tecumseh Products Co.(TECUB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mandela Gives Assurances As the Zulu Leader Wavers
Promising an end to mass protests and social disruption, Nelson Mandela sought today to reassure the business community of the soundness of his economic policies as the nation prepared for elections expected to result in his becoming South Africa's first black President.
"Mass action was the weapon of people who had no vote," Mr.
Mandela declared in an address on the floor of the stock exchange as he took his campaign into a final tour before the voting that begins Tuesday for the nation's first free elections.


Broncos Cut Kragen
The Denver Broncos released the veteran nose tackle GREG KRAGEN, citing National Football League salary cap considerations.
Kragen is considered one of the league's premier nose tackles.
Kragen, who played for the Broncos for nine years, would have earned $1.15 million next season.


American Annunity Group Inc.(AAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Managed Care Is Supermarket Medicine; The Patients' Choice
To the Editor:
"Sneak Attack on Health Reform" (editorial, April 11) criticizes the "any willing provider" clause as being protection for special interests (M.D.'s, hospitals, and so forth), and antithetical to reform.
"Any willing provider" simply means that a health plan may not exclude a provider who meets quality standards and accepts the plan's fee.
The plan is free to set high standards and offer limited fees.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article on April 15 about the accidental downing of two American helicopters by American warplanes over Iraq misidentified Lieut.
Gen.
Lesley J. McNair, an American who was killed by accident in World War II.
He was chief of United States Army ground forces, not all Allied ground forces.


Despite Woes in Japan, Its Stocks Find Buyers
POLITICAL instability, a sour economy and an overvalued currency are usually not mentioned in the same breath as a promising stock market.
But in the case of Japan, the well-documented troubles have turned its market into a contrarian play.
"Japan is a case where all the bad news is out and on the table," said Michael Metz, chief investment strategist at Oppenheimer &amp; Company.
"I think it is a relatively attractive market, and my guess is the surprise will be on the upside."


Informix Corp.(IFMX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Kidder Dismisses 2d Trader, Saying He Concealed Loss
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company said yesterday that it had discharged another trader for concealing losses, in a sign that broader problems were emerging at the securities firm.
The trader, Neil Margolin, was the second person to be dismissed this week by Kidder after being accused of illicit trading activities.


Tandy Corp.(TAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Webster Financial Corp reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Fairer Juries, Male and Female
When a court allows lawyers to eliminate potential jurors just because of their race or sex, it offends the dignity of the potential juror and threatens an injustice to the contestants.
Now the Supreme Court has ruled that when the prosecution strikes jurors solely because of their sex, the Constitution is violated as well.
By a 6-to-3 vote, the Court found that like racial discrimination, gender-based bias is invidious enough to violate the Constitution's equal protection clause.


A Dispute On Wheat Heats Up
The wheat war brewing between the United States and Canada intensified today when the Clinton Administration announced that it was taking the first steps to restrict imports of Canadian wheat and barley into the United States, beginning July 1.
The United States contends that Canada has been unfairly subsidizing its wheat, depriving American farmers of earnings and driving up the cost to the Federal Government of its farm supports.
Months of trade talks have failed to resolve the dispute.


Celebrating Cultural Diversity


Devils' Brodeur Stopping All Sabres Throw at Him
Martin Brodeur may have finished second to Dominik Hasek in goals-against average during the regular season, but the Devils' rookie goaltender has been outplaying his Buffalo counterpart.
Brodeur, 21, a strong candidate for the Calder Trophy that goes to the National Hockey League's top rookie, played his best game of the season Thursday night in Game 3 -- a 2-1 victory by the Devils that gave them a 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game series.
Game 4 is here Saturday night.


Allied Group Inc.(ALGR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


2 Oil Giants Post Steady Earnings
Exxon and Mobil, the nation's two largest oil companies, yesterday reported first-quarter earnings that were stable in the face of falling crude oil prices and little or no growth in revenue.
The companies said increased profits for refined products like gasoline made up for much of the falloff in income from exploration and production.
They also said that earnings were helped by stronger prices for natural gas.


California Case Settled By Prudential Securities
Prudential Securities settled charges of securities law violations yesterday with California, which had been the lone holdout to the firm's broad settlement of fraud charges with state and Federal regulators.
But the agreement does not end the firm's potential problems with state regulators.
California is beginning investigations of individual brokers and executives at Prudential and is expanding other related inquiries.


Bearings Inc.(BER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
The headline with an obituary on Wednesday about the winner of a Nobel Prize for studies of the brain misspelled his surname in some copies.
He was Dr.
Roger Wolcott Sperry.


Well-Pump Users Get Conflicting Advice on Lead Test Results
As families rush to have their well water tested for possible contamination from pumps containing lead alloys, they are getting confusing advice about what to do if modest amounts of lead are found in the water.
On Monday the Environmental Protection Agency, responding to an experiment suggesting that lead can leach into water from submersible pumps made with leaded brass or bronze parts, advised millions of households with such pumps to have their water tested.


Selling F-16's to Pakistan Is No Threat to India
To the Editor:
I am constrained to respond to Ambassador Siddhartha Shankar Ray's letter ("Arming Pakistan Doesn't Promote Peace," April 9) as well as your editorial of March 29, as both seem to regard the U.S. proposal to deliver F-16 aircraft to Pakistan, paid for by us, as an unsavory deal.
The Administration's proposal is not aimed at the supply of aircraft but at nuclear nonproliferation in South Asia.
Ambassador Ray has written eloquently about India's activities intended to engage America on the nonproliferation issue.
However, India's negative response to Deputy Secretary of State Talbott shows its determination to avoid any move toward nuclear nonproliferation.


Ametek Inc.(AME,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Aid Sought For Jailing Illegal Aliens
President Clinton asked Congress today to appropriate $350 million to help states pay the costs of imprisoning illegal immigrants convicted of felonies.
For states with large numbers of illegal immigrants, particularly California, New York, New Jersey, Florida, Texas, Illinois and Arizona, the costs of incarcerating thousands of aliens as felons runs to hundreds of millions of dollars a year.


Children Need More Than 'Quality Time'
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to the news article "Study Confirms Some Fears on U.S. Children" (April 12), about the deprivation of medical care, supervision and intellectual stimulation that millions of infants suffer and that retards their growth into healthy adults.
As a parent, I have told my adult children that being a mother is more than giving birth; it's a full-time job and you remain a caring parent all your life.
I believe a parent (if possible) should be home until a child is 3 or 4 years old.
The loving, caring and nurturing of a young child is the best gift a parent can give.
After a day at work a parent is too exhausted to give "quality time." Is it fair to a baby to be fed, dressed and delivered to day care by 8 A.M.?
His or her day can last to 6 P.M. at day care.


Lawyers' Publicity Ban Eased in Rail Killings
Warning lawyers on both sides to follow a state ethics rule, the judge in the Colin Ferguson case yesterday nonetheless rejected a request from prosecutors to issue a complete ban on remarks to the news media.
The decision to lift a ban that was temporarily in place was a qualified victory for William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, who are representing Mr.
Ferguson, the man charged with killing 6 commuters and wounding 19 others on a Long Island Rail Road train on Dec. 7.


C-Tec Corp.(CTEX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First Hawaiian (FHWN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Excerpts From Hillary Clinton's News Session on Whitewater
Following are excerpts from Hillary Rodham Clinton's news conference at the White House yesterday, as recorded by The New York Times:
Q.
Since Whitewater's been in the news so much, I feel it's fair to ask you the same question I put to the President some time ago -- and you were, are, a co-partner: Do you know of any money that could have gone from Madison to the Whitewater project or to any of your husband's political campaigns?


Police Release Bank Photograph Of Man Suspected in Robberies
The New York City Police Department released a photograph yesterday of a man they identified as a suspect in a series of armed robberies in Queens that began on March 21.
The photograph was taken by a surveillance camera inside a Queens bank where the police said the suspect apparently began stalking one of his victims.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  NATO ULTIMATUM TO SERBS
The NATO allies warned the Bosnian Serbs that they would face air strikes against military targets within a 12.4-mile radius of the town of Gorazde unless they immediately stopped their attacks on the enclave.
Later they extended the same protection to four other Muslim "safe areas" in Bosnia. 1


Germantown Savings reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Business Grows in Atlanta, After Tapping a New Source of Credit
Joyce S. Prince, 55, began a children's clothing business in Atlanta more than 20 years ago.
Late last summer, she closed out a line of credit and replaced it with a larger term loan backed by the Small Business Administration.
At the same time, she refinanced her commercial mortgage through the agency.
Although it was difficult and timeconsuming to obtain, the S.B.A. money is helping her expand the retail portion of her business.
The manufacturing and wholesale segment generated $200,000 in profit on $3.5 million in slaes last year.
Her eight retail stores produced a $90,000 profit on $1.25 million in sales.
She sees the stores as the real growth area.


Reynolds &amp; Reynolds Co.(REY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


South Jersey Industries(SJI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Witco Corp.(WIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Co-Steel Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Central Newspapers (ECP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Review/Film; Digression And Color Are All of It For Hopper
As a director, Dennis Hopper can be counted on to fill the sidelines of a film with amusing wild-card diversions, even if he has more trouble holding together a central plot.
In the amiable, loose-knit "Chaser," which opened yesterday at local theaters, all the fun is in the digressions.
The film's ragtag South Carolina setting yields plenty of local color, which is just right for a director who enjoys staging a fight scene on a miniature golf course.
By the time this happens, late in "Chaser," audiences will long since have lost track of the film's barely believable story line.
"Chaser" is a mega-macho road movie about two Navy men assigned to escort a maximum-security prisoner.
One of the escorts is brash, conniving Eddie Devane (William McNamara), who is rounded up for special duty on the eve of his discharge from the service.
The other is gruff Rock Reilly (Tom Berenger), who can say "Ha-ha-ha" about as sourly as anyone ever has on screen.


Snap-On Tools Corp.(SNA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Critic's Notebook; A Beauty or a Beast? Contrasting Film and Musical
When Disney's swift, exuberant "Beauty and the Beast" arrived on screen, it delivered all the panache of a Broadway show without any of the foot-dragging nonsense.
So a Broadway version to which all the nonsense has been added raises a few questions.
For whom is this show really intended?
Can its live action rival the film's flawless animation?
How will it play for children, who were after all the audience that made "Beauty and the Beast" a hit?
And what if those children only have milk money, not the $65 needed for a seat in the orchestra?
Bear in mind that a family outing for four can cost $260 -- maybe more, if you don't make it past the $45 sweatshirts and $20 audiocassettes at the souvenir stand.
Can this experience possibly be worth 13 times as much as a "Beauty and the Beast" videotape, which also happens to be the more enduring purchase?
Believe me, even a 5-year-old can do the arithmetic on that one, especially a 5-year-old who loves the film.
And Broadway's "Beauty and the Beast" can count on a lot of stiff criticism within the one-digit age bracket, which constitutes most of the presold audience for this extravaganza.
They may be small, but they know the movie by heart.


2 Economists Nominated to Fed
President Clinton nominated two economists to the Federal Reserve Board today whose philosophies suggest that they may seek to temper the pace at which the nation's central bank raises interest rates to fight inflation.
The nominations of Alan S. Blinder, a member of the Council of Economic Advisers on leave from Princeton University, and Janet L. Yellen, an economics professor at the University of California at Berkeley, allow the President to start putting his stamp on an institution now run entirely by Republican appointees.
Mr.
Blinder and Ms.
Yellen have reputations as mainstream economists who may put a bit more emphasis than their predecessors on increasing short-term economic growth rather than fighting inflation.


KAYAKING
DAWN IS breaking over the Sea of Cortes.
The horizon, an inky blue, is crowned with an iridescent, salmon light that paints the underside of meandering clouds with the rays of a sun that has not yet climbed up to the edge of the earth.
In utter stillness, the little sea kayak moves easily out toward the Mercenaries -- a jagged outcrop of volcanic and sedimentary spires two miles from the coastline of Baja California Sur in Mexico.
Bestrewn with osprey nests, the rocks also shelter flocks of cormorants, blue-footed boobies, peregrine falcons, ravens, hawks and scores of pelicans preening before breakfast.
Near the kayak, six porpoises leap from the water, their backs glistening in the rising light.
Halfway to the rocks, a pair of fins stick out of the water.


Mozart and Schubert Plus Some Cole Porter
VOCAL music performances continue apace around the state.
This afternoon at 3 Cole Porter makes an unexpected appearance alongside Mozart and Schubert at the season finale of the Armstrong Chamber Concerts at First Congregational Church on the Green in Washington.
Douglas Webster is the singer, joining the violinist Helen Armstrong, the flutist Carol Wincenc, the cellist Mark Shuman and the pianist Kazuko Hayami in an aria from "Don Giovanni" and a Schubert song, along with the Porter medley.
Enclosing those works: Bach's Trio Sonata in C and the Opus 99 Piano Trio of Schubert. (The number for reservations is 868-9466.)


Airs and Arias


For a Friend


From Banking to Childproofing Homes
WHAT happens when a banker, after 22 years as an executive, suddenly finds himself the victim of staff reductions?
He turns to an industry as far from banking as he can get: child care.
"Briefly, that is the story of how I became an entrepreneur," said Frank W. Wright, the 49-year-old former banker who runs Child Proofers, a child-safety business in Mamaroneck.
"In my banking career I was a domestic lending officer, working in the Manhattan offices of foreign banks. I wore a Brooks Brothers suit, commuted to work on the train and never had thoughts about changing careers, but in December 1990 all that changed. Ironically, it was only 18 months after I was recruited by my last banking employer, an Australian bank, from my previous employer, a French bank. I was given notice with half a year's severance pay and out-placement counseling."


How Natural Cover Shelters Wildlings
AN ode is a kind of lyrical poem written to express exaltation and praise.
Though this column is not such a work, something glorious must be said about the wildflower hepatica, for this is its season.
The flower itself is a delicate source of joy, kind of a woodland surprise.
It is so small, it could be missed by someone speeding around the grounds to check what was still there. (It was.)


Clinton's New Foreign Focus
To deal with the Bosnia crisis and his failing Haiti policy, President Clinton has had to focus more intensely on foreign affairs.
Page 4.


Humble Watercress in Fancy Settings
IN England, when the first buds of spring were beginning to open, we used to gather the watercress that grew wild in the streams running through the Dorset fields around our house.
But I haven't found a place I feel quite safe doing that nowadays, because so many of our rivers are polluted, so I buy it instead.
But spring still makes me think of watercress, especially watercress soup, which we used to make with leeks and potatoes and a great deal of Dorset cream.
Recently, I came upon a delightful recipe for watercress soup made with oysters.
They are poached with their liquor in a light cream and white wine base in which the watercress is briefly cooked, too.


Bosnian Serbs Hint at Reprisals if NATO Attacks
The Bosnian Serb forces have it made clear to the top United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia that any NATO air strikes against them would be followed by sharp reprisals against the almost 6,000 United Nations personnel in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Officials at an 11-hour meeting that ended early today in Belgrade between Yasushi Akashi, the United Nations official, and the Serbian leaders said that although a cease-fire agreement was reached for Gorazde, the tone of the Bosnian Serbs was threatening.


My Conversation
My abandonment of Roman Catholicism was spawned by a premature death, my mother's at age 49, on the day before my 22d birthday.
I prayed like crazy for God to spare her, and when He did not, I established a new line of communication.
I called God Allah and prayed with my palms cupped (to catch blessings) and my eyes wide open (to keep Allah's creations in sight).
Given the irony and absurdity of events in racially torn Boston, where I lived, Islam was a godsend.
A few months after my mother's death, whites assaulted a black man in front of Boston City Hall, using as one weapon a flagpole with an American flag attached.
With that attack and my mother's death, a lifetime of frustrations reached the breaking point.


Commercial Property/Trump Tower; New Tenant Mix, New Image and New Revenues
SOME buildings are just structures.
Others are icons.
And icons are just not expected to change.
So it is with more than a small degree of wonder that New Yorkers have watched Trump Tower, once home to stores that attracted the biggest of big spenders, metamorphose into a vertical mall that, while still higher toned than anything in, say, A &amp; S Plaza, is a far cry from the posh emporium created at 57th Street and Fifth Avenue 11 years ago.


GROWING UP HALDEMAN
The poignant tragedy in Peter Haldeman's remembrance of his years, "Growing Up Haldeman" (April 3), is compelling.


Space Under a Chair, Sound From a Coffin
YOU ARE WALKING DOWN A narrow corridor toward a video monitor that, when you get close to it, displays your image, observed from the back by a surveillance camera you didn't notice when you entered the corridor.
You are in a room, empty except for two loudspeakers implanted in the walls from which a man's voice assaults your ears, insistently demanding that you leave.
You are standing beside a carousel and the riders are cast-aluminum forms of dead animals strung up by the neck or feet, scraping along the floor as they're dragged by the rotating beams.
Where are you, and how can you get out of there?
You are in the Bruce Nauman retrospective here at the Walker Art Center, and if you are like most people, the urge to flee is strong.
Mr.
Nauman's goal seems to be to knock you out rather than win you over.
His work is aggressive, paranoiac, ridiculous and loud.
In fact, this must be the loudest show in years.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
NOW EVERYBODY REALLY HATES ME By Jane Reed Martin and Patricia Marx.
Illustrated by Roz Chast.
Unpaged.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.


Kathleen Lorenz, David Mastrangelo
Kathleen Mary Lorenz, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, was married yesterday to David Michael Mastrangelo, an associate in corporate finance at Salomon Brothers in New York.
The Rev.
James V. Hobbs performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Basilica of the Assumption in Baltimore.


Panels in Congress to Act on Improving Air Quality on Aircraft
Two chairmen of Congressional panels say they will take action to improve the quality of air in airline cabins.
One of them, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, who is chairman of the Agriculture Committee, said this week that he had had the "very unpleasant experience" of being sprayed with an insecticide before his aircraft landed in Australia, one of more than 20 countries requiring such spraying.
He said he may introduce legislation to protect Americans who travel to those countries.


Habitats/Changing Apartments; Fast Find, Slow Close
WHEN Mary Warlick's landlord in the Chelsea section of Manhattan demanded what she considered an unreasonable rent increase last August, she decided she'd take "a few looks and answer some advertisements."
"If I'd paid what he asked, I'd be paying enough to buy a place," she said, in her North Carolina accent.
"That gave me an idea. I looked at this building the first day. I went up to the doorman and asked him whether the building was rental or co-op."


ON WASHINGTON
Perhaps the best part of the redesign of your magazine is the addition of the On Washington column by Maureen Dowd.
It is always a treat, and, like dessert, I save it for last.
Dowd's wit, sharp and on target, is the bright spot of a melancholy time of the week, Sunday evening.
MIKE KELLY Redmond, Wash.


For Power Tools, Be Prepared to Take Apart the Motor
MOST home power tools are used just occasionally, and years may elapse before problems develop.
But to prevent an electric drill's quitting when atop a ladder or a circular saw's going through a sheet of plywood, there are maintenance hints.
Always be sure that the tool receives full power.
Use an adequate extension cord, with 12-gauge wires.
Do not use a cord with smaller 14-gauge wires, even if it is labeled heavy duty.
Never use an ordinary household extension cord.
Inadequate power causes motor parts to overheat, eventually ruining them.


That Time To Catch A Rising Star
Year after year, National Football League teams spend hundreds of thousands of dollars scouting college players, looking for the next Lawrence Taylor or Emmitt Smith or Dan Marino.
And year after year, when the N.F.L. draft arrives, some teams will somehow pass on a Taylor or Smith or Marino and take a young hero who will struggle just to last a few years in the pros.
This annual refurbishing exercise, a highly inexact science, is with us again.
The draft begins at 3:30 P.M. today with two rounds and will conclude tomorrow with five rounds, starting at 10 A.M.


Safe Theft
Safety sells, at least in the opinion of Volvo and Michelin.
Volvo print and TV advertisements offer vignettes of real people who survived crashes in their Volvos.
Michelin television commercials show a baby playing in a tire, with a couple discussing which is more important: cost or safety.
But does anyone really care?
Has concern for automotive safety really surpassed the 80's desire for power, money and glove leather bucket seats.
In a word.
Yes.


A Bluegrass Documentary With a Brooklyn Accent
THE SEARCH FOR ARCHIVAL material often leads film makers to unlikely precincts.
For Rachel Liebling, who wrote and directed the documentary "High Lonesome: The Story of Bluegrass Music," the search extended from her four-room apartment in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, to cellars and attics in Virginia, tobacco farms in North Carolina, and the muddy hills of western Kentucky, as well as more than 20 university libraries.
But perhaps the most satisfying moment in researching "High Lonesome," which opens on Friday, came, of all places, in New York City.
Ms.
Liebling wanted a film clip of Bill Monroe, the founder of bluegrass music whose life and career she follows in the movie, singing the mournful ballad "Body and Soul." She knew that he had been filmed singing the tune in the 1960's, but when she approached the director, he said the film didn't exist, although he invited her to search the basement of his Canal Street studio.


Images Made by Slicing and Reassembling
THE Trans Hudson Gallery, at 160 First Street, lies low behind a chain-link fence.
Its walls are industrial gray; so is the Mary Ann Unger sculpture lying across the courtyard, and, on the sunless day of the reviewer's visit, there were two gray cats courting on the decaying sidewalk.
These details combined into a perfect introduction for the building's interior, with its grotto-like lobby in virtual darkness and the huge gallery beyond, where most of the lights were turned off.
The general impression was of a set for T. S. Eliot's "Murder in the Cathedral," except that the players are the "Composite Pictures" of George Peck, which are a cross between painting and collage.


Despite Late-Round Picks, a Knack for Making Giants Out of Mortals
The Giants own the 24th pick over all in the National Football League draft, which means that Big Daddy will be long gone by the time it's their turn to pick.
In fact, many of the impact players will have already hugged their moms and thanked Dad for getting them this far.
But that doesn't mean New York will boycott the draft and stay home.
The Giants have had amazing success -- thanks largely to General Manager George Young -- in finding the jewels in later rounds that were overlooked by other teams.
They are hoping to duplicate that success today.
Their needs are many -- wide receiver, backup running back, defensive back -- but since this isn't fantasy football, they can only make one selection with that 24th pick.


River Boats
The strangest sight on 42d Street in Manhattan these days is Michael Davis and Donald Betts (below with his daughter, Mary, 7) hand-carving a 26-foot, four-oared gig in the lobby of the old McGraw-Hill Building.
Davis and Betts are two of the people behind "Floating the Apple," a benevolent plot to get New Yorkers back on the city's rivers.
They plan to launch two brand-new boats in June.
Following are Davis's answers to a few questions:
Q. What if someone is afraid of the river?


Suzanne O'Leary, William Mills 3d
Suzanne Michele O'Leary and William Patrick Mills 3d, lawyers in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Joseph Gleeson officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Mills is an associate at the firm of Haythe &amp; Curley.
She graduated from Boston College, and she and her husband received law degrees from Fordham University.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil J. O'Leary of Manhasset.
Her father is a vice president, in Jericho, L.I., at Dean Witter Reynolds.


David R. Butler, Industrial Designer, 53
David R. Butler, an industrial designer and stylist of corporate identity symbols, died on Friday at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 53.
The cause was cancer, said his daughter, Jennifer Butler.


Evening Hours; Sponsors Take Their Bows
The Metropolitan Opera's annual 'On Stage at the Met' party, April 10.


Data Bank/April 24, 1994
Data Bank/April 24, 1994
Housing Starts
March
Feb.
Jan.
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,473
1,314
1,271
Merchandise Imports
Feb.
Jan.
Dec.
In billions
$50.2
$49.4
$49.6
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$37.8
$39.3
$42.2
3-Month Treasury Bills
April 22
April 15
April 8
Rate in percent
3.74
3.58
3.54
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.19
3.99
3.94
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.22
7.28
7.25
Weekly Jobless Claims
April 15
April 8
March 31
In thousands
364
350
336
Coal Production
April 15
April 8
April 1
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
21,242
20,373
20,703


Austrian Hotel
To the Editor: Knowing that we were to spend two winter months in Munich, "Schussing and Soaking in the Alps" (Nov. 21) encouraged us to plan a side trip to Bad Gastein, Austria.
We found the described great scenery, cross-country skiing, excellent food and curative waters.
We took writer Wayne Curtis's advice about hotels and discovered the Gruner Baum.
What especially impressed us was the personal greeting from the innkeepers, Hannes and Monica Blumschein, and their attention to every detail.
It started as we alighted from the train and saw the hotel's chauffeur waiting on the platform to grab our bags and escort us to the van for the five-minute drive to the "hotel village." It is, in fact, its own little world of perfect hotel management as seldom seen anywhere anymore.


A New Home for England's Crown Jewels
From 1967 until early January this year, England's Crown Jewels were housed in the vaults of the Tower of London's Waterloo Block, where they were displayed in cramped quarters that resulted in long waiting lines and crowded viewing.
Last month, a new 15,000-square-foot Jewel House opened, occupying the entire ground floor of the Waterloo Block and capable of accommodating up to 20,000 visitors a day, compared to 5,000 previously.
Also, for the first time the display is easily accessible by wheelchair.
The new $15 million display is divided into two sections, the first consisting of three rooms, which include an area displaying carved shields representing the 40 monarchs since William the Conqueror and a room showing filmed scenes from the 1953 Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II.


Correction
An article last Sunday about Senator George J. Mitchell, the Maine Democrat, misstated the year that the Boston Red Sox last won the World Series.
It was 1918, not 1917.


A Long Quest for Turn Lights on a Perilous Parkway
Ocean Parkway was created to attract strollers.
The eight-lane thoroughfare, with a tree-lined median strip, has bridle paths and wooden benches.
It is also the most dangerous road in Brooklyn.
Two weeks ago, a 3-year-old boy became the 31st traffic fatality on the parkway since 1988.


Law-Abiding Americans Find Reason to Laud Singapore Justice; Celebrity Awaits
To the Editor:
One thing your April 10 editorial doesn't mention is what will happen when Michael Fay is returned to the United States.
We can expect to see him as a guest on the television talk shows, with the networks bidding for the right to re-create his story.
That should boost ratings, and he will make a fortune.
LEONARD COHEN  Scranton, Pa., April 17, 1994


Church's Comeback 'Like a Miracle'
Four years ago fire destroyed much of the Episcopal Church of the Holy Apostles as it was undergoing a renovation to reverse a long deterioration.
After the fire, its dazzling stained-glass windows were strewn shards of smoky glass, the interior was gutted and only one-third of the newly installed roof remained.
Yesterday the Holy Apostles congregation returned to the corner of Ninth Avenue and 28th Street to worship in a 136-year-old church many feared they had lost forever.
"It's sort of like a miracle," said the Rev.
Elizabeth G. Maxwell, associate rector.


Correction
An article last week about new baseball stadiums misidentified the author, Paul Goldberger, in some copies.
He is the chief cultural correspondent of The New York Times, not its architecture critic.


Burglaries 'Sloppy' and Rising
After declining steadily in the West and Central Village since 1991, burglaries are on the rise again.
Through April 17, the number of burglaries in the Sixth Precinct rose by 25 percent, to 262, over the same period last year.
Capt.
Stephen R. Kennedy said he could not explain the rise but the head of his burglary unit, Sgt.
Anthony Biondolilo, linked the increase to a growing desperation among drug users.
"Most of it is sloppy burglary, not professional, drug users looking for salable property to pay for their habit," the Sergeant said.


Can Closer Links Deter Corruption?
When criminologists talk about community policing, Alfredo Compres is not the kind of officer they have in mind.
Officer Compres looked for criminals in the Harlem precinct where he worked, but investigators say he was more interested in stealing from them than arresting them.
The authorities say that "Abusador," as he was sometimes known on the street, even shot a drug dealer in the lobby of an apartment building last December after robbing him.


Moscow Withdraws Its Objections to NATO Strikes Near Gorazde
In a diplomatic about-face, Russia today dropped all objections to NATO's threat to bomb the Bosnian Serbs around Gorazde, and a few hours later the Serbs announced a retreat had begun.
"The Bosnian Serbs' military command has criminally defied the elementary norms of humanity," Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev told the Interfax News Agency.
"The only alternative to air strikes is compliance by the Bosnian Serbs with their commitments."


Lose a Little of Park Avenue, Gain a Little Park?
When Daniel A. Biederman looks at the nexus of 42d Street and Park Avenue, he doesn't just see the constant blur of humanity on the move: the throngs of commuters dashing through Grand Central Terminal, the hordes of workers, shoppers and visitors darting through traffic and scurrying along sidewalks, the streams of cars, taxis and buses lining the streets and the elevated roadway.
Mr.
Biederman, who brought us the refurbished Bryant Park, sees a need for a mall for strolling, sitting and snacking.
To get it, he wants to have the southbound lanes of Park Avenue just below 42d Street closed.
And he's determined, no matter what the Community Board says about it.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
After reading your article, I, a nonsmoker, fought a vague urge to smoke a cigarette in defense of Philip Morris and hailed a silent hurrah at the announcement of their multibillion-dollar lawsuit against ABC for its report of added nicotine content.
This in the same week doctors announced nicotine's medicinal benefit for chronic irritable bowel syndrome and the Food and Drug Administration called for a ban on smoking in all public facilities.


Roe's Legacy Is Hardly Secure
To the Editor:
I applaud you for your understanding of how critical Roe v.
Wade has been to women's full emancipation ("How a Ruling on Abortion Took On a Life of Its Own," The Week in Review, April 10).
However, I am far less sanguine that its legacy is secure.


Michael Gaylin and Alison Sloane
Alison Lori Sloane, the senior editor of Soap Opera Digest in New York, was married last evening to Michael Andrew Gaylin, a screenwriter.
Rabbi Alan Lachtman performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Gaylin, 28, also writes a column for The Sunday News in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
If not for the tragedy, I'd enjoy the irony of the reverent words about personal choice, freedom and accommodation from Philip Morris executives so soon after they canceled Kraft's advertising on a recent episode of "Roseanne" that featured a same-sex kiss.
STEPHANIE MCAULIFFE Pacifica, Calif.


Vicki Stone, Timothy Stafford
Vicki Carole Stone, a consultant at Find/SVP, a market research company, was married yesterday evening to Timothy Alden Stafford, a partner in Dechert Price &amp; Rhoads, a law firm.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated at the Water Club in New York.
Mrs.
Stafford graduated from New York University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Stone of Floral Park, L.I.
Her father is the president of Tasco Industries Inc., a textile manufacturer in Calhoun Falls, S.C.


April 17-23: Defining Equality; Supreme Court Says Jurors Can't Be Barred On the Basis of Sex
Jury service is widely recognized as the prototypical citizen's duty -- part of citizenship itself.
A series of recent Supreme Court decisions made it clear that barring potential jurors on the basis of race was unconstitutional because it devalued the citizenship of those excluded.
Last week, the Court extended that analysis from race to sex, voting 6 to 3 that such discrimination on the basis of sex violates the Constitution's guarantee of equal protection.
"Gender, like race, is an unconstitutional proxy for juror competence and impartiality," Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote in the majority opinion, which traced the history of discrimination against women in the courts.


Pirates' Ninth-Inning Uprising Hands Braves Fourth Straight Loss
Pirates 6, Braves 1
The Atlanta Braves lost their fourth straight game, their worst slump in a year, when Kevin Young singled home the tie-breaking run in the ninth inning last night to send the visiting Pittsburgh Pirates to a 6-1 victory.


Corrections
A front-page article in the Westchester Weekly today about the formation of four new minor league baseball teams in the county describes incorrectly where they will play.
After the section went to press on Thursday, the board of the Westchester Community College voted not to let the league play there, so now it is seeking another site in the county.


Hiking in a Once-Forbidden Kingdom
ABOUT 500 years ago, a king, or perhaps a lama -- his name has gone unrecorded -- decided to cover all the walls of the great Buddhist temple of Jamba with mandalas, the intricate, magic cosmic designs of Tibetan Buddhism.
Jamba is one of several gombas (temples or monasteries) in Mustang, a semiautonomous district of Nepal near the Tibetan border; it contains the world's largest collection of 15th-century mandalas and a golden Buddha nearly 50 feet high.
Jamba's immense prayer hall, 43 feet wide and just as high, is very dark, but turn on a flashlight and the huge mandalas, each five feet in diameter, wheel through the space; gods and their mystic emanations dance across the walls, their golden ornaments flashing in the beam of light, while others sit in contemplation upon their lotus thrones.


THE NATION: 'Re-Zoned'; Hillary Clinton Meets the Press
THE only puzzle is what took her so long.
When Hillary Rodham Clinton stepped into the State Dining Room and settled comfortably into an armchair beneath a brooding portrait of Abraham Lincoln, she was immediately in her element.


First U.S. Trade Exhibit Is Held in Hanoi
Fifty American companies hoping to do business here today concluded the first United States trade fair in Vietnam since the war ended in 1975.
Hundreds of thousands of curious residents paid 20 cents each to tour the booths, called Vietnamerica Expo '94, and sample a few wares.
High-school teachers sent their students to the Giang Vo Exhibition Center to practice their English with the visiting salesmen, often peppering the Americans with friendly personal questions.


Direct Marketing And the Census
To the Editor:
The chart accompanying the article "They've Got Your Name. You've Got Their Junk" (March 13) identifies "census records" as public records that are used by list compilers to target specific individuals for unsolicited offers of catalogues, subscriptions, donations and so forth.
This representation is misleading.


April 17-23: Confronting the Past; France Convicts One Man Who Served Nazis
After years of hesitation, a French court last week found a Frenchman guilty of committing crimes against Jews during the German occupation in World War II.
But a key question remained: Would the trial let France claim it had at last confronted its collaborationist past?
The immediate answer appeared to be no.
In this case, Paul Touvier, a 79-year-old who had served in a pro-Nazi militia, was sentenced to life imprisonment for ordering the execution of seven Jews on June 29, 1944.
But, compared with the Vichy regime's role in rounding up some 76,000 French and foreign Jews for deportation to death camps, he was a minor figure.


Audit Says Astronauts Fly Jets to Resort Sites
Astronauts at the Johnson Space Center in Houston have flown two-seater supersonic jets to Colorado Springs on weekends during ski season as well as to New Orleans and Fort Lauderdale, Fla., according to NASA's inspector general.
While the astronauts said they were fulfilling the flight time required of them each month, some lawmakers criticized the flights to resort cities.
Each costs about $2,000 an hour.


Journal; Nixon, Big and Small
Like more than a few Americans of my generation, I learned to despise Richard Nixon around the same time I learned to recite the Pledge of Allegiance.
Yet now, nearly 40 years later, an America without Richard Nixon seems inconceivable and unimaginable, an emptier place.
When the stroke hit, it was possible not only to root for him to live but to feel genuine loss at the prospect of his imminent death.
Not because he can be likened to his hero, Theodore Roosevelt, or even his unenthusiastic ticket mate, Dwight Eisenhower.
Far from it: Mr.
Nixon was the historical black hole into which the higher dreams of the assassinated Kennedy brothers and Martin Luther King Jr. disappeared.
But as a cultural archetype who inspired and inflamed the American imagination for half a century, Richard Nixon was a giant, right up there with Billy the Kid, Citizen Kane and Moby Dick.


Maria Lombardi, Jeffrey Lynch
Maria Josephine Lombardi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis T. Lombardi of Syracuse, was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Stephen Lynch, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Lynch of Pittsfield, Mass.
The Rev.
James T. O'Brien performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception.
The bride is a public relations associate for Liz Claiborne Inc., the clothing and accessories manufacturer, in New York.
She graduated from Boston College.


In the Region/Westchester; Transforming a Waterfront Eyesore Into an Asset
THREE weeks ago Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan toured North Tarrytown's waterfront and pronounced a parcel of land "a natural spot" for a waterfront park and a dock that could accommodate Hudson River ferry boats and help bring tourists into the commercial center of the village.
The Senator pledged support for the project, saying he would ask the Army Corps of Engineers to spend $500,000 to dredge for the deep-water dock.
The village already has a $200,000 Federal transportation grant for planning and building the park, known as Sleepy Hollow Landing, and a $10,000 grant from the Hudson River Improvement Fund, a private nonprofit foundation.


Wary of the Dangers of Insecticides, Scientists Have Developed Techniques For Killing the Ultimate Urban Pest In Safer, Ecologically Sensitive Ways
AS recently as a decade ago, Dan Dickerson, a paunchy veteran of New York's cockroach wars, could have been called Dan the Killer, Dan the Terminator, Dan the Avenging Angel of Roach Eradication, with sprayer in hand and a hefty supply of foul-smelling insecticide.
"I was a meat-eating, insect-spraying mongrel," says Mr.
Dickerson, betraying more than a trace of the outsize he-man bug talk that has sold millions of cans of Raid and an endless two-lane blacktop of Roach Motels.


For Power Tools, Be Prepared to Take Apart the Motor
MOST home power tools are used just occasionally, and years may elapse before problems develop.
But to prevent an electric drill's quitting when atop a ladder or a circular saw's going through a sheet of plywood, there are maintenance hints.
Always be sure that the tool receives full power.
Use an adequate extension cord, with 12-gauge wires.
Do not use a cord with smaller 14-gauge wires, even if it is labeled heavy duty.
Never use an ordinary household extension cord.
Inadequate power causes motor parts to overheat, eventually ruining them.


Doctor Loses His License On Abortions
The doctor whose clinics perform a majority of the abortions in Mississippi was found guilty on Friday of professional misconduct, and the state medical board suspended his license for a year.
Dr.
Thomas W. Tucker, who performs as much as 70 percent of Mississippi's abortions at his two clinics here, was found guilty of 32 of 34 charges against him, most of them dealing with the prescribing and dispensing of medicine.
Among other things, he was found to have kept signed prescription forms, and to have allowed workers who were not doctors to perform preliminary abortion procedures while he was absent.


Florida Reviving Efforts To Legalize Gambling
LESS than a decade after Florida voters resoundingly defeated a proposal to bring casino gambling to the state, a coalition of hoteliers, cruise ship operators and race track owners is trying again.
Seizing on fears that a recent widely publicized series of killings of tourists here, combined with the advance of gaming in other states, might encourage visitors to go elsewhere, they have begun a well-organized and lavishly financed effort to have the issue placed on the ballot in November.
The most sweeping of the four proposals being floated is endorsed by the Florida Hotel and Motel Association and would grant each of the state's 67 counties the right to choose among any combination of freestanding casinos and casinos in hotels, riverboats and parimutuel facilities.
The campaign to pass a constitutional amendment authorizing gaming picked up momentum after the Florida Legislature defeated similar legislation during its annual 60-day session, which ended earlier this month.
But supporters are heartened by a recent statewide poll that found that a majority of Florida residents currently favor some form of gaming.


At Briarcliff, a Thorn in Tenants' Genteel Side
For much of the winter, the residents of the Briarcliff apartments say, their new landlord repeatedly cut off the heat, forcing them to bundle up in coats and blankets, huddle around space heaters, turn up their gas ovens and boil water for bathing.
What's unusual about this picture?
The Briarcliff is a 12-story luxury doorman building at 171 West 57th Street -- opposite Carnegie Hall -- with spacious three-bedroom apartments that have been home to Barbara Walters, Emanuel Ax, Anita Loos and Peter Jennings.


Law-Abiding Americans Find Reason to Laud Singapore Justice; Barbaric Punishment
To the Editor:
I applaud "Condemn Singapore's Brutality" (editorial, April 10), urging Americans appalled by Michael Fay's sentence of caning for vandalism to raise their voices in protest.
As you note, many people do not realize what is involved in this barbaric form of punishment, thinking it nothing more than a severe spanking -- painful but deserved.


Imprints of a New White House Hand
Six weeks after he joined the staff to stanch the Whitewater hemorrhage, Lloyd N. Cutler's influence on White House strategy became unmistakable on Friday afternoon.
That was when Hillary Rodham Clinton broke her silence and fielded every question reporters could come up with about her family's finances.
It was a clear manifestation of the promise Mr.
Cutler made when he became White House counsel to make public all the facts on hand about the Clintons' investments.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 24, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
10
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
2
16
SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland.
3
5
WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.
4
5
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a killer.
5
1
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
6
5
HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.
7
1
DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romantic adventures of a young woman raising unruly nephews in Regency England.
8*
4
MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Researching his ancestry, an American journalist learns about the history of Mexico.
9
1
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
10
3
FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) An affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people returning to their hometown.
11
4
CAULDRON, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $6.50.) Economic disaster and nationalist hate groups besiege Europe; America enters World War III.
12
1
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Troubles befall a woman and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
13
4
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to a South Carolina town.
14
2
SPANDAU PHOENIX, by Greg Iles. (Signet, $5.99.) Intelligence agencies vie for a diary full of still-invaluable secrets about World War II.
15
1
CHRISTY, by Catherine Marshall. (Avon, $5.99.) A 1967 novel about a young schoolteacher in the Tennessee hill country.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
15
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
546
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
4
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
4*
15
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
5
62
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) A memoir.
6
7
CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A night of torture and murder.
7
132
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
8
25
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
9
47
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
10
146
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) Communicating.
11
32
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.
12*
145
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
13*
4
IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.) An Irish rebel's memoir.
14
49
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
15*
19
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy.
16*
12
WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ...
AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.
17*
1
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans.
18*
18
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
162
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
169
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
27
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
4
7
MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $11.) Ways of teaching children about money.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 9, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Amy Chappell, Andrew Slutkin
Amy Beth Chappell and Andrew George Slutkin, associates at the Baltimore law firm of Snyder, Weltchek &amp; Vogelstein, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Nathaniel Schwartz officiated at Tavern on the Green.
Mrs.
Slutkin, 28, graduated cum laude from New York University.
She and her husband received their law degrees from Duke University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas T. Chappell 3d of Wyckoff, N.J.


Taking City Planning in a New Direction
UNMISTAKABLY sharp-edged on issues like crime and education, the administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani cannot be so easily defined when it comes to land use.
There are some civic leaders, indeed, who say they have yet to see any planning policy at all coming from City Hall.
In part, that is because the administration is still young and has been preoccupied with a number of issues it inherited, like the fate of the New York Coliseum site on Columbus Circle or the future of the Melrose Commons urban renewal area in the South Bronx.


More Delays Keep 125th St. Vendor-Laden
The eviction notices printed for hundreds of illegal vendors along 125th Street in Harlem announce in bold letters: "Remember! Everybody could be a winner."
But after months in which the city has made hesitant efforts to rid the crowded street of peddlers and their tables, both frustrated business owners and the vendors have begun to question whether anyone will emerge a winner under plans announced by the city last September.


Allow Miscalculation, Open the Way to War
Again and again in this century, and in others as well, it has been miscalculation that turned crisis into conflict.
The German generals were sure in 1914 that they could win a swift and painless victory; had they not been, they might have acted differently.
Likewise Hitler a quarter-century later, who was certain that Britain would fail to answer his attack on Poland as it had acquiesced in his seizure of the Sudetenland, and North Korea in 1950, which apparently misread a comment of Dean Acheson's to mean that an attempt to swallow South Korea would provoke no strong American response.
It is the job of political leaders, well before the moment of maximum tension arrives, to send the clearest possible signals to their potential enemies.
If it is left too late, such messages become ultimatums, and armed conflict too often ensues because issues of pride and face intrude.


Sharper Focus: Genesis of Clinton's Hard Line
As President Clinton struggled this week to respond to new Serbian aggression in Bosnia and to salvage his unsuccessful policy in Haiti, he took some pleasure in having forced himself to attend to foreign affairs as never before in his Presidency.
"No one can ever say again I've been disengaged," Mr.
Clinton told one adviser on Tuesday as back-to-back National Security Council meetings on Bosnia finally gave his aides what they had long pressed for: a chance to enlist the President in an extensive review of his most intractable foreign-policy problem.


Tightening Up On Agencies
IN 49 states an entrepreneur can rent a storefront, hang out a travel agent's sign and go into business selling bus or cruise tickets or hotel reservations without having to pass a state examination for a license, as a hairdresser or a real estate broker might.
And, while there may be local business registration fees, 44 states do not require the agent to register the business.
In the likely event the agent wanted to sell airline tickets, a certification would be needed, but it is from an industry clearinghouse, the Airlines Reporting Corporation.
Rhode Island is the one state now requiring an examination; 10 other states place some minimal legal requirement on the sale of travel: California, Florida, Hawaii, Iowa, Illinois, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Virginia and Washington.
Some of these states, and Massachusetts, uneasy about a recent rash of defaults and consumer losses, are examining how to tighten the tour-operator business, which produces the multimillion-dollar failures that make headlines, and the travel agency business.
Recent Defaults
Two big recent defaults involved the luxury tour operator Hemphill Harris in California in 1989 and the Milestone Education Institute, a Massachusetts student tour operator, in 1993.
The Hemphill Harris failure stranded travelers and left luxury hotels with unpaid bills; the total loss is unclear, with estimates ranging from $900,000 up.
Milestone's closing, according to the Massachusetts Attorney General, meant that 4,462 students and teachers lost $7.8 million.


Corrections
The Mutual Funds column on April 10, about tax-free investing, misstated the name of a fund.
It is the Vanguard Short-Term Municipal Bond Fund, not the Vanguard Short-Term New York Municipal Bond Fund.


Business Diary: April 17-22
COMPANIES Could That Be I.B.M.
Emerging From the Tar Pits?
It made good copy: the tale of a dinosaur that failed to keep up with the times and was clearly headed for the high-tech tar pits.
But I.B.M., it seems, decided that it wasn't too pleased with that script.
And last week -- a year after Louis Gerstner took charge -- it came out with a surprisingly strong quarterly report that says, at least tentatively, that I.B.M. is alive and kicking.
These numbers don't say "extinct": profits, $392 million, on revenues of $13.4 billion.
And, miracle of miracles, sales of mainframes -- the very word conjures images of dusty bones in this world of miniaturization -- aren't doing as badly as they were.
The stock market, often cool to good profit news these days, was gleeful, as I.B.M. shares jumped 12 percent in a day, and crept up even more the next, to close the week at $58.75.
O.K., that's not $170 (August 1987) but it's not $41 (August 1993) either.


Disabled, Yet Retaining Control Over His Care
To his final hours, Richard M. Nixon wanted to remain in control of his destiny.
And he did, through a living will.
That Mr.
Nixon had a living will, also known as an advanced directive, was confirmed by his chief of staff, Kathy O'Connor, in an interview with The Associated Press.
Neither she nor hospital officials were at liberty to discuss its specifics.


The Environment Is Business's Business
To the Editor:
Marc J. Epstein is right in "A Formal Plan For Environmental Costs" (Viewpoints, April 3) that the integration of environmental management into daily operations as well as into strategic management is necessary.
Sound environmental stewardship will test the limits of innovative thinking of business managers as well as regulators.
Managers must realize that this is not simply about good citizenship or a cleaner environment; it is also about creating competitive advantage and opportunities.


World Markets; An Old Hand for Japan's Fresh Start
WHEN Morihiro Hosokawa announced two weeks ago that he was resigning as Japan's Prime Minister, many foreign observers mourned the untimely downfall of the first politician here in four decades committed to deregulating the economy.
His revolution had barely begun.
That is why the governing coalition's selection of Foreign Minister Tsutomu Hata as the next Prime Minister initially provoked contradictory responses.
Mr.
Hata is a conservative pragmatist, not a visionary, so some foreign observers were disappointed when his name was first floated.


Barriers to Immunization Peril Children, Experts Say
Barriers to immunization are leaving millions of children needlessly at risk of measles, whooping cough, polio and other potentially serious diseases, a panel of experts has warned.
In a report made public on Tuesday, the panel, of the Institute of Medicine, said fewer than 70 percent of the country's 2-year-olds have all their recommended inoculations because of the failure of doctors, parents and health agencies to make sure children are protected.
It said the barriers included factors besides the availability of vaccines and their costs.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
ANTHROPOLOGY  WEST OF THE THIRTIES  Discoveries Among the Navajo  and the Hopi.
By Edward T. Hall.
Doubleday, $21.95.


A Continent on the Dole and on the Rebound
HOW MANY AMERICAN ARTISTS can you name off the top of your head who came to prominence in the two decades following World War II?
Many, no doubt.
Pollock, de Kooning, Rothko, Rauschenberg, Lichtenstein, Warhol, Johns.
Now, how about Europeans?
Dubuffet, Bacon, Beuys, Klein . . .
Starting to need help?
Americans do need it, generally.
Postwar America is among art history's most touted periods, and with reason.
But its success has been at the cost of Europe's reputation in America.
As part of the cold-war mentality of winners and losers, only one side in the trans-Atlantic battle could end up on top and, after all, America won the war.
No wonder the title of the standard book on Abstract Expressionism is "The Triumph of American Painting."


The Start Belongs to Hextall, but the Pressure Is Evenly Distributed
While practicing the last couple of days, the Islanders haven't concerned themselves with the recent headlines predicting a Ranger sweep.
They're not kidding themselves, either.
The Rangers have taken a commanding 3-0 lead in the first-round matchup of the Stanley Cup playoffs, and they have shut down the Islander offense and broken down their defense.
Coach Al Arbour announced today that Ron Hextall, his veteran goalie, would start Game 4, scheduled Sunday afternoon at Nassau Coliseum.
The Rangers will be playing for a week off.
The Islanders will be playing for their dignity.


Concert to Benefit the Needy
AN intriguing vocal-instrumental mix at 4 P.M. today brings classical music, Broadway show tunes and spirituals to the South Presbyterian Church in Dobbs Ferry.
The concert is a benefit for both Midnight Run, a support organization for the homeless, and the church's own Global Mission, which lists agricultural projects in Zaire and nutrition education in Bangladesh among its programs.
The impressive roster of local musicians includes Meg Bussert, who recently completed a 10-month stint as the diva Carlotta in "Phantom" at the Westchester Broadway Theater and who has just joined the cast of "Damn Yankees" on Broadway.
She will be singing numbers from "She Loves Me" and other shows.


Closing the Book on Bournemouth
WITH ONE FOOT IN England, where he is in his last weeks as principal conductor of the Bournemouth Symphony, and the other in Texas, where he becomes music director of the Dallas Symphony in June, Andrew Litton took what he called a week off late last month.
What he meant was a week off the podium.
Having just led nine performances of Verdi's "Falstaff" at the English National Opera and a five-day tour with the Bournemouth, he flew to Dallas for three 13-hour days of meetings and auditions, to New York for more meetings, and back to Dallas to tie up loose ends.
Then it was "back to the grind," he said, in Bournemouth.
The grind at the moment is shepherding the 101-year-old orchestra on its first American tour, which includes a performance at Avery Fisher Hall this afternoon.
The program consists of Bernstein's "Candide" Overture, Sibelius's Violin Concerto, with Cho-Liang Lin as soloist, and Shostakovich's Eighth Symphony.


Nancy Pitman, Adam Rosenberg
Nancy Ellen Pitman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mark I. Pitman of Syosset, L.I., was married last evening to Adam Craig Rosenberg, the son of Mr. and Mr.
Jay S. Rosenberg of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 25, is a consultant at R. H. Macy &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the director of sports medicine at the Hospital for Joint Diseases in New York.


SURFACING
FOOD  Crepes for yen: Replacing tiramisu as the hot Western food fad in Tokyo is the Belgian crepe, cooked to order by street vendors, who stuff it with ice cream and a chocolate sauce that tastes suspiciously like Hershey's syrup.
FASHION  Children's camouflage wear: Uniforms for the Children's Defense Fund?
Miniature army fatigues for 2-year-olds, one manufacturer said, are meant to be seen as "attractive green patterns" and not as "army stuff."


The Radically Useless Building
ARCHITECTURE AND DISJUNCTION By Bernard Tschumi.
Illustrated. 268 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press. $27.50.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18  ATTACK AND RETREAT AT GORAZDE  Despite a NATO ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs, they continued their attack on Gorazde.
But United Nations officials said some Serbs began to pull back and promised compliance as the deadline approached. 1  CLINTON'S NEW FOREIGN FOCUS  President Clinton has been forced to shift his focus to respond to the situation in Bosnia and to try to salvage his Haiti policy, and it has brought a new level of involvement for him in foreign policy.  14


Fran Albin, Philip Cronin
Fran Melanie Albin, a senior associate at Global Exchange, a marketing company in Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Philip Sullivan Cronin, a founding partner of Cannon Associates, a management consulting firm in Washington.
Judge Levin H. Campbell, a senior judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston, officiated at the Hay-Adams Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Cronin, 42, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is the daughter of Marvin and Natalie Albin of Paramus, N.J.
Her father, who is retired, owned a porcelain refinishing business in Paramus.
Her mother, who is also retired, taught reading at the Pierrepont School in Rutherford, N.J.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE FATE OF THE ELEPHANT By Douglas H. Chadwick.
Sierra Club, $14.
Selected one of the best books of 1993 by the editors of The Times Book Review, this study examines the natural history and habitats of elephants in the regions where they dwell, from Africa and Asia to American zoos.
Ultimately considering whether these animals will survive, the book is "fun to read and a splendid and much-needed introduction," Vicki Hearne said here.
PIGS IN HEAVEN By Barbara Kingsolver.
Harper Perennial, $13.
In this sequel to the author's novel "The Bean Trees," Taylor Greer, a young single mother, is confronted with the possible loss of her 6-year-old daughter, Turtle.
The child, a Cherokee Indian, was taken in by Taylor after she was left, abused and neglected, on the front seat of Taylor's car; although Turtle was officially adopted, such proceedings are illegal according to the Indian Child Welfare Act if they take place without the tribe's consent.
Last year our reviewer, Karen Karbo, said: "Possessed of an extravagantly gifted narrative voice," Ms.
Kingsolver "blends a fierce and abiding moral vision with benevolent, concise humor. Her medicine is meant for the head, the heart and the soul -- and it goes down dangerously, blissfully, easily."


The Rangers' Odd Couple
The bond between Mike Keenan and Mark Messier, the coach and the captain, is evident to even a casual observer of the Ranger hockey scene.
They can be spotted chatting informally in street clothes a couple of hours before a road game.
Or they might be observed wearing workout clothes and laughing over a small joke between drills on the ice at the practice rink in Rye, N.Y.
Such interactions between two persons in these roles wouldn't be remarkable except that it wasn't the same last season, when Messier was captain and another man, Roger Neilson, was the coach.
The lack of easy communication between Messier and Neilson contributed to Neilson's firing midway through a season that ended with a last-place finish and a failure to qualify for the Stanley Cup playoffs.


Why Can't They Get It Right?
PEOPLE are always asking Dr.
Joel Tenenbaum what the weather is going to be like the next day.
Dr.
Tenenbaum, a meteorologist and scientific computing professor at Purchase College, spends his days poring over readings of barometric pressure and air temperature and studying minute fluctuations in the polar jet stream.
But don't ask him if it's going to rain tomorrow and spoil your picnic.
"I'm a wholesale weatherman, not a retail weatherman," Dr. Tenenbaum said.


Minnesota's Most Famous Son?
To the Editor:
In his article about Garrison Keillor  [ "A Prodigal Son Makes His Way Home," March 27 ]  I was disappointed but not surprised by Neal Karlen's assertion that Mr.
Keillor is Minnesota's most famous son.
Such a claim smacks of the cultural myopia for which New York has long been famous out in the heartland.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Weight of the World
PATIENTS are a bit stunned when they happen upon a nurse, Linda Jo Belsito, of Hicksville.
"They just look," Ms.
Belsito said.
"Finally some will say, 'You're obviously into some type of athletics.' "


SERBS, DEFYING ULTIMATUM, RAIN SHELLS OVER GORAZDE; U.N. BLOCKS NATO AIR RAIDS
Staring down a NATO ultimatum, Serbian nationalist forces rained shells on Gorazde, in eastern Bosnia, on Saturday and mounted infantry assaults on a nearby munitions factory.
But just hours before the deadline, United Nations officials said that they had reports of "significant Serbian withdrawals" from around Gorazde, starting at about 5 P.M.
Saturday, and that the Serbs had promised to fulfill all NATO's demands.


Correction
An article on April 10 about the status of cable television in New York City misstated the area served by Liberty Cable, the number of channels it offers and its availability to individual customers.
The company is equipped to serve all of Manhattan, parts of three other boroughs -- the Bronx, Queens and Brooklyn -- and parts of Hudson and Bergen counties in New Jersey.
It has 72 channels, not 55, and it offers retail service for individual subscribers, as well as building-wide service.


Applause From Newark
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's essay "Hurok Was a Huckster, and More"  [ March 20 ]  reminded me of the time Sol Hurok saved classical music in Newark.
At the time, the Mosque Theater, a 3,600-seat former Masonic gathering place, was the main concert hall in the state.
Many of Hurok's famous artists had appeared there to great acclaim.


Julia A. Null, Evan A. Smith
Julia Anne Null, a daughter of Dr.
Anne Bertholf of Buffalo and Dr.
Jack Null of Kent, Ohio, was married yesterday to Evan Andrew Smith, a son of Michael and Shelly Smith of Spring Valley, N.Y.
Judge Brenda P. Kennedy of Court No. 7 of the Travis County Court-at-Law in Austin, Tex., officiated at the Barr Mansion, a historic home in Austin.
Mrs.
Smith, 27, is a freelance editor and writer in Washington.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylania.
Her father is a professor of English at Kent State University.
Her mother is the associate dean and the director of the Niagara Frontier Center of Empire State College, in Buffalo.
The bride's stepfather, Dr.
Robert Bertholf, is the curator of the poetry and rare books collections at the State University at Buffalo.


Jennifer Kasmin, Simon Miller
Jennifer Ann Kasmin and Simon Joel Kasha Miller, lawyers in New York, were married last evening at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Rabbi Martin M. Rozenberg officiated.
Mrs.
Miller and her husband, both 27, graduated from Cornell University and received law degrees from Boston University.
She is an associate at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
He is an associate at Graubard, Mollen, Horowitz, Pomeranz &amp; Shapiro.


A Prolific Playwright Finds Name Dropping Pays
ASK Larry Myers why his two newest plays running through next Sunday at the Theater for the New City in the East Village of Manhattan are called "The Sal Mineo Fan Club Comes to Order" and "Gene Tierney Moved Next Door." He answers, "One, because I'm a poet, and two, to sell tickets."
"A play's got to have a name that grabs people," said Mr.
Myers, who wrote many of his 40-odd plays in East Quogue.
"Tennessee Williams once told me that."


Wall Street; A Scion of the L.B.O. Reflects
THE reins have been passed this year from father to son at Kohlberg &amp; Company, the leveraged buyout firm founded by Jerome Kohlberg, one of the founders of Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company.
James Kohlberg, 36, is now managing partner of the firm, which is based in Mount Kisco, N.Y., while Jerome, 68, continues full-time as senior partner.
In 1993, the firm took four of its companies public; the stocks of three -- the ABT Company, ABC Rail Products and Northwestern Steel and Wire -- are up 57 percent, 38 percent and 9 percent, respectively.
The fourth, the Welbilt Corporation, declined 5 percent.
The elder Mr.
Kohlberg left Kohlberg, Kravis in 1987.
He later sued the firm, alleging improper business tactics, and the case was settled out of court.
In an interview, James Kohlberg shared his views on the L.B.O. business, but declined to talk about the Kohlberg, Kravis connection.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on April 10 about black-and-white films added a title incorrectly to the list of those shown at the recent New Directors/New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art.
"Suture" was not among those films; it opened at the Angelika at the same time as the museum series.


A Director-Alchemist Transforms 'An Inspector Calls'
STEPHEN DALDRY IS ONLY 32, but already it is clear there are few limits to his unconventional skills.
He is probably the only British director who can fly an airplane.
He is certainly the only one who has spent a year working in a traveling circus as a clown.
He can also walk a tightrope, ride a unicycle, juggle flaming brands and swallow fire.
And just now he is metaphorically becoming the master of two still trickier arts, those of the alchemist and of the human cannonball.
Within the last few years, he has zoomed from nowhere to the giddy heights of the British theater.
In 1991 he was running a tiny pub-playhouse on the London fringe.
Now he is artistic director of Britain's most important center of new drama, the Royal Court, and a front-runner for the top job at the National Theater, should Richard Eyre give it up in 1996, as he has intimated he may.
And with "An Inspector Calls," which opens on Broadway at the Royale Theater on Wednesday, the Daldry cannon is about to take aim at the American peaks, too.


Dana I. Ruben, Gregory Rogers
Dana Ilene Ruben, the daughter of Myrna C. Ruben of Bethesda, Md., and the late Leon B. Ruben, was married last evening to Gregory Todd Rogers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Rogers of Armonk, N.Y.
Rabbi Joseph P. Weinberg performed the ceremony at the Mayflower Hotel in Washington.
Mrs.
Rogers, 29, was until recently the assistant director of the Barbara Mathes Gallery in New York.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father was a founding partner in Steven-Windsor, a chain of men's wear stores, in Alexandria, Va.


POSTINGS: Restoration by the Book; 64 Pages Of Rules for Landmarks
The basic rule comes from the Bible, Proverbs 22:28: "Remove not the ancient landmark." But for those people who own or reside in a landmark, and are looking for an easy way to be up to date on the regulations regarding their building, the Landmarks Preservation Commission has come up with an additional text, what might be considered the commission's own bible.
It's called "Title 63," the formal name for the rules the commission uses to regulate more than 20,000 buildings in New York City that have been designated landmarks or are in historic districts.
The 64-page illustrated booklet includes information on how to apply for approval of proposed alterations and how to obtain expedited review of certain kinds of applications.


April 17-24; The Sax Player Had No Coattails
Whatever he does next, Arsenio Hall will undoubtedly be remembered as the first black host to make it in late-night television.
And who can soon forget his eager-to-please guest, Bill Clinton, wearing shades and playing the sax as he campaigned for the Presidency?
But in the world of television competition that wasn't enough, and last week Mr.
Hall became the latest casualty in the struggle for late-night hegemony.
Calling the decision the "most complicated" of his life, the 34-year-old late-night host announced that his final broadcast would be May 27.


Christo Talks About Taking on the Reichstag
THE conceptual artist Christo likes to create on a huge scale -- surrounding Florida islands with pink plastic or installing thousands of blue-and-yellow umbrellas in California and Japan.
He and his wife and partner, Jeanne-Claude, will discuss their next project tomorrow at Cooper Union, and it is in that tradition: wrapping the Reichstag, the home of the once-and-future German Parliament, in a million square feet of silver fabric.


BIRTH RITE
Joshua J. Hammerman's About Men column "Birth Rite" (March 13) addresses a growing debate in the Jewish community.
While Hammerman believes that "no damage is done," many men have contacted us, including Jewish men, who have sexual and psychological issues connected with their circumcisions.
At a time when women are calling for choice over what happens to their bodies, it is strange that we do not consider extending the same right to men.
RONALD F. GOLDMAN Circumcision Resource Center Boston


Laura Greenberg And Craig Laub
Laura Anne Greenberg, a daughter of Dawn Frost of New York and David A. Greenberg of Essex, Conn., was married last evening to Craig Allen Laub, a son of Raymond and Patricia Laub of Milwaukee.
Rabbi Charles Davidson and the Rev.
Louis Gioia, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Columbia University Chapel in New York.
Mrs.
Laub, 28, is an assistant marketing manager for the Optima card division of American Express in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia.
Her father is the president of the Clinipad Corporation, a medical goods manufacturing company in Guilford, Conn.
Her mother is the director of development for Graham-Windham Services to Families and Children in New York.


April 17-23: Cosmic Certainty; Yes, Earth, There Are Other Planet Systems
The solar system is not alone.
With a certainty rare in announcements of cosmic discoveries, astronomers say they have made the first confirmed observations of a family of planets around a star far, far from the Sun.
They detected the existence of two planets about three times the size of Earth and a smaller one no bigger than Earth's Moon, out more than 7 trillion miles in the Virgo constellation.


Devils Slip On Defense And Sabres Tie Series
The Devils gave the puck away in their zone on a regular basis and got less than inspired goaltending from Martin Brodeur in Game 4 of their playoff series with the Sabres tonight.
The result was a 5-3 loss that tied the four-of-seven-game series at two games apiece.
The series will resume Monday night at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
One excuse the Devils had was that they played without Bernie Nicholls, their most versatile forward, who may miss the rest of the series because of a knee injury suffered in Game 3.
His place in tonight's game was taken by Corey Millen.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about advertising to consumers in their 20's misidentified the home city of Direct Talk, a generational marketing firm.
It is Boca Raton, Fla.


Chez Panisse
To the Editor: I am green with envy after reading Jane Shapiro's dinner menu from Chez Panisse ("Going Back to Berkeley," Feb. 27) because of the contrast with the meal my family had there one Monday evening: green salad, steak with peppercorn sauce, matchstick potatoes, crepes suzette.
Ms.
Shapiro says the chef and owner "serve food that tastes as if it were made at home for friends." In this day of concern about cholesterol and healthful foods, this was not a meal I would serve at home for either family or friends.


April 17-24; Getting More Box for the Buck
The 1990's version of good things coming in small packages?
Good things now come in big packages, especially when they are small.
Take, for example, a $279 fax-modem card, which is about the size of the credit card that paid for it.
It comes in a cardboard box the size of, say, volume two of the Encyclopedia Britannica (Arizona through Bolivar, Simon).
The modem is an accessory for a "sub-notebook" computer that is also about the size of an encyclopedic volume of an encyclopedia.
But its box would hold eight or nine of the same computers.


China Releases Dissident and Sends Him to U.S. for Treatment
A prominent leader of the Tiananmen Square democracy movement was released today and immediately sent to the United States to seek treatment for hepatitis and a heart ailment.
The dissident, Wang Juntao, was one of five political prisoners with serious medical problems who were the subject of a letter signed by a majority of United States Senators and sent to President Jiang Zemin in February.


The Executive Life; Rat-Race Fugitives, Drag-Race Fanatics
FOR some executives in Northern California, a relaxing evening getaway from work lasts 10 seconds and speeds by at 130 miles an hour.
Welcome to the Wednesday Night Drags at Sears Point Raceway near Santa Rosa, 50 miles north of San Francisco.
On Wednesday nights from March to November there is open competition, and among the hot-rod jockeys and teen-agers with hopped-up muscle cars are the president of a bank, the owner of a big winery and the chief executive of an engineering company, as well as the heads of a construction company and a bank security concern.


April 17-24; Does the Distinguished Gentleman Get It?
Last week the United States Senate revealed its own gender gap as it debated whether Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, following the Tailhook scandal, should lose the privilege of retiring with a full pension.
The full pension was approved, but the voices of seven angry women Senators narrowed the margin to 54 votes to 43.
During the debate, Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska, who had said he was "angry" that "people are using a dedicated career servant as a symbol," confronted Senator Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois.
SENATOR STEVENS: Does the Senator think Admiral Kelso is here asking?
The President of the United States is asking the Senator to confirm him in the rank he held for five years.
That is the difference.
The Senator does not understand it.


Principal Is Reinstated in School Prayer Case
A judge, faulting "the loss of moral values in public education," on Friday ordered the reinstatement of a school principal who was suspended because he let a student read a prayer over the school intercom.
The principal, Bishop Knox, became the center of an uproar after he was dismissed in November.
Hundreds of people attended rallies, students walked out of many schools around the state, and politicians, including Gov.
Kirk Fordice, spoke out in favor of school prayer.
The State Legislature passed a law allowing prayer initiated by students, even though some lawmakers expressed doubts about its constitutionality and predicted court challenges.


Manager's Profile
Brian C. Rogers  Fund: T. Rowe Price Equity-Income Fund, $2.9 billion in assets.
Manager since 1985 inception. (Sponsor: T. Rowe Price, Baltimore.)  Born: June 27, 1955; Beverly, Mass.


HOW DO TOBACCO EXECUTIVES LIVE WITH THEMSELVES?
In "How Do Tobacco Executives Live With Themselves?" (March 20), Roger Rosenblatt has given us a rare look into the psyche of the tobacco industry.


Reporters Keep Faith With Kurds in Iraq
To the Editor:
The year 1993 was a grim one for journalists, as the annual report of the Committee to Protect Journalists shows.
The current year's toll is already mounting.


Tracy B. Barba, Douglas Schiff
Tracy Beth Barba, the daughter of Theodore and Elizabeth Barba of Old Brookville, L.I., was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Douglas Marc Schiff, a son of Selwyn and Barbara Schiff of Westport, Conn.
Judge William Crosby of the Village Justice Court of Tarrytown, officiated at Tappan Hill.


Swan Song


April 17-24; Should Sky-Diving Become an Olympic Sport?


Sentinels of Broadway
IT was 7:29 P.M., always a time of expectancy in any Broadway theater.
Sara Zittel, theater usher, was in a state of maximum readiness.
Waiting in her strategic position at the landing of the Richard Rodgers Theater on West 46th Street, she assumed an air of regimental attention.
She made sure that her badge of office, the white usher's collar with its two gold buttons glittering in the lobby light, was perfectly in place.
In fact, 31 minutes before curtain time for "Laughter on the 23d Floor," the Neil Simon comedy, silence had descended upon a house of ushers.
All 16 readied their Playbills, grasped their flashlights and braced for the onslaught to come.


Law-Abiding Americans Find Reason to Laud Singapore Justice
To the Editor:
"Time to Assert American Values" (editorial, April 13), on the sentence of caning imposed on the American Michael Fay in Singapore, does not represent the United States.
It is time that criminals were punished forcefully for malicious mischief and other violent acts they choose to commit.


Muslims Leave Bushwick; The Neighbors Ask Why
It is the hauntingly mellifluous chant of the muezzin, beckoning the faithful to prayer, that Maria Vega wishes still echoed off the buildings of her neighborhood in Bushwick, Brooklyn.
Some time during the last year -- first in dribs and drabs, then in a mass exodus -- at least 300 members of an unusual, insular sect that blended Islamic and Jewish precepts packed up and abandoned a community they had come to dominate over the last two decades.
They boarded up their mosque, their stores, their school and nine apartment buildings they owned, and moved away.


100 Years of Firsts At the Penn Relays
Many world and Olympic champions first made headlines at the "Penns" as high school and college athletes.


Of Privacy and Security: The Clipper Chip Debate
AT first glance, the Clipper chip is a rather undistinguished slice of silicon, no more exotic than the microprocessors found in millions of personal computers.
Even so, it has managed to inflame the hearts and minds of the technological elite who are struggling to shape the country's future in the digital age.
Congressional hearings are scheduled to resume this week on the chip, the heart of the Clinton Administration's new voice and data security system, officially known as the key escrow encryption initiative.
The Administration's goal is to make it easier for law enforcement officials to conduct legal wiretaps on new generations of devices that send information over the telephone system, including wireless phones, computers and facsimile machines.
The hearings, before subcommittees of the Senate Judiciary Committee and the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, have been called to review the adoption of Clipper as a new encryption standard, a move that has been widely criticized on privacy grounds, and to explore modifications and alternatives.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Admiral Kelso: Vote to allow Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d to retire at his four-star rank despite the Tailhook scandal.
Approved 54 to 43, April 19.
2.
Free Parking: Vote on a proposal to eliminate free, reserved parking spaces for members of Congress at Dulles International and National Airports outside Washington.
Rejected 53 to 44, April 20.
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Yea
Nea
Lieberman (D)
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Nea
Yea
Lautenberg (D)
Nea
Yea
New York
D'Amato (R)
Nea
Yea
Moynihan (D)
Nea
Yea
House
1.
Crime Bill: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime bill that would delete a provision to revise death-row appeal procedures.
Approved 270 to 159, April 19.
2.
Crime Bill: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime bill that would add $10.5 billion to aid the states in constructing prisons.
Approved 377 to 150, April 19.
3.
Crime Bill: Vote on an amendment to a major anti-crime bill to delete provisions that would let future death-row prisoners use statistical evidence of racial bias in past executions to prove in court that their own death sentences were motivated by discrimination.
Rejected 217 to 212, April 20.
4.
Crime Bill: Vote on passage of a $27.9 billion anti-crime package of tougher penalties and bigger prisons and more prevention programs.
Approved 285 to 141, April 21.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
2. Gejdenson (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
3. DeLauro (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
4. Shays (R)
Yea
Yea
Nea
Yea
5. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
6. Johnson (R)
Yea
A
Yea
Yea
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Yea
A
Yea
A
2. Hughes (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
3. Saxton (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nea
4. Smith (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
5. Roukema (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
6. Pallone (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
7. Franks (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
8. Klein (D)
Yea
Yea
Nea
Yea
9. Torricelli (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
10. Payne (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
Nea
11. Gallo (R)
A
A
A
A
12. Zimmer (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nea
13. Menendez (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
2. Lazio (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
3. King (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nea
4. Levy (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
5. Ackerman (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
6. Flake (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
Yea
7. Manton (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
8. Nadler (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
Yea
9. Schumer (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
10. Towns (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
Yea
11. Owens (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
Nea
12. Velazquez (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
Nea
13. Molinari (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
14. Maloney (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
15. Rangel (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
Nea
16. Serrano (D)
Nea
Nea
Nea
Nea
17. Engel (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
18. Lowey (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
19. Fish (R)
A
A
A
A
20. Gilman (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
21. McNulty (D)
Yea
Yea
A
Yea
22. Solomon (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nea
23. Boehlert (R)
Yea
Yea
Nea
Yea
24. McHugh (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Yea
25. Walsh (R)
Yea
Yea
Nea
Yea
26. Hinchey (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
27. Paxon (R)
Yea
Yea
Yea
Nea
28. Slaughter (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
29. LaFalce (D)
Nea
Yea
Nea
Yea
30. Quinn (R)
Yea
Yea
Nea
Yea
31. Houghton (R)
Yea
Yea
A
Yea
KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Corrections
A picture caption in Home Design, part 2 of The Times Magazine, on April 10, with an article about modern architecture misidentified an architect.
He was Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, not Marcel Breuer.


Armory's Uncertain Future
In 1917, the National Guard's Eighth Coastal Artillery Regiment left its rambling armory on 94th Street and Park Avenue in Manhattan for a new site in the Bronx where it would have more room and richer recruiting options.
The Bronx building, at 29 West Kingsbridge Road, is an architectural wonder, with two grand three-quarter-round towers that highlight the stately medieval-style exterior and a moat that runs across the front.
It was designated a city landmark in 1974, while the regiment's former home was demolished in the 1960's.


Figaro Connection
To the Editor: Paul Hofmann's article "What's Doing in Vienna" (March 13) recommends the Konig von Ungarn Hotel as a place to stay.
Music lovers may wish to know that this hotel adjoins the Figaro Haus where Mozart lived and wrote "The Marriage of Figaro." The building is now a small museum.
RUTH ALBERT SPENCER  New York, N.Y.


Way Out, Ways In, Right Away
"We've come a ways in journalism, too," I wrote in this space recently.
My meaning was that we've come pretty far, but not too far; had I meant to say we had come really far, I would have written a long way, with the way singular, as in the Virginia Slims slogan "You've come a long way, baby."
Why, then, did it seem more natural to write the unmodified way as ways?
Maybe because we've come a way would be confused with we've come away, with its different meaning of "we've left our moorings." Or maybe I wanted to pull a little mail.


RUINED TEMPLES OF AN ANCIENT EMPIRE
WHEN mighty kings ruled from Angkor, from the 9th to the 15th century, much of today's Thailand was part of the Khmer Empire, and the only paved roads in Southeast Asia ran from the capital to the other main cities.
Along these roads, temples and rest houses were built for the travelers who wanted to worship the gods and sleep comfortably afterward.
In northeastern Thailand, two such Khmer temples, Phimai and Phanom Rung, survive.
The first of these was begun perhaps as early as the 11th century; both were certainly completed before 1200.
Because of their distance from the capital, the temples are relatively small, but they are handsome nonetheless.
And there are few tourists: During my two visits over the last year, there were several groups of Thai schoolchildren at Phanom Rung; very few visitors at all at Phimai.
Conveniently, both can be visited in a day's excursion from Korat (also known as Nakhon Ratchasima, which is the name, too, of the province of which this is the main city).
The drive through the Thai countryside is picturesque, passing by villages of houses on stilts, a fair complement of water buffaloes, occasional banyans and flame trees, and providing views over the Korat plateau.


Away From the Zoo, Emus Are Raised for Profit and Fun
ON a recent evening at the Plaza Hotel in New York, members of the Confrerie de la Chaine des Rotisseurs, a gathering of epicures, sipped 1986 cabernet sauvignon in between bites of emu medallions.
Earlier that day, on Route 34 south just outside Carlisle, Pa., the luncheon crowd at T Jimmy's ordered the usual, emu burgers and fries.
The emu is the national bird of Australia.
Emus that have made it to this country did so mainly as zoo attractions.
In the 1950's, Australia, deciding to keep the bird to itself, banned the export of emus or emu eggs, allowing only the emu meat and its byproducts to be exported.


Knicks Surrender Playoff Advantage
After a long regular season in which they faced many obstacles, the Knicks were helpless this afternoon, watching television as two other teams decided their playoff fate.
In the end, the Hawks' 93-89 victory over the Orlando Magic at the Omni gave Atlanta the top-seeded playoff position in the National Basketball Association's Eastern Conference and deprived the Knicks of a regular-season goal.


Who Owns Lassie?
Everyone knows Lassie.
And many people know that the movie and TV roles were played by eight dogs, all males, all descended in a direct line from the original Pal.
But not too many know that the original Lassie (in glorious color at right) cost his trainer, Rudd Weatherwax, $10 and turned into an investment even more richly rewarding than Hillary Rodham Clinton's initial buy in cattle futures.
Although Weatherwax did well, others did even better.
The first eight Lassie movies, from MGM, all done in the 40's and 50's, grossed $285 million.


Regina Clarkin, Francis O'Leary
Regina Joan Clarkin, the publisher and president of The Peekskill (N.Y.) Herald, a weekly newspaper, was married yesterday to Francis Thomas O'Leary, a conductor for the Metro-North Commuter Railroad.
The Rev.
Thomas Devery performed the ceremony at the Holy Name of Mary Roman Catholic Church in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Ms.
Clarkin, 36, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent H. Clarkin of Peekskill.
The bride graduated from Marist College.


Bookshelf
HAND, HEART, AND MIND: The Story of the Education of America's Deaf People.
By Lou Ann Walker.
Dial. $14.99. (Ages 10 and up) The consequences of a revolt of students at Gallaudet University in 1988, with banners reading "Deaf Pride," is at the beginning and at the heart of an informative, politically astute account, including a bibliography, photographs and biographical sketches of prominent deaf Americans.
RUB-A-DUB-DUB: Who's in the Tub?
Written and illustrated by Jun Takabatake.
Chronicle Books. $10.95. (Ages 2 to 6) If you must take a bath, you could find inspiration in a little boy who builds playmates out of soap bubbles, which are then transformed into the real thing and crowd the tub.


Adrienne Petite, Reed Auerbach
Adrienne Marie Claire Petite, a senior account executive at Porter/Novelli, a public relations firm, was married last evening to Reed David Auerbach, a partner in the law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Bernard Perelmuter and the Rev.
Charles Kane, a Roman Catholic priest, jointly officiated at Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N.J.
Mrs.
Auerbach, 32, graduated from Louisiana State University.
She is a daughter of Joan and Joseph Petite of Basking Ridge, N.J.
Her father retired as the president of Universal Voltronics, an electrical equipment manufacturer in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
Her mother is a counselor at the Women's Center of the County College of Morris in Randolph, N.J.


Amid Criticism, Howard's President Quits
Three days after a racially charged rally underscored criticism of Howard University, and on the eve of a move to end his tenure as president of the university, Franklyn G. Jenifer has resigned to lead the University of Texas at Dallas.
The appointment, made on Friday night, came just as the board of trustees at Howard, long considered a prestigious center of black scholarship, had begun two days of talks on whether to oust Mr.
Jenifer.
The trustees acted amid concerns over Mr.
Jenifer's decision to allow a rabid critic of Jews, Khalid Abdul Muhammad of the Nation of Islam, to speak at rally on campus this week.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Roxbury; Low Taxes, Low Profile and Rural
STRICT zoning dating to 1932, a profusion of ledge rock and wetlands that are natural deterrents to development, a location that is off the main routes and a population that prizes peace, privacy and low taxes have combined to let Roxbury retain a rural character that elevates the term low-key to new heights.
Because of the zoning there are no restaurants, movie theaters, liquor stores, dry cleaners, sidewalks, clothiers, condominiums or co-ops.
The nearest hospital and supermarket are nine miles away, in New Milford, and the nearest major shopping is at the Danbury Mall, 20 miles away.


DID I PLAGIARIZE HIS LIFE?
I found David Leavitt's defense of his dispute with the English poet Stephen Spender deeply disturbing, not for any legal ramifications but for the ethical issues it raises ("Did I Plagiarize His Life?" April 3).
It is clear that Spender is offended by what distortion Leavitt has made of his life rather than by any serious plagiarism.
Spender renounced his homosexual life to marry, while the hero of Leavitt's book "While England Sleeps" "ends up uninhibitedly and unapologetically gay." The novel is therefore as much a political act as a literary work.
It may be fiction, but Leavitt implies that Spender in life was a hypocrite for choosing a woman over a man.
Leavitt has every esthetic right to write whatever he wishes, but was he ethically correct in treating a living subject in the way in which he did?
Did it ever occur to him that his novel might hurt Spender?
It certainly has embarrassed and enraged him.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Charles Osgood; A New Face at CBS 'Sunday Morning'
HIS television tag line is already known to millions: "See you on the radio." Charles Osgood will be saying a lot more than that in his new, high-visibility television assignment, one he says fills him with pride, joy, and a bit of anxiety about long hours at work and responsibilities at home in Englewood.
On April 1 -- April Fools' Day, he notes -- Mr.
Osgood was named as the replacement for Charles Kuralt as host of the CBS News program "Sunday Morning." Mr.
Kuralt, best known for his "On the Road" reports, was the program's host for 15 years.


Giants Wake Up in Time To Pummel Mets Pitchers
Dusty Baker was starting to see Cy Young in every pitcher San Francisco faced.
The Giants have been dreadfully cold at the plate, their batting average the worst in baseball, and Baker, their manager, had no idea what to do about it.
What he needed, it appears, was a second shot at the Mets.


Humble Watercress in Fancy Settings
IN England, when the first buds of spring were beginning to open, we used to gather the watercress that grew wild in the streams running through the Dorset fields around our house.
But I haven't found a place I feel quite safe doing that nowadays, because so many of our rivers are polluted, so I buy it instead.
But spring still makes me think of watercress, especially watercress soup, which we used to make with leeks and potatoes and a great deal of Dorset cream.
Recently, I came upon a delightful recipe for watercress soup made with oysters.
They are poached with their liquor in a light cream and white wine base in which the watercress is briefly cooked, too.


With Eyes Open Wide, Libertarians Choose Stern
At first blush, the pairing of Howard Stern, the outrageous radio showman, and New York's tiny Libertarian Party might have seemed a bit incongruous.
But consider his opponents for the party's gubernatorial nomination at its state convention here today.
There was Norma Segal, who advertised herself as "Al Sharpton's English teacher at Tilden High School." There was Dottie-Lou Brokaw, who was nominated by a man who boasted that "she hasn't missed a hemp rally since they've been having hemp rallies." There was James Ostrowski, who spent much of his speech to the convention quoting the writings of Karl Hess, an obscure Libertarian theorist.


Who Needs It?
"What Would You Do With a Motorola Pager?" is a booklet 30 pages long, 2 inches by 4 inches, that offers 100 answers to its own question.
Here are a few:
"A family member or friend wants you to pick up something at a store on your way home."


Familiar Names, Bright Effect at the 'Connecticut Art' Show
THE "Connecticut Art" exhibition is making its annual splash at the Stamford Museum and Nature Center.
This year, the judge is Martha Scott, who has served as curator at both the Aldrich Museum, in Ridgefield, and the Palace Theater, in Stamford, and has long been known for her writing on art.
Of the 178 works submitted, Ms.
Scott has chosen 73, and not a few of them are by familiar names, which makes for a certain predictability.
Nevertheless, the general effect is bright and appropriately optimistic for the time of year, which is also marked by the arrival of lambs and kids at the Nature Center.


GROWING UP HALDEMAN
I understand Peter Haldeman's frustration and anger at his father's Christian Science practitioner.
However, his mean-spirited attempt to make her the scapegoat of his father's death, in this, the most public of forums, misses the point and reminds me of his father in his darker days.
The decision to address his illness through prayer instead of medicine was Bob Haldeman's, as is the responsibility for that decision.
No one who knows anything about him would accuse him of being impressionable or woolly headed.
SCOTT MACKENZIE New York, N.Y.


Loch Ness Trip
Is there really a Loch Ness monster?
This summer, monster enthusiasts may find out for themselves.
Daily tours on a 34-foot deep-diving submarine will probe the depths of Scotland's infamous lake.
The craft, formerly a deep-sea rescue sub in Canada, can carry five passengers and a pilot to a depth of 300 feet.


Crossing Lake Messinger
Spring is generally a good time to ignore politics in New York, because it is the season for the most stupefying phrase in journalism: budget gap.
But this year might be different.
When Mayor Giuliani presents his first budget, he might actually begin to address the city's fundamental problem, which I like to call the Lake Messinger syndrome.
This syndrome has obsessed me since an odd concert at the Beacon Theater two years ago called the Ban the Dam Jam.
It was sponsored by environmentalists opposed to a hydroelectric project that would flood land used by Cree Indians in northern Quebec.
Most of us in the balcony had no strong feelings about Canadian hydroelectricity -- we were there to hear Roseanne Cash and Mary-Chapin Carpenter sing -- but we sat quietly through the opening acts and speeches until the appearance of Ruth Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President.
She vowed to ban the dam, even though some of the electricity would be sold to New York, and her passionate defense of the Crees' hunting lands prompted a cry from the balcony.


Correction
An article in some copies last Sunday about a revival of rentals in Long Beach, L.I., misidentified the seller of the Coral Club.
It was L.B.F.C Properties Corporation, a Chemical Bank subsidiary, not the Resolution Trust Corporation.
The article also misspelled the surname of a principal of the Kew Gardens Redevelopment Corporation, which purchased the property.
He is James Kapler, not Kepler.


Post-Mortem


Another Lark From Moonstone
IN HER NOVEL "THE SONG OF the Lark," written in 1914, Willa Cather tells of a singer, Thea Kronborg (modeled on the soprano Olive Fremstad), as she progresses from a sturdy childhood in Moonstone, Colo., to triumphs in her early 30's at the Metropolitan Opera.
"Thea's scale of values will always be the Moonstone scale," she writes.
"And, with an artist, that is an advantage. . . . It keeps them from getting affected . . . keeps them from getting off the track generally."
Dawn Upshaw, who, at 33, has established a distinctive place of her own as an opera singer and recitalist, has much in common with Cather's heroine: She comes from the American heartland (albeit from an urban environment).
She found her vocation only in her late teens but was then drawn irresistibly to the expressive bonding of words and music.
Her artistic development came quickly and was sustained by values acquired early in life.


Tenore Yields on Hospital
STEPHEN P. TENORE, chairman of the County Board of Legislators, last week called a truce in his disagreement with the County Executive's office over management of the 683-bed County Medical Center in Valhalla, the major critical-care and trauma hospital for a seven-county region from New York City to Albany.
"The Board of Legislators will back off for now and give the County Executive and the new Hospitals Commissioner carte blanche to turn things around there, because I kept hearing that if action wasn't taken now, we might not have a hospital in six months," Mr.
Tenore said last Wednesday.


How Natural Cover Shelters Wildlings
AN ode is a kind of lyrical poem written to express exaltation and praise.
Though this column is not such a work, something glorious must be said about the wildflower hepatica, for this is its season.
The flower itself is a delicate source of joy, kind of a woodland surprise.
It is so small, it could be missed by someone speeding around the grounds to check what was still there. (It was.)


INSIDE
Reviving the Meadowlands
The agency that runs New Jersey's Meadowlands sports complex and other sites is struggling with debt and exploding competition.
Its solution: expansion, backed by private money and political clout.
Page 35.


Technology; 2,860 Feet Under the Sea, a Record-Breaking Well
DURING most of the hour-and-a-half helicopter ride out to Shell Oil's Auger offshore drilling platform, one can see rigs and platforms dotting the deep blue water below.
Then, for 30 miles, there is nothing but water and sky.
Finally the eye glimpses the four yellow hull towers of the 39,000-ton Auger platform and, gradually, the outlines of pipes, rigging, valves and living quarters rising 419 feet above the water.
Here, in pristine isolation, the Shell Oil Company nine days ago opened a well in water far deeper than humankind had ever ventured in search of petroleum wealth.
Shell hopes the platform and its 14 wells will be producing 46,000 barrels of oil and 125 million cubic feet of natural gas a day by year's end.


Corrections
Last Sunday, because of an editing error, an article about David Aukin, a television executive in Britain, associated another film incorrectly with the New Directors/New Films series.
"Backbeat" was not shown in the series.


Playing the Child, Not for Laughs
THEIR NAMES MEAN ALMOST nothing at the box office.
Their faces are, at most, vaguely familiar.
Was he the one in "King of the Hill" or the one in "This Boy's Life"?
Child actors are nothing new.
Hollywood has always used -- and misused -- children.
What is new is a crop of more than a dozen child and teen-age actors giving extraordinary performances in movies in which few people live happily ever after.
For every cute cardboard character in "Dennis the Menace" and "Mrs. Doubtfire," there were two or three painful roles for children last year in movies aimed directly at adults.
And to play these painful roles, Hollywood does not use the modern-day equivalent of Shirley Temple.


Janet Oettinger, T. Donald Eisenstein
Janet Ruth Oettinger and Dr.
T.
Donald Eisenstein were married April 16 at Temple Sholom in Cedar Grove, N.J.
Rabbi Norman R. Patz officiated.
Mrs.
Eisenstein, 57, is the owner of Partyworks Inc., a store that sells announcements and invitations in Caldwell, N.J.
She is a daughter of Frieda Freeman of West Orange, N.J., and the late Harry Freeman.


A Family-Friendly Spot in North Madison
THE name Noodles telegraphed two messages to us: pasta dishes and informality.
And bingo!
When we arrived at this small restaurant in the North Madison Shopping Plaza in North Madison, both messages turned out to be on target.
Noodles, with a bar and a few tables in the front, is a cozy place with knotty pine pilasters and booths along one side, a few tables, decor that features fish prints, cutout wall signs, a dried floral wreath, framed portions of old quilts and other Americana, and a wait staff that is upbeat and welcoming.
In short, the place is family-friendly, with the decibel level to prove it.
The menu is wallet friendly as well, with filet mignon the highest priced entree on the menu at $13.95.
Most entrees are in the $9.95-$10.95 range.
As expected, pasta dishes dominate the short menu, but other choices include seafood, chicken, beef (filet and hamburger) and Danish pork ribs.


Who Was Picasso's Mona Lisa?
There is probably no artist in history whose life and work has been studied more closely than Pablo Picasso's.
So it came as something of a surprise when the noted scholar and curator William Rubin announced in an article in the May issue of Art News that he may have discovered something new.
He writes that a previously unknown infatuation by Picasso with the Jazz Age socialite Sara Murphy in the early 1920's inspired several hundred paintings and drawings previously thought to have been depictions of idealized women or the artist's wife at the time, Olga.
One of the paintings is the great Neoclassical "Woman in White" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Most visitors to the Met who gaze on the cool, calm elegance of that work probably never heard of Olga, much less Sara, and may wonder what all this adds to their appreciation of the work.
But Mr.
Rubin's speculations (he bases his ideas on interpretations of the drawings and paintings, not the discovery of an incriminating document, a Dear Pablo letter, for instance) links this phase of Picasso's art to some of the most interesting characters of the time.
The Roaring Twenties
Sara and Gerald Murphy were luminaries in their own right, the models for Dick and Nicole Diver in F. Scott Fitzgerald's "Tender Is the Night," and Mr.
Rubin hints that the infatuation between Picasso and Sara blossomed because Gerald, meanwhile, may have been having a homosexual relationship with the composer Cole Porter (they were collaborating on a ballet).
The value of Mr.
Rubin's assertion isn't only in what it potentially reveals about Picasso's sex life but also in what it says about the close-knit cultural carnival of the Roaring Twenties.


The Secret Life of Commercials
SOMETIMES it just happens.
Michael Somoroff, a director of television commercials, achieved an epiphany on a corn flakes shoot.
It was the way the strawberry crossed the pour of milk at just the right moment.


Tributes to Nixon Underline Triumphs, Not the Downfall
Paying tribute to Richard M. Nixon on the day after his death at the age of 81, American and world leaders today emphasized the 37th President's epochal achievements in reconciling the United States with Communist powers, rather than the ignominy of his resignation from office.
A fierce and glowering anti-Communist early in his career as a member of the House Un-American Activities Committee, Mr.
Nixon as President began to wind down the cold war with his opening to China and the negotiation of the first nuclear arms-control treaty with Moscow.
Then, from the shadows of old age, 15 years after Watergate, he watched the Soviet empire crumble.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


A Contender And a Winner
To the Editor:
As a cinematographer, I found Mary Ellen Mark's essay "Using Light and Dark as Paint"  [ April 10 ]  well focused and perceptive.
But in discussing Academy Awards for black-and-white films before that category was abandoned, how could Ms.
Mark have overlooked the Oscar that Boris Kaufman received in 1954 for his stunning black-and-white brush strokes in Elia Kazan's "On the Waterfront"?
FRED BORNET  New York


Susan M. Smith, Douglas Mitchell
Susan Marie Smith, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James P. Smith of Englewood, N.J., was married there yesterday to Douglas John Mitchell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Mitchell of Venice, Fla.
The Rev.
Joseph O'Brien performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Cecilia Church.
Mrs.
Mitchell, 27, graduated from St.
Bonaventure University.
She is studying for a master's degree in reading instruction and literacy at Michigan State University.
Her father is a clinical professor of medicine at Cornell University Medical College and a senior attending physician in pulmonary medicine at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, both in New York.


Jane A. Taylor, Peter W. Elfers
Jane Arlene Taylor, the daughter of Mrs.
Lewis W. Saxby Jr. of Ottawa Hills, Ohio, and Thomas H. Taylor of Inverness, Ill., was married yesterday to Peter William Elfers, a son of Kathleen B. Kiernan of Irvington, N.Y., and William P. Elfers of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Donald Marra, the Mayor of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


A Rush for a Popular Thin-Crusted Pizza
EVERY night, 365 nights a year, Eddie's Restaurant in New Hyde Park is full.
Customers wait patiently in line for seats.
Most people are there to eat Eddie's thin-crust pizza, especially the 10-inch bar pie.
The restaurant that the late Eddie Fanelli, a former boxer, opened in 1941 has become an institution selling 10,000 pizzas a week.
This summer, many more people than just those who pack the Hillside Avenue spot will be eating its pizzas.


No Headline
"One looks at the victory and asks, was this worth so much blood? So many lives had to be lost for a Government of national unity? It's good because we can take the best from all the different parties. But it's not the kind of victory some of us dreamt about." THANDI MODISE-MKHWANAZI of the African National Congress Women's League.  [ 10:1 ]


Cathy Gilliam, Martin Hertl
Dr.
Mary Catherine Gilliam, a research fellow in plastic surgery at Washington University in St.
Louis, was married on Friday to Dr.
Martin Hertl, a research fellow in transplantation surgery there.
Catherine O'Hagan Wolfe, the clerk of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan, officiated in the Appelate Division courtroom there.
The bride, 34, is known as Cathy.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and received a medical degree from the University of Florida.
She is a daughter of Anne H. Lewallen of New York and John W. Gilliam of Port Charlotte, Fla.


Kissinger's 'Diplomacy'
To the Editor:
With the collapse of Communism, the disappearance of a global military threat and the simultaneous emergence of new power centers in Asia and Europe, the problem of how to build a world order has become central to American foreign policy.
In my recently published book "Diplomacy" I sought to examine how previous periods have dealt with such a change in their environment, from the emergence of the modern nation-state to the present.
In particular, to draw lessons for America's future, I tried to describe America's unique blend of hope and necessity, of the oscillation between seeing America's role as building the nation into an example for others and rebuilding the world in America's image.


Sports of The Times; Mason's Not Necessarily Off the Hook Just Yet
THERE are no accidents around Pat Riley.
There are no impulsive gestures.
Every action stems from a plan, a strategy, a philosophy.
This is why Anthony Mason may have a bit larger career problem than he would like to think.
Mason remains suspended for today's game in Chicago, and it is not a foregone conclusion Mason is going to be in uniform when the Knicks begin the playoffs late this week.
Mason has crossed the well-defined border of a coach who believes you're either in or out.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
SHAKESPEARE READING
Shakespeare's birthday on April 26, 1564, will be celebrated today in Nyack by readings of two of his plays.
"The Tempest" will be heard at 1:30 P.M. and "Macbeth" sounds off at 7 P.M., both at the Nyack Library on South Broadway.
Seventeen members of the Acting Company of Nyack, under the direction of Peter DeMaio, will speak Shakespeare's lines.
They and the rest of the company have had plenty of practice, having presented five summer seasons of Shakespeare at the Hopper House and Bear Mountain State Park.
Listeners can stop by for an act or two, or stay for the duration.
There is no charge for admission and reservations are not necessary.
The phone number for more information or to inquire about available seating is 358-3544.
THE OLD STONES SPEAK
Five acres of burial grounds at St.
Paul's Church, a national historic landmark in Mount Vernon, will be open for tours today and the last Sunday of each month through October at 2 P.M., free of charge.
The gravestones, dating from 1665 to the present, are carved in a variety of styles and stones, and the earliest ones are inscribed with the naive imagery of angels and celestial bodies typical of the period.
Hundreds of soldiers from the French and Indian War, the Revolutionary War, the War of 1812 and the Civil War are buried there, many in mass graves.
David, Philip and Samuel Pell, founders of Pelham, and the artist Edward Gay are some of the more notable people interred.
The church is at 897 South Columbus Avenue, and a telephone call to 667-4116 will insure a tour reservation.
TO AFRICA AND BACK
"If It Doesn't Break, It Won't Crack," a new theater work by Theresa Folkes-Plair of New Rochelle, will be performed in Yonkers on Saturday at 2 P.M. in the auditorium of the Will Library, 1500 Central Park Avenue.
The 40-minute theatrical excursion to an African Village and back again defines the women of Africa in relation to the black women of America, and in microcosm, women everywhere.
The piece weaves movement, music and narration together, in English and in Twi, the language of the Asante tribe of Ghana.
Admission is free.
Call 377-6441 or 337-1500 for more information.
NEW TWIST ON OLD TALE
"The Trial of the Big Bad Wolf," a musical comedy that twists the tale of Little Red Riding Hood, will be performed by the Theater Connection of Westchester Community College, at 75 Grasslands Road in Valhalla on the next two weekends.
B.
B.
Wolf (get it?) is charged with home wrecking, murder and sheep-hunting without a license, and for 60 minutes, interspersed with 10 musical numbers, he is subjected to a trial by the audience-turned-jury.
Appearing as witnesses for the prosecution are the snub-snouted Hamm Sisters Vocal Trio and Little Fred Riding Hood, a dapper rapper.
Suitable for all ages, the show was directed by Pia Haas and choreographed by Molly Franzblau.
Performances are scheduled Saturday and Sunday at 7:30 P.M. through May 8, with Saturday matinees at 1 P.M. and Sunday matinees at 2 P.M.
Tickets are $7, $5 for children through 12 and people 65 and older.
Call 785-6567 for reservations or more information.
For directions to the college call 785-6700.
GOSPEL CONCERT
Dream Sounds, a series of Gospel and Spiritual concerts heard on Saturdays at noon over WVOX-Radio, will be presented in a live performance on Saturday at 8 P.M. at the Irvington Town Hall Theater.
The concert, incorporating jazz, blues, gospel and rhythm and blues into the program, will feature the 60-voice Westchester Interdenominational Fellowship Choir; Purpose, a nine-member vocal group from Manhattan; Michelle McKelvey, a classic gospel singer, accompanied by Tommy Moore, a pianist, and other soloists.
The mistress of ceremonies will be Anni of the Dream Sounds radio show.
Tickets are $10 in advance, $15 at the door.
Call 591-6602 or 948-6211 for reservations.
The theater is at 85 Main Street.
CAPITOL COMEDY
President Clinton, former President Bush and Pat Robertson have been entertained by the antics of the Capitol Steps, a troupe of current and former Congressional staffers who believe that they can be comedians just as effectively as movie actors can be presidents.
The group will perform on Thursday at 8 P.M. at the Mid-Westchester Y.M.-Y.W.H.A.'s annual benefit dinner.
The event will be held at the Pepsico Theater of the Performing Arts Center at Purchase College.
Ticket prices are $100 for the show and dessert or $175 for a pre-performance buffet dinner, show and dessert.
Call 472-3300 for reservations or more information.
CANINE WALKATHON
Next Sunday the S.P.C.A. of Westchester will hold a Walkathon for dogs and their owners.
Anyone of any age can enter so long as a dog or two is in tow.
Registration begins at 10:30 A.M., rain or shine, at Rockwood Hall Park in North Tarrytown, followed by an aerobic warmup for people and pets before the hike begins at 11:30.
Spring water and snacks for humans and animals will be provided along the two-and-a-half-mile route, which may be circled once or several times or merely strolled for a couple of dozen yards before heading home.
The pre-pledged donations of cash from friends, relatives and neighbors, which walkathoners must deliver at registration time, will help operate animal-welfare programs of the S.P.C.A.
There is a travel prize for the person who collects the most money.
The park is part of the Rockefeller State Preserve, at the junction of Routes 117 and 9.
To pre-register or get more information, call 763-9012.
TALKS AT SUPERSTORE
Booksellers are outdoing themselves these days creating events and environments that will entice customers into their stores.
At the Borders superstore and cafe at 60 South Broadway in White Plains, two noteworthy authors are appearing this week.
Dr.
Sherwin Nuland, surgeon and author of the best seller "How We Die: Reflections on Life's Last Chapter," published by Knopf, will talk about his book Thursday at 8 P.M.
And Saturday at 1:30 P.M.
George Jellinek, musicologist, author and radio personality, will discuss his new book, "History Through the Opera Glass," a Dover publication that covers 2,000 years through the librettos of 200 operas.
Call Borders, at 421-1110, for more information.
ELEANOR CHARLES


A Votre Sante
To the Editor:
I read with interest the article on the Cognac Festival du Film Policier  [ "In This Case, V.S.O.P. Means Very Suspenseful Old Potboiler," March 27 ]  and searched in vain for my name.
I am the United States director of the festival and have been since its inception 12 years ago.
All the stars mentioned in the article were brought there by me.
RUDA DAUPHIN  New York


Were Women in Class of '58 Doomed?
IF your profession is wife and you get laid off, do you just go out and find another job in the same line of work?
The question would probably never occur to the women of Hillary Rodham Clinton's generation, the Class of '69.
They simply do not think that way, because most of them have other options.


Award for Anderson
Dave Anderson, a sports columnist of The New York Times, has been named the 1994 winner of the Red Smith Award by the Associated Press Sports Editors.


After the Brutal Winter, the County Struggles to Restore Itself
LIKE so many hibernating bears liberated from their dens, homeowners can now take advantage of long-awaited balmy spring days to reclaim their outdoor domains, consigning last season's hardships to winter lore.
The seemingly endless winter of 1993-94, however, still casts its shadow over the county.
Just as homeowners are struggling to repair the damage to their property, from clogged drainpipes, flooded basements and wounded shrubbery to cracked patios and leaking roofs, those responsible for the county's roads and parks are still digging out.
In many cases, the remedies used to keep the county moving during the snow and ice storms have contributed to the daunting maintenance situation that now exists.


When a Man (a Lawyer!) Writes About Women
RON BASS ARISES EACH DAY AT 3 A.M. in his sprawling home in Brentwood and starts to write in his loose-leaf notebooks.
And write.
Mr.
Bass writes 12, 14 hours a day.
On weekends he takes a break and writes only eight hours daily.
Three, four, even five movie scripts are in various stages of completion.
"If someone says I'm a compulsive workaholic or I'm doing it for greed or I'm just grinding them out, they're absolutely wrong," said Mr.
Bass, co-author with Al Franken of the drama "When a Man Loves a Woman," which opens on Friday.
"I'm doing it because I love it. Anyone who says things like that should just look at my films."


Ms. Pollitt And Mr. Zaback
Maureen Grace Pollitt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Royal W. Pollitt Jr. of Stony Point, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Martin Zaback, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Zaback of Ashtabula, Ohio.
The Rev.
Patrick Quigley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Cove Church in Tomkins Cove, N.Y.


Correction
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about attracting fashionable crowds to restaurants referred incorrectly to a group of models seated at a table.
They were new models with Next Management, not the Ford New Faces of '94.


Can They Go Home Again?
THE HOMELESS By Christopher Jencks. 161 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $17.95.


What Bankruptcy Mess?
To the Editor:
In "Let the States Deal With Bankruptcy" (Viewpoints, April 10), David A. Skeel Jr. fails to demonstrate how the so-called "bankruptcy mess" will be cleaned up by transferring such cases to the states.
No judicial system will ever be perfect.
The Bankruptcy Court system, however, works remarkably well considering the number of cases filed and the dollar amounts involved.
There clearly have been some abuses, but their number is remarkably small.
That the bankruptcy system works so well is testament to the excellence of the judges appointed since the adoption of new bankruptcy laws in 1978 and the professionalism of the staffs assisting in their administration.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Existing-home sales, Mar., mils., ann. rate
3.83
4.05
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index, April
86.7
87.0
Wednesday
Durable-goods orders, March, pct. chg.
-2.6
1.0
Thursday
Gross domestic product, 1st qtr., pct. chg.
7.0
2.8
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
364
350
Friday
Personal income, March, pct. chg.
1.3
0.6
New-home sales, Mar., thous., ann. rate
649
690
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Two-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
Five-year note auction
Thursday
Bundesbank council meeting


Amid Tight Security, a Colombian Is to Be Tried in Jet Bombing
On Nov. 27, 1989, a Colombian passenger jet exploded shortly after taking off from Bogota, killing all 110 people aboard.
Colombian and United States authorities called it one of the worst instances of terrorism tied to the drug trade.
They said a bomb had been placed aboard the craft in a plot to kill two informers, suspected of being on board, who were cooperating with Colombian authorities against drug traffickers.


Abortion Is Divisive Issue at Population Talks
A contentious preparatory conference on world population policy ended here tonight without agreement on abortion, access to contraception by adolescents and financing, leaving delegates to fight over these issues when they meet in Cairo in September.
For three weeks the delegates tried to finish work on a plan that will serve as a blueprint for international agencies and countries on how to devise programs and channel money over the next decade in an effort so slow the growth of the world's population.
The speeches were sometimes passionate and the debates over wording often tedious, with accusations of unfair lobbying tactics traded.


A Dance That Literally Lights Up
EVERY DANCE PERFORMANCE uses theatrical lighting, but none has explored the interaction of light and movement with such striking originality as "Necessary Weather." Initiated by the experimental dancer Dana Reitz with the lighting designer Jennifer Tipton, this three-way collaboration also involved the dancer Sara Rudner and was two years in the making.
Like so many figures active in the dance avant-garde of the 1960's and early 1970's, the collaborators are as interested in process as in the finished product.
Their means of expression here is strongly formal, concerned with structures, how movement affects the use of light and how light affects not just what the public sees but also what the dancer feels in the light.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Luring More Shoppers To the Lower East Side
A campaign to revitalize the city's original bargain center on the Lower East Side and to reintroduce outlet-bound New Yorkers and American and foreign tourists to the area is well underway, said David Ceci, the executive director of the Lower East Side District Management Association, a nonprofit organization that has been sponsoring the effort.


The Out of Towners Meet the Tooth Fairy
To the Editor:
Crimes of violence against visitors to the Big Apple receive sensationalized publication and broad circulation.
The story that follows portrays a different picture of New Yorkers, and a more complete picture of their character.


In Three Decades, Nixon Tasted Crisis and Defeat, Victory, Ruin and Revival
To millions of Americans, Richard Milhous Nixon was the most puzzling and fascinating politician of his time.
He was a man of high intelligence and innovative concepts whose talents, especially in international affairs, were widely respected by both friend and foe.
Yet he was so motivated by hatreds and fears that he abused his powers and resorted to lies and cover-ups.
Almost constantly in the public eye from the time he entered politics in 1946, he propelled himself into a career that culminated a generation later when he became the first President to travel to Communist China and the first to resign from office.
Over the decades, he evoked conflicting emotions among millions of Americans.


POP BRIEF
R. Kelly: 12 Play Jive 41527; CD and cassette.


A Life Lesson From Wall Street
To the Editor:
The discussion of Lawrence Kudlow's problems in "A Wall St. Star's Agonizing Confession" (April 3) was a great service to readers of The New York Times, many of whom, I am sure, will be inspired to examine their own habits and perhaps change their lives for the better after reading the article.
Sylvia Nasar and Alison Leigh Cowan deserve praise for the sensitive way they handled the story; Mr.
Kudlow deserves the same for having the honesty and guts to come forward.
ROBERT L. DILENSCHNEIDER  Manhattan, April 14 The writer is the head of the Dilenschneider Group, a strategic counseling and public relations firm.


How Gap Inc. Spells Revenge
WATCH OUT, Penney.
Beware, Target.
Take care, local retailer.
At an obscure shopping strip in this San Francisco suburb known mostly for its many cemeteries, Gap Inc. has just opened a new kind of store that might well change the business of selling clothing to the vast majority of Americans.
The concept behind the store, part of a new chain called the Old Navy Clothing Company that is soon to be in 45 places nationwide, is simple.
Shoppers who can't afford the Gap or other such retailers deserve better than the bland, poorly made and often carelessly displayed offerings of many stores with low prices.
Combine the style and quality on which the Gap stores made their name with the low prices and big selection of a Toys "R" Us or a Home Depot, and you will steal this market -- $75 billion, by some estimates -- and become very rich indeed.
Sell to the masses, live with the classes.


South Africa's Long Journey: From Violence to Cooperation
For decades it was a distant dream.
Then for a few years it seemed inevitable.
Only in the closing days has it hit South Africans with the force of an electric charge that it is real.
Over the next few days, a black majority that has grown up enslaved by a white ideology will become full citizens of their own country.
Beginning Tuesday with prisoners and the bedridden, and continuing for two more days, they will vote.


F.Y.I.
I Scream
Q.
To whom do I complain about the terrible noise that comes from the ice cream truck that parks in front of my apartment every day?
Are there any laws against the racket these trucks make with their "music"?


Rich Already Bear Biggest Tax Burden
To the Editor:
Re "This Much Is Clear: Taxes Just Aren't What They Seem" (The Week in Review," April 10):


New Bidding On Coliseum Is Weighed
The chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said yesterday that reopening of the bidding process on the long-delayed New York Coliseum development project might be the best way to insure that development proceeds there.
In a letter to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Peter E. Stangl, chairman of the authority, which owns the property, said his optimism was fading that a renegotiated transaction with Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the developer of the project, could be achieved.


BEST SELLERS: April 24, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
1
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a close friend's young daughter.
3
1
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor, haunted by his father's murder, stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
4
2
89
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
5
4
10
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
6*
3
14
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
7
1
THE COURTSHIP OF PRINCESS LEIA, by Dave Wolverton. (Spectra/
/Bantam, $21.95.) Romance and the balance of power in the "Star Wars" universe.
8
5
25
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.
9
8
2
LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and fun among half a dozen couples.
10
6
54
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
11
7
3
ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.) Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong Kong to China in 1997.
12
10
2
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
13
11
9
THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths investigate a series of catastrophes.
14*
9
7
ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials from reaching North Korea.
15
13
4
RIVER GOD, by Wilbur Smith. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $24.95.) Ambition, greed and romance in Egypt at the time of the Pharaohs.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
50
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
18
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
3
3
8
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician reflects on "life's final chapter."
4
5
7
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
5*
4
6
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo.
6
10
2
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
7
6
6
MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.) The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a Washington Post reporter.
8
7
15
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) Love and relationships.
9
8
21
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
10
9
29
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
11
1
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Ways in which the art of diplomacy and the balance of power have shaped the world we live in.
12
14
35
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
13
15
88
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
14
1
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
15
5
I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard. (Villard, $19.) The late humorist's description of his experience following heart surgery.
16*
11
33
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations by the star of "Seinfeld."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
14
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
2
2
48
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
3
3
FIRST THINGS FIRST, by Stephen R. Covey, A. Roger Merrill and Rebecca R. Merrill. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Ways to organize your life to be successful.
4
3
26
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 9, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BIRTHDAY BOYS, by Beryl Bainbridge. (Carroll &amp; Graf, $18.95.) A lively, subversive historical novel that penetrates the stoic official heroes of Scott's Antarctic expedition of 1912 to discover the individual silly boys within.
E.M.
FORSTER: A Biography, by Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally punctuated by little bursts of liberation.
MASTER OF THE GAME: Steve Ross and the Creation of Time Warner, by Connie Bruck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The inner truth of this amazing entrepreneur may not be within human grasp, but Ms.
Bruck, a staff writer for The New Yorker, makes known what seems knowable.
MESHUGAH, by Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) The third (so far) posthumously published novel by Singer is set in the early 1950's; its characters, despite their high spirits and unstoppable gab, are haunted by stories that can't be forgotten and can't be told.
ONE ART: Letters, by Elizabeth Bishop, edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) A handsome collection of letters from a poet whose output was so small, and so good, that her every opinion and observation is more than welcome.
PAUL REVERE'S RIDE, by David Hackett Fischer. (Oxford University, $27.50.) No rehash of Longfellow but a historian's careful account of the ride and the surrounding events, emphasizing the broad-based, communal nature of the Revolutionary movement in New England.
REBELLIONS, PERVERSITIES, AND MAIN EVENTS, by Murray Kempton. (Times Books/Random House, $27.50.) Pieces long and short by a journalist whose abiding fidelity to the radical impulse and the baroque style has made him as inimitable as he is indispensable.
RUSSIA UNDER THE BOLSHEVIK REGIME, by Richard Pipes. (Knopf, $35.) This painstaking, literate final volume of a trilogy begun 20 years ago reflects its author's long involvement with Soviet policy and scholarship and, like its predecessors, does not withhold moral judgment.
THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath &amp; Ted Hughes, by Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $23.) In the course of a contrarian approach to the Plath myth (genius-housewife crushed by odious male poet), Ms.
Malcolm raises pages of provocative questions about the values, and value, of biographers.
SOULS RAISED FROM THE DEAD, by Doris Betts. (Knopf, $23.) The main event in Ms.
Betts's first novel in 13 years is the death of a child; out of it is spun a deep understanding of grief, of the pungency of Southern small-town life and of the inevitable injuries reality inflicts.
THE SOVIET TRAGEDY: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991, by Martin Malia. (Free Press, $24.95.) Not a work of research but of interpretation, this study aims to reassert the primacy of ideology and politics over social and economic forces in explaining what happened.


April 17-23: U.S. and Haiti; A Little Movement Toward Getting Tough
Critics of President Clinton's Haiti policy got some of what they wanted last week: lots of attention and a few adjustments.
Haiti's exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, said it was "racist" for the Clinton Administration to summarily return Haitian refugees after intercepting them on the high seas.
Randall Robinson, president of a black foreign-policy lobbying group, fasted for nearly two weeks to protest that policy and on Thursday six Democratic members of Congress were arrested after demonstrating outside the White House.


Culling History From Propaganda
Few people probably remember the brief stir caused a few years ago when a historian named David Irving published a book, "Hitler's War," in which he made the extraordinary assertion that the Nazi extermination of the Jews was carried out without the Fuhrer's knowledge.
Mr.
Irving, as Mark Kramer, a foreign policy specialist at Brown University, has argued, was able to make this claim because Hitler used code words to refer to the destruction of Europe's Jews, and he never committed to writing any order to implement the Final Solution.
In the absence of proof that he did know, Mr.
Irving concluded that he did not.
Mr.
Irving's Hitler thesis served as a reminder that even the most tendentious historical views can gain credibility in part because the sources of history can be interpreted in different ways -- or sensationalized or falsified or used dishonestly or ignored.
And so, the frustrating and difficult search for the truth remains just that -- frustrating and difficult.
This is especially true when it comes to plumbing the shadowy depths of the cold war.


Janis Tardy and Gueorgui Pastujov
While living on a mile-long train with acrobats, high-wire walkers, lion trainers, contortionists and clowns, Janis Tardy and Gueorgui Pastujov met and fell in love.
As members of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus (which is in residence at Madison Square Garden through May 1), they travel around America by rail.
Ms.
Tardy, 30, grew up in Fair Lawn, N.J., where the sight of a dancing bear or an elephant would cause a mass evacuation.
A trained ballerina, she auditioned for the circus on a lark nine years ago and is now the dance captain.
She leads acts like the Spanish Web, in which performers in buttercup-yellow bathing suits do somersaults and spins while climbing and descending long ropes that hang from the ceiling like Tarzan's vines.


Ellen S. Schlein, David B. Kostman
Ellen Sunny Schlein, a daughter of Mrs.
Michael J. McCray of Houston, was married there last evening to David Brett Kostman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley J. Kostman of Millwood, N.Y.
Rabbi Roy Walter officiated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel.
The bride, 24, is a sales associate in New York at Valentino Uomo, a manufacturer of men's wear.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
The bride's stepfather is the owner of the McCray Group, a Houston advertising agency.


Soft-Shell Crabbing In the East 70's
CAFE CROCODILE


Andre Watts Helps Group Mark Its 25th
IN several ways, the Mount Kisco Concert Association typifies the kind of grass-roots activity on behalf of the arts prevalent in the county.
Like other organizations, including Friends of Music in Ossining and Performers of Westchester in Ardsley, the Mount Kisco association is run by a board of directors with their sleeves rolled up, and it is committed to offering top performers at low ticket prices.
The association, which caters to families and holds its yearly series at Fox Lane High School in Bedford, keeps its operation going without a paid staff to write grant proposals, negotiate with artists' managers or ride herd over the myriad details of putting on concerts.
The 27 board members are willing to do the work, said one member, Dede Rothenberg, because they share a belief in the group's mission, which she defined as "bringing top-notch performers to our local community" and "building a young audience."


Prehistoric Relics Ride a Roller Coaster
SPURRED BY THE HOOPLA OVER "Jurassic Park," the top grossing film of all time, fossil frenzy escalated to record levels last year.
At trade shows and auctions here and abroad, exotica of all sorts, from dinosaur eggs to prehistoric skeletons, starred as the collectibles of the 1990's.
Then, suddenly, supplies exceeded demands for even the most spectacular of ancient remains and the market fizzled.
Two weeks ago, the majority of the costliest items offered at Bonham's, the London house that has become the most aggressive in organizing such auctions, went unsold during the largest sale of natural history material in memory.
Now the experts are wondering whether the phenomenal interest in some of Earth's oldest and most esoteric objects was a fluke.


Tracey McMinn, Jeffrey Hardy
Tracey McMinn and Jeffrey Phillip Hardy, economists at the Energy Department in Washington, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert Busey performed the ceremony at the National Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Hardy, 26, graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in international affairs from American University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. McMinn of Ithaca, N.Y.
Her father is the dean of the College of Architecture, Art and Planning at Cornell.


Street by Street: Where Social Services Are
All over New York, people complain that their neighborhoods are being forced to take on more than their fair share of undersirable social-service programs.
A major problem - and one that is starting to be the subject of urgent public debate - is that, for lack of comprehensive clearinghouse for information, agencies make plans without knowing if others intend to open programs in the same area.
It was only on April 15 that city and state officials finally agreed to start a database of all city and state social service programs.
Until that computer inventory is completed, the most comprehensive look at the distribution of social services, at least in Manhattan, might be a new map prepared by the Manhattan Neighborhood Coalition.
It merges more than a dozen lists of public and private social service sites and other drug treatment, residential care and correctional programs in the borough, ranging from barely noticeable food pantries to large homeless shelters.


The Great Peddler Wars
Since the late 1800's, the city has tried to regulate peddlers, who jammed areas such as Orchard Street on the Lower East Side and Ninth Avenue between 38th and 42d Streets, once known as Paddy's Market.
But from the beginning, the permitting process has been ignored by thousands and abused by others, who have bought hundreds of licenses to equip their own small armies, illegally creating vending empires.
There are currently 853 licenses awarded to vendors of general merchandise by the Department of Consumer Affairs and about 3,000 licenses for food vendors, who are regulated by the Department of Health.


Michelle Breslaw and Scott Bellin
Michelle Beth Breslaw, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome S. Breslaw of New York, was married last evening to Scott Jeffrey Bellin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald H. Bellin of Framingham, Mass.
Rabbi Tom Weiner performed the ceremony at Old Oaks Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Bellin, 26, teaches kindergarten at Public School 116 in Manhattan.
She and her husband graduated from Syracuse University and she received master's degrees in elementary education and reading from Hunter College.
Her father is an internist and gastroenterologist in New York and the secretary-treasurer of the medical board at Beth Israel Hospital.
Her mother, Madeline S. Breslaw, is her husband's office manager.


Sound Bytes; A New Power in Publishing
MORE than a decade ago Brewster Kahle left the relative quiet of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's artificial intelligence laboratory to help found the Thinking Machines Corporation in Cambridge, Mass., which designs some of the world's most powerful computers.
But for Mr.
Kahle (pronounced KALE), it wasn't enough to simply compute quickly; he wanted to apply supercomputing power to the problem of "information overload."


One Last Slice: The End Nears For Pizzeria
Along a strip dominated by Barnes &amp; Noble, the Gap, trendy bars, bistros and big chains, a hardcore group of pizza lovers is mourning the imminent death of a tiny, but revered, institution: a pizzeria whose owner knows many of them by name.
After 36 years, rising rents are forcing Tom's Pizzeria and Restaurant, a modest 800-square-foot kitchen at Columbus Avenue near 85th Street, to close.


Tenacious and Abundant: A Guide to the Cockroaches of New York
GERMAN COCKROACH
Blatella germanica is by far the most common roach in New York.
It ranges from one-half to three-quarters of an inch in length and is brown with two dark "racing stripes" behind its head.
It inhabits humid, hot places, usually kitchens and bathrooms, and shows a preference for the back of refrigerators and stoves.


Mangia!
TREASURES OF THE ITALIAN TABLE Italy's Celebrated Foods and the Artisans Who Make Them.
By Burton Anderson. 318 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $20.


My Search for Donna Delbert
"HAVE I GOT A woman for you!" Bob Lund announced with a procurer's wink, and heaved an apple box labeled "Donna Delbert" onto his kitchen table.
His wife, Elaine, set out a pot of decaffeinated tea with some slices of poppy seed cake and said apologetically that she and Bob had to go "over to the museum to wait for the man to read the gas meter." Now, Bob and Elaine really do own a museum -- the American Museum of Magic, in Marshall, Mich. -- specializing in all the magicians who were not Houdini, but I bet Elaine was lying about the gas man; Marshall is the kind of blueberry pie town where the gas company trusts you to read your own.
No, they were leaving me alone with Donna Delbert's apple box because they knew I would fall for her, and l'amour is a private thing.
When they were gone, I opened the box.
I like touching personal things that belonged to the dead, things I have no right to touch.
As the snow began to fall outside the Lunds' kitchen, I read Donna's letters, stroked her dainty gloves and sniffed the torches she ate fire from.
Then, in an advertising photo, I saw her for the first time, peering from her own plump shadow, her vampire lips in a coy half-smirk under plucked, painted eyebrows.
She was my kind of woman, a creature of the night.


HAVE A NICE BREAKFAST
SCENE ONE: He is trying to negotiate their West Side apartment before she does, but both have overslept.
His first cup of coffee (sipped over the kitchen counter) is leftover microwave.
He mutters inaudibly while he makes a fresh batch.
She sleepwalks in, fixes a glass of orange juice and a bowl of oat bran with skim milk and wanders vaguely off toward the bedroom.
He tries to pour himself some juice, but the carton is empty.
He pops a frozen waffle into the toaster, then eats it lukewarm en route to the shower.
Not a word, not a gesture has passed between them.
Eventually, both are dressed and speaking, but they do not sit down and they do not so much make conversation as find it ambushing them.
Such words as they do exchange hover on blame: of her mismanagement of the juice department; of his lack of help; of whoever is responsible for accepting the invitation to the dinner neither wants to attend that evening -- and so on up to and including the usual rehearsal of the flaws of each other's upbringing, competence and humanity.


In Wake of Victory, a Reluctant Champion
Michael Moorer is the new heavyweight champion of the world, but he was thinking today of how nice it would be to quit.
Still partly concealed behind his ever-present dark glasses, Moorer disclosed a side he has kept from the public through much of his career.
It is a career that peaked Friday night when methodically, but also in furious bursts, he wrested away Evander Holyfield's two heavyweight crowns with a majority decision.


Shortchanged By Philanthropies
Long Island has long been the stepchild to New York City in its lack of funding sources.
And those sources that are here many times focus on New York City.
All Long Islanders need to realize the importance of philanthropic activity for the benefit of Long Island.
Imagine what our lives would be like with no nonprofit organizations.
The arts, higher education, health and human services would all be limited, if nonexistent.
Nonprofits and the services they provide humanize our lives.
Let's hear it for those who do support Long Island.
And those who don't, remember, home is where the heart is.
PENNY DOYLE Director of Development Hospice of the South Shore Bay Shore


A Street Vendor's Harried Day
It was not quite noon when Gopal Saha, Mobile Food Vendor No. 18575, made his first sale of the day: a $2 Haagen-Dazs Cookie Dough Dynamo sandwich.
"Looking good," he said, stuffing the two already-crinkled bills deep in a blue jeans pocket.
In another 20 or 30 minutes, the crowd swirling past his pushcart on West 49th Street in Rockefeller Center would swell to three or maybe even four abreast on the sidewalk.
Potential customers all.
Suddenly, Mr.
Saha's worst nightmare began to come true.
"The alphas are coming," yelled the hot-dog vendor down the block.
That is street-seller argot for the police, who have begun a crackdown on food carts in congested midtown neighborhoods the city has declared off limits.


No Headline


A Sunny Place for Shady People
COTE D'AZUR Inventing the French Riviera.
By Mary Blume.
Illustrated. 208 pp.
New York: Thames and Hudson.
Paper, $14.95.


POSTINGS: Next to the L.I.R.R. Tracks; Five 2-Family Houses For Kew Gardens
When a Manhattan lawyer named Albon Platt Man bought 400 acres of farmland in Queens in 1869, he laid out a model garden community that he called Richmond Hill, after the section of London.
In 1909, when train service began on the Long Island Rail Road, the northerly section of the Man property was renamed Kew Gardens, also after a section of London.
Most of the land in Kew Gardens was developed for one-family detached houses on large lots, but now one of the last vacant parcels is being developed for five two-family houses, three of which are fully detached and two of which are semi-attached end units.
The lots are 25 feet by 100 feet.


BENEFITS
Larry King, Live in Brooklyn  TODAY -- Larry King, the television interviewer who grew up Brooklyn as the the son of Russian immigrants, returns to his roots at a benefit for the resettlement of Jews from the former Soviet Union.
The black-tie event, sponsored by the UJA-Federation, will be at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center, 60 West End Avenue in Brooklyn.
Cocktails start at 5 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $625, from (212) 836-1101.
For the Children of Haiti  TODAY -- The works of 20 Haitian artists will be on sale at a benefit for Forgotten Children of Haiti, a group of volunteers that raises money for an orphanage and a children's hospital in Haiti.
The sale will be from 12:30 to 5 P.M. at Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church, 86-45 Edgerton Boulevard at 178th Street, off Hillside Avenue in Jamaica, Queens.
There is no admission charge, but donations are welcome.
Information: (718) 739-0880.
New Museum Fund-Raiser  TODAY -- The New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway near Houston Street, will hold a black-tie benefit that will include an auction of 160 works.
The event will begin at the museum at 5 P.M. with cocktails and the auction.
Dinner and dancing will follow, from 8 P.M. to midnight, at the Rainbow Room in Rockefeller Center.
Tickets, $350, or $100 for the cocktail reception and auction alone, from (212) 219-1224.
Guarding Free Expression  MONDAY -- Maurice Sendak, Studs Terkel, Judith Viorst, Jules Feiffer, Ken Follett, Christopher Durang and other writers will present vignettes about recent struggles against censorship at a benefit for the National Coalition Against Censorship.
The event will be in the Delegates' Dining Room at the United Nations starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Dinner and the presentations will follow.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 807-6222.
Dramatic Reunion  MONDAY -- The 25th anniversary of the founding of the drama division at the Juilliard School will be celebrated at a black-tie dinner and a performance by several of the division's first students, including Kevin Kline, Kelly McGillis and Patti LuPone.
The performance, written by the playwright Wendy Wasserstein, will be at the school, in Lincoln Center, at 7:30 P.M.
Dinner and dancing will follow at the New York State Theater.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 838-2660.
Evening at the Library  MONDAY -- The Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, will hold its annual black-tie fund-raising event starting with cocktails at 7:15 P.M.
There will be a recital by the baritone Thomas Hampson, followed by a dinner in the museum's Garden Court.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 685-0008, extension 360.
Funds for Cancer Research  MONDAY -- The Cancer Research Institute will set aside money from its annual spring benefit to help scientists doing research in cancer immunology.
The event at the Copacabana, 617 West 57th Street, will start with cocktails at 6 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 688-7515.
Big Brothers/Sisters Party  MONDAY -- Big Brothers/Big Sisters of New York City, which provides companionship and role models for needy youngsters, will hold its 15th annual Sidewalks of New York Awards Dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins; J. Carter Bacot, chairman and chief executive of the Bank of New York; Franklin A. Thomas, president of the Ford Foundation, and Paula Zahn, the co-anchor of "CBS This Morning," will be honored.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 686-2042.
Professional School's Award  MONDAY -- Brooke Astor will be honored at the annual spring benefit for the Professional Children's School.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. at the Manhattan Center, 311 West 34th Street, will be followed by dinner, a performance by the school's children and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 582-3116.
Service Center Anniversary  MONDAY -- Mark Green, New York City's Public Advocate, will be the guest speaker at the 35th-anniversary benefit for the Lower Eastside Service Center, one of the city's largest drug and mental health treatment centers.
A reception at 6:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment at Jing Fong Restaurant, 20 Elizabeth Street, south of Canal Street.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 233-5372.
Party and a Show House  MONDAY -- The Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club will hold its annual decorator show house and reception from 6 to 8 P.M.
Guests can move from the specially decorated Sara Delano Roosevelt House at 47 East 65th Street to the reception at the Americas Society, 680 Park Avenue at 68th Street.
Tickets, $125, from (718) 893-8600.
Musical Theater Benefit  TUESDAY -- Musical Theater Works, which develops new writers and musicals, will hold a 6 P.M. dinner at Sardi's, followed by the 8 o'clock performance of "Beauty and the Beast" at the Palace Theater.
Tickets, $190, or $150 for the show alone, from (212) 677-0040.
Margaret Thatcher Honored  TUESDAY -- Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain will receive the Simon Wiesenthal Center's Humanitarian Laureate at the center's annual dinner, at the Marriott Marquis.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner and the presentation.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 370-0320.
Symphony for a Symphony  WEDNESDAY -- Stephen Hartke's Symphony No. 2 will be performed by the Riverside Symphony, which will also benefit from the evening.
The 8 P.M. performance at Alice Tully Hall will be followed by a champagne reception.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 864-4197.
Jessye Norman Concert  WEDNESDAY -- The soprano Jessye Norman will give a benefit performance for Lincoln Center Productions at Avery Fisher Hall.
Champagne and dinner on the Grand Promenade at 5:30 P.M. will be followed by the concert at 8.
Tickets, $750, from (212) 875-5460.
N.Y.U.
Hospital Benefit  WEDNESDAY -- A 6 P.M. buffet at Shun Lee West, 43 West 65th Street, followed by a performance of "Carousel," at 8 o'clock at the Vivian Beaumont Theater, will benefit the Tisch Hospital auxiliary at the New York University Medical Center.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 263-5040.
Brooklyn Museum Ball  WEDNESDAY -- The annual black-tie ball for the Brooklyn Museum will honor Thomas G. Labrecque, chairman and chief executive of the Chase Manhattan Bank.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing in the museum's Beaux-Arts Court.
Tickets, $250, from (718) 789-2493.
Aid Society's 140th Year  THURSDAY -- The Children's Aid Society will celebrate its 140th anniversary with a black-tie benefit at the Pierre.
Cocktails will start at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing until 1 A.M.
Tickets, $500, or $100 for people under 40 for cocktails and dancing starting at 8 P.M., from (212) 949-4934.
Helping New York's Children  THURSDAY -- Graham-Windham Services to Families and Children, which provides programs for 6,000 children in the New York City area, will hold its annual spring benefit at the Plaza.
The black-tie event starts at 7 P.M. with cocktails, followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Tickets, $325, from (212) 529-6445, extension 318.
Restoring Sight  THURSDAY -- Betty Comden and Adolph Green will perform some of their show tunes at a cocktail party at Doubles in the Sherry-Netherland Hotel.
The event, from 6 to 8 P.M., will benefit the Eye-Bank for Sight Restoration, an eye-transplant agency that has helped restore sight to 37,000 people.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 980-6700.
Women's Health Education  THURSDAY -- The Women's Health Education Project, an organization based in East Harlem that provides information on holistic and other alternative health remedies in workshops in shelters throughout the city, will hold its third annual fund-raising party.
There will be a buffet and an open bar from 6 to 8:30 P.M. at the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street between Broome and Grand Streets.
Patty Larkin, a singer, will entertain, and Evelyn C. White, a reporter for The San Francisco Chronicle and the editor of "Black Women's Health Book: Speaking for Ourselves," will speak.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 987-0066.
Human Rights Watch  THURSDAY -- Human Rights Watch, a New York-based group, is sponsoring an international film festival, which will open with the premiere of "China: Moving the Mountain" at Loews 19th Street East Theater, 890 Broadway.
The 7 P.M. show will be followed at 8:30 by dinner at the 200 Fifth Club, 200 Fifth Avenue at 23d Street.
The festival will run from Thursday through May 12 at Loews Village Theater VII, Third Avenue at 11th Street.
Opening night tickets, $150, from (212) 972-8400.
Antiques in White Plains  THURSDAY -- The Westchester Preservation League and the Westchester Housing Fund will benefit from a preview of the White Plains Antiques Show, where 85 dealers will be exhibiting.
The benefit reception from 6 to 9 P.M. will be at the Westchester County Center, at the intersection of Routes 100 and 119 in White Plains.
Tickets, $35, from (914) 593-2492.
Benefit for Cancer Center  THURSDAY -- To raise money for a new $47 million clinical cancer center, the Presbyterian Hospital will hold a black-tie dinner-dance at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, will be the guest of honor and Liza Minnelli will entertain.
Cocktails at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 972-2268.
Fund-Raiser for AIDS Group  THURSDAY -- The People With Aids Health Group will benefit from a 6 P.M. cocktail party at Club USA, 218 West 47th Street, and an 8 o'clock performance of "Sally Marr and Her Escorts" at the Helen Hayes Theater.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 255-0520.
Dance and a Reception  THURSDAY -- Hilary Easton &amp; Company will present a benefit dance performance at St.
Mark's Church, 10th Street at Second Avenue, at 8:30 P.M.
A reception will follow from 10 to 11 P.M. at Flamingo East, 219 Second Avenue near 14th Street.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 366-5747.
New Theatrical Home  FRIDAY -- The New Group Theater Company will hold its annual spring benefit in its new home at the John Houseman Studio Theater, 450 West 42d Street.
A 6:30 P.M. champagne reception will precede the 7 P.M. performance of Stephen Starosta's "Undertakers" and will be followed by dinner.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 967-4900.
Patching New York  FRIDAY -- Friends of Project One City, a group of young civic-minded volunteers who are part of the Citizens' Committee for New York City, will hold a benefit to raise money for neighborhood groups.
From 9 P.M. to 2 A.M., there will be dancing, hors d'oeuvres and an open bar at the Puck Building, Lafayette and Houston Streets.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 989-0909, or $60 at the door.
Rooftop Flower Show  FRIDAY -- A cocktail party and preview of the 46th annual Gramercy Park Flower Show will be held on the rooftop terrace of the Gramercy Park Hotel, on 21st Street at Lexington Avenue.
The preview party, from 6 to 8 P.M., will benefit the Gramercy Neighborhood Association.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 673-4652 or (212) 725-2755.
Helping Babies With Cancer  FRIDAY -- The Pediatric Cancer Foundation will benefit from a black-tie dinner-dance at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $300, from Richard Siegler at (212) 806-5400.
Children's Art Carnival  SATURDAY -- An exotic-food festival, with some 200 cooks preparing dishes like jambalaya, collard greens and ham shanks, and including jazz and dancing, will be held from 5 to 9 P.M. at South Hall at the Riverside Church on Riverside Drive near 120th Street.
The event will benefit the Children's Art Carnival, a Harlem group that introduces young people to the arts.
Jessye Norman will be the host.
Tickets, $45, or $50 at the door; $20 for children under 12.
Reservations: (212) 234-4093.
Yivo and Theater Benefit  NEXT SUNDAY -- Ben Vereen, Robert Klein, Leonard Nimoy, Mike Burstyn, Daisy Egan and Sherry Glaser will perform in "The Grandparent Connection" to benefit the Yivo Institute for Jewish Research and the Circle in the Square Theater.
The 5:30 P.M. production at the theater, on 50th Street just west of Broadway, will explore the relationships between two generations.
Champagne and hors d'oeuvres follow the presentation.
Tickets, $250, and $100 for children 16 and under, from (212) 307-2700.
Jazz in Four Lofts  NEXT SUNDAY -- Some 35 jazz musicians and singers will perform in four loft spaces at 1200 Broadway near 29th Street starting at 5 P.M.
A buffet supper will be served as guests wander about the lofts.
The event will benefit Doing Art Together, which provides art education for children, parents and teachers in inner-city schools and in social service centers.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 879-5500, extension 3179, or at the door.
Meet 'Mrs.
Piggle-Wiggle'  NEXT SUNDAY -- Parents and children may see a preview of "Mrs. Piggle-Wiggle," a television series to start on Showtime in June.
The 30-minute presentation, at 2 P.M. at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, 65th Street at Amsterdam Avenue, benefits Broadway Arts Theater for Young Audiences.
A reception follows with the series' executive producer, Shelley Duvall, and its star, Jean Stapleton.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 245-4680, extension 323.
City Ballet Family Matinee  NEXT SUNDAY -- The New York City Ballet's first Sleeping Beauty Family Benefit for the dance company will start with a 1 P.M. performance of the Peter Martins production of the ballet.
A backstage visit and a party follow the performance.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 870-5585.


Humble Watercress in Fancy Settings
IN England, when the first buds of spring were beginning to open, we used to gather the watercress that grew wild in the streams running through the Dorset fields around our house.
But I haven't found a place I feel quite safe doing that nowadays, because so many of our rivers are polluted, so I buy it instead.
But spring still makes me think of watercress, especially watercress soup, which we used to make with leeks and potatoes and a great deal of Dorset cream.
Recently, I came upon a delightful recipe for watercress soup made with oysters.
They are poached with their liquor in a light cream and white wine base in which the watercress is briefly cooked, too.


For Power Tools, Be Prepared to Take Apart the Motor
MOST home power tools are used just occasionally, and years may elapse before problems develop.
But to prevent an electric drill's quitting when atop a ladder or a circular saw's going through a sheet of plywood, there are maintenance hints.
Always be sure that the tool receives full power.
Use an adequate extension cord, with 12-gauge wires.
Do not use a cord with smaller 14-gauge wires, even if it is labeled heavy duty.
Never use an ordinary household extension cord.
Inadequate power causes motor parts to overheat, eventually ruining them.


Julia A. Boss, Charles Knapp
Julia Anne Boss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William L. Boss of Seattle, was married yesterday to Charles Norman Knapp, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Knapp of Coral Gables, Fla.
The Rev.
John Andrew performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.


Rioters Attack Ethnic Chinese In Indonesia
Anti-Chinese riots in Indonesia have led to one death and have alarmed Government and business leaders who fear that the violence could spread to other parts of the vast Southeast Asian nation, which has an economy dominated by ethnic Chinese families and a work force consisting mainly of ethnic Malays.
The riots began more than a week ago in Medan, Indonesia's third largest city, paralyzing the area for several days as thousands of laborers took to the street, demanding higher wages and an explanation for the mysterious death last month of a union activist.


Cabby, 19, Slain 4 Days Into Job
A 19-year-old who started working as a livery cabdriver last week was found shot to death yesterday morning inside his taxicab, parked in the East Village with the engine still running, the police said.
The driver, Francisco Minaya, a resident of the Lower East Side, was the sixth cabdriver to be killed in the city this year, all of them livery drivers, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.
Although robbery is strongly suspected, he said, the police do not know how much money, if any, was taken.


Can South Africa Do It? No. Yes.
ONE by one the states of Africa have been liberated from white oppression only to fall into new oppressions of their own making -- tyranny, civil war, wretchedness.
The failures elsewhere in Africa haunt the birth of a free South Africa.
The question that preoccupies many whites and not a few blacks as they approach the country's first free elections this week is whether, after the euphoria is over, South Africa will decline into the division and misery that seem to be the curse of the continent.
South Africa is different, answer the optimists, and they are right.
But it is also in some ways the same, counter the pessimists, and they are also right.


Terry Keenan, Ronald Kass
Terry Keenan, a reporter and an anchor with the Cable News Network in New York, was married last evening to Ronald R. Kass, a group vice president in New York with the Masco Corporation, a manufacturer of building products and home furnishings.
Rabbi Robert Rothman performed the ceremony at the National Academy of Design in New York.
The bride graduated from Johns Hopkins University.
She is a daughter of Joseph and Marie Keenan of Albany.
Her father is a retired professor of sociology at the State University at Albany.
Her mother, also retired, was the owner of Career Guidance Bureau, an employment agency in Albany.


A School District United Behind Its Superintendent
To the Editor:
I beg to differ regarding the April 3 headline, "Official's Ouster Adds to Bitterness in Divided District."


4 Are Shot in Manhattan
One man was killed and three others were seriously wounded in what appeared to be a drug-related shooting Friday evening in Morningside Heights, the police said.
Two men on a motorcycle rode up alongside a blue Nissan near West 132th Street and Broadway around 7:30 P.M., the police said, and sprayed the car with gunfire from a 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol.


Coach Tires of Ban That Never Was
Roy Hodgson, the affable coach of the Swiss national team, doesn't mind a joke, even at his own expense.
Although his team qualified for the World Cup for the first time since 1966, he once said, Germany still thought of Switzerland as a yodeling country, not a soccer country.
Now that people are laughing at him, not with him, though, his smile has withered into a tart grimace.
Throughout the soccer-playing world, Hodgson is being lampooned as the Dr.
Strangelove who has banned his players from having sex during this summer's World Cup, lest they be sapped of strength and resolve.


Laura Loveland, Eric S. Kratz
Laura Jill Loveland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon G. Loveland of Port Washington, L.I., was married last evening to Eric Steven Kratz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Kratz of White Plains.
Cantor Jacob Yaron performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Kings Point, L.I.
Mrs.
Kratz, 28, is a public relations consultant in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a first vice president at Bank Leumi Trust Company in New York.
Her mother, Patricia Loveland, is an administrative assistant at the Manorhaven School in Port Washington.


Sports of The Times; On N.F.L. Draft Day, a Son Helps Complete Cycle
TODAY in Park Forest, Ill., members of the Yarborough family -- grandmothers, grandfathers, aunts, uncles, stepbrothers, nieces and nephews -- will sit around their television sets and watch excitedly as the National Football League conducts its college draft.
Ryan Yarborough, the object of the family's interest, will be off to himself -- sweating out the anxiety -- maybe with a friend or two in a Chicago hotel.
The family wanted to throw a draft party, but Ryan, a football writers' all-America receiver from the University of Wyoming, declined.
His rationale was that he had been low-key for all these years, why change now.
Besides, he had to be nervous.


Is Broadway Ready for a Disney World Show?
SOMEWHERE DEEP WITHIN Walt Disney Productions' over produced, 2 1/2-hour (including intermission) "Beauty and the Beast," now at the Palace Theater, the soul of Disney's sweet, modest, 84-minute animated film is crying to get out.
It never does.
It's wearing concrete boots inside the monster body of the Disney organization's idea of what a Broadway musical should be: relentlessly bland, busy, upbeat and robotlike.
Each individual performance, each song and each dance is seemingly programmed by the same computer responsible for moving the scenery and setting off the fun-house special effects.
This "Beauty and the Beast" is the original film clunkily re-enacted at what looks to be great expense, mostly by performers of faceless competence, on sets of sometimes startling ordinariness, in colors that don't offend.
There are a couple of lively specialty dancers, but the choreography wouldn't be out of place at a dinner theater.
There's just more of it here, and more people doing it.
The original Alan Menken and Howard Ashman songs, two of which are still charming, have been supplemented by seven inferior new numbers by Mr.
Ashman and the lyricist Tim Rice.
Their only apparent purpose: to pad out the show so that it overlaps with your bedtime, no matter how old you are.


All the World's a Billboard
To the Editor:
The proposal by Stephen H. Judson to advertise luxury cars in the foyers of concert halls ("Maestro, Hand Me the Sales Brochure," Viewpoints, April 3) fell short of its marketing potential.
If yachts or Cadillacs were crammed into Lincoln Center and the Metropolitan Museum, elitist art could be lavishly financed.
Why not also have the brokerage cadres of Wall Street hand out theater playbills with their own business cards inserted?
And Donald Trump could finance gallery openings with post-structuralist ads for his condominiums and casinos.


At Yale, Nude Trolls And Pigs That Fly
YOU may have heard the story about the professor who asked, "How would you produce 'Peer Gynt?' " and the student who answered, "Do it on the radio." Variations of the response have come up in plays ("Educating Rita") and no doubt in theater classes for a century. (Someone once said: "Get the record.")
It's not that Ibsen's phantasmagorical epic, the theatrical equivalent of a dare, has been wanting in productions since its premiere in 1867, even though Edvard Grieg's "Peer Gynt" Suite is more frequently performed.
One production in Sweden in the 1950's had 106 adults and 120 children in the cast.
A streamlined version at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park (in 1969) starred Stacy Keach, Judy Collins, Olympia Dukakis and Estelle Parsons.


Elisabeth Seldes, Matthew Carnahan
Elisabeth Hall Seldes, a vice president of production at M-G-M Pictures in Santa Monica, Calif., was married yesterday to Matthew McNair Carnahan, a playwright and screenwriter in Venice, Calif.
The Rev.
Judith Meyer, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Adamson House in Malibu, Calif.
Ms.
Seldes, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
She is the daughter of Aileen Patterson Seldes of New York and Timothy Seldes of Washington.
Her father is the president of Russell &amp; Volkening, a literary agency in New York, and her mother is a freelance journalist and author.


Editorial Notebook; A Most Unusual Marching Band
In 1943 and 1944, Army Air Corps cadets training at Yale University marched to New Haven's town green every day behind an extraordinary band with an extraordinary leader, Capt.
Glenn Miller.
It was wartime.
Miller had broken up his phenomenally successful dance band to enlist, and the Air Corps had him assemble bands for its U.S. posts.
Miller picked the best musicians he could get for the band at Yale, which he then proceeded to conduct -- on campus, where his music filled the cavernous dining hall daily at lunchtime, off campus at War Bond rallies and hospitals, on network radio and, starting in the summer of 1944, for the troops in Europe.


Bowood's History
To the Editor: As both an Anglo-Hoosier and a chemist I was disappointed by two omissions from Olivier Bernier's article, "Living in Easy Grandeur" (March 20).
Bowood in Wiltshire, England, was the country seat of William Petty, the second Earl of Shelburne, an early advocate of conciliation with the American colonies.
Later, as King George III's chief minister, he was held responsible for the signing of the Treaty of Paris ending the Revolution on Sept. 3, 1783.
I am surprised at how rarely this event is commemorated or even remembered.
Perhaps we should rename Labor Day (which in recent years has lost much of its Depression-era resonance) in its honor.
The only memorial I've come across is a rather scruffy wall plaque in the Rue Jacob in Paris.


Mixing All Colors
Visionaire magazine celebrates its 'white' issue, at Rizzoli in SoHo, April 13.


Katherine Lee, Steven S. Kim
Katherine Kyung Lee, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jong M. Lee of Sunnyside, S.I., was married yesterday to Steven S. Kim, the son of Evelyn Kim of Claremont, Calif., and the late Kenneth S. Kim.
The Rev.
William Scafidi performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The bride, 25, graduated from New York University.
Her parents own Lee's Discount in Port Richmond and other variety stores on Staten Island.


Brilliance in Color and Pattern
BASKETS by Kiyomi Iwata and quilts by Marilyn Henrion are scintillating visions of color and pattern overlaid with subtle textures.
Although the techniques and tools of these two artists are very different, their creations are personal poems interlaced with fibers.
The baskets, at the Newark Museum, and the quilts, at the Merrill Lynch &amp; Company gallery in Plainsboro, have their roots in traditional food containers and warm covers for the family.
Ms.
Iwata and Ms.
Henrion have transformed such utilitarian functions into esthetic concepts.


Forest Service Is Rethinking Its Mission
In search of a modern mission, top officials of the United States Forest Service recently invited hikers, bikers, loggers, anglers, equestrians, environmentalists and entrepreneurs to a high school gymnasium here and asked how the Government could better serve them as customers.
We are not your customers, several participants responded. We are your owners.


Despite A Rebuff, Hope Springs Eternal
A springtime perennial from Coney Island, which just can't stop nurturing dreams, even in its decline (or perhaps because of it):
More than a decade ago, Horace Bullard, an optimistic Harlem-born entrepreneur, put together a plan to build a giant amusement park.
In 1989 the Board of Estimate approved his plan.
But last month the city withdrew its support, convinced that Mr.
Bullard could not raise enough money to finance his $450 million dream.


In West Harlem's 30th Precinct, The Cocaine Sales Are Wholesale
They come wheeling off the Henry Hudson Parkway and the Major Deegan Expressway, drug dealers, big and small, from New Jersey and upstate New York, from Connecticut and Pennsylvania and sometimes farther south, cruising in to buy cocaine in what has become one of the biggest wholesale drug markets in the country.
Their destination, as well of that of many dealers from elsewhere in New York City, is a little patch of Harlem that became notorious this month as the home of the largest collection of police officers charged with corruption in nearly a decade.


Mandela Tells Backers to Holster Guns and Vows Gun Control
Predicting victory but furious at some celebratory gunfire, Nelson Mandela denounced some of his own supporters as criminals at a political rally today and vowed that gun control would be firmly enforced by the new government that he expects to lead.
"A level of criminality, even among members of the A.N.C., is here," he declared at the opening of a large campaign rally, singling out supporters in the African National Congress who had happily punctuated the sky above the stadium with pistol and rifle fire.


Town And Suburb
WHAT: The Discovery, the new "family four-by-four" from Land Rover, the British purveyor of high-status four-wheel-drive vehicles.
Available just in the last two weeks to buyers in the United States, the Discovery follows a trend among luxury auto makers, including Mercedes and BMW (which recently bought Rover), to offer vehicles under $30,000 for so-called value-conscious buyers.
While Rover's best-known product, the Range Rover, costs upward of $52,000, the slightly smaller Discovery starts at a mere $28,900.
That price makes it competitive with other luxury compact sport utility vehicles like the Jeep Grand Cherokee.
WHERE IT'S BUILT TO BE DRIVEN: The highway, of course, plus everywhere you don't drive your Accord -- through the river, over the woods, across construction sites when no workers or police officers are around.
Land-Rovers are engineered to be supreme off-road vehicles.
The Discovery's promoters say it can climb 45-degree angles and ford streams almost 20 inches deep.
Yank a lever in the very manly center console and you double the pulling power of the V-8 engine; jerk another lever and you lock the differential, to keep power flowing equally to all wheels when you're plowing through deep mud or snow.
The higher the dried mud is splattered on your windows, the cooler you look.


Where Are They Today?
To the Editor:
Stephanie Brush's chart on youthful alienation as depicted in movies  [ "Alienation Isn't What It Used to Be," April 3 ]  neglected to mention the fates of these timeless rebels.
Sure, there are detailed accounts of where these screen symbols made their mark, but little has been said about the future choices that were made.
The paths they took say as much about conformity as about the young, alienated generations they represented.
Where are these tireless rebels now?


Fashion Cuts Loose
A blow-out party to end the second annual New York fashion week, in one of the Bryant Park tents, April 13.


Waxing Serious About the Red Baron
PETER KILDUFF of New Britain is almost a prototype of the home-town boy who stays put.
His parents both worked in New Britain's hardware factories, as he did for a year after high school.
He still lives in the city and today, at 52, he is director of university relations for his alma mater, Central Connecticut State University, which, oh yes, is located in New Britain.
Over the last quarter of a century, however, Mr.
Kilduff, a tall, gangling man who, at least on the surface, seems to take few things seriously, has been living another part-time life -- one so totally removed from his ordinary life that it borders on the bizarre.
He is an international authority on German air power in World War I and perhaps the foremost authority in the world on the Red Baron.


Kyoto
When Emperor Kammu decided to build a new capital for Japan a little more than 1,200 years ago, he had two basic aims.
He wanted to revive Imperial rule by getting away from the powerful Buddhist priests in the old capital of Nara, and he sought to construct a city with that magic combination of attributes that would allow it to flourish for centuries.
Kyoto, as the Imperial capital became known, never obtained political power.
A series of warlords based in other parts of the country exercised the real authority.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LITERARY HISTORY  THE WOMAN READER,  1837-1914  By Kate Flint. Oxford University, $38.


GROWTH OF JOBS MAY BE CASUALTY IN INFLATION FIGHT
With the Federal Reserve pushing up interest rates, a disagreement has surfaced about whether the central bank might be trying unnecessarily to keep at least a million unemployed people out of jobs in the belief that this is required to hold down inflation.
Neither the Federal Reserve nor the Clinton Administration, which has endorsed the Fed's anti-inflation policies so far, would say they were in favor of bolstering unemployment.
That would be damaging politically, and contrary to the job-creation goals of the Administration.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Optioned Mike Butcher, pitcher, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Ken Patterson, pitcher, from Vancouver.


L.I.R.R. Chief's Statements Are Questioned
The inspector general of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority has questioned the Long Island Rail Road president's statements about how much time he spends at his house in Virginia.
The L.I.R.R. president, Charles Hoppe, was accused in a report by the inspector general earlier this month of not telling the truth when he said the weather prevented his return from Virginia during a storm that disabled much of the railroad in February.


Opryland Schedules 700 Country Concerts
"Nashville on Stage," a series of more than 700 country music concerts, will take place at Opryland USA in Nashville from May 6 to Oct. 2.
Alabama is booked to play 105 nights at the newly renovated Chevrolet/Geo Celebrity Theater, which seats 4,000; on the other nights, Tanya Tucker or the Oak Ridge Boys will perform.
Concerts begin at 8:30 P.M.


Japan's Political Soup Is Gaining Some Clarity
Viewed from Washington, Japan's Prime Minister-designate, Tsutomu Hata, who is scheduled to take office tomorrow, has plenty of crises on his hands: a $60 billion trade surplus with America, North Korean neighbors with a penchant for nuclear weapons and an economic reform program that has drifted to a halt.
Seen from Tokyo, though, Mr.
Hata's coalition faces a far more urgent problem: office space.
Over the last two weeks, as Japan's second political Big Bang in a year blew apart existing parties, so many new political groupings formed that Parliament ran out of rooms to accommodate all of them.
By latest count, there were 12 parties or parliamentary groups in the lower house, the highest number since 1948.


DID I PLAGIARIZE HIS LIFE?
Attacking David Leavitt's right to imagine a story based on a real event is tantamount to attacking the act itself.
While it isn't surprising to find that kind of behavior from, say, Truman Capote's former society friends, or from the con artist whose story provided John Guare with the seed of the idea that would become "Six Degrees of Separation," it is almost unbearably depressing to hear it come from a writer.
Stephen Spender should be ashamed of himself.
SAMUEL BERNSTEIN New York, N.Y.


Fulfillment, Even in Later Life, at the Keyboard
WITH their fingers frozen in midair and their faces contorted as if a dentist's drill were about to invade their mouths, eight adults sat waiting for a nun's command.
"All right," Sister Miriam Cecile Lenehan told the group.
"We're going to play 'Mary Had a Little Lamb,' and we're going to use two hands -- at the same time."
Two hands?
That meant a chord!
And most had just discovered notes.
"The first night I learned where C was," Jackie Merklin of Seaford whispered on her third night of piano lessons.
"I never knew that's where C was."


Norman Kline to Retire As the Emelin's Director
AUDIENCES at the Emelin Theater here may not know it, but Norman Kline has been watching them.
The man most closely associated with the theater's growth over the last 21 years knows who was sitting in the hall, how their children do in school and what they whisper in the supermarket the morning after a show.
Mr.
Kline, who has been the theater's producing director and managing director since it was founded in 1973, is the kind of administrator who handles all the programming, attends nearly every performance and says, "If you're cold, I'll give you a sweater." No wonder, then, that Mr.
Kline has decided to shift his perspective away from the minutiae of theater life to its core: playwriting and directing.


Life Without The Wriggling
THE SUMMER HOUSE A Trilogy.
By Alice Thomas Ellis. 339 pp.
New York: Penguin Books.
Paper, $9.95.


V. S. Naipaul in Search of Himself: A Conversation
THE life and art of V. S. Naipaul are an interlocking series of journeys.
The longest and the most difficult was his first.
In 1950, just before he turned 18, he ventured from the New World to the Old World, from Trinidad, where he was born -- the grandson of emigres from India -- to England, where he had a scholarship at Oxford University.
Eventually he became a writer with a world perspective, and he has never stopped traveling.
These travels have inspired 22 books of fiction, history and commentary.
At 61, Vidiadhar Surajprasad Naipaul is a self-remade man, a distinguished man of letters with a penetrating view of life, and of his life, as a source for literature.
As he says: "One isn't born one's self. One is born with a mass of expectations, a mass of other people's ideas -- and you have to work through it all."
For Mr.
Naipaul, his new book, "A Way in the World" (to be published next month), is, in the Proustian phrase, a "pilgrimage of the heart." It represents the author's search for selfhood and for an understanding of the effects of inheritance.
In this highly personalized narrative, he looks back at his books and relives the creative process in a new form.
"A Way in the World" is, he says, "a settling of accounts for me with myself," for what he regards as errors of artistic judgment.


IS MISPLACING YOUR GLASSES ALZHEIMERS
IN LITTLE MORE THAN A DECADE, ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE HAS moved from an obscure and supposedly rare condition to become the nation's fourth-leading cause of death.
The disease slowly but relentlessly eviscerates a lifetime of memories, destroying brain cells and blocking communication from one cell to another.
It eventually erases all that makes a person alive, unique and human.
A recent Gallup Poll found that one of every three Americans now knows someone who has it and that nearly 50 percent worry about developing it themselves.
The disease afflicts four million people, and family after family has a sad story to tell about it.
Harriet H., for example, says she did not understand her husband's condition until the night they gave a dinner party at their suburban Washington home.
"It was a very nice evening; we all had a wonderful time," she says.
"And then as people were getting ready to leave, my husband put on his coat to leave with them. He didn't know he was in his own home."


The Case For 460 Feet
The safety overrun that is being proposed for Runway 13-31 has been described as being like a highway shoulder that would be used only in emergencies.
"You don't drive on it, but you know it's there," said David Plavin, director of aviation at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


A Life Lesson From Wall Street
To the Editor:
Lawrence Kudlow's addictions evoke sympathy and admiration for his courage in revealing them to the public.
However, I cannot help thinking of all the sweeping budget cuts he has passionately recommended over the years and how many addiction treatment programs were thrown overboard as part of those cuts.
Many people as deserving of treatment as Mr.
Kudlow have been frozen out of such programs and will not have the small comfort of sympathetic articles in the newspaper.
HOWARD L. REITER  Coventry, Conn., April 4  The writer is a professor of political science at the University of Connecticut.


Train Whistles and Tributes Resound at the Nixon Library
In the tiny white clapboard house where Richard M. Nixon was born 81 years ago, his tape recorded voice can still be heard, filled with love and longing for his parents, accompanied by the sounds of the train whistles that he said called him out to the challenges and adventures of the wider world.
In the spacious library that was built beside it after his Presidency, his image continues timelessly on television screens, delivering his "Checkers" speech, debating John F. Kennedy, answering questions on an interactive video, always explaining, insisting, justifying, as he did throughout his long political career and in nine books.


Black Aviation Group Encourages Youths' Dreams of Careers in Flying
YEARS ago, Gail L. Thompson and Paul Mitnaul both dreamed of becoming airline pilots.
And both did learn to fly, with Ms.
Thompson qualifying in small planes and Mr.
Mitnaul earning his wings -- and medals for valor -- as a fighter pilot in World War II.
But they abandoned their dreams, mostly because both people happen to be black.


For Power Tools, Be Prepared to Take Apart the Motor
MOST home power tools are used just occasionally, and years may elapse before problems develop.
But to prevent an electric drill's quitting when atop a ladder or a circular saw's going through a sheet of plywood, there are maintenance hints.
Always be sure that the tool receives full power.
Use an adequate extension cord, with 12-gauge wires.
Do not use a cord with smaller 14-gauge wires, even if it is labeled heavy duty.
Never use an ordinary household extension cord.
Inadequate power causes motor parts to overheat, eventually ruining them.


Once Is Not Enough
For 40 years, a Ladies' Home Journal column asked, "Can This Marriage Be Saved?" Now a French magazine asks, "Are You Ripe for Divorce?" That's the headline above one of the Cosmo-style quizzes in Divorce, a new publication poised to capitalize on a French divorce rate that's tripled in the last decade.
One in three marriages now ends in divorce.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  To be a Broadway usher is to be sentinel, parental surrogate, flight attendant.
To Sara Zittel, an usher at the Richard Rodgers Theater, "it's a calling."  NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Michael Somoroff, ad man, is an artist of the hyper-real, capturing corn flakes, potato slices, Campbell Soup at that sheerest instant when they achieve the perfection of the image in the mind's eye.


Baseball Caps And First Amendment
In "Students' Baseball Caps Prompt a Principal to Balk,"  [ March 27 ] , Kenneth Handler, the principal of Mineola Middle School, spells out his policy regarding the wearing of baseball caps.
He states: "Yes, I confiscate hats. I'm trying to teach common courtesies and civil human behavior." Unfortunately, by his policy and his action, Mr.
Handler has chosen to ignore a 1969 U.S.
Supreme Court ruling that 'the Bill of Rights does not stop at the schoolhouse gate."
What a student wears to school is considered to be symbolic or expressive speech -- black arm bands in the 1960's protesting the Vietnam War -- and is protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.
It has been implemented appropriately since then in New York by each Commissioner of Education.
Neither the courts nor the commissioners would make a distinction in this matter between a middle school and a high school student.


Dianne Mitchell, William Martin
Dianne Marie Mitchell, the managing editor of the Rockefeller University Press in New York, was married yesterday to William Gray Martin, the general counsel for the New York City Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Alcoholism Services.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Ms.
Mitchell, who is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from Hunter College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Mabel Mitchell of Armonk, N.Y., and the late Harry Mitchell.
Her mother is the manager of the corporate guest house in Greenwich, Conn., for the Travelers Inc.
Her father was a naval architect at Gibbs &amp; Cox in New York.


Sharing the Noise
At a rate of 1,000 flights a day, the jets to and from La Guardia Airport roar over Queens neighborhoods.
Residents have complained about the noise for 30 years.
In June, the Federal Aviation Administration will begin testing its latest plan for reducing the problem - three new flight paths intended to disperse the noise throughout the borough.
The new flight patterns, which will be in effect for six months, will bring the number of paths to six, said Thomas Boch, a spokesman for the agency.
To make the new paths permanent, he said, would require environmental impact studies.
"We want to capture the summer months and even take a look at how much better things are when the windows close in the fall," Mr.
Boch said.


Streetscapes/The Walker Town House; The Grand Mansion of an Early Black Entrepreneur
UNDER Laurie Beckelman, its chairwoman, the city's Landmarks Preservation Commission has emphasized looking in the city's residential neighborhoods for buildings of architectural or historic merit.
In Manhattan above 110th Street, it has made 10 designations since the beginning of 1993.
A signal candidate for landmark protection would have been the only town house built in Manhattan by an African-American, the 1915 Madam C. J. Walker residence at 108 West 136th Street.
Designed by Vertner Tandy, an early black architect, it was as elegant as any East Side mansion.
But the house was demolished by the city itself more than 50 years ago.


Mr. Frankel Light And Ms. Marks
Cheryl Robin Marks, the daughter of Sondra and Stanley Marks of Long Beach, L.I., was married last evening to Gordon Frankel Light, the son of Sondra Light of Bay Harbor Islands, Fla., and Gerald Frankel of Dallas.
Cantor Rochelle Nelson officiated at the Grand Bay Hotel in Coconut Grove, Fla.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a freelance hair and makeup stylist.
She graduated from Queens College.


Repulsion Is the Attraction
"CITIES OF ARTIFICIAL EXCAVATION," A major show of work by the New York architect Peter Eisenman, will not be coming soon to a museum near you.
Organized by the Canadian Center for Architecture in Montreal, where it remains on view through June 19, the show will travel to Spain and the Netherlands but not to the United States.
Given Eisenman's stature, the oversight is startling but symbolically apt.
For a quarter of a century, it has been this architect's fate -- more accurately, his chosen path -- to remain just slightly beyond the pale.
Obsessed by his place in history but terrified of being pigeonholed, at once covetous and contemptuous of public acceptance, Eisenman, 61, has made a career out of his alienation from conventional practice.
While scarcely an obscure figure, he has attained prominence within the profession by cultivating the impression that he remains outside it, claiming that his work amounts to a sustained critique of what the rest of the profession is up to.
This despite the fact that in the past few years Eisenman has completed or begun a small city's worth of major commissions, including a convention center and an art museum in Columbus, Ohio; two office buildings in Tokyo; a design school in Cincinnati; a theater complex in Atlanta; and a 40-acre housing and commercial development in Frankfurt.


A Lonely Cry From the Smoking Section
SHARON B. is a 44-year-old woman who lives on the Upper West Side and works in television production.
She feels so persecuted these days, so discriminated against and vulnerable that she does not want to be further identified.
I've known her for several years and was surprised at the depth of her anger.
But I sympathize only to a point; Sharon is a smoker, and I am not.
"All of a sudden, I'm a smoker," she snapped.
"I've stopped being a competent, intelligent, feeling woman. I'm identified as a smoker, maybe the last group of people you can pick on and still feel good about yourself."


Inmates' Calls Monitored To Curb Prison Violence
In an effort to curb crime and gang violence in its prisons, Connecticut has begun monitoring all phone calls made by inmates except their conversations with their lawyers.
State officials say the four-month-old program has already paid off, leading to an arrest for drug trafficking and helping to prevent a gang confrontation.


Strong Vote of Confidence For Transit Police Officers
To the Editor:
Please tell Transit Police Officer Brendan J. McGarry that at least one member of the public appreciates what he and his fellow officers are doing down there.
Me.
THOMAS W. STREETER  Brooklyn


A B in His Bonnet


The Havana Hat Trick
My second trip down, a lady in a sequinned bonnet let me in on the hat trick: Charter companies flying the jam-packed Miami-Havana run impose a baggage limit of 44 pounds per person.
But they cannot set a limit on how much the passenger weighs.
So Cubans and Cuban-Americans load themselves with whatever won't fit into the regulation duffel bag: socks, jeans, underwear, shirts worn in layers.
Packages of rice, coffee, flour stuffed into the linings of crinolines; rolls of United States dollars pinned into pockets.
And, to top it off, the hats, lovingly bedecked with little gifts for family and friends.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
103.26
103.50
110.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6892
1.7134
1.5840
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3781
1.3844
1.2617
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4886
1.4715
1.5745
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$371.00
$377.50
$346.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Profile; Antismoking Forces at the Barricades? Bring 'em On!
BRENNAN DAWSON took another puff on her Marlboro Light and thought through a long, smoky exhale.
"What's going to happen next? Wish I knew," she said.
"If I knew, I could plan a strategy."
As hard times go, these may yet be remembered as the good old days for the tobacco industry, with political pressures rising.
The usual chorus of anti-smoking advocates have been joined in loud voice by Federal lawmakers and administrators, eager to increase regulation of the tobacco industry, including advertising, promotion and nicotine content.
And nobody seems ready to back off.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
FOREST HILLS  Austin Street Pulls Out the Stops
The Austin Street Spring Festival is scheduled for today, complete with open-air cafes, children's rides, a small petting farm, musical entertainment on two stages and the offerings of 300 vendors and Austin Street store owners.
There will also be hourlong walking tours of nearby historic sites at 11 A.M. and 2 P.M. (tours start at the Columbia Savings Bank).
Austin Street will be closed from Ascan Avenue to 69th Road.


Bringing Sunlight Indoors
LETTING in the sunshine, and getting a panoramic view of flowers, trees and wildlife, is becoming a popular way to enhance the value of a home while improving its livability.
Though demand dropped off sharply during the recession, sunspaces are now among the more sought-after modifications, according to the February edition of Remodeling News, a monthly trade magazine.
They even outshine screened porches and a finished basement as one of the "most popular remodeling projects," according to the Remodelers' Council of the National Association of Home Builders.


A SENSE OF PLACE
HELLO, Mr., Ms. and Mrs.
New Jersey, and thanks for listening.
This is your answering machine.
As a long over due act of independence, I am going to fulfill your worst nightmare: I'm going to replay all the messages that you absolutely hate the most.
All the unwanted phone calls that clog your answering-machine tape day after day, the ones you listen to endlessly but don't want to return.
Frankly, I'm tired of getting these messages.
Oh, you can't stand them, but I'm the one who actually has to take them, and I'm not taking them anymore!
Think of this not as replay, but as revenge.


Got a Minute?
Call it idle time, relaxation, daydreaming, procrastination, lollygagging or just goofing off -- the hallowed tradition of dodging work for no particular reason other than "to be" may be an endangered pastime.
True idleness, as opposed to goal-directed recreation like skiing or tennis, might be defined as those little windows of solitude in busy days that allow minds to wander the highways of imagination with no specific destination in mind.
Psychologists and sociologists who study the use of leisure time say that these unstructured moments, like taking a walk, gazing out the window or sitting on a park bench, are emotionally vital because they help people sort out life's complications, generate creative ideas or simply regenerate.


Japan Split Over Role in a North Korea Showdown
As Japan struggled to form a new government over the last two weeks, a long-brewing dispute broke out within its fragile governing coalition over an issue that has also seized the attention of the Clinton Administration: if sanctions are imposed on North Korea or a military confrontation develops with it, is Tokyo ready to side fully with the United States?
That question was at the top of Secretary of Defense William Perry's agenda when he met on Friday with Tsutomu Hata, who is expected to be formally approved as Japan's Prime Minister on Monday.
Japanese and American officials provided little detail of the discussion, but Mr.
Perry said after the meeting that he was certain "we would want and we would get full support" from Japan.


Suburbanites Lend Detroiters a Hand


Colonial Affair Surges to Take Excelsior
Two weeks from the Kentucky Derby, the star 3-year-old colts were either resting or priming yesterday for their two minutes of history.
But at Aqueduct, some of the senior stars of the sport were getting a head start on their season of handicap racing, and Colonial Affair gave the most stirring performance of the day when he won the Excelsior Handicap by the length of his neck over Contract Court.
It was his first appearance in the winner's circle since last June, when he won the Belmont Stakes with Julie Krone on his back, and he did it the hard way: After losing six straight starts, two by fractions, he stalked Contract Court the entire way, nailed him in the final strides and stuck his head in front at the wire.


A Clinton Nemesis Revels in the Role
Floyd Brown loped across the graveyard behind his office and slipped into the frat house way he has of describing his take-no-prisoners, make-no-apologies approach to bringing down Bill Clinton.
"We strap on our 'No-Fear' caps and go into the arena," he said.
"Attack! Attack!"
Then he laughed the deep, lingering laugh of a man who loves his work.


DID I PLAGIARIZE HIS LIFE?
The crux of the dispute between Spender and Leavitt seems to me to be a generational one.


From Afar; An Indomitable Man, an Incurable Loneliness
To many Americans born before World War II, the death of Richard Milhous Nixon seemed hardly believable, even though he was 81 years old and film clips had shown him looking somewhat feeble during a recent trip to Russia.
That only alerted older Americans to look for another Nixon comeback.
He had, after all, played an improbably long, large -- sometimes unwelcome -- part in their lives and time, in a public career that lasted for nearly 50 years after he first won election to Congress in 1946.
And he had seemed indomitable (or, to the many who did not love him, relentless), returning again and again to prominence after defeats and a disgrace that would have finished other politicians.


Fossils to Be Shown In New Museum Wing
Fossils are getting a new home at the American Museum of Natural History in New York, with the scheduled opening on May 14 of the Lila Acheson Wallace Wing of Mammals and Their Extinct Relatives, in time to celebrate the museum's 125th anniversary.
The renovation is part of an ambitious project, to be completed in 1996, that will recount the history of veterbrate evolution.
Unlike traditional exhibitions that are displayed in a time line, the new mammal hall is organized in the pattern of a giant evolutionary family tree, with the central pathway through the exhibition being the trunkline of evolution, and branching points representing new developments.


Fertilizing Your Lawn? Look Before You Leap
WHEN the forsythia blooms, so the saying goes, it's time to kill your crabgrass.
Get out there with the herbicides like 2,4-D and pendimethalin to poison the weeds that have had the audacity to trespass on the great American lawn.
Every spring, it's the same story.
I trot out the studies that link lawn pesticides to bird kills, dog deaths and potential carcinogens as well as ground water pollution, and all I get is the hoarse voice of Cassandra.


Evening Hours; Say 'Formaggio!'
An evening for La Scuola New York, the Italian-American school, Guggenheim Museum, April 14.


A Son's Fight Against Death Inspires a Father
In a perfect world, one without heartache and one where all people, especially children, shared in only joyous, tragedy-free occasions, tomorrow night would have been just another chapter in a fantasy season for a pitcher named Mark Leiter.
Tomorrow, Leiter, who attended high school in Bayville, N.J., and college at Ramapo State, returns to the tristate area as one of the surprising success stories in the American League this season.
A former Yankees farm hand and now a member of the California Angels starting rotation, Leiter, one of the few pitchers unfazed by the Year of the Hitter, is undefeated.
He will try to improve to 3-0 when he faces his old team at Yankee Stadium.
Incurable Illness
But life for Mark Leiter is not as simple as a mere quest for a 3-0 record.
Sorrowfully, for Mark Leiter and his family, life has not been that innocent and unencumbered for almost a year.
Not when in the course of that year, a young man and his wife learned that their infant son suffered from Wednig-Hoffmann Disease, or Spinal Muscular Atrophy, an incurable form of Lou Gehrig's disease that strikes children.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Roy Up and Strong  Only hours out of his hospital bed, Patrick Roy made 39 saves last night to key Montreal's 5-2 victory over Boston at the Forum, squaring the first-round National Hockey League playoff series at 2-2.
Roy was hospitalized for two days because of appendicitis, and there were fears he would require surgery, which would have finished him for this series.
But the condition responded to antibiotics and he was released yesterday morning.
Kirk Muller scored twice and Paul DiPietro got another on power plays for Montreal as the Canadiens scored on three of their first five shots against Boston goalie Vincent Riendeau.
A key goal came from Guy Carbonneau in the final minute of the second period after Adam Oates and Ted Donato had closed the gap to one goal for Boston.
Ed Ronan added another for Montreal in the third period.
Game 5 of the series is scheduled for tomorrow night in Boston. (AP)


Purse by Any Other Name
Comment read on the Internet: "Electronic Purse? No real man is going to be caught dead using such a thing. Give me electronic gold or electronic silver."
This bit of macho pique was touched off by the word "purse" in a news release from an international consortium organized by Visa.
The group is developing standards for a worldwide digital money card that would have a computer chip to register how much money it "holds." Users would load the card with money at a bank cash machine and then spend it on gasoline, groceries, food, telephone calls and other items wherever the equipment existed to handle the card.


Q. &amp; A.
Limiting Occupants Of a Co-op Q. I live in a co-op apartment which I own.
The owners of the apartment above me have moved in a number of members of their family and there are now five adults and two children living, and running a business from, what was a modest-sized two-bedroom apartment.
Are there any specific city or state health regulations concerning the number of people who can occupy a given amount of square or cubic footage?
Any special rules pertaining to children?
And is a co-op entitled to set further limits on the number of people who can occupy an apartment of a specific size? . . .
Andrew Frothingham, Manhattan


In the Name of 'Fair Share': Where the Social Services Are


VIETNAM'S WEALTH OF MUSEUMS
THE lighting is dim, the glass cases are dusty, and the descriptions on faded 3-by-5 index cards are typed in quoc ngu, the romanized alphabet that the Vietnamese use for their written language.
These minor inconveniences should not be a deterrent.
Vietnam's extensive and amazingly varied museum collections are a boon for travelers who are passionate about art and artifacts of mysterious lost civilizations, or who wish to acquire local perspective on the events of the recent past.
My museum touring in Hanoi began out of a sense of duty -- streets, shops, and open-air markets were exerting a stronger call.
But one rainy day, during my three-week trip to Vietnam more than a year ago, I took shelter in the History Museum in the center of the old French Quarter with Mr.
Kha, my earnest, inexhaustible guide.
We were the only visitors.
Floorboards creaked, sounds echoed strangely.
The resident curator, who happened to come by, joined us.


Vietnam: Memorabilia of a War Best Forgotten
Nineteen years after North Vietnamese tanks smashed through the gate of Saigon's Doc Lap presidential palace and ended the Indochina War, ghosts of the conflict linger in urban souvenir shops, museums and the bomb craters that still dot the Red River Delta near Hanoi.
Zippo lighters (or Asian imitations) -- adorned with the G.I. adages of the 1960's and 1970's and lost or left behind by withdrawing soldiers -- are briskly traded at shops specializing in war memorabilia in the markets of Ho Chi Minh City.
To Vietnamese, the sayings have little meaning, but appreciative buyers of the lighters are foreigners, for the most part.
Most Vietnamese have little interest in war souvenirs, for the war is something to be forgotten, not remembered.
To some of the farmers of what once was the Republic of Viet Nam, the lighters are reminders of scorched-earth raids sometimes conducted by Saigon's troops and Americans against Viet Cong-occupied hamlets, in which soldiers used Zippos purchased from PX stores to set fire to thatched roofs.


To First Fan's Delight, Deluge of Long Balls Has Yet to Slow Down
The remarkable increase in home runs and runs scored this season has received the White House stamp of approval.
During a Rose Garden ceremony last week, President Clinton let some baseball people know he enjoyed the early-season deluge.


A Touch of Modern Exotica
It was the most daring design of fashion week: a backpack made from leather stretched into the fierce face of an African mask.
You might be wise not to tote the bag on the streets, but Byron Lars's witty, wacky African-inspired show -- all basket-weave headgear and tree-bark colors -- marked a coming of age in New York fashion.
Mr.
Lars is the first African-American designer to dig down to his roots and put the results on a major runway.
He dared to make fun of ethnic origins in a city where most people try to fit into the "gorgeous mosaic" by wearing sneakers, sweatshirts and jeans.


Well Suited
To the Editor:
I disagree with only one item on the chart -- the Fashion Statement made by "Saturday Night Fever." Who can forget the cheap white suit that made John Travolta famous?
DEAN W. HARTLEY  Ravena, N. Y.


Amy B. Terry, David M. Kriegel
Amy Brown Terry, the daughter of Ellen Coleman Terry of Dallas, was married there yesterday to David Michael Kriegel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Kriegel of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Kay Hunter, a minister of the United Church of Religious Science, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Brook Hollow Country Club.
The bride, 25, graduated from the University of Southern California.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at California State University at Northridge.
Her mother owns Ellen Terry Realtors in Dallas.


1 Killed and 21 Hurt in Crash of Minibus
A minibus carrying people returning to New York City from a visit to an upstate prison veered off a highway in the Adirondacks yesterday afternoon and rolled off an embankment, killing one passenger and injuring 21, the authorities said.
The minibus -- carrying the driver and 21 passengers, mostly women and children who had visited friends and relatives at the Adirondack Correctional Facility in Raybrook -- crashed about 5 P.M. on the Adirondack Northway near Pottersville, about 75 miles north of Albany.


He's Wallowing All the Way to the Bank
Aaron Spelling, producer of "Charlie's Angels" and "Fantasy Island," "The Love Boat" and "Dynasty," knows how unkind the critics can be.
When they hear he has created a summer show for Fox titled "Models Inc.," they will jump to all the wrong conclusions.
They will think leggy girls in skimpy outfits.
They will think leggy girls changing out of skimpy outfits.
They will, he insists, be sorely disappointed.


How Natural Cover Shelters Wildlings
AN ode is a kind of lyrical poem written to express exaltation and praise.
Though this column is not such a work, something glorious must be said about the wildflower hepatica, for this is its season.
The flower itself is a delicate source of joy, kind of a woodland surprise.
It is so small, it could be missed by someone speeding around the grounds to check what was still there. (It was.)


On the Road to Myanmar
But much else -- most else, in fact -- has not changed in the Golden Land.
And for that, the world's adventurous travelers should be grateful.


A Pontiac That Shouts While Rivals Whisper
DEAR Sir:
Why does General Motors offer four-wheel disk brakes on so few of its cars?
This is particularly vexing when considering the many virtues of the Pontiac Bonneville SSEi, which has so many desirable safety features and yet uses drum brakes on its rear wheels.


Courtney Love Bows to Convention
KURT COBAIN'S SUICIDE CASTS a bleak shadow over Hole's new album, "Live Through This." Courtney Love, Hole's singer and main songwriter, was Cobain's wife, and together the couple was a tabloid-media dream, complete with arrests, drug problems, sleazy pasts and uninhibited quotes.
Now, there's plenty to be read into the songs Love recorded last fall.
In "She Walks Over Me," a four-chord punk rocker that will remind everyone of Nirvana, she sings, "Hold you close like we both died/ My ever present suicide."
Hole has been transformed in the three years since it released "Pretty on the Inside." Half of its lineup -- Kristen Pfaff on bass and Patty Schemel on drums -- is new, and its guitarist, Eric Erlandson, has toned down.
What used to be a primal, noise-drenched band has veered toward clarity, control and old-fashioned songwriting craft.


Jill M. Haber, Thomas Coffey
Jill Meredith Haber and Thomas Edward Coffey, both editors at New York Newsday in Melville, L.I., were married yesterday in Stony Brook, L.I.
Kenneth Connolly, a justice of the peace in Voorheesville, N.Y., and an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at the Old Field Club.
Mrs.
Coffey, 35, graduated magna cum laude from the State University at Albany.
She is a daughter of Barbara and Walter Haber of Lebanon, Pa.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of the Baldwin (L.I.) Public Library.
Her mother is a travel writer.


Little Rock Journal; A Sport Is Lost, and Maybe a Haven
Thousands of miles from the battles ravaging their homes in the former Yugoslavia, three students at the state university here are waging their own battle to remain in the United States and avoid being drafted and perhaps forced to fight each other.
The students, Igor Prochazka and Vinko Rozic of Dubrovnik, Croatia, and Bojan Simanic of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, are here on scholarships to play water polo at the University of Arkansas.
But in recent days the students, all sophomores, learned that the university's water polo team would be eliminated this fall because of budget cuts brought about by the Legislature's refusal to increase the appropriation for higher education.
Although they can receive athletic scholarships for one more year, the university is searching for other colleges with water polo teams where the three could transfer.


Kenneth Mendelson, Joelle Moreno
Joelle Anne Moreno, a lawyer for the Justice Department's antitrust division in Washington, was married last evening to Lieut.
Comdr.
Kenneth Lee Mendelson of the Navy Medical Corps.
Cantor David Shneyer officiated at the Officers' Club at Andrews Air Force Base, Md.
Ms.
Moreno, 31, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Swarthmore College and the University of Pennsylvania Law School, where she was an editor of The Law Review.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Francisco Jose Moreno of Lakeville, Conn., and Susan Seidler of Brooklyn.
The bride is a stepdaughter of the late Gabriel Seidler.


Richard Nixon
If not the dominant politician of his time, he was surely the most durable.
It thus came as something of a mild surprise, when he died Friday evening at the age of 81, that Richard Nixon had somehow failed to survive time itself.
It is, of course, the multiple offenses associated with Watergate for which Mr.
Nixon is immediately remembered -- the "dirty tricks" campaign, the conviction of so many of his associates for perjury and obstruction of justice and, finally, his own resignation to avoid an almost certain impeachment proceeding.
This betrayal of the public trust remains the granite flaw that forever bars Mr.
Nixon from the pantheon of great Presidents.


Tides of Political Influence Ebb and Flow at the New Jersey Sports Authority
When Christine Todd Whitman ran for governor, she clubbed her Democratic opponent, Gov.
Jim Florio, with charges of political influence at the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
The authority, she asserted, "has become a center for perks and privilege for a growing class of Florio cronies and political hacks -- courtesy of the taxpayers."
Things are changing now that Mrs. Whitman is Governor.


Community Board Meetings in Brooklyn
DISTRICT 1: Greenpoint, Williamsburg; 2d Tuesday of month; next May 10, 7 P.M., 211 Ainslie Street; (718) 388-4440.
DISTRICT 2: Fort Greene, Brooklyn Heights; 2d Wednesday of month; next May 11, 6 P.M.; place to be announced; (718) 596-5410.


Where All Meals Begin With Miso Soup
OZUMO is a space-age Japanese restaurant.
All eyes gravitate to the glitter of this flashy strip-shopping-center spot in Bethpage.
Sedate and serene are words often used to describe Asian restaurants.
But Ozumo, a nontraditionalist, flaunts its modernity.
Its elaborately neon-splashed windows wink at all who pass by.
Inside, the scene is set by a long up-front sushi bar, a bubbling fountain surrounded by plants and walls filled with Japanese dolls and decorations.
Pictures and wall hangings that depict sumo wrestlers dominate.
That is appropriate, because the name Ozumo was described by a waitress as meaning the Super Bowl of sumo wrestling.


The Plea Of Moviegoers
I am certain that I will not be the lone voice in support of Glenn Collins's recent plea to movie distributors, theater owners and sundry other should-be keepers of the flame that would be culture in New Jersey ("A Sense of Place").
Years ago, when I lived just outside of Philadelphia in South Jersey, decisions could be made quite spontaneously to pop into Philly to catch the latest foreign or artsy film at the Ritz 5 of Society Hill.
I could be there in 15 to 20 minutes, complete with parking space and sighting of apres-film dinery.


Sports of The Times; A Champion's Little Corner Of the World
THEY are never listed in the tale of the tape.
They are usually ignored in the hype.
What they do between rounds is upstaged either by a commercial or the banter of television analysts.
But a boxer's cornermen often define a fight, for better or for worse.
And more and more, they are defining the heavyweight champion.
In emerging as the first left-handed heavyweight titleholder, Michael Moorer did what his new trainer, Teddy Atlas, had instructed him to do: use the right jab.
And he responded to Atlas's challenge after the eighth round.


Laura Castaneda, Arthur Buckler
Laura Padilla Castaneda, a business reporter for The Dallas Morning News, was married on Friday to Arthur David Buckler, a news editor in the Dallas bureau of The Wall Street Journal.
Fletcher Freeman, a justice of the peace in Dallas, officiated at the Allen Courthouse there.
Ms.
Castaneda, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Southern California and received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Socorro and Ruben Castaneda of South El Monte, Calif.


A Do-It-Yourself Brownstoner Does the Foreclosure
A GENERATION ago, pioneers of the brownstoning movement on the West Side of Manhattan were buying buildings and putting in their own money or sweat -- usually both -- into upgrading them for their own occupancy, probably with some help from rental income.
They succeeded so well, and values rose so much, that by the 80's it would take a family with a high income to afford to buy such a town house, assuming it had been fairly well maintained.
The family might well be competing with investors planning to hold buildings as rentals, or convert them to co-ops.
Investor interest tends to price out most young families.


Richard Nixon: Petty Schemes and Grand Designs
Some say Ronald Reagan ended the cold war, spending the Russians to death in the arms race.
Others say Mikhail Gorbachev ended it, with reforms that failed, but not before revealing the failure of the Soviet system.
But if one person must be chosen for contributing most to the end of Soviet-American conflicts, my candidate is Richard Nixon.
His recognition of what he called for years "Red China" brought put into the open what had been denied religiously on both sides -- that Communist solidarity was a myth (one on which we based our wars in Korea and Vietnam).
From that time on, the reality grew ever less escapable -- that the Soviet Union was an embattled underdog.
Coping with thousands of miles of border with China, with disaffection in the satellites and in neighbor states like Yugoslavia and Romania, the U.S.S.R. was clearly (in Richard Barnet's phrase) the only country in the world "ringed by hostile Communist powers."


Gay Trips to Europe
Guided package tours to Europe for gay men and women are the specialty of Our Family Abroad, a new travel company based in New York.
Besides visits to cities with large gay populations, the tours are intended to insure a comfortable traveling environment for gay people, said Peter K. Schulze, the company president.


At Work; In Praise of Executive Coaching
WILLIAM P. MILO always thought he did a pretty good job of stroking and motivating his "direct reports," so it came as a surprise when some of his managers at the Phico Insurance Company, a large health insurer in Mechanicsburg, Pa., let Mr.
Milo know they felt unappreciated.
Well, not exactly unappreciated.
"Through further analysis, we discovered they felt praised," said Mr.
Milo, the senior vice president for administration and planning for Phico.
"But when someone does a super job, they feel they aren't treated differently."
Mr.
Milo learned of his very reparable flaw while he was scouting and testing leadership development programs for Phico, in search of solutions to problems posed by changes in the economy and the nature of his business.
His is an industry in turmoil, both from the corporate desire for more efficiency and the country's desire for health care reform.
"Re-engineering's hit us," he said.
"We need to be much more flexible, more customer-focused. We need to get people to be more creative."


Sports, Money, Politics -- A special report.; New Jersey's Sports Empire: New Fields, Hard Times
The Meadowlands sports complex, rising from swamps and garbage dumps 20 years ago, was a perfect antidote to New Jersey's image as a second-rate place with smelly air and dirty politics.
Out of a wasteland where legend said only discarded mercury and dead mobsters could be found, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority mined riches, attracting four professional sports franchises to its world-class arenas.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
DARROW DELIGHTS
Since 1933, when his first cartoon was published in The New Yorker, Whitney Darrow has extracted chuckles and guffaws from millions of people who then looked forward to the next of his more than 1,500 drawings.
During his 50-year career he has also illustrated numerous books for adults and children, and his work has been acquired by museums and private collectors around the world.


IN SHORT: FICTION
DOMESTIC NOVEL  MATRON OF HONOR  By Sallie Bingham. Zoland, $19.95.


There Were Complaints About Q Train Service
To the Editor:
I dispute the assertions made by Transit Authority officials in the April 10 "Brooklyn Update" regarding the absence of complaints concerning the suspension of Q train express service.


The Economy Will Survive Higher Rates
A FUNNY thing happened when the Federal Reserve set out to raise interest rates this year.
The ones they wanted to raise went up only grudgingly.
But others zoomed skyward.
Call it the case of the misbehaving yield curve.
Short-term rates have moved less than the Fed seemed to have wanted, while long-term rates rose more.
Moreover, rates on corporate and municipal bonds have risen more than those on Treasuries.


BROOKLYN UPDATE
*
BOROUGHWIDE: Shortly after the massacre of 29 Muslims in a mosque in Hebron, and the shooting later of Hasidic students on the Brooklyn Bridge on March 1, some Brooklyn Arab and Jewish religious leaders met at Borough Hall to discuss the potential for splinter violence.
Last week, that meeting gave birth to a seminar in Borough Hall, attended by about 100 leaders of varied religious institutions.
This time the purpose was how to combat the everyday crimes that plague them.


A Life Lesson From Wall Street
To the Editor:
It is difficult to find much sympathy for Lawrence Kudlow.
He is just another in a long line of conservative Republicans who preach family values and personal responsibilities but upon further inspection are found to be hypocrites.
Three marriages and a drug and alcohol problem.
I thought drug use was illegal?
Values and responsibilities?
The pressure of capitalism too much?
Don't make me laugh.
DAVID HEGNER  Newton, N.J., April 3  The writer is a high school teacher in Newton, N.J.


Margot Hintlian, Ralph S. Block
Margot Hintlian and Ralph Steven Block, accountants in Boston, were married last Sunday.
Rabbi David Kudan and the Rev.
Richard Messina, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated jointly at the chapel of the Belmont Hill School in Belmont, Mass.
Miss Hintlian is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Hintlian of Winchester, Mass.
She is an associate at Coopers &amp; Lybrand.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received an M.B.A. from Suffolk University.
Her father is the president of the Leavitt Corporation, nut processors and manufacturers of peanut butter in Everett, Mass.


Asweat With Dreams
THE COLLECTED STORIES By Grace Paley. 386 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


One Woman's Fling In 'Shirley Valentine'
ONE might not have imagined that "Shirley Valentine," a one-woman play, would work in a minuscule theater, though, of course, it ought to.
But all Shirley does is talk to the audience (sometimes to the wall in her kitchen, or to a rock when she goes to Greece).
It is Shirley's call all the way, with nothing to turn to but the wall and the rock, and the lady up there had better take the stage for two hours and be one terrific storyteller, for Shirley tells one after another, and the character, a self-effacing, self-described "St. Joan of the Kitchen Sink," is more apt to provide comment than characterization.
Happy to say, the 90-seat Schoolhouse here is the ideal setting for Willy Russell's endemic English work about a housewife who tells the tale about how she bursts out of humdrum Liverpool, turns it into an ode to her Grecian turn at infidelity and finally arrives at a sense of self-worth.


Henry James in the Age of AIDS
AS MAX SAW IT By Louis Begley. 146 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


Fire-Eating Lesbians
It used to be that political street theater was remarkable for its dull lack of theatricality.
Think back to the 60's and students pretending to be Vietnamese peasants.
But the post-modern era has its rewards.
Among them is the acting of the Lesbian Avengers, some of it deadly serious, some deliciously silly.
Fire-eating, their dramatic trademark, grew out of tragedy.
Last year, a lesbian and a gay man, Hattie Mae Cohens and Brian Mock, burned to death in Salem, Ore., after a Molotov cocktail was tossed into the apartment they shared.
A month later, on Halloween, at a memorial to the victims in in New York City, the Avengers (then newly organized) gave their response to the deaths.
They ate fire, chanting, as they still do: "The fire will not consume us. We take it and make it our own."


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
REMEMBERING D-DAY
Four men who were there and a naval history author will speak during a six-day series of free events, "Remembering D-Day: A 50th Anniversary Observance of the Battle of Normandy," at the Monmouth County Library in Manalapan.


By Rail to Monaco
To the Editor: In "Monte Carlo: It's a Rich Experience" by Alan Riding (Feb. 13), the author lists helicopter ($60 round trip), taxi ($70) and shuttle bus ($30) as options for "Getting There" from Nice.
However, there is another option, namely by train, and it is a pleasant alternative indeed.
The fare is about $40 round trip.
The trip takes about an hour on the high-speed T.G.V., which starts in Marseilles and goes on to Italy.
However,
I prefer the regular local train, which costs $15 and takes about half an hour longer.
In some places the tracks are so close to the sea that the spray from the Mediterranean splashes against the train.
One stops at the fabled Riviera towns Cannes, Juan-les-Pins, Antibes, Nice, Beaulieu, Eze and Monaco.
The view from the other side varies from La Grande Corniche, the famed road that parallels the train tracks in some areas, for near-distance views of the hill towns.


A Kill Switch Can Steal a Car Thief's Precious Time
CALL it what you will: kill switch, engine disabler or starter interrupt.
This low-tech device has a simple purpose, to thwart a car thief without the costly bells and whistles of many security systems.
Installers and manufacturers recommend wiring the kill switch to the car's starter.
Before turning the key in the ignition, the driver simply flips a toggle, inserts a plastic key into a connector or punches a code into a keypad.
The toggle can be hidden under the dashboard, beneath the seat or in the glove box.
Push-button switches can be tucked under the carpeting and activated by foot.


The Executive Computer; CD-ROM's: They're Not Just for Entertainment
IF you think kids spend a lot of money on music CD's, hear this: Corporate America spends far more money acquiring business information and research electronically -- whether on CD-ROM or through on-line services -- than the nation's consumers spend on recorded music.
More than $12 billion a year is spent on such business information, and at least $1 billion of that is for CD-ROM titles -- a significant share for a market that, while nearly a decade old, saw scant customer demand during most of that period.
CD-ROM's are computer compact disks (CD) with read-only memory (ROM), meaning they are meant to play back information, not create it.


Clinton's New Foreign Focus
To deal with the Bosnia crisis and his failing Haiti policy, President Clinton has had to focus more intensely on foreign affairs.
Page 4.


When a Buried Truth Wants Out, Is It Real?
SIX men and a woman sat around a kitchen table in Hamden the other day telling similar stories.
All professionals, they talked about raising their families, watching their children grow up to lead successful lives.
Though they might have made some mistakes as parents, they said, overall their kids seemed well adjusted.
But then came the nightmare.


Hot-Blooded Girl Next Door
"I'LL be wearing a pink teddy and my Wonderbra."
This is how Anka Radakovich, the sex columnist for Details, the young-men's magazine, described herself when a prospective interviewer asked that perennial blind-date question, "How will I recognize you?"


Out of Uniform
To the Editor:
Stephanie Brush says Dana Andrews wears a black leather bomber jacket in "The Best Years of Our Lives." No article of clothing ever issued by the Air Force was black.
Andrews's costume was the classic, reddish-brown leather flight jacket, waist length, with brown rayon lining, two button-down patch pockets and a button-down collar.
STANLEY P. FRIEDMAN  Yorktown Heights, N. Y.


Sunset for the Oil Boom And Alaska's Life Style
Living off the lard of North America's largest oil field, the state of Alaska has created a modern superstate unlike anything the world has ever seen -- a sort of boreal welfare society in which people are paid to live and are given a monthly bonus if they make it past the age of 65.
Alaskans pay no state income or sales taxes.
Home mortgages, even for mobile homes, have long been subsidized.
High schools inside the Arctic Circle have Olympic-sized swimming pools.
Some of the most remote bush communities have spanking new roads-to-nowhere, and there seems to be a satellite dish next to the moose antlers in every other home.


On Sunday; Can't Be Sold Or Bought Or Bothered
IN June New Jersey's black voters will go to the polls for the first major election since Edward J. Rollins Jr. boasted they could be bought for the price of a preacher.
Will they turn out in droves, in righteous torrents, churning the anger that Mr.
Rollins provoked into a bold show of black political power?
"No," said Samuel Kelly, as he leaned against a building in South Trenton on a sunny Thursday morning.
"I figure that done passed over."


Rattletrap Tenement Takes on New Meaning
Since it got under way two years ago, the Lincoln Square development project has angered many on the Upper West Side for its plans to create a sprawling "urban entertainment complex."
But for 28 people whose dilapidated tenements will remain like museum pieces in the midst of the complex, the development is not just irksome.


Shortchanged By Philanthropies
"An Effort to Help Children in Poor Families"  [ March 6 ]  points out a major funding challenge for many worthy causes throughout Long Island -- that is, foundations based here often focus on the needs of nearby New York City.
What the article did not make clear is that even foundations which call Long Island home often stop their giving at the Nassau-Suffolk border and do not support important programs anywhere in Suffolk County, where so many Long Islanders live.
As we work hard to meet the significant reproductive-health-care needs of people in Suffolk we know that most Long Island foundations are missing opportunities to support excellent programs that clearly further their goals, with the notable exception of the Long Island Community Foundation, which was not mentioned in your article.
The county line does not stop human need.
Yet desperate and very real people do cross these "borders." Indeed, people often travel great distances, and in a region with inadequate public transportation, seeking help and care they truly must have.


U.N. Blocks NATO's Call To Hit Serbs
In a sharp dispute over the use of force in Bosnia, the NATO allies sought to launch air strikes today in response to the Serbian shelling of Gorazde but were blocked from doing so when the United Nations objected.
The disagreement led to an angry telephone exchange between the NATO Secretary General, Manfred Worner, and Yasushi Akashi, the senior United Nations official in the former Yugoslavia.


Word for Word/Teen Magazines; Read This. It's Just So Totally Freaked Out. I Mean, Go for It, Dude.
Teen magazines have been with us for generations -- perhaps you remember Bobby Sherman pinups -- but now they are experiencing a raging case of growth hormones.
A new crop of mold-breaking publications has arrived on newsstands to challenge the Big Four -- Seventeen, YM, 'Teen and Sassy.
The reason for the ferment is that publishers and advertisers are scrambling to tap the growing market of teen-agers with oodles of disposable money, much of it from their Baby Boomer parents.
The American teen population (13 to 19) increased in 1992 for the first time in 15 years -- it is estimated at almost 25 million now -- and its growth is expected to far outstrip that of the overall population before peaking at 30.8 million in 2010 -- or more teen-agers than were around in 1969 when Woodstock and the Baby Boomers helped transform American society.


Isabel Kaplan, Gary MacGurn
Isabel Jill Kaplan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen L. Kaplan of New York, is to be married today to Gary Steven MacGurn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred MacGurn of San Diego.
The Rev.
Eugene S. Callender, a Presbyterian minister, is to officiate at the Ram's Head Inn on Shelter Island, L.I.
Cantor Charles Korn is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 29, is an executive story editor at the Sokolow Company, a television production company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is an associate director of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company.
Her mother, Patricia E. Kaplan, is a producer at Home Box Office.


Democrats Shun Their Candidate
Booted from power and drained of money, the New Jersey Democratic Party has been trying to mend its sickly image to lure back voters and contributors.
But John L. Kucek is apparently not the kind of candidate the party wants to trumpet as its new vanguard for the mid-1990's.
Because of some embarrassingly slap-dash organizing, the state's Democrats learned late this week that Mr.
Kucek, an outspoken Holocaust revisionist who has been frequently called anti-Semitic, may likely be their standard-bearer in the election for Congress in the 11th Congressional District in affluent Morris County.


Risa Gordon And Eric Siegel
Risa Whitney Gordon, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce E. Gordon of Florham Park, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Eric Scott Siegel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Siegel of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Laurence Groffman officiated at the Crestmont Country Club in West Orange, N.J.
Mrs.
Siegel, 28, is an account executive at Howard J. Rubenstein Associates, a public relations agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is an otolaryngologist in Nutley and Belleville, N.J.


Helen Maher and Robert Brownell Jr.
Helen Dorothea Maher, a daughter of Joan and John Maher of Carlisle, Pa., was married yesterday to Robert Burton Brownell Jr., the son of Claudia S. Brownell of Staunton, Va., and Dr.
Robert B. Brownell of Forest, Va.
Msgr.
Raymond R. Shevlin officiated at the University of Virginia Chapel in Charlottesville.
The bride, 32, is a finance manager at Silicon Graphics, a designer of computer work stations in Mountain View, Calif.
She graduated from Bucknell University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the dean of the Dickinson School of Law in Carlisle.
Her mother is a professor of management at Wilson College in Chambersburg, Pa.


One Man


How Natural Cover Shelters Wildlings
AN ode is a kind of lyrical poem written to express exaltation and praise.
Though this column is not such a work, something glorious must be said about the wildflower hepatica, for this is its season.
The flower itself is a delicate source of joy, kind of a woodland surprise.
It is so small, it could be missed by someone speeding around the grounds to check what was still there. (It was.)


Emily Bingham, Stephen Reily
Emily Simms Bingham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Bingham Jr. of Glenview, Ky., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Stephen Rourke Reily, the son of Mrs.
James W. Reily Jr. of New Orleans and the late Mr.
Reily.
The Rev.
Hill C. Riddle, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
A summa cum laude graduate of Harvard University, she is a candidate for a doctorate in American history at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is a former editor and publisher of The Courier-Journal and The Louisville Times, newspapers in Louisville, Ky., of which her paternal grandfather, the late Barry Bingham Sr., was also editor and publisher.
Her paternal grandmother, Mary Caperton Bingham, is a philanthropist in Louisville.


Humble Watercress in Fancy Settings
IN England, when the first buds of spring were beginning to open, we used to gather the watercress that grew wild in the streams running through the Dorset fields around our house.
But I haven't found a place I feel quite safe doing that nowadays, because so many of our rivers are polluted, so I buy it instead.
But spring still makes me think of watercress, especially watercress soup, which we used to make with leeks and potatoes and a great deal of Dorset cream.
Recently, I came upon a delightful recipe for watercress soup made with oysters.
They are poached with their liquor in a light cream and white wine base in which the watercress is briefly cooked, too.


Political Notes; Nonpolitical Visit to Israel Is a Campaign Oxymoron
New Jersey's Assembly Speaker, Chuck Haytaian, a candidate for the Republican nomination for the United States Senate, might still be millions of dollars shy of overtaking Senator Frank R. Lautenberg in fund raising.
But for this week, at least, Mr.
Haytaian is likely to surpass the Democratic incumbent in miles traveled.
Mr.
Haytaian is to leave on Tuesday for an eight-day trip to Israel that he and his campaign staff say is a long-planned private visit.
Even though no campaign aides are accompanying the candidate and no campaign money is being spent, Mr.
Haytaian surely expects to squeeze political mileage out of his trip.


Alicia Johnston, Martin J. Luber
Alicia Merritt Johnston and Martin Joseph Luber, medical students at the State University Health Science Center at Syracuse, were married yesterday.
Msgr.
Paul Lasch officiated at St.
Joseph's Church in Mendham, N.J.
Ms.
Johnston, 25, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She is a daughter of Drs.
Anne M. Johnston and W. Dexter Johnston Jr. of Mendham.
The bride's father is a technical manager at A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J.
Her mother is the director of immunology at Roche Biomedical Laboratories in Raritan, N.J.


A Judge Says 'Now'; Clearing Cases Against the City of New York
They huddled in groups of twos or threes, muttering nervously, defiantly, tugging at their cuffs, straightening their ties of many colors.
Who was this stranger coming in to tell them, seasoned Manhattan personal-injury lawyers, how to do business?
And indeed they felt personally injured: the judge was from Queens.
"We don't know him; he doesn't know us," said one lawyer, who did not want his name in print because of his business before the court.
"But he has the reputation of being a head-banger, a whip," he said, shuddering.


Proposed Pregnancy Clinic May Be Cut
Alarmed by high rates of infant mortality in some areas, city officials began a campaign about 10 years ago to combat the problem by opening health offices throughout the city to provide services to pregnant women.
Over the years, many of the offices that were expected to help areas with the highest infant mortality rates have either been closed or failed to open because of budget cuts.
Of the 10 centers proposed in the 1980's, only three are operating, in Central Harlem, Mott Haven and Bedford Stuyvesant.


A Tradition Beyond Jazz And Blues
THE FOUR NEW COMPOSITIONS PLAYED earlier this month at a Detroit Symphony Orchestra symposium for black American composers hardly seemed black at all.
Apart from their programmatic aspects -- a narration invoking a black childhood in the 1940's in Donald E. Dillard's "Childhood Scenes"; references to a Caribbean island in Daniel Roumain's "Haitian Essay," a musical allusion to blacks who worked at the 1893 Columbian Exposition in Chicago in Dolores White's "Celebration" -- the pieces were simply examples of various American styles, executed with varying degrees of expertise.
Whiffs of jazz and blues and Haitian folk tunes could be heard, but neither these works nor the fourth piece -- Jonathan B. Holland's "Martha's Waltz," inspired by Edward Albee's "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf" -- attested to a hyphenated identity.
At times it seemed that their composers and the others at the symposium were unified only by their apparent lack of interest in black pop culture.
Defining a black American musical tradition for the concert hall was one of the symposium's preoccupations, and it was difficult not to sense that this tradition is now tenuous.
Although blacks continue to play crucial roles in jazz, blues, gospel, hip-hop and other popular styles, fewer than 2 percent of orchestral musicians and perhaps only a few dozen classical composers are black.
But as Eileen Southern's distinguished work "The Music of Black Americans" shows, a long history of black involvement with the concert hall precedes contemporary affirmative action programs.


Ground Plan for a League of Their Own
FIVE years after retiring from the major leagues, Lee Mazzilli is returning to the ball field.
But in this incarnation the 39-year-old former outfielder -- Maz to his fans -- is coming back as a minor league baseball commissioner.
Standing by the dugout on the Westchester Community College diamond here, Commissioner Mazzilli -- a former player for the Mets and the Yankees -- talked last week about his plans to develop four minor league teams in the county: the White Plains Devils, the Yonkers Blue Bandits, the Mount Vernon Hoot Owls and the New Rochelle Bears.


Kathryn Scarola, Andrew Timpson
Kathryn Noel Scarola, the daughter of Natasha Sylvester of New York and Anthony Scarola of Blairstown, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Joseph Timpson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Timpson of Olivebridge, N.Y.
The Rev.
George Robinson, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Community Church of New York.


America's Falling Asleep
FOR DECADES, I ASSUMED THAT SOME PEOPLE JUST NATURALLY FALL ASLEEP MORE EASILY THAN others and that I was simply on the far end of normal.
I sailed through the day on five hours' sleep and fell asleep at night before my head hit the pillow -- no insomnia for me.
Then up again without an alarm at 4:30.
A regular dynamo!
I also figured it was normal to doze off at concerts or shows, especially if I had eaten beforehand, and to nap during car, train and plane rides, to catch 40 winks after meals or when I sat down to read in the afternoon or evening.
I admit that falling asleep while driving -- which happened to me twice, miraculously with no harm to my vehicle, myself or anyone else -- does not fit into my concept of normal.
But I blamed extenuating circumstances: a filling lunch and hot sun streaming into the car, and a day of skiing, heater on high and three sleeping children for companions.


Walk, Walk, Walk, Walk, Grand Slam!
Todd Van Poppel was struggling to throw strikes.
Any strike.
Any time.
Against any Yankees.
It was a humiliating display as he tried with a fastball, tried with a curveball and then looked toward home in an agonizing manner after four consecutive Yankees barely twirled their bats before dropping them and proceeding to first base.
If Van Poppel's wild streak frustrated the Athletics, those feelings of helplessness increased dramatically when he finally tossed a pitch somewhere near the strike zone that a batter hit fair.
Paul O'Neill, salivating with the bases loaded, walloped a 2-2 pitch into the right-field upper deck for a grand slam and a 5-1 lead.
Bad time to mix in a strike, Todd.


Nets Toast Rout of Bucks While Peeking Into Tunnel
The Nets held a pre-playoff party at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight with Derrick Coleman providing a double-double of 17 points and 12 rebounds and champagne all around for his teammates, who routed the Milwaukee Bucks, 135-100, in their final home game of the season.
But the Nets don't yet know their opening-round opponents.
It will be either the Knicks, in a much-hyped Lincoln Tunnel three-of-five-game series, or the Chicago Bulls.


THEIR TREATMENT, THEIR LIVES, THEIR DECISIONS
IRENE PALUMBO GOT THE TERRIFYING news.
A doctor called to say she had cancer in both breasts.
"I started crying on the phone," she says.
"I was terrified." But the diagnosis was just the beginning.
She learned she had to decide on her own treatment.
Did she want mastectomies, in which both breasts would be removed, or should she have the cancerous lumps taken out and then six weeks of radiation treatment?
Palumbo, a 58-year-old mother of three and grandmother of one from Wakefield, Mass., simply did not want to choose.
She was too distraught.
So she asked her doctors what to do.
Her gynecologist said she should definitely have the double mastectomy.
Her cardiologist said absolutely not: "It's so disfiguring." A radiologist said she could handle the radiation just fine, so perhaps she should have the lumpectomy.
Family and friends all preferred the mastectomy: "Just be rid of it," one said.


SPIES &amp; THRILLERS
Richard Bowker's SENATOR (Morrow, $22) is about a prominent Republican politician from Massachusetts, a possible future President, who visits his mistress one evening and finds her murdered.
She was a journalist who had been interested in writing his biography.
He attempts some spin control and manages to keep the police off his back for the time being.
There is no proof that he is the murderer.
But Senator Jim O'Connor has secrets to protect, among them dealings with a mobster.
If this becomes public -- and the press is already starting to sniff at his trail -- not only will his career be over, he could well end up in jail.
He is also in the middle of a tough re-election fight against a wily, determined campaigner.
His marriage is in tatters.
His bright and attractive teen-age daughter is unhappy.
In short, this is a senator with more problems than he can handle.


New Third World Fear: Investors Could Walk Away
THE international debt crisis is finally over. Well, maybe.
A week ago, the world's biggest banks quietly agreed to restructure the last big chunk of commercial debt in Brazil, effectively marking the end of the 12-year-old lending crisis in Latin America.


Supersonic Experience At a Six Flags Park
This month, Six Flags Great Adventure in Jackson, N.J., will offer visitors a chance to experience the sensation of breaking the sound barrier.
Highlights of The Right Stuff Mach 1 Adventure flight simulator include a copy of the cockpit of a T-38, the supersonic training jet for the military, and hydraulically synchronized seats that move on three axes.
The Right Stuff Mach 1 Adventure simulator is scheduled to open May 21.
Admission is included in the ticket price (including entry to a drive-through safari) of $32, $20 for children 54 inches and under and $16 for seniors 55 and older.
Call (908) 928-1821.


Evening Hours; Grand Central Campus
Brown's 'Campus Dance' at Grand Central Terminal, April 12.


Katherine McCaw, Eugene Gordon
Katherine Ann McCaw, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. McCaw Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married on Friday to Eugene Nathan Gordon, a son of Nancy Heilpern Gordon of Palo Alto, Calif., and Samuel Gordon of Portola Valley, Calif.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Rendezvous Bay Hotel on Anguilla, the British West Indies.
Mrs.
Gordon, 28, is a copywriter at the First Deposit National Corporation in San Francisco.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is a vice president at Seabury &amp; Smith, an insurance brokerage in New York.
Her grandfather the late Eugene F. Kennedy, an architect, designed the doors and altar of St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.


'Stomp': Not, Not, Not-So-Bad Vibrations
"There it goes -- BOOM VROOM BOOM VROOM BOM . . . like an Indian tribal bass drum, a large drum right under my feet," said Scott Biscione, about 9:15 P.M. the other night.
Kip Pepper joined in: "The whole floor is vibrating, and it goes through the tip of your toes to the top of your head."


Rockefeller Home Is Cruise Destination
Tours of Kykuit, the 40-room Rockefeller home in the Hudson Valley that opens to the public on May 4, are already booked for May and June.
But it is still possible to visit Kykuit in those months by taking a cruise on the Hudson River.
NY Waterway, formerly Port Imperial Ferrybus System, inaugurates its new route on May 6, with one trip a day Friday, Saturday and Sunday, starting at 10:30 A.M. in Weehawken, N.J., and at 10:45 A.M. at the ferry terminal at 12th Avenue and 38th Street in Manhattan, returning seven hours later.
Beginning June 20, the service will expand to six days a week (closed on Tuesdays) and two trips a day.


Corrections
A short discography on April 3 with an article about Verve Records misidentified the producer of "The Girl From Ipanema: The Bossa Nova Years," a four-CD set by Stan Getz.
He was Creed Taylor, not Norman Granz.


The Great American Food Fight
CONSUMED Why Americans Love, Hate, and Fear Food.
By Michelle Stacey. 237 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


Checking Up on the Children
Downtown -- Ivan F. Boesky, the former Wall Street arbitrager who ran into trouble for insider trading in 1986, was waiting in a crowd outside Circle in the Square Theater Downtown on April 14.
He was there for the opening of "Fallen Angel," a musical by his 28-year-old son, Billy Boesky, about a rock musician with a father behind bars.
With his white hair brushing against his blue blazer and a touch of stubble on his well-tanned face, Mr.
Boesky, who now lives in California, looked casually hip in his blue jeans.


The Hemline Stops Here
A signature look for a decade takes several years to evolve.
The look of the 1990's is only now being defined in a quiet, inconspicuous style.
It was seen on a few of the women who attended the recent New York fashion collections wearing black satin knee-length dresses that the European designer Helmut Lang had cut on the bias; on the runways, Calvin Klein, Donna Karan and Marc Jacobs were placing their authority behind the same silhouette.
Unlike the straight knee-length skirts many women never abandoned, this new approach gives the 1930's body-caressing dresses a certain sassiness, with proportions and hemlines that reflect the 1940's.
And black satin, which used to come out only at night, is being worn in the daytime.


Wall Street; A Case of Corporate Books, Seasoned to Taste
CLASS-ACTION lawsuits for fraud against high-tech companies are usually frivolous attempts at bilking perfectly honest corporate citizens, right?
Well, not quite right.
The target of one such suit, Platinum Software, started an internal investigation after it was sued for fraud on Jan. 19.
And, lo and behold, somebody was cooking the books.


DuPont Adds $214 Million in Payments to Farmers Over Fungicide
Du Pont has agreed to pay $214 million to 220 farmers who said their crops had been ruined by a fungicide from the company.
The settlement, announced on Friday, eliminates nearly half the suits against Du Pont in connection with the fungicide, Benlate DF, which was recalled in 1991.
Since that year, when the crop damage was first reported, Du Pont paid more than $500 million to farmers.


Runway Plan Is Reviving Old Fictions
Two years ago, a USAir Fokker F-28 barreled off La Guardia's Runway 13-31, killing 27 of the 51 people aboard.
Last month, a jet skidded off the same runway during a blinding snowstorm.
To the Port Authority and the Federal Aviation Administration, each incident underlined the need to build a safety overrun, a measure that was first proposed eight years ago.
Mayor Giuliani recently ordered the project, which had been making its way slowly through the lengthy bureaucratic approval process, put on a fast track.
But the plan is prompting the same debate it's been generating for eight years: how to keep Flushing Bay from becoming merely La Guardia's backyard pond.


Lunch Service Canceled To Guard Dinner Service
To the Editor:
When Jezebel, the restaurant of which I am proprietor, was undergoing its annual renovation, I was contacted by a writer for The City section, and I took the liberty of mentioning our plan to initiate a lunchtime seating.
That fact was reported in the March 6 "Good Eating" column.


Mutual Funds; Faring Well in Good Times and Bad
TO Brian C. Rogers, manager of the T. Rowe Price Equity-Income Fund, the recent rout was welcome: prices have retreated so far that he sees value in the stock market for the first time in two years.
With prices down, yields are up and that is all-important to this fund, which relies on high-dividend-paying stocks plus a small chunk of bonds.
The fund's yield, now 3.9 percent, hasheldit up in down markets.
Price Equity-Income has the distinction of being a fund that has stayed the course in good times and bad.


Amtrak to Widen Ban On Smoking in Trains
On May 1, Amtrak will ban smoking on its short- and medium-distance daytime trains and some long-distance overnight trains.
The corporation says that this step will make 82 percent of its trains nonsmoking.
The new policy covers all regular trains in the Boston-Washington corridor -- the Met roliners were already nonsmoking -- and all trains into and out of Canada.


Mrs. Clinton Steps Forward
As political theater, Hillary Rodham Clinton's news conference Friday afternoon was undeniably a smash hit.
She serenely answered an hour's worth of aggressive questions on her complex adventures in the commodities and Arkansas real estate markets.
She was also forthrightly remorseful about her earlier resistance to the press and to the appointment of a special counsel.
The First Lady, declaring she had decided to emerge from her "zone of privacy," seemed finally to grasp a central truth that has eluded the White House staff and her husband for months: In Presidential behavior, unanswered questions create a vacuum that sucks everything into it -- including the energies of the press, the legislative vitality of Congress and the attention of the chief executive.


Q and A
German Ferry Service
Q.
I will be in Germany with my family in July and would like to know if there are any ferries from Hamburg to Denmark, to the Netherlands or across to England? -- John P. McConville, New York, N.Y.


The Man, the Climb, The Power, the Fall
Driven by a fierce, enigmatic tenacity, Richard Nixon's career was a tumultuous roller-coaster ride of victory, crisis, defeat, revival, triumph, ruin and, in later life, re-emergence as an elder statesman.
A five-page obituary of the 37th President, by John Herbers, begins on page 29.


Acting Against Type: The Self-Hating Jew
IN RECENT YEARS, THE ACTOR RON Rifkin has won critical praise for his interpretations of embittered middle-aged men tormented by self-hatred for being Jews.
So the choice of Mr.
Rifkin to play the dark heart of Arthur Miller's new play, "Broken Glass," seemed only natural.
As Phillip Gellburg, a man whose main attribute is discomfort with himself and his own Jewishness, Mr.
Rifkin is in familiar territory.
Last year he played Ken Hoyle, the unscrupulous baby-formula salesman of "Three Hotels" by Jon Robin Baitz; in 1991 he appeared in Mr.
Baitz's highly acclaimed "Substance of Fire" as Isaac Geldhart, the independent publisher who wrecks everything while believing himself to be upholding high standards.


IN SHORT: FICTION
POLISH-AMERICAN STORIES  CHILDREN OF STRANGERS  Stories.
By Anthony Bukoski.
Southern Methodist University, cloth, $22.50; paper, $10.95.


Wet Ride in Hershey
It may be the ultimate high dive.
Tidal Force, the new $4 million water ride at Hersheypark in Hershey, Pa., consists of four boats, a 100-foot steel scaffold, a gigantic slide shaped like a figure-8 and an enormous pool containing 200,000 gallons of water.
In just over two minutes, each boat, holding 20 passengers, climbs to the top, then races down, hitting the water at 50 miles an hour.


A Life Lesson From Wall Street
To the Editor:
There is something deeply disturbing in the earnestness of the article about Lawrence Kudlow.
Both its substance and tone provide further evidence that economic reporting increasingly consists of little more than accounts of sandbox play among members of an elite salon -- all of whom are quite disconnected from the realities of most Americans.
To be sure, coping can become difficult when life throws someone an unwieldy amount of success or failure.
Just ask any of those thousands of midlevel employees throughout the United States who have lost jobs in the name of productivity -- none of whom will ever be the subject of such a windy profile.
MATT ROHDE  Silver Spring, Md., April 5  The writer is a lawyer with the Federal Government.


'New Faces, Old Names'
To the Editor:
I take issue with the statement in your article headed "In Real Estate, New Faces, Old Names" on March 20 that the "brothers Max and Harry Koeppel split many years ago, so unreconciled that neither would give up the company name." This is not true.
I was on the scene during the many months that it took for my father (Max) and my uncle (Harry) to divide their interests and nothing could have been more friendly and accommodating than the attitudes displayed by both of these fine men.


No Ace, but a Winning Hand; The Semi-Nameless Sonics May Be the Best in the N.B.A.
Four and a half minutes went by, and the Seattle SuperSonics could not score one basket.
The stretch run came, and basketball's best regular-season team was outscored, 15-1.
The Sonics didn't make the extra pass, didn't get inside, didn't quite look like future champs.
Jump shot by Kendall Gill, no good.
Jump shot by Shawn Kemp, off the back rim.
Jump shot by Gary Payton, just short.
Three-pointer by Sam Perkins, way off.


Jets Find No Time for Prospects
The "best athlete available" mantra that has fallen from the lips of most National Football League personnel people when discussing the college draft over the last few years has been replaced this year with "best value available." It is a sign of the times with free agency and a salary cap dominating the N.F.L. landscape.
For much of this afternoon's college draft the Jets will be in the "b.v.a." mode.
Because free agency has added a revolving door to most teams, gone are the days of taking players with potential and spending two or three years to groom them.


On Sculptures Of Grief
Perhaps the best comment one can offer on the views expressed by John Wood in his letter to the New Jersey editor on March 27, in reference to the article "Sculptures Capture Grief of Plane Bombers," is the adage "Honi soit qui mal y pense" ("Evil to him who evil thinks").
It has been a custom since ancient Greece to display nude figures to depict many noble human states: dignity, beauty and struggle -- the Laocoon, the Thinker and David, among them.
I, for one, would think the letter writer's neo-Victorian views laughable, were they not so piously connected to the tragedy of Pan Am Flight 103.
JULIUS KLEIN West New York


Teen-Agers Educate Teen-Agers About Realities of AIDS
IN a conference room at North Shore University Hospital, 15 students from Great Neck North High School discussed what they had learned in two days of training about AIDS and how they would be peer educators in their school.
"To change kids' habits you've got to scare them," a junior, Desiree Haghani, said.
"Like in the film we saw. First there's a cool kid smoking a cigarette. Then the next time we see him he's in a hospital in a wheelchair shaking and unable to breathe. That's when it hits you."


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $1.62 million
211 West 19th Street  5-story commercial loft building being converted to a 3-bedroom, 3-bath residential property and artist studios; elevator, skylights, exposed brick walls, 3 exposures, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $55,000, listed at $2 million, 21 weeks on market (Brokers: Kingman Associates; Ambrose Mar-Elia)


Emotional Satisfaction of 'South Pacific'
JUST imagine the very model of a repertory theater for mu sicals what musical theater buff hasn't? -- and it is evident that the Paper Mill Playhouse has the goods.
When it delivers, the state theater of New Jersey opens up resources of talent, imagination, taste and craft; those impulses -- call them artistic -- that reach beyond gaudy display in the fulfillment of a mission: to perpetuate the tradition of the American theater's great, seriously threatened art form.


Albany Plans House Calls To Monitor the Mentally Ill
Hoping to break an expensive and debilitating cycle of hospitalization, release and relapse, New York State will soon begin a program for the chronically mentally ill that delivers medical services directly to their homes -- even if those homes are on the street.
Using some of the money the state anticipates saving from closing down the last of its hulking mental hospitals, New York will send out medical teams to monitor some of the thousands of mentally ill people who are discharged each year with little or no supervision.


Spot the Tastemakers
Celebrating front-liners and behind-the-sceners.


Brazil Cultivates U.S. Wine Drinkers
Never internationally known for its wines, Brazil has bucked a worldwide slump in wine exports to the United States and has emerged as the fastest growing exporter to the American market.
Brazilian wine shipments to the United States jumped 36 percent last year, thanks to Marcus James, a label with an American-sounding name but with roots deep in the vineyards of southern Brazil.


Spring of the Patriarch: Daly Wins Again
To the waking Chuck Daly, every morning is the same, he says, whether it be in his condominium in Fort Lee, N.J., or in one of the hotel beds on the road in Seattle or Phoenix or Minneapolis or Orlando, Fla.
"I open my eyes and I think, 'Did we win or lose last night?' " he recalled.
"This is a brutal business -- the travel, the practices, the pressures of winning and losing," said Daly, who is in his second year as the Nets' coach.
"And I hate losing. I hate losing. And in this business you've got to put up those W's. It doesn't matter that I love the game. It never gets easier. Sometimes I wonder how I've lasted so long."


Carjacker Unnerves the Elderly of Queens
Eight times now he has struck in broad daylight in several Queens neighborhoods, a lone attacker following his elderly victims from banks, threatening them at the point of a silver pistol as he demands money and sometimes a car.
Once he pistol-whipped, robbed and shot a woman inside the garage of her home.
Once he stole a woman's handbag as she was unloading packages in the driveway of her house.
And another time, he entered the passenger side of a man's car, demanded money and ordered him out.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Smitty Smith Drummer Visiones
The drummer Smitty Smith's show at Visiones on Wednesday night centered, naturally enough, on his drumming.
Mr.
Smith came to prominence in the early 1980's, performing with an exceptionally wide range of musicians, from Sting and Sonny Rollins to Art Farmer and Steve Coleman.
He has occasionally appeared as a leader, and his shows, especially early on, were fascinating because he used a septet, allowing him to write real orchestrations.


Essay; Mr. Comeback
Late one night in the White House, working on a speech, Richard Nixon tried to encapsulate his more recent predecessors in a single word or phrase: "Truman -- a fighter. Eisenhower -- a good man. Kennedy -- charisma. Johnson -- work. Me -- what?"
I did not have a good answer that night in 1970; I do now.
Nixon -- an inspiring resilience.


Commentary on Suicide Lacked Any Awareness
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen might add to the troubling insensitivity of Andy Rooney his belief that Kurt Cobain's suicide at 27 underlines the trivialities of both his music and his anguished mind ("Real Pain," column, April 20).
Mr.
Rooney claims one's art can be no better than one's life and shows no awareness that suicide among young people has tripled over the last three decades or that creative people suffer disproportionately from depressive disorders leading to suicide.


Saberhagen Can't Close Door on Giants
Bret Saberhagen knows he is one player for whom the Mets don't have hopes, they have expectations.
Dwight Gooden is hurt.
Bobby Bonilla is slumping.
And, as hot as he is, Jeff Kent can't always be the one to get the job done.
Today, it was Saberhagen's turn to be the linchpin -- a role he had filled quite nicely his first three starts of the year.
This time, though, Saberhagen just could not get it done.


CHRONICLE
Who could resist an invitation issued in the names of Aristophanes, Chaucer, William Shakespeare, Lorraine Hansberry, Mark Twain and Anne Frank?
They are listed among the hosts of a dinner for the National Coalition Against Censorship tonight in the United Nations Delegates' Dining Room.


Learning-Disabled Children Are Being Served by the System
To the Editor:
Your three-part series on special education in New York City threw away a wonderful opportunity objectively to review, at the local level, the successes and failures of the implementation of the Individuals With Disabilities Education Act, a landmark law ("A Class Apart," front page, April 6-8).


DSC Communications Corp.(DIGI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No-Hit Bid Falls Short, But Abbott Sails On
One by one, Jim Abbott's teammates couldn't help but notice the zero.
Abbott's effective aggressiveness, combined with the plays that were being made behind him, drew their attention to the zero in the line score, where the Oakland Athletics would normally have hits, by the start of the seventh inning.
Abbott's no-hitter last Sept. 4 had turned the mound at Yankee Stadium into his stage and now, with Luis Polonia diving to spear Terry Steinbach's drive in the fifth, and Wade Boggs going to his left to reach Rickey Henderson's grounder to end the sixth . . .


Spring Break Puts Atlanta's Party Spirit to the Test
With tens of thousands of black college students in town for three days of partying, this city's tolerance and crowd-control abilities were put to the test this weekend.
Still, Atlanta, which is 70 percent black, did not want to exert so much control over the visitors that it quashed their ardor, especially because, as one black city official said, these were "the black cream of the crop," expected to spend as much as $20 million here.


Computer Task Group Inc.(TSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Rangers Sweep as Islanders Can't Even Find Any Moral Victories
The New York Rangers, a club bone tired of hearing about the disappointments of yesteryear and determined to make their Stanley Cup destiny happen this year, today continued to play as if there were no tomorrow in their series against the hapless Islanders.
Because of the collective brilliance the Rangers crammed into a four-game package, there will be no tomorrow in this series: The Rangers completed their sweep of the Islanders with a convincing 5-2 victory this afternoon at Nassau Coliseum.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Building Co., Eufaula, Ala., an initial public offering of 1.82 million common shares.
Dean Witter Reynolds.


The Fine Print: A periodic look behind the law.; Seeking Savings, Congress Enacts a Paperwork Everest
Here is a common situation: A man celebrates his 65th birthday and becomes eligible for Medicare, but continues to work and receives health insurance coverage from his employer.
Under Federal law, patients, doctors and hospitals should first file claims with private insurers, using Medicare as a secondary source to pay bills not covered by employer health plans.
But there is a problem.
The Government often has no way of knowing that the man has private insurance, so he is able to collect from Medicare.


Bombay Co. (BBA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


METRO DIGEST
SCANDAL IN THE 30TH: A GROUP PORTRAIT
What drives police officers to step over the line into lawlessness?
Of the dozen men accused in the 30th Precinct drug-corruption scandal, all had working-class backgrounds, and a few had exemplary reputations.
In a wide array of interviews, people who know the accused have helped to sketch the broad contours of the officers' lives, and to provide a partial understanding of the road to the wrong side of the law.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


BWIP Holdings Inc.(BWIP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Investigating By a Monitor Is Opposed By Bratton
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton said yesterday that while he did not oppose having an outside agency monitor police corruption efforts, he did not want it to conduct its own investigations, a position that puts him at odds with a commission examining the issue.
First in a television interview and then in elaboration by a spokesman, the Commissioner provided his most detailed position yet on an external monitor, a subject that is expected to be a major recommendation in the Mollen Commission's final report next month.


Elco Industries Inc.(ELCN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The British Battle Over D-Day (With Vera Lynn a Combatant)
Nearly 50 years after the real thing, Britain is once again fighting over the beaches of Normandy.
The battle this time is between Prime Minister John Major and British veterans unhappy with his Government's plans for commemorating the anniversary of the landings.
After a barrage of headlines like "Legion D-Day Fury," and insistent sniping from Labor benches in the House of Commons, reports from the front have Mr.
Major staging a tactical retreat and promising to dispatch his National Heritage Secretary to meet with the veterans to work out a truce.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Du Pont, Dow Chemical and other makers of materials used to make heart valves, artificial blood vessels and other implants have been quietly warning medical equipment companies that they intend to end deliveries because of fears of lawsuits.  [ Page A1. ]


Andrew Corp.(ANDW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
Havana Woos Cuban Exiles
The Cuban Government announced a number of measures to encourage more Cuban-Americans to visit and to attract investment.
Page A9.
Leonard H. Goldenson, the founder of ABC, and his wife, Isabelle, will finance brain research.
Page A10.
Big Pick to Bengals
Cincinnati chose Dan Wilkinson, a 315-pound defensive tackle from Ohio State, as the first pick in the pro football draft.
SportsMonday, C1.
A2 Arts


Ipsco Inc.(IPSCF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lines Shift in Border War for Mexican Shopper
Mexicans call them Malinchistas after La Malinche, the Aztec, who married the Spanish conqueror Hernan Cortes and aided his triumph over Mexico.
Today, Malinchistas are Mexican shoppers who cross the border into Texas seeking cheaper prices, better selection or cachet.
They are the quarry in an intensifying battle between retailers in Texas, who are trying to keep their stores full of Mexican shoppers, and merchants in Mexico, who want them to shop at home.
The Mexican side appears to have the edge, helped by none other than United States retailers like Wal-Mart and Sears.
Those chains are lavishing Mexicans with more "Made in the U.S.A." products, sold in "Made in the U.S.A." settings.


American Business Products Inc.(ABP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dance in Review
'Incomplete Disaster'  Kumiko Kimoto St. Mark's Church
Kumiko Kimoto describes her "Incomplete Disaster" as "an investigation of falling bodies and their physical reactions to being caught." That it is.
But her statement says nothing about the emotional resonance of this piece, which her company, Dance Kumikokimoto, presented on Thursday night as an attraction of the Danspace Project.


After a Ruling, Hawaii Weighs Gay Marriages
This island state, where multiculturalism is a way of life and not just a slogan, could become the first to legalize marriage between people of the same sex -- or at least offer marital benefits for gay couples who register as domestic partners.
Whether by sanctioning gay marriage, which no other nation has done, or by passing America's first statewide domestic partnership act, Hawaii would lead the way in this fundamental redefinition of family, which some see as a sweeping expansion of civil rights and others see as an erosion of traditional values.


Excel Industries Inc.(EXC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


4 Hurt, 1 Critically, In Bronx Shootings
Two gunmen sprayed bullets into a crowded sidewalk in the Hunts Point section of the Bronx yesterday, wounding four people, one critically, the police said.
One victim was a 3-year-old girl whose right leg was grazed.
The shooting began at 2:40 P.M. at 860 Bryant Avenue, a sprawling, five-story apartment building, and spread to two other locations as people scattered, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
Lyn Saunders, 21, of the Bronx, fell in front of the apartment building with a bullet wound to the right side.
He was in critical condition at the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, the police said.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Salif Keita Singer Irving Plaza
Six years after his last New York concert, Salif Keita returned to a packed Irving Plaza on Wednesday night as a full-fledged international star.
His band hailed from Brazil, South Africa, Martinique, Guinea, France, Senegal and Mr.
Keita's native Mali.
That multinational coalition, joined by Joe Zawinul of Weather Report as guest keyboardist, came up with music that was utterly modern yet steeped in the griot tradition.


The Pain and Glory of Choice
The campaign for the first election open to all races in South Africa has been a season of opposites: brotherhood and bloodshed, exultation and despair, threats and promises.
But in the final hours before the vote that will alter the country forever, the images that persist are joyful ones as the members of the black majority, silenced and disenfranchised no longer, are lifting their voices to rally, to cheer, or to firmly declare their choice of leaders when they cast their ballots.


Invacare Corp.(IVCR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Linear Technology Corp.(LLTC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Wake Him Up and Tell Him He's a Giant
Thomas Lewis was at his mother's house in Akron, Ohio, sleeping upstairs.
When the National Football League draft started, he thought that at best he wouldn't be picked until the second or third round.
Rather than sitting around the set waiting and worrying, he decided to take a nap.
Then he heard the 40 guests downstairs screaming.
He ran downstairs, somewhat startled.
Then he saw what the commotion was all about: The Giants had taken the little known receiver from Indiana University with the 24th pick of the first round.
The Giants had 15 minutes to make the pick but used less than 4.
Lewis couldn't believe it.


Masland Corp.(MSLD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Stars Sweep Blues  Mike Modano scored both Dallas goals yesterday, including the game-winner on a power play with 3 minutes 49 seconds left in the game, as the Stars defeated the host St.
Louis Blues, 2-1, to complete a four-game sweep of their first-round playoff series.
Modano took a pass from Russ Courtnall and scored from the right circle for his fifth goal of the playoffs. (AP) Flames Go Up by 3-1: The Calgary Flames won their second straight road game with another stirring third period in Vancouver, British Columbia, leaving the Canucks on the verge of elimination in their opening-round series.
Third-period goals by Wes Walz and Theo Fleury carried the Flames to a 3-2 victory and a 3-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game series.


Alleghany Corp.(Y,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Albemarle Corp.(ALB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Enjoying the Weather, but Not the Pool


Grabbing a Spot in the Spring for a Child's Place in the Fall


Review/Dance; Mark Morris's Unlikely Collaboration on Bosnia
At first glance, it might seem far-fetched for an experimental modern-dance choreographer like Mark Morris to create a premiere for an American folk troupe that specializes in the dances of the former Yugoslavia.
Yet on Friday night when Zivili, an ethnic-dance company based in Columbus, celebrated its 20th anniversary with a gala performance at the Ohio Theater here, its enterprising collaboration with Mr.
Morris proved anything but a mismatch.


Carpenter Technology Corp.(CRS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Havana Woos Exiles, Easing Visits and Dangling Financial Carrot
The Cuban Government announced a number of measures this weekend in an effort to encourage more Cuban-Americans to visit and to attract investment here.
Scrapping many of the requirements that had limited the number of emigres' returning on visits, the Government was host to a three-day conference that was the first sizable meeting between the Communist leadership and representatives of the exile population in 16 years.


Energy Service Co. (ESV,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Harvard Medical School Receives $60 Million Gift
Grateful for the responsiveness that Harvard doctors showed when they sought help for people with cerebral palsy, Leonard H. Goldenson, the founder of the American Broadcasting Companies, and his wife, Isabelle, are donating $60 million to Harvard Medical School, the largest gift in the school's 200-year history.
Dr.
Daniel C. Tosteson, Dean of Harvard Medical School, said the Goldensons' gift would underwrite research on neurological diseases like cerebral palsy and on other aspects of brain function.


Bemis Co. (BMS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Judge Is Arrested in Bronx And Is Accused of Assault
An acting State Supreme Court justice who has presided over many criminal cases in his Bronx courtroom was arrested early yesterday and charged with assaulting the woman with whom he lives and with resisting arrest by the officers who took him into custody.
The charges, both misdemeanors, were the first criminal accusations against a sitting New York State judge since Sol Wachtler, the state's former chief judge, was arrested in November 1992 and charged with harassment, attempted extortion and threatening to kidnap the teen-age daughter of his former lover.


Community Health Systems Inc.(CHSI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Messier Leading By Strong Example
He has become one of New York's most recognizable athletes.
He is easy to pick out in the crowd at a Knick game, in commercials for athletic apparel and on the ice anywhere.
Maybe it's the set jaw, the 5 o'clock shadow or the intimidating stare.
Maybe it's his aura that draws all the attention.
But Mark Messier, team captain and center for the Rangers, has set a standard in the National Hockey League with a celebrated career and five Stanley Cup rings.
And he maintained that excellence today with two goals as the Rangers eliminated the Islanders in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.


Dividend Meetings


Pharmacies in a Quandary Over Tobacco
Hundreds of independent pharmacies across the country have become so troubled by the conflict between selling medicine and selling tobacco that they have taken tobacco products off their shelves.
In a statewide campaign by pharmacists late last year, 60 drugstores in Michigan agreed to discontinue tobacco sales.
A similar campaign is planned for Rhode Island.
And dozens of pharmacies in Minnesota, Utah and Washington state have pulled the plug on tobacco under pressure from county medical and pharmaceutical societies.
Even in the tobacco-growing state of South Carolina, some pharmacies have taken the smoke-free stance.


E-L Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wilkinson Caps a Big Day
Dan (Big Daddy) Wilkinson, the first player selected in today's National Football League draft, noticed that his mustard green suit didn't match the Cincinnati Bengals' orange and black cap that his agent had placed on his head.
"Oh, well," said Wilkinson, a 21-year-old defensive tackle from Ohio State.
But the Bengals cap was also more than a fashion statement.


Christopher Begins Journey To Promote Mideast Peace
Secretary of State Warren Christopher left on a one-week trip to the Middle East tonight with two main goals: to help broker a peace between Israel and Syria, and to press Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization to put the finishing touches on a peace agreement.
Mr.
Christopher, who will first stop in London and Geneva to discuss the war in Bosnia, is scheduled next weekend to carry a peace package to Damascus from Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, and to feel out Syria's President, Hafez al-Assad, for his response.


The Road to Louisville Is Taking Cruel Twists
With less than two weeks to go to the Kentucky Derby, the road to Louisville continued its cruel twisting yesterday: Soul of the Matter, the colt who outran Brocco at Santa Anita last month, was outrun himself by Southern Rhythm in the Lexington Stakes at Keeneland.
The upset was the latest in a series of tumbles for major candidates for the Derby, and it was executed one day after Ride the Rails ran fourth in the Arkansas Derby and quit the chase for the Triple Crown altogether.
He was victimized by a 29-1 shot named Concern, and there was a common denominator: Garrett Gomez, who rode Concern in Arkansas, also rode Southern Rhythm in Kentucky one day later and became an instant "spoiler" on the road to Louisville.


An Expensive Winter
It was even worse than we thought.
Snow removal costs in the region reached record highs this winter, state and city officials say.
The clean-up bill, which includes salary and overtime for crews, new equipment, repairs and salt costs, was twice as stiff as last winter's in New York City while Yonkers and Newark spent three times as much.
That previous winter, marked by a tremendous blizzard in March 1993, seemed cold enough at the time.
But this season was unrelenting, according to meteorologists, as the 17 storms were accompanied by consistently low temperatures.
But no single storm qualified for Federal disaster aid, so states will receive no help in paying for emergency snow removal.


Beware the Superpower Syndrome
Having tried to appease the interventionists while not getting sucked in to a war in Bosnia, President Clinton's options narrow dangerously.
Halfhearted bombing doesn't scare the Serbs.
Anything more threatens to undermine Russian reformers, split NATO and make the U.S. a full participant in the war.
We are learning the hard way that there can be no "peacekeeping" until there is a peace to keep.
Having managed to survive the cold war without ever exchanging a shot with the Soviets, we now find ourselves on the verge of war with Serbia, a country with a population about equal to that of the Los Angeles basin.
This happened because the cold war rules are obsolete and we haven't worked out any new ones.
From this mess some cautionary lessons emerge.


Books of The Times; Take Woe and Blend It With Humor
Without a Hero Stories  By T. Coraghessan Boyle  Viking. 238 pages. $21.95.
"It was like all nature had turned against us," says the narrator of "Top of the Food Chain," a hapless scientist testifying before a Senate committee about how his handiness with DDT has somehow wreaked havoc in Borneo.
It's often that way for the characters in "Without a Hero," the latest collection of sharp, rueful, malevolently funny short stories from T. Coraghessan Boyle.


Abroad at Home; Crimes of War
The first great Nazi crime in World War II was the terror bombing of Rotterdam on May 14, 1940.
The Luftwaffe destroyed the city center and killed 900 people.
The Serbian assault on Gorazde is a crime of similar character.
Over the last three weeks hundreds of Serbian mortars and heavy guns and 60 tanks fired at point-blank range into that small Bosnian city.
More than 700 people have died.


Gun Sweeps and Tenants' Rights
To the Editor:
"Gun Sweeps: No Model for Cities" (editorial, April 20) mischaracterizes the President's response to a recent Federal court ruling that certain sweeps of public housing facilities in Chicago are unconstitutional.


G.O.P. Rivalry May Mean Loss Of Council Seat
The special election for a City Council seat on Staten Island on Tuesday pits two politically prominent families against each other and also will determine whether the Republican Party can retain the dominance it has held for years in that district.
The election, in the Council's 51st District along the south shore of Staten Island, is being held to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Alfred C. Cerullo 3d, a popular Councilman appointed last month as the city's consumer affairs commissioner by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
A win by a Republican would maintain the seven Republican seats on the 51-member City Council.


Brush Fire Halts Route 3 Traffic
A large brush fire in the marshlands near the Meadowlands sports complex caused officials in New Jersey to close Route 3 and to divert traffic from part of the New Jersey Turnpike yesterday.
The blaze produced smoke that was visible in New York City and the surrounding area.
The fire, which did not appear to be deliberately set, was centered underneath the Hackensack River Bridge, which links East Rutherford and Secaucus.
It was under control by 5:45 P.M., Lieut.
William Pletsch of the East Rutherford police said.
No injuries, deaths or damage to buildings were reported.


Isles Flail at Failure; Rangers Just Skate On
So here was Mick Vukota of the Islanders, skating near the benches, pushing his stick against Brian Leetch, the best player for the Rangers in their four-game sweep of the Islanders in the first round of the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Vukota's action came late in a game that was already decided, in a series that was already decided, and it was merely an unprovoked gesture of frustration, of sour grapes, the sort of thing done by sore losers who have been humiliated.
The sort of little thing that starts big trouble.


CHRONICLE
The afternoon lesson plan in Studio 563 of the Drama Division of the Juilliard School was a parody of that stirring anthem from the musical "Les Miserables," the song "Do You Hear the People Sing?"
This time the lyrics said:


A Rebound for Harper's and Atlantic
In the nearly 150 years that The Atlantic Monthly and Harper's Magazine have played enduring roles in the nation's intellectual and literary dialogue, the two publications often lost hundreds of thousands -- sometimes millions -- of dollars a year.
In the last 15 years, both magazines came close to expiring.
But as many larger and better-financed magazines are still stumbling their way out of recession, the two stalwart publications say they have turned themselves around.


A Cross-Country Pass Route
After spending five years in Laramie, Wyo., Ryan Yarborough, the wide receiver from the University of Wyoming, said he was ecstatic over the prospects of coming to New York and playing for the Jets.
"I really couldn't ask for a better place," said Yarborough, who was picked yesterday in the second round of the draft by the Jets.
"I've never even been to New York. But it's not like I'm from Laramie. It's fine with me."


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Ratings for News Programs Slip Amid Prime-Time Glut
Just three months ago, when two networks were offering air time by the truckload to Diane Sawyer, the news magazine was considered television's hottest programming genre.
But by last week, when the official network season ended, the ratings for the nine news magazines now on the air were down not only for the entire season, but sharply in the second half.
The decline is raising concern that the news magazine format may have reached a saturation point with viewers.


Macmillan Bloedel reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Nets Hardly Trembling Over Facing the Knicks
As physical as the Knicks are known to be, the Nets expect them to try to establish territorial dominance when the teams meet in a three-of-five-game playoff series, commencing Friday night at Madison Square Garden.
"Doesn't bother me at all," Nets forward Derrick Coleman said before New Jersey was beaten by the Orlando Magic, 120-91, here tonight in a meaningless regular-season finale.
"I don't think it bothers any of my teammates as well. I mean, we're used to playing physical. We can mix it up with anybody."


Alexander &amp; Baldwin Inc.(ALEX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lone Star Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pianist Wins Contest No One Can Enter
Although the Gilmore award's fast-developing reputation for eccentricity may not be entirely justified, it was momentarily enhanced on Saturday evening in the opening concert of the Irving S. Gilmore International Keyboard Festival.
In a program by the Kalamazoo Symphony Orchestra at the capacious Miller Auditorium on the campus of Western Michigan University here, the main order of business was the presentation of the 1994 Gilmore Artist, Ralf Gothoni.
But Mr.
Gothoni, a 48-year-old Finnish pianist and musical polymath, spent most of his time onstage with his back to the audience, playing and conducting Beethoven's Piano Concerto No. 3.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Kristin Hersh Singer Irving Plaza
Onstage, rock musicians often treat family life the way vampires are said to treat garlic.
They keep away from it.
At Irving Plaza on Thursday night, Kristin Hersh broke rock's domestic code of silence and performed powerful solo songs inspired by her experiences as a wife and mother.
Her lyrics weren't about marital bliss; they were raw and revealing insights into Ms.
Hersh's frustrating search for artistic and personal freedom within the constraints of motherhood.


No Headline
"You meet someone. You fall in love. You get married and live happily ever after. That's all we want." -- JOSEPH MELLIO, who hopes to be first to the altar if Hawaii upholds gay marriage.  [ B8:2. ]


Hemlo Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Dance in Review
'Easy'  Vivian Trimble Bessie Schonberg Theater 219 West 19th Street Chelsea
Choreographers tend to worry last about the music for their dances, but for Vivian Trimble, music and dance are inseparable.
Ms.
Trimble belongs to a four-woman band called Luscious Jackson, which provided the accompaniment for "Easy," the new dance she presented on Thursday night.


Rwandan Refugees Describe Horrors After a Bloody Trek
Their clothes are blood-soaked, and their wounds are eerily similar.
Pursued by fear, the 450 or so men, women and children in the makeshift hospital here made the same journey across the border from Rwanda, nursing the deep gouges made by the machetes that struck their skulls, necks and hands.
They submit without a murmur of complaint to the painful scrubbing of their jagged wounds, then curl up on stretchers or on the rain-soaked lawns to sleep.


Genicom Corp.(GECM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Man Held in Hospital Rape
A 34-year-old man is scheduled to be arraigned today in Manhattan Criminal Court on a charge of raping a Harlem Hospital patient who was unconscious and on a respirator.
The man, William Washington, who has no known address, was arrested shortly after the attack, which occurred about 8 A.M. on Wednesday on the hospital's 12th floor, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a spokeswoman for the New York City Police Department.
Mr.
Washington entered the hospital last Monday, but the police did not know why he was hospitalized.
Hospital officials could not be reached late last night.


After 4 Decades, a Batttle for Recognition of a Soldier Still Goes On
A bitter dispute between the Army and one of its old soldiers over the Medal of Honor has been taken up by a California Congressman, raising the possibility of a House debate that could center on racism.
Charles M. Bussey, a retired black lieutenant colonel who fought with honor in World War II and Korea, says he was denied the Medal of Honor for heroics in Korea because of discrimination.
The Army says he was properly honored with its third highest combat award, the Silver Star, rather than with the highest award for bravery.


American Maize-Products Co. (AZE.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Songs and Salutes for Nixon's Final American Journey
The body of Richard M. Nixon will be flown tomorrow to his birthplace and laid to rest with song, salute, and somber ceremonies that will begin at an air base in Newburgh, N.Y., and culminate with his burial on Wednesday in Yorba Linda, Calif.
A military honor guard and a 21-gun salute will pay homage to the former President during a brief ceremony at Stewart Air and National Guard Base in Newburgh, N.Y., where Mr.
Nixon's remains will be put aboard the same Boeing 707 that carried the body of his wife, Pat, who died last year, said Maj.
Paul Fanning of the New York Army National Guard.
Mr.
Nixon's daughters, Julie Nixon Eisenhower and Tricia Nixon Cox, and their families will accompany the body to the El Toro Marine Corps Air Station in California.


Amsco International Inc.(ASZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Limit Monitor, Bratton Says
The Police Commissioner said that any outside monitor of the department should not have investigative powers.
Page B3.


Ipalco Enterprises (IPL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Weatherford Intl(WII,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ninth Annual Crime Victims' Ceremony Is Held in Manhattan Church


A Historic Name, a Futuristic Vision
As the publishers of the country's largest newspapers gather here today for their annual convention, one of their official hosts is likely to draw special attention: the witty, mustachioed 44-year-old publisher and editor of the smaller of this city's two dailies, The San Francisco Examiner.
His name, William Randolph Hearst 3d, resonates with American newspaper history.


Bridge
Thinking about deals on which something went wrong is an essential element in moving to an expert level.
This should not mean an immediate post-mortem, holding up the game, but careful thought, and perhaps discussion with partner, when play is over.
Often an expert will realize that he or she missed an inference, and in rare cases will make public a mea culpa.
The diagramed deal was played recently in a major tournament in Japan.
Sitting West was one of that country's top-ranked players, Akio Kurokawa, whose nickname, inevitably, is Ace-king-ten.
His partner was Peter Newman, a young Australian who imitated his country's most famous animal by leaping to three spades over the opening bid of one diamond.


Jacobs Engineering Group (JEC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pop and Jazz in Review
Javon Jackson Saxophonist Sweet Basil
Javon Jackson, a young tenor saxophonist, is a jazz classicist's dream.
Though Mr.
Jackson went to music school, he sounds instead as if he learned how to improvise by playing jazz, not studying.
His music reverberates with the sounds of Charlie Parker, John Coltrane, Sonny Rollins and Dexter Gordon, and it's classical in the sense that it engages in a dialogue with older music widely accepted as paradigmatic.
In its fluidity and lack of extremes, it reaches a type of classical balance as well.


Smith International (SII,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


He Giveth Then Taketh A Young Fan's Souvenir
Dodgers 7, Expos 1
The Los Angeles Dodgers beat visiting Montreal, 7-1, last night and ended the Expos' five-game winning streak in a game marked by a fluke play in which right fielder Larry Walker mistakenly gave a live ball to a fan in the stands.


Paths to Scandal: A special report.; Stories of Courage and Sacrifice, Corruption and Betrayal in Blue
Like all police officers who ride a patrol car together, they would do anything for each other.
Last April, Jorge Alvarez proved that.
He and Randolf Vazquez, partners on the midnight shift at the crime-infested 30th Precinct in northwest Harlem, came upon a drug-crazed individual firing at another man on West 151st Street.
They scrambled out of their patrol car, as other drug dealers in the neighborhood joined the battle.
"It was like Vietnam out there," said a police officer who subsequently arrived on the scene.
"Bullets were whizzing by your head."


Needed: A Recycling Compromise
The Giuliani administration says it wants to recycle more of New York City's garbage, but cannot afford the cost.
The City Council leader and litigants in a lawsuit say sorry, the city pledged to recycle more energetically than it does now and is legally bound to keep its promise.
The courts agree and have ordered City Hall to afford what it says it cannot.
That sounds like an impasse, but there is a sensible way out.
The City Council approved the recycling plan and it has the legal authority to change the deadlines and rate of compliance.
Slower compliance, less cost.
The administration will have to make a good case to the Council for amending the law; if its arguments are credible, and they appear to be, the Council will have a clear obligation to revise its law.


Graco Inc.(GGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Automotive Industries (AIHI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


IMPLANT INDUSTRY IS FACING CUTBACK BY TOP SUPPLIERS
Big chemical companies and other manufacturers of materials used to make heart valves, artificial blood vessels and other implants have been quietly warning medical equipment companies that they intend to cut off deliveries because of fears of lawsuits.
While the suppliers' new policies have not yet forced important products from the market, medical equipment makers that are scrambling to protect themselves from the impending cutoffs say they are having trouble lining up alternate suppliers.
Industry executives and doctors say that the trend could eventually make some life-saving implants hard to come by and have a devastating effect on development of new devices.


Accounts
*
Montauk Resort and Marina, Montauk, L.I., to RY&amp; P Moss, New York, to handle its account, previously at Robert Towers Advertising, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Hayes-Dana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Political Memo; Wanted: G.O.P. Candidate; Must Be Ambitious, Popular
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's approval ratings are at the same level that George Bush's were the week before he lost the 1992 election.
They are where Jimmy Carter's were in 1980 immediately after an American helicopter crashed in the Iranian desert.
And yet an improbable confluence of factors, ranging from the utter disarray in New York's Republican Party to the gradual recovery of the state's economy, is starting to make Mr.
Cuomo look more and more like a front-runner.


Arrow Electronics Inc.(ARW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


U.S. Troops in U.N. Peacekeeping
Americans are justifiably wary about putting troops at the United Nations' disposal.
U.N. troops in Bosnia are empowered to do little more than flash their blue berets and count the Serb shells obliterating Gorazde.
U.N. troops in Rwanda have scurried for safety, abandoning thousands of refugees who had sought their protection.
And in Somalia, the U.N. coaxed American peacekeepers into deadly clashes with the most prominent warlord.
No wonder Americans are uneasy about playing "designated hitter for the United Nations," as Senator Trent Lott recently put it.
But these setbacks do not invalidate the notion of collective action.
It will generally be preferable for the United States to contribute troops, logistical support or financing to an effective peacekeeping force than to play global cop by itself.
That is why the Clinton Administration's draft policy spelling out the criteria for American participation in U.N. peacekeeping makes good sense.


As All Go to the Polls: Who, How, Where, When
As the candidates in South Africa's first free elections left the campaign trail today, they were replaced by a legion of perhaps half a million people who will organize, police, count, witness and validate what may be the world's most closely monitored transition of power.
The gargantuan exercise beginning Tuesday is, like South Africa itself, a hybrid of high-tech and make-do, of anxiety and expectation, of Europe and Africa.


Alltrista Corp.(JARS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Arbour's Resignation Seems to Be at Hand
Al Arbour is dropping large hints that today's playoff game may have been his last as coach of the Islanders.
In a post-game news conference, when asked about changes for next season, Arbour said: "I have a lot of things to say, but I don't think I should say it right now."
Following a meeting with his staff, Arbour was asked whether he has made up his mind about returning next season.


Battle Mountain Gold (BMG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Italian Coalition Trips on Old Yugoslavia Issue
A statement last week by a freshly elected parliamentary deputy about Italy's relations with the former Yugoslavia has cast a shadow over the foreign policy of the coalition backing Silvio Berlusconi's effort to become Prime Minister.
Mirko Tremaglia, a deputy of the right-wing National Alliance, which supports Mr.
Berlusconi, said on Wednesday that Italy should "tear up" a 1975 treaty with the former Yugoslavia and block membership of Slovenia and Croatia in the European Union until the rights of their Italian minorities are respected.
He went on to declare that Istria, the tongue of land on the northern rim of the Adriatic Sea that is part of Croatia, as well as the city of Rijeka and the Dalmatian coast are "historically Italian" and described them as "occupied territories.'


CDW Computer Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


5 Rural Sheriffs Are Taking the Brady Law to Court
The Val Verde County Sheriff, J. R. Koog, knows the Brady Act is now the law of the land.
The way he sees it, though, it is not an enforceable law.
And so he is having a difficult time enforcing it.
Very difficult.
"No, sir, Congress can't sit up there and tell this lowly little sheriff out here at the end of the world what to do," he said.


Comdisco Inc.(CDO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Damark International Inc.(DMRK,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Rightist Wins A Runoff Vote In El Salvador
The candidate of the right, Armando Calderon Sol, won a landslide vote today in a presidential runoff election, unofficial returns indicated.
His victory further consolidated the power that the governing party won last month in local and parlimentary elections.
Returns from about 35 percent of the precincts showed Mr.
Calderon Sol had 66 percent of the vote, and Ruben Zamora, the candidate of the left, had about 33 percent.
Late this evening Mr.
Zamora appeared on television to concede.


Gooden May Miss Start
The Mets may have to shut down Dwight Gooden for the second time this season because of his sore big toe.
Though the organization will make no official decision regarding his scheduled Wednesday start, it is highly unlikely he will be able to pitch against the Padres that day.
Gooden attempted to throw on the side today at Candlestick Park and was forced to stop after three pitches, so great was the pain in his toe, which he uses to push off the mound.
He is scheduled to be examined by a Mets team physician Monday in New York.


Curtice-Burns Foods (CBI,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


Market Place; For Texans, pride outweighs percentages in buying bonds.
IN the financial markets, which immediately assess the value, or cost, of wars, hurricanes, new Presidents and new technology, what's the true worth of Texan pride?
About 10 basis points, or one-tenth of 1 percent in annual interest.
A tenth of a percentage point or more is the annual interest Texans willingly forgo by favoring bonds from their own state over comparable bonds from other states without income taxes, according to Timothy T. Browse, portfolio manager of the Eaton Vance Texas Tax-Free Marathon Fund.


Devils Haven't Kept Emotions in Check
The Stanley Cup playoffs trigger a time of high emotion for hockey players and coaches.
Those who control their emotions are usually winners at the end.
Those who lose control usually are not, and the Devils suffered that consequence in Buffalo Saturday night.
The Devils did a lot of other things wrong as well in Game 4, and as a result their playoff series with the Sabres has now become a two-of-three-game affair.


Review/Television; Mother, Daughter And Hatred
Tonight's "Getting Out" movie on ABC is being billed as a "Premiere Showcase" presentation.
This means that, in terms of aspiration, it's closer to a "Hallmark Hall of Fame" production than a run-of-the-mill television flick.
Contrived uplift is not guaranteed.
In fact "Getting Out," based on a play by Marsha Norman, is rather grim.
But that doesn't detract for a moment from wallopingly good performances by Rebecca De Mornay and Ellen Burstyn.
The De Mornay character makes her entrance as Arlie, a pregnant young woman running away from a reform school only to get ensnared in a shooting while trying to hold up a gas station.
Eight years later, Arlie is now Arlene, rehabilitated by a prison chaplain.
Heading home for Macon, Ga., Arlene is eager for a reunion with her son, Joey, who was born in prison and taken home by her mother (Ms. Burstyn).
That's not to be, obviously.
This is Marsha Norman territory, and the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright (" 'Night, Mother) is notoriously tough on moms and any male past the age of puberty.


The Crows Are Coming, So Prepare
To the Editor:
Have you noticed the growing crow population in Manhattan?
This may come as a surprise, but they're definitely moving in.


South Africa, Mind Yourself
To the Editor:
Natasha Mostert's plea for America, and presumably the rest of the world, to scrutinize the post-election actions of the African National Congress, the likely winning party in that country's first democratic, all-race election, rings hollow ("Trading Places in South Africa?" Op-Ed, April 19).


Several Companies Shift Their Accounts
Several large consumer product companies changed the agencies on their accounts on Friday.
Coty Inc. named Jerry &amp; Ketchum Inc. of New York to handle the creative portion of its Aspen fragrances account, which had been at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding of Chicago until Coty's parent, Benckiser Consumer Products, combined Coty with its Quintessence division, which marketed brands like Aspen and Jovan Musk.
Billings were estimated at $9 million.


Jets Move Up in Draft to Take Glenn, a Cornerback
The Jets desperately needed help in their thin receiving corps, but they came face to face with a prospect they felt they couldn't pass up in the first round of the National Football League college draft this afternoon.
So, they forgot about Charles Johnson of Colorado, rated as the best receiver in the draft, and selected cornerback Aaron Glenn of Texas A&amp;M.
The Jets traded their No. 13 pick and a fifth-round selection to New Orleans for its No. 12 pick in the first round in order to get Glenn.
He was the second cornerback taken in the draft, behind Antonio Langham of Alabama, who went to Cleveland with the No. 9 choice.


With Regular Season Done, Knicks Think Championship
In their final tune-up before the playoffs, the Knicks had an impressive road test.
New York closed the regular season by handling the Chicago Bulls, 92-76, this afternoon at Chicago Stadium.
The Knicks finished the regular season with a 57-25 record, but the most important season comes later this week, when the National Basketball Association playoffs begin.
And the Knicks' first-round opponent will be the Nets.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


New York Area Economy Faces Struggle to Keep Up
Despite being driven by leading industries of the future that provide the New York metropolitan area with building blocks for a stronger economy, that economy has failed to gain as much ground as other regions, according to a new report to be released tomorrow.
The study, prepared for the Regional Plan Association by the economic consulting firm DRI/McGraw-Hill, offers one of the most detailed looks in recent years at the economy of the immense urban conglomeration of New York City and its surrounding area.
It makes for sobering reading.


For Clinton and Nixon, a Rarefied Bond
They hardly seemed made for each other.
One was in his 80's, the other in his 40's, one a Republican, the other a Democrat.
One was a straight arrow, painfully shy, a classic loner, conspicuously formal in dress and manner (though under pressure, as the Watergate tapes showed, he could swear like a stevedore); the other, a devotee of Elvis and the Beatles, gregarious to a fault, experimented with marijuana in his youth, developed a reputation as a lady's man and much prefers sweats to suits.


Seaside Resort Is Accused of Housing Bias
With city building inspectors on her doorstep, Nancy Carrasco made up her mind.
No, she told them, she would not budge.


Calling Mr. Clinton About Crime
Vying with the Senate for the anti-crime trophy, the House has voted still more billions for police, prisons and prevention, along with dozens of death penalties and other harsh sentences.
While Democrats compete with Republicans for ownership of the crime issue, President Clinton runs hard to keep up with the political pack.
When the House and Senate negotiate over their bills and hundreds of pages of differences, will Mr.
Clinton stake a legitimate claim to leadership?
Will he help shape a strong public safety law that maintains such fair provisions as the Racial Justice Act?
Those are the interesting questions now.


Rabin's Many Hats: Peace Talks May Be Affected
A new Israeli law that bans smoking in public places cannot go into effect because the Acting Health Minister refuses to sign it.
It would be hypocritical of him to do so, aides say, when he himself is a notorious two-pack-a-day man.
Instead, he is waiting for the Prime Minister to appoint a full-time (and perhaps nonsmoking) health minister.


Alza Corp.(AZA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Japanese See Hopeful Sign In Transition
To Japan's business community, the pending change of Prime Ministers from Morihiro Hosokawa to Tsutomu Hata represents the transition from a visionary to a nuts-and-bolts manager.
Business leaders say they are optimistic that Mr.
Hata will be able to put into effect some of the policies the flashy Mr.
Hosokawa elucidated well but could not always carry out.
These include deregulating business activities, spurring the economy with permanent income tax cuts and coming up with proposals on opening the country's markets to restart the stalled trade negotiations with the United States.


Anthony Industries Inc.(ANT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AT&amp;T Capital Corp.(TCC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
March  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
April  Wednesday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
March  Thursday  Gross Domestic Product . . . 1st.
Qtr.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Personal Income . . .
March  New-Home Sales . . .
March


Foote, Cone in Deal With Tierney Group
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications has formed an alliance with the Tierney Group, a public relations agency, under which Brian Tierney, the president and chief executive, will become chief executive of the Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Philadelphia office.
The agreement was announced on Friday, only days after trade publications had speculated that Foote, Cone &amp; Belding would close or sell FCB Philadelphia, which has billings of $110 million and 120 employees.
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding will continue to own the office, which will be renamed FCB/Tierney, effective on May 2.
Mr.
Tierney receives equity options in the operation.


Haggar Corp.(HGGR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 BOWING TO NATO, SERBS PULL BACK
Bosnian Serb forces, bowing to a NATO ultimatum, retreated from Gorazde but blew up the town's water treatment plant as they left.
The U.N. and NATO determined that air strikes against the Serbs were no longer warranted.
A1


Dance in Review
90 Dances in 9 Days  Evolving Arts Theater 622 Broadway (near Bleecker Street) East Village
Over the next few months, the Field, an organization that serves as a choreographic forum, will offer installments in an unusual series called 90 Dances in 9 Days.
The starting times for each separate work to be shown at a performance will be announced in advance and, by buying various kinds of combination tickets, theatergoers can come and go as they wish for either a single evening or for a weekend of events.


Guaranty National Corp.(GNC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Paragon Trade Brands Inc.(PTB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 27


Review/Music; Voices From the Past: Spry and Not Shy
"I'm a young chicken!" boasted Mary Smith McClain, an old-time blues and gospel singer who goes by the name of Diamond Teeth Mary.
"I'm 91 years young, and I live by myself and I take care of myself," she boomed out proudly.
Even though the singer, who appeared at Weill Recital Hall on Friday evening, uses a wheelchair, she displayed the vitality of a woman half her age as she belted out lusty, rough-hewn versions of "Stormy Monday," "When the Saints Go Marching In" and "Precious Lord." A half-sister of Bessie Smith, she spent the 1920's and 30's performing in minstrel and variety shows.
She is now a regular performer on the international blues circuit.


New Tenants Around Times Square; Vacancies Drop as Businesses Find Space to Fit Their Needs
When Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn packed up its Park Avenue headquarters for a move to Times Square nearly four years ago, some of the law firm's employees faced the move with trepidation befitting a covered wagon trip across the Great Plains.
"We thought of Times Square as the wild, wild west, all right," said Robert J. Kafin, chief operating partner in the firm.
"We were something of pioneers back then, and there was some resistance at the time."


Lam Research Corp.(LRCX,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Bengals Land a Big One And Select Wilkinson at No. 1
Among the big winners in yesterday's National Football League draft will surely be the Cincinnati Bengals.
With the first choice over all, the N.F.L.'s most tightfisted team took defensive tackle Dan Wilkinson of Ohio State, the best player in the draft, knowing he would cost them a small fortune to sign.
The Indianapolis Colts were big winners, too.
They took running back Marshall Faulk of San Diego State with the second pick over all and then traded up to get Trev Alberts, the outside linebacker from Nebraska, with the fifth pick.


CHRONICLE
TWEED ROOSEVELT , a great-grandson of President Theodore Roosevelt, has recreated his forebear's perilous trip down Brazil's 1,000-mile Rio Roosevelt and is now making plans to trace his expedition from the Badlands of North Dakota to the Big Horn Mountains of Wyoming.
But tomorrow evening, he is coming to New York for a tamer mission: an encounter with a teddy bear.
The Steiff company is throwing a party at Theodore Roosevelt's birthplace, 28 East 20th Street, to introduce a replica of a blue teddy bear that it made in 1908 and which sold at an auction in December in London for $74,250.


TNT Freightways Corp.(TNTF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Treasury Auctions to Offer Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week consists of bills and notes, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Tuesday, the Government will sell two-year notes, followed by Wednesday's auction of five-year notes.
There will be an auction of one-year bills on Thursday.
According to traders, by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.74 percent; the six-month bill was at 4.19 percent and the one-year bill was at 4.64 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two- and five-year notes were offered at a price to yield 5.66 percent and 6.55 percent, respectively.


South Africa Bomb Kills 9, Stirring Voter Anxiety
As the South African election campaign ended, a thunderous car-bomb blast today in downtown Johannesburg killed at least nine people and dimmed hopes that South Africans would be able to vote free of fear.
The blast left a waist-deep crater in the street about midway between the national and regional headquarters of the African National Congress, shattered glass for blocks and lacerated scores of passers-by on the quiet Sunday streets.


Rome Journal; A Fallen Politician Twists in Scandal's Spotlight
In his prime, Gianni de Michelis was a natural for the headlines: his hair was long, his disco dancing renowned, his position in the inner circle of Italian politics beyond doubt.
As Foreign Minister, he boogied the globe.
As power broker in Rome, he took a suite in a Rome hotel and held court there.
Then came the fall.


Patents
HOSPITALS can be breeding grounds for bacteria, and postoperative patients sometimes are at greater risk of infection than if they were recovering at home.
If infection sets in, it can lead to septic shock, an inflammatory disease that kills about 100,000 people a year and adds $4.5 billion a year to the country's health care costs.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A tongue-in-cheek commercial uses mockery as the latest tactic in the artificial sweetener wars.
FOR years, marketers of artificial sweeteners have been lobbing packets of their products at each other, figuratively speaking, by running tough campaigns that attack each other by name.
Their aggressive battle now enters a deliciously wicked phase as the advertising becomes the focus of the fracas.
The Cumberland Packing Corporation is responding to a campaign for the Nutrasweet Company that features female celebrities like Cher, Lauren Hutton and Raquel Welch, who belittle Cumberland's brand, Sweet 'N Low, and swear fealty to Nutrasweet's brand, Equal.
A television commercial by Pedone &amp; Partners of New York, the longtime Sweet 'N Low agency, mocks the concept of celebrity endorsements as well as the stars who endorse Equal in a series of spots by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago.


Sports of The Times; N.F.L. 'Pretty Boys' Even More in Demand
HE'S known as Big Daddy, but he's really Big Daddy II.
Long before Dan (Big Daddy) Wilkinson was liberated from Ohio State's study halls yesterday by the Cincinnati Bengals, the original Big Daddy, huge Eugene Lipscomb, roamed the National Football League as a defensive tackle for the Baltimore Colts.
"I just grab everybody in the backfield," the original Big Daddy once said modestly, "then I keep the one with the ball."


Bus in Crash Was Carrying Too Many
The driver of a minibus that crashed in the Adirondacks on Saturday, killing one person and injuring 20 other passengers, had a driver's license that allowed him to carry no more than 14 people in his vehicle.
The driver, Wagner M. Alcivar, 32, was being held by Federal immigration authorities yesterday after they determined that he is an illegal alien from Ecuador.
He faces Federal charges of using a false Social Security card, and the state police say they are also investigating the case to see if any charges are warranted.


Correction
Because of a technical malfunction, two sentences in Padma Desai's April 19 letter on the Russian economy were scrambled.
The sentences should have read: "For instance, the 1994 budget deficit target was pruned down in February to 7.4 percent of the gross domestic product from its initial 16 percent. A legitimate concern is whether these policies will hold or be abandoned."


Review/Music; Jarvi's Detroit Symphony: Resonating, Then Receding
As a guest conductor passing through New York, Neeme Jarvi has distinguished himself as a musician who knows how to get what he wants, and who wants the right things.
His performances work, in part because of his physical presence.
Conducting technique has no standards, but a few have that unexplainable gift for conveying musical wishes by bodily attitude.
Mr.
Jarvi is one of them.
Saturday night at Carnegie Hall presented Mr.
Jarvi as orchestra builder and music director.
Judging from the performance by the Detroit Symphony Orchestra of Rachmaninoff's First Symphony, he is as good at distinguishing his players as he is himself.
There is a heft and resonance from this substantial if frequently troubled orchestra that I cannot remember from the past.
When string players play well, they have a way of activating the floor beneath them, and on Saturday Carnegie Hall's stage parquet became an added instrument.


BOWING TO NATO, SERBS PULL BACK BUT DAMAGE CITY
Bosnian Serb forces, bowing to a NATO ultimatum, retreated today from Gorazde, blowing up the town's water treatment plant and leaving behind burning houses.
At the same time, the United Nations and NATO papered over differences and determined that air strikes against the Serbs were no longer warranted.


Dropped Insurance Wasn't Fault of B'nai B'rith
To the Editor:
Ann Hood's moving piece about the loss of her maternity health insurance coverage, "I'm Insured -- I Think" (Op-Ed, April 13), part of your occasional series "Health Care: Second Opinions" -- brings up a number of problems with the health insurance industry.


Control Data Systems Inc.(CDAT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Dance in Review
'3 Whips'  Woodpeckers 170 Mercer Street SoHo
Bless the Swiss.
In recent years, they have proven unexpectedly goofy as choreographers.
And that reputation was upheld on Saturday night, when four Swiss-born choreographers presented their work.
To start, the program had the peculiar title of "3 Whips." One of the seven pieces was about the cultural impact of velvet.
And an endearing minx of a tap-dancer provided periodic comic relief that was funniest when she was at her most solemn.


Power? No, Patience. 1,318th Trip Does It.
Twins 7, Blue Jays 3
Alex Cole led off the game with the first home run of his career, sending the Minnesota Twins over Toronto, 7-3, at the Skydome yesterday and stopping the Blue Jays' six-game winning streak.


Cominco Ltd. (CLT,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Donnelly Corp.(DON,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Review/Theater: Broken Glass; A Paralysis Points to Spiritual and Social Ills
Arthur Miller's new play at the Booth Theater, "Broken Glass," asks the intriguing question, "Why can't Sylvia Gellburg walk?"
Paralyzed from the waist down, the woman, a middle-aged Brooklyn housewife, is otherwise in perfect health.
There's nothing of the neurotic about her.
She's smart, strong-willed and just as baffled as everyone else by her condition.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Optioned Mike Butcher, pitcher, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Ken Patterson, pitcher, from Vancouver.
Placed Greg Myers, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Jorge Fabregas, catcher, from Vancouver.
Designated Mark Sweeney, outfielder, for assignment.


Champion Enterprises Inc.(CHB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


85 Wounded in Gorazde Are Airlifted to Sarajevo
Six French and British helicopters flew into Sarajevo this afternoon, carrying 85 wounded victims of the 26-day Serbian offensive on Gorazde in eastern Bosnia.
United Nations armored personnel carriers mounted with cannons covered the helicopter landing site, Sarajevo's Kosevo Stadium, where the opening and closing ceremonies of the 1984 Winter Olympic Games were held.


World Economies


Aviall Inc.(AVL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


How Pride In Election Eases Fear
Euphoria vies with fear as the chronic violence resounds in rat-a-tats of post-colonial mania off in the wings.
But center stage, this trouble-weary nation remains set for climactic free elections that are not to be denied.
"I love you all," Nelson Mandela said in firm counterpoint to all the gunfire and bombings, thanking the throngs of ordinary people in the vibrant Soweto ghetto outside Johannesburg and beyond, thanking the nation that once imprisoned him, for having heard him out in the first open elections in South Africa.


Managing the Whiz Kids
The story was perversely entertaining.
A 36-year-old techie is accused of outsmarting his eminent Wall Street employer, racking up a $9 million bonus by faking bond trades.
Joseph Jett, head of Kidder, Peabody's government bond trades, victimized no customers.
He did allegedly burn Kidder's shareholders, although few of them will lose much sleep over their modest losses.
But the accusations followed scary plunges on financial markets and splashy losses by aggressive investment funds, corporations and banks that traded derivatives -- fancy financial instruments whose value "derives" from underlying stocks, bonds or other assets.
The series of events raises the troubling question of whether financial whiz kids have gotten eerily out in front of their managers, let alone Federal regulators.


Sierra Pacific Resources (SRP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Greatly Feared Zulu Watches Over the Political Machine
A week ago, Thomas Mandla Shabalala proudly counted himself among the two or three most feared men in South Africa.
He may still be, but he has also become something else: the Inkatha Freedom Party's most formidable vote getter.
The self-proclaimed mayor of this sprawling squatter township on the hilly outskirts of Durban, Mr.
Shabalala is perhaps the most visible of Inkatha's urban bosses.
He is regularly reviled (misrepresented, he says) by the South African press for controlling his fief with what critics say is a mix of terror and patronage.


Duke Power (DUK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Man in the Middle Calls on Confucius
He is an unlikely figure to find at the fulcrum of the Bosnian war: a trim, bespectacled Japanese diplomat, taking flak from all sides, but always ready with a quote from Confucius.
Yet there Yasushi Akashi is, living in the faded splendor of Zagreb's Esplanade Hotel, working in a pine-paneled suite at the makeshift United Nations headquarters here, calling his wife back in Scarsdale when he can, fending off NATO calls for bombing one day, Serb threats the next, Bosnian Government complaints the day after.


Detroit Edison (DTE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Blue Jay Pitchers Charged in Florida
Toronto Blue Jays pitchers DAVE STEWART and TODD STOTTLEMYRE were charged yesterday in connection with a scuffle with the police outside a Tampa, Fla., nightclub in February.
Stewart and Stottlemyre were charged with battery on a law enforcement officer and resisting arrest.
The third-degree felony charges were filed by the Hillsborough County State Attorney's office.
No arraignment date was set.
Stewart, 37, and Stottlemyre, 28, were arrested Feb. 20 in Tampa's Ybor City section on the night of Stewart's birthday.
The Blue Jays hold spring training in Dunedin, about 45 minutes away.


Review/Theater: Faith Healer; From 3 Versions of a Shared Past, a Vision of Memory's Power
None of the three characters in Brian Friel's 1979 play, "Faith Healer," which has been given an incandescent revival at the Long Wharf Theater, dare to look at the past straight on.
The soul-lacerating story they share can be approached only by oblique degrees, with evasive detours into silence, snatches of song and numbing recitations of place names.
"Why don't we leave that until later?" says the play's title character, as he nears the wrenching climax of his tale.
"Why don't we do that? Why not? Indeed."
"Faith Healer," directed with exquisite care and subtlety by Joe Dowling, with three performances that come as close to perfection as acting gets, unfolds as a quietly devastating study of pain recollected and the transfiguring nature of memory.
It is one of those rare works of art audiences are destined to recall as a deeply personal experience, and you'll find yourself trying to sort out the different visions of reality offered here long after the play is over.


Asarco Inc.(AR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cheap Moon Mission May Offer Glimpse Of Future for NASA
OUTSIDE the nondescript brick building on a street like many others, life was elementally terrestrial.
People hurried in and out of a post office around the corner.
A yellow school bus brought children home.
Two little boys played in a yard, where laundry dried on the line.
Inside, in a small, darkened room, a few men and women sat at computer consoles and watched scenes from another world.
One after another in rapid succession, pictures of the Moon, gray vistas of lifeless plains and yawning craters, appeared on the wall screen.
The spacecraft Clementine was reporting home last week, as it has since it went into lunar orbit in February, sending the first close-up pictures of the Moon in more than two decades.


Russ Berrie &amp; Co. (RUS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The N.R.A.'s Indecent Attack
To the increasing number of Americans who want to see their society disarmed, the scare tactics of the National Rifle Association look more and more like a bad joke.
But the N.R.A.'s message -- that an unholy legion of anarchists is out to take away the guns from law-abiding, family-protecting citizens -- still attracts enough people to deserve a serious response, especially when that message takes a scurrilous form.
The recent attacks on Representative Charles Schumer of New York by CrimeStrike -- a division of the N.R.A. -- fall into this category.
Full-page advertisements this month in USA Today called Mr.
Schumer the "criminal's best friend" and excoriated him for setting aside money in the crime bill to prevent crime.
The ad accused him of squandering tax dollars "to 'increase the self-esteem' of young criminals, and to pay for midnight basketball leagues." It asked readers to tell Mr.
Schumer to build more prisons, "not build friendships with criminals." A similar television commercial was submitted to CNN, which refused to air it.


Alighiero e Boetti, 53, an Artist Who Mixed Disparate Elements
Alighiero e Boetti, an Italian Conceptual artist who saw his work as a collaboration between different people, cultures and disciplines, died on Sunday at his home in Rome.
He was 53.
The cause was brain cancer, said Gianenzo Sperone, whose gallery in Rome represented the artist for most of his career.


ShowBiz Pizza Time (SHBZ,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Amdahl Corp.(AMH,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 25


Pittston Services Group (PZS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Gooden's Injured Big Toe Puts Him on the D.L.
In a stunning blow, the Mets learned yesterday that Dwight Gooden has further damaged his already sore big right toe and will be out for much longer than the Mets had expected.
Gooden had a magnetic resonance imaging examination yesterday at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, where it was revealed that in addition to the original capsular tear to the ligament in the toe, he now has cartilage damage as well.
Gooden's condition will not require surgery, but a cast was put on the foot and he will be out of the Mets' rotation until at least the fourth week of May.


Market Place; After the food poisoning, Foodmaker is still struggling.
DESPITE a promising marketing campaign that lured many leery customers back to its Jack-in-the-Box restaurants, Foodmaker Inc. is still struggling to recover from an outbreak of food poisoning last year at its fast-food outlets in the Pacific Northwest.
The food contamination, which left two children dead and 400 people ill, sent Foodmaker's sales into a tailspin, as customers avoided Jack-in-the-Box restaurants in large numbers.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  MORE BOMBS IN SOUTH AFRICA  More than a dozen bombs exploded in South Africa, one of them killing ten people.
Taken together, they were an ominous message for the nation's first free election.
A1


Transit Revolution Coming. Bring a Fare Card.; Electronic Turnstiles Promise Vast Changes in Pricing, Planners Say
For 40 years, the most complicated decision about transit fares has been how much to charge for a token.
This week, as Herald Square becomes the last of New York's 69 busiest subway stations to receive electronic turnstiles, the transit system is on the threshold of a brave new world of pricing possibilities that some say could transform the role of mass transit in the city's economy.
But nobody is sure just how, and the Metrocard electronic-fare system is for now a shiny $700 million tool that no one has decided how to use.


Hudson Foods Inc.(HFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Quantum Corp.(QNTM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Optioned Brad Pennington, pitcher, to Rochester of the International League.
Recalled Mike Oquist, pitcher, from Rochester.


Hasidic Student In Stable Condition
Nachum Sasonkin, one of the Hasidic students wounded in the shooting attack on a van on the Brooklyn Bridge last month, has been removed from intensive care and was described as stable yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
Mr.
Sasonkin was shot in the head and doctors initially thought he was unlikely to survive the March 1 attack.
But he showed signs of improvement and recovered enough to no longer be listed as critical, hospital officials said.
They would not provide further more details.


Mayor and City Council Clash Over Privatization
In a looming confrontation between Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council, the administration threatened yesterday to go to court to block legislation that would allow the Council to hold hearings on the Mayor's attempts to turn city services over to private companies.
With a Council committee vote on the bill likely today, Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers said that the Mayor had campaigned on a platform of introducing competition into government by allowing private businesses to bid on delivering city services.
"We think this bill represents a roadblock for us doing that and goes against the mandate given to the Mayor by the voters," he said, calling together reporters to get out the administration's message.


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber (GT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Sun and Fujitsu to Broaden Pact to Bolster Sparc Chip
Sun Microsystems Inc. and Fujitsu Ltd. said today that they would significantly broaden their longstanding collaboration and jointly work to bolster Sun's Sparc microprocessor against competitive threats from chips made by the Intel Corporation and other companies.
Sun, the world leader in engineering work stations, has long supplied its products for sale in Japan by Fujitsu, this nation's largest computer company.
And Fujitsu has long manufactured Sparc microprocessors, which Sun uses in its machines.


CHRONICLE
SUSAN MORRISON, who has been the editor of The New York Observer since August 1992, will leave the newspaper next month, according to an announcement made yesterday by Ms.
Morrison and ARTHUR CARTER, the publisher of the weekly.
The statement did not say whether she was stepping down voluntarily or because her contract would not be renewed when it expires in August, but it did say that Mr.
Carter "hopes a new editor will be at the newspaper in early June."
In a telephone interview, Ms.
Morrison said: "Editing this paper is one of those thrilling, seat-of-the-pants operations done at a fast pace. It is one of those jobs that should have term limits."


Major Figures on Both Sides Questioning Israel-P.L.O. Talks
As Israeli and Palestinian negotiators wrestled in Cairo with their still-unfinished peace agreement, influential political figures on both sides today challenged the legitimacy of the negotiations and said they would not be bound by the results.
On the Palestinian side, attacks on the Cairo talks were led by Dr.
Haidar Abdel-Shafi, who used to head the Palestinian delegation when negotiations were held in Washington.


Electronic Arts Inc.(ERTS,NMS) reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Saturn Returns to Full Output of Cars
The Saturn Corporation, the tiny auto maker created by the General Motors Corporation to pioneer manufacturing and sales techniques, said today that it had returned to its prior production level of small cars after its sales rose with the industrywide boom.
The move clearly puts Saturn in a stronger position as it prepares to seek backing from G.M. for an additional assembly plant in hopes of bolstering its profits.
Saturn officials have to demonstrate that they can sell everything they can now build before asking for more production capacity.


In a Luxury Model, Speed and Refinement
SUBTLE differences between one desktop computer and another keep computer magazines busy running benchmark tests, but the results are clear.
These boxes on our desks are becoming commodities.
Computers are not yet as fungible as pork bellies, but they are getting closer.
Again and again, benchmark tests reveal that machines with similar specifications perform in remarkably similar ways.
Faster models typically have fast microprocessors, swift disk drives, special video cards and lots of fast cache memory to support them.
Slower models get by with less, but do not cost as much.
The mandatory automotive analogy?
Two Maseratis will perform more comparably than a Maserati and a Yugo.
Both, however, are likely to get you where you are going.


Giuliani and Whitman Stress Mutual Understanding in Broadcast
There were promises of mutual support and understanding during a television appearance last night shared by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman as the two Republican newcomers to office set out to ease the tensions over crime and business competition between New York City and New Jersey.
Conscious of the often fractious past relations between the cross-Hudson neighbors, Mrs.
Whitman and Mr.
Giuliani took pains to support each other's views.


Kuhlman Corp.(KUH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


METRO DIGEST
DONNA GIULIANI, TACKLING NEW ROLES
In public, Donna Hanover Giuliani relishes her role as the First Lady of New York City, an ebullient partner who holds her solemn husband's hand at every opportunity and defrosts him every time she giggles.
In private, Mrs.
Giuliani, a veteran of the personable arts of television journalism, plays a subtler sort of "first." A1.
NEW YORK CITY  OFFICER ENTERS PLEA IN CORRUPTION INQUIRY
A 25-year-old police officer pleaded guilty to lying to a grand jury that is looking into suspected corruption in a Brooklyn police precinct and agreed to cooperate with the inquiry in the hope of gaining leniency.
B2.
AT CITY HALL, A CLASH OVER PRIVATIZATION
In a looming confrontation between Mayor Giuliani and the City Council, the administration threatened to go to court to block legislation that would allow the Council to hold hearings on the Mayor's attempts to turn city services over to private companies.
B3.
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE PROGRAM PLANNED
Mayor Giuliani, in a new program to combat domestic violence, will assign a police officer and a detective in every precinct to track wife-abuse cases his advisers said.
B3.
CAMPING OUT FOR KINDERGARTEN SPOTS
As thousands of New Yorkers began registering their children for kindergarten classes this fall, some parents had already spent all night lined up outside an elementary school in Queens, determined to get their children seats in the neighborhood school rather than watch them be bused to another one miles away.
B4.
INCIDENT AT HOSPITAL IS INVESTIGATED
A patient accused of sexually assaulting a comatose woman in Harlem Hospital was supposed to undergo a psychiatric examination when he was admitted, but the exam was never done, a senior official of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation said.
B4.
REGION  DEAL IS WEIGHED IN KIDNAPPING CASE
Prosecutors and defense lawyers for John Esposito, who was charged last year with kidnapping a 10-year-old girl, Katie Beers, and imprisoning her for 16 days in a underground bunker behind his house, are trying to work out a plea bargain that would allow the girl to avoid testifying.
Andrew B. Siben, Mr.
Esposito's lawyer, said he believed "a plea would be in everyone's best interest." B6.
RIFKIN PORTRAYED AS METHODICAL KILLER
As jurors heard the details of Joel Rifkin's confession to killing 17 women, the prosecution sought to portray him as a methodical killer who knew that he had done wrong and who was remorseful.
B6.
MISSING LONG ISLAND WOMAN FOUND ON BUS
Michelina Abbatiello, who disappeared on the weekend of her wedding shower, was found aboard a bus at a customs check point on the Canadian border in upstate New York.
In a phone call, she told her sister that she was well but was not returning home.
B6.
GIULIANI AND WHITMAN PLEDGE SUPPORT
There were promises of mutual support and understanding during a television appearance shared by Mayor Guiliani and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman.
B6 Chronicle &lt;B7  Our Towns by Evelyn Nieves B6


Komag Inc.(KMAG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


SOCCER
United States
A number of American players said they would consider a tie to be a loss against Iceland.
So what do they think about the 2-1 defeat to one of the minnows of world soccer?
Perhaps only Coach Bora Milutinovic knows the answer.


Liz Claiborne (LIZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Texaco and ARCO Earnings Drop on Lower Oil Prices
Texaco Inc. and ARCO reported lower earnings for the first quarter yesterday as lower oil prices cut profits on their production and exploration businesses while cheaper oil helped their refining and marketing operations.
Texaco, which is based in White Plains, said its net income fell 27 percent, to $202 million, or 69 cents a share, from $278 million, or 97 cents a share, in the comparable quarter a year earlier.
Revenue fell 10 percent, to $7.4 billion from $8.2 billion.


Philip Morris
The investment superstars Peter Lynch and Warren E. Buffett differ on tobacco stocks like Philip Morris.
Mr.
Buffett told Berkshire Hathaway shareholders yesterday that he doubted that tobacco companies had a bright future.
Mr.
Lynch, former manager of Fidelity Magellan, says they are undervalued.
Shares of Philip Morris fell yesterday.


Nash Finch Co.(NAFC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 26


F.D.A. Opens Inquiry on Upjohn's Handling of Data on Sleeping Pill
The Federal Government will investigate new allegations that the Upjohn Company knew of serious side effects caused by the sleeping pill Halcion, but reported them falsely to the Food and Drug Administration.
The charges were made by Dr.
Sidney M. Wolfe of the Health Research Group, a consumer advocate organization here.
An Upjohn spokeswoman said that the initial failure to report the side effects was a mistake but that all were reported later.


Jeep Is Giving Chrysler a Success Story in Japan
About 750 Honda dealers in Japan have the right to sell the Jeep Cherokee, but how many are actively doing so?
"We don't have a clue," said Jerry K. Hsu, the Chrysler Corporation's new man in Japan.


Fare Card Brings Debate on Options For Transit Pricing
In two days, Herald Square will become the last of New York's 69 busiest subway stations to install turnstiles that take electronic fare cards as well as tokens.
The question is, will that push the transit system into a brave new world of pricing?
There is no shortage of possibilities.
The Transit Authority could charge off-peak fares, so that a ride that costs $1.25 at rush hour would be less expensive at other times.
Or it could give discounts to regular riders.
Or offer almost-free bus transfers.


Meredith Corp.(MDP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Classical Music in Review
Bournemouth Symphony  Avery Fisher Hall
Orchestras from Europe's smaller big cities have been passing through town recently on their way to or from American tours.
Groups from Bonn, Liege and Bournemouth have been among them.
Tours serve one of two purposes, and in the best cases both purposes together.
One is to bring something fresh, unexpected or especially substantial to new audiences; the other is to ratify one's worthiness for the folks back home: a sort of domestic promotional effort with an international setting.


Newly Elected Rightist Pledges to 'Govern for All Salvadorans'
The first promise that El Salvador's next President, Armando Calderon Sol, made on declaring victory after the election on Sunday was that he would unify his divided country.
"I want to assure all our political adversaries that we will govern for all Salvadorans," he told a country whose civil war killed 75,000 people.


U.S. Robotics (USRX,NMSX) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Salomon Profit Curbed By Volatility in Markets
Sharp declines in foreign financial markets, big swings in foreign exchange markets and its own propensity to take risks extracted a painful price from Salomon Inc. in the first quarter.
The Wall Street investment firm reported net income of $66 million yesterday for the first three months of the year, or 48 cents a share, in contrast to a loss of $102 million, or $1.10 a share, in the corresponding quarter a year earlier.
Revenues for the latest quarter were $1.77 billion, up 11.3 percent from $1.59 billion a year earlier.


Classical Music in Review
Young Uck Kim And Emanuel Ax  Metropolitan Museum
Young Uck Kim and Emanuel Ax play different instruments but hear music in much the same terms.
Feeling, both men seem to be saying, is at its strongest and most penetrating when it is held tightly to rules of proportion, defended from excess.


Accounts
*
Avia Group International, Beaverton, Ore., invited five agencies to compete for its account, excluding the incumbent, Citron Haligman Bedecarre, San Francisco.
The agencies competing for the account, with billings estimated at $2 million to $5 million, are Butler, Shine &amp; Stern, Sausalito, Calif.; Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis; Cole &amp; Weber, Portland, Ore.; DDB Needham Chicago, and Livingston &amp; Co., Seattle. *
Shell Cos. of China and Hong Kong to Dentsu, Young &amp; Rubicam, Hong Kong and Shanghai, as the first agencies to handle advertising and communications for the Shell brand and Shell products in China.
Dentsu, Y.&amp; R.'s Beijing and Guangzhou offices will also work on the account.
Billings were not disclosed.


Former South Africans May Also Vote Today
To the Editor:
An advertisement placed in The Times on April 24 by the Independent Electoral Commission did not provide complete information on eligibility to vote in South Africa's election.
Also, the South African Embassy has disseminated incorrect information to the 130,000 former South Africans living in the United States.


SPX Corp.(SPW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


UAL Director Named
The United Airlines' division of the Air Lines Pilots Association has named Roger Hall, its chairman, to the board of United's parent, the UAL Corporation, if shareholders approve a $5 billion offer by the carrier's unions to exchange concessions for majority control.
The International Association of Machinists recently named John F. Peterpaul, a general vice president, to the other board seat to be held by a union representative.
One seat remains to be filled, most likely by the still-unnamed president of the restructured company.
The proposed board membership is considered an important part of the unions' offer to buy the company because many shareholders, who will vote on the proposal this summer, have expressed worry about the extent of the United unions' influence.


CDI Corp.(CDI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Senator, Promoting Student Nutrition, Battles Coca-Cola
It may be true, as the advertising slogan says, that things go better with Coke.
But school lunch is not one of them, the chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee said today.
The chairman, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, has introduced a bill that would encourage schools to restrict or ban the sale of soft drinks and other items of "minimal nutritional value."


Fakery Gets You Somewhere: Devils Up, 3-2
Led by two goals each from an inspired Claude Lemieux and John MacLean, the Devils played their best game of the playoffs tonight.
Trailing by 3-1 in the second period, they rallied to post a 5-3 victory over the Buffalo Sabres Byrne Meadowlands Arena and take a 3-2 lead in the Eastern Conference quarterfinal series.
Game 6 will be played at the Aud in Buffalo on Wednesday night.
Game 7, if necessary, will be here Friday night.


On My Mind; Bosnia And the Holocaust
In his last book, Richard Nixon writes that the siege of Sarajevo would not have lasted as long as it did had the victims been not Muslims but predominantly Christians or Jews.
The book has not yet been published, but within two days of his death, the substance of that one comment was quoted in the press.
Each time the journalistic surround was clear: The man is right.


Unocal Corp.(UCL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
The baritone Thomas Hampson joined the New York Philharmonic and Leonard Slatkin on Saturday night for Debussy's "Trois Ballades de Francois Villon" and Ravel's "Don Quichotte a Dulcinee." Ravel's cycle, originally written for a film by G. W. Pabst, closely follows Debussy's in structure, with successive moods of melancholy passion, religious dedication and high-spirited revelry.
Mr.
Hampson caught them all with assurance and panache; Mr.
Slatkin supplied colorful, atmospheric accompaniment.


Chesapeake Corp.(CSK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Cape Town Sunset Leaves White Rule in Deep Shade
Sniping partisanly in the dying of apartheid's light, the old South African Parliament adjourned today forever in a session distinguished by the dearth of black faces -- the last time that will happen -- and by members' heated resort to democracy to salvage their careers in the nation's first free elections.
"Vote for the Inkatha party -- the future of tomorrow," one member boomed into a television camera, campaigning for voters well beyond the musty colonial decorum of what long reigned as the racially rigged debating chamber of the white oligarchy.


Corrections
A map yesterday showing the states that have laws prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation misidentified one state in some editions.
The shaded area identified as Vermont was New Hampshire.


Emphesys Financial Group Inc.(EFG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Blue Wall of Silence: Graft Shielded Behind Old Code
Deputy Chief Ronald Johnson died of cancer in her rookie year, but Officer Jennifer Johnson still carries his words in her head.
Her father told her of a line between the law and corruption that cannot be crossed.
Yet he talked of how important it is for officers to stand together, like family.
Those conflicting standards create an odd purgatory for officers in the New York City Police Department, some for whom silence is the only sin.


Fremont General Corp.(FMT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lights, Cameras, Liverwurst
OF all the luncheonettes in all the world, film makers have discovered Schnackenberg's.
They were here the other day, again.
Moving counters out, installing fake, easy-to-break windows, creating a scene on Washington Street for "Basketball Diaries."


CHRONICLE
As surely as tulips bloom at this time of year, so do organizations roll out their annual awards for accomplishment, service, performance.
With the pace of presentation ceremonies accelerating, herewith a sampling of honors newly bestowed or about to be.
The DALAI LAMA will receive two tributes this week.
Today, he is to be awarded an honorary doctor of humane letters degree by Columbia University at a special convocation in the rotunda of Low Memorial Library.


Horace Mann Educators Corp.(HMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Quaker State Corp.(KSF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Yankees Bid Ojeda Farewell
The Yankees designated left-hander Bob Ojeda for assignment yesterday, meaning that his brief career with the team is over.
Ojeda's stay with the Yankees officially lasted 10 days and included two forgettable starts, which led General Manager Gene Michael and Manager Buck Showalter to conclude they would be better off without him.
The Yanks have 10 days to trade the 36-year-old Ojeda.
If they are unsuccessful and he is not claimed on waivers, they must pay his entire $350,000 salary.


Weicker Signs Agreement With 2 Tribes on Casino Gambling
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. signed agreements with two Indian tribes today that could raise the ante too high for anyone other than Indians to ever operate casinos in Connecticut.
Under the agreements, Mr.
Weicker, an outspoken opponent of casino gambling, recognized the Mohegan Tribe in eastern Connecticut as a sovereign nation and settled its land claims, and in exchange for at least $80 million a year in payments to the state, also put it in the casino business.


THE 37th PRESIDENT: WHITE HOUSE TAPES; Nixon Lawyers to Continue Fight Over Papers and Tapes
The heirs of Richard M. Nixon plan to continue his 20-year-old fight to control more than 3,000 hours of White House tapes and 150,000 pages of Presidential papers, his lawyer said today.
But legal experts said Mr.
Nixon's death may speed the release of the records, which are locked away at the National Archives and have never been made available to scholars or journalists.


Public Service Co. of New Mexico (PNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Jets Have Focus on Bono of 49ers
On the second day of the National Football League college draft, the Jets did more than look for raw talent to add to their roster.
In moves that could alter the shape of the Jets' quarterback situation, General Manager Dick Steinberg spent much of the day trying to work out a deal to get the 49ers' backup quarterback, Steve Bono, and then selected quarterback Glenn Foley of Boston College in the seventh round.
The Jets completed the draft today by selecting defensive tackle Lou Benfatti of Penn State in the third round, receiver Orlando Parker of Troy State in the fourth round, linebacker Horace Morris of Tennessee in the fifth round and fullback Fred Lester of Alabama A. &amp; M. in the sixth round.
On Sunday, the Jets took cornerback Aaron Glenn of Texas A&amp;M in the first round and receiver Ryan Yarborough of Wyoming in the second round.


Macy Bondholders Insist on a $4 Billion Valuation
The committee representing bondholders of R. H. Macy &amp; Company issued a statement yesterday saying that it would "vigorously oppose" any plan of reorganization for the distressed retailer that valued the company at less than $4 billion.
The statement was unusual because Cyrus R. Vance, the court-appointed mediator in the bankruptcy case, has repeatedly taken to task the company, its creditors, and their lawyers and financial advisers for talking to reporters.
He has asked them to sign a confidentiality agreement.
Mr.
Vance gave his consent to the release of the statement, according to the bondholders' committee.


Winners, Losers and Others In League's Annual Draft
The National Football League draft ended yesterday with accolades for the San Francisco 49ers, the Minnesota Vikings, the Washington Redskins and the Indianapolis Colts.
There were thumbs-down verdicts for the Denver Broncos, the Los Angeles Raiders, the San Diego Chargers and the Dallas Cowboys.
And there was a conviction that the Cowboys would not win a third straight Super Bowl this season or even come close.
A quick look at who seemed to do well and who did not:


Trying to Get a Souvenir New York City Skyline


Bombs Won't Win in South Africa
Unable to block this week's election by other means, racial zealots in South Africa have turned to the coward's weapon: the car bomb.
In and near Johannesburg, 19 people were killed in car bombings near offices used by the African National Congress, then at a taxi stand for black commuters; at least two others died in a dozen bomb attacks elsewhere.
No group has claimed responsibility, but white extremists have threatened drastic action to scare voters from the first poll in three centuries open to all South Africans, regardless of race.
This is a moment that belongs to the world as well as South Africa.
It is unthinkable that it can be delayed or spoiled by "a group of desperate people," in President F. W. de Klerk's words, who have "declared war on the rest of society." Correctly, his Government has responded with the biggest peacetime military call-up in South Africa's history and by posting 100,000 police officers, double the planned total, at polling stations.


Classical Music in Review
Sherrill Milnes  Baritone Kaye Playhouse
Sherrill Milnes charmed his audience on Sunday afternoon with a program given over mostly to rarities, and interpretations that centered on characterization rather than overt display.
Not that there were no daring moves.
Mr.
Milnes, whose baritone has been put to its best and most famous use in mainstream Romantic opera, opened his program with arias from Baroque and Classical French works: Mondonville's "Titonet l'Aurore," Lully's "Amadis" and Gretry's "Richard the Lionhearted." There were few concessions to period style, and there was a touch of brutishness in the Gretry and Mondonville.


Sequent Computer Systems Inc.(SQNT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Amerada Hess Corp.(AHC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Armstrong World Industries (ACK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


By Design; Perfect Look for Summer
A cropped top and drawstring pants are just the thing to wear on lazy, warm-weather weekends.
A cutoff T-shirt, whether sleeveless, cap-sleeved or long-sleeved, looks freshest in crisp stripes or a bright solid color.
Ann Taylor has striped cotton and spandex cropped T-shirts with capped sleeves or without sleeves for $34, and with long sleeves and a scooped neck for $38.


Safeco Corp.(SAFC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Specter of Hate Stalks Burundi, Too
Diplomats and Government officials are concerned that Burundi, which reflects the same ethnic divisions as Rwanda, could follow its blood-drenched neighbor into anarchy.
The last few days have seen an intensification of fighting that broke out in the capital's suburbs last month between the army, which is dominated by the minority Tutsi, and militants of the majority Hutu.


Doman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Blue Jays' Gaston Gets Suspension
Toronto Blue Jays Manager CITO GASTON received a three-game suspension yesterday from the American League for bumping the umpire RICK REED and for disorderly behavior during a game against the California Angels on April 15.
The suspension, imposed by the American League president, BOBBY BROWN, will not take effect until Brown hears Gaston's appeal at a session scheduled for late May in New York.(AP)


Pop and Jazz in Review
The Charlatans  Irving Plaza
Tim Burgess, the lead singer for the psychedelic dance group the Charlatans, from Manchester, England, just couldn't keep still when his band played on Saturday night.
His rubbery arms were flapping like an excited bird's wings; his beestung, Mick Jagger-like lips were in constant motion, even when he wasn't singing, and he continually strutted across the stage like a chicken in a small pen.
The other band members seemed like mannequins in comparison with the charismatic and very narcissistic singer.


Postage Due
Oh, the frustrations of life on the fringe.
Take East Rutherford in New Jersey, across the Hudson River from New York City.
Seven World Cup soccer matches will be played there.
Jillions will watch on TV.
But the U.S.
Postal Service's souvenir sheet of stamps shows the games in the Big Apple.
"The whole world found Lillehammer, Norway," fumes George Zoffinger, chairman of New Jersey's World Cup Host Committee.
"I'm sure they can find East Rutherford, N.J." Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman filed her own complaint, pointing to an agreement that says New Jersey will be mentioned in all promotions related to the games there.


Sierra Health Services Inc.(SIE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Russian Opposes Air Strikes Against Serbs
In remarks that put him at odds with Moscow's most recent policy statements, Defense Minister Pavel S. Grachev said today that he strongly opposed air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs.
He added they should not be blamed "one sidedly" for shelling Gorazde.
General Grachev's comments, at a news conference, underscored strains in the Cabinet over the Bosnian crisis.


Douglas &amp; Lomason Co.  (DOUG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


UNR Industries(UNRI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society  Alice Tully Hall
The Chamber Music Society's program on Friday night started out in ordinary fashion, with Beethoven's "Spring" Sonata and Schumann's Piano Quintet.
Pamela Frank was the violin soloist, not quite as technically assured as usual (there were a few intonational shrieks) but supplying her customary warm, dark, eloquent tone.
Her father, Claude Frank, contributed a lively accompaniment.
Ms.
Frank joined a group that included Lilian Kallir (pianist), Joseph Silverstein (violinist), Walter Trampler (violist) and Leslie Parnas (cellist) for the Schumann; the lower string tone was sometimes wan and unsteady, but the reading as a whole had weight and character, particularly in the slow movement.


Clark Equipment Co. (CKL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE 37th PRESIDENT; Swift Printing Of Nixon Book
Random House is rushing into print with a book that President Richard M. Nixon had completed shortly before his death.
The book "Beyond Peace," had been scheduled for release in June but will now be off the presses tomorrow.
Harold Evans, the former President's editor, said Mr.
Nixon had planned to make further revisions to reflect his visit to Russia in March.


Central Maine Power Co.  (CTP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE 37th PRESIDENT; Federal Offices Close for Nixon
Congress will recess, the Supreme Court will close, regular mail delivery will be suspended and most Federal offices and financial markets will shut down tomorrow to mourn former President Richard M. Nixon, but the offices of most state governments will remain open.
New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and most other states will operate normally tomorrow, when the former President's funeral will be held at the Richard M. Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, Calif.


Patterns
A Modern Marriage
Before there was fashion inspired by hip-hop, grunge, rave or rap, there was the music itself.
And for 15 years, that alternative music has been getting invaluable exposure at the New Music Seminar in New York.


Observer; The Tiger With No Teeth
It was entertaining to watch the press crowd come to grips with the dead Richard Nixon over the weekend.
What a botch they made of it.
They seemed engaged in a group conspiracy to grant him absolution.
It will be said that they were simply indulging in the civilized insincerity that courtesy prescribes at such times, and there is something to be said for an outbreak of courtesy in the press.
The Clintons would doubtless welcome an epidemic of it.


The Inevitability of Incompetent Doctors; Unjust Michigan Law
To the Editor:
I am a lawyer in Michigan specializing in malpractice.
Our office and various colleagues of mine have seen numerous cases where individuals such as Dr.
Garry E. Winn, in your April 9 article on medical incompetence, have been allowed to practice medicine even though their colleagues are aware that they are incompetent.
We do our best to recoup for our clients monies that are used to help put their lives together.


Southern Pacific Rail Corp.(RSP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
3.70
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.74
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.25
4.19
2.96
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.86
6.92
5.95
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.15
7.22
6.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.94
8.02
7.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.30
6.30
5.99
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


United Wisconsin Services Inc.(UWSI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Executive Changes
AMERICAN STORES CO., Salt Lake City, named Robert P. Hermanns senior executive vice president of food.
B.
F.
GOODRICH CO., Akron, Ohio, named Jon V. Heider, its senior vice president and general counsel, to the post of executive vice president.


Classical Music in Review
Dana Hanchard  Soprano Merkin Concert Hall
In France, the border between art songs and the music of the streets and bars is easily crossable and often poorly marked.
Dana Hanchard's sly, sophisticated recital on Thursday night embraced both frontiers by investing them with identical values.
At the same time, Steven Blier's piano playing was making it agreeably difficult to sort out intricate written-out accompaniments from ad-lib pop performance.


Miscellany
*
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, Chicago, agreed to acquire CF2GS, a direct response agency in Seattle.
Foote, Cone will acquire 100 percent ownership and CF2GS will operate under its current name and existing management structure, with its founders, Ron Christiansen and Bill Fritsch, reporting to the agency company's FCB West unit.
CF2GS, with 40 employees, has billings estimated at $30 million from clients like U.S.
Bank and Royal Caribbean Cruise Lines.


Missing Long Island Woman Found, Well, on an Upstate Bus
Michelina Abbatiello, the 23-year-old Long Island woman who disappeared March 25 on the weekend of her wedding shower, was found today aboard a bus at a customs check point on the Canadian border in upstate New York.
In a phone call, she told her sister she was well but was not returning home.
Miss Abbatiello was reported missing by her family after she failed to return from a shopping trip at the Roosevelt Field Shopping Center near her Westbury, L.I., home.


No Headline
"Someone is trying to scare us away from the election. They are wasting their time. We are going." -- ZOLE MSENTI, a South African taxi driver hurt in a bombing.  [ A1:6. ]


Marvel Entertainment Group Inc.(MRV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


'Indefinite' Ban Of Mason Definately Over
Anthony Mason was reinstated by the Knicks yesterday after serving a three-game suspension without pay for "conduct detrimental to the team."
Mason will accompany the Knicks today when they leave for Charleston, S.C., to begin practice for the three-of-five-game first-round playoff series against the Nets that opens Friday night at Madison Square Garden.


Natal Journal; Brazil's Glory Days of B-25's and Boogie-Woogie
After straining in vain against his net one hot afternoon, a fisherman here finally dove overboard out of frustration.
When he emerged from the murky waters of the Potengi River, he reported a catch too big for his rowboat: a twin-engine B-25 bomber.
Patrick Muller, a French scuba diver, confirmed it after a day of underwater exploration.
"It's an American B-25 all right, almost completely intact," he said.
"The plane was down there for 50 years, and then this guy snags it in his net."


Lubrizol Corp.(LZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Most Markets Shut Tomorrow
Most financial markets in the United States will be closed tomorrow for a day of mourning for former President Richard M. Nixon, who died Friday.
The stock and commodities markets will be closed.
The Public Securities Association has recommended the closing of the government securities market and money-market trading.


Top Quark, Last Piece in Puzzle Of Matter, Appears to Be in Place
The quest begun by philosophers in ancient Greece to understand the nature of matter may have ended in Batavia, Ill., with the discovery of evidence for the top quark, the last of 12 subatomic building blocks now believed to constitute all of the material world.
An international team of 439 scientists working at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory will announce the finding today, bringing nearly two decades of searching to a dramatic conclusion.


National Steel (NS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


INSIDE
Casino Deal in Connecticut
Governor Weicker signed agreements with two Indian tribes that could raise the ante too high for anyone other than Indians to operate casinos in Connecticut.
Page B1.
To the Moon, on the Cheap
There are no elaborate control rooms or huge design teams.
Yet a modest space mission is providing the first close-up pictures of the Moon in two decades.
Science Times, page C1.
Quayle Sees His Future
Dan Quayle, who as Vice President became the most ridiculed politician in modern American history, has begun a new push for recognition, and perhaps the White House.
Page A20.
Round and Round He Goes
With only two days of rehearsal, Marcus Lovett, the star of "The Phantom of the Opera," took the leading role in "Carousel" and won the brass ring (and a bruised nose).
Page C17.


Rights Groups Stepping Up Pressure on Colombian Officials
A union leader and human rights campaigner, Isidro Caballero, was last seen in February 1989, going from village to village in northwestern Colombia to gather support for a peace forum.
When his wife, Maria Nodelia Parra, heard of his disappearance she began a campaign that few Colombians would dare to undertake.
For five years she collected witnesses' accounts that told how the army had detained him without charges and killed him.
She conducted protests demanding information on his whereabouts, and she made trips to Bogota asking justice authorities to investigate the case.


Laclede Steel Co.  (LCLD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Mental Decline in Aging Need Not Be Inevitable
SHE was 69, and still active as a professor at Harvard University.
But, she told a research team there, she had begun to find it hard to recall the names of newer faculty members, and not long ago completely forgot her classroom number when asking for a slide projector to be set up.
Just that morning, she said, she was at a loss to think of the word for "the thing you turn eggs over with."
She had one question for the research team, assembled to study the normal course of mental aging: "Am I losing it?"


Rare Butterfly Consigned to Extinction
SCIENTISTS say the country's most recently discovered species of butterfly is about to become extinct.
But rather than taking what they call "heroic measures" to save it, they are advocating a more hands-off policy that they predict will soon have biologists counting one less species among North America's butterflies.
Like concerned family members gathered around a loved one's death bed, the biologists who studied this small alpine insect, the Uncompahgre fritillary butterfly, have begun the mourning process, already sadly shaking their heads.
They say there is no clear way to save the butterfly, so rather than spending precious conservation dollars to try to resuscitate the species, they suggest letting it go.


A Russian Reformer Is Down but Not Out
Boris G. Fyodorov, who warned when he resigned as Russia's Finance Minister in January that anti-reform politicians and industrial leaders were plotting an "economic coup," may be biding his time, but he's not biting his tongue.
If anything, Mr.
Fyodorov has become more vociferous since retiring -- temporarily, as he sees it -- to a position in the Soviet Parliament.
Appearing here on Friday at a conference sponsored by the University of Chicago on the role of central banks in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, Mr.
Fyodorov assailed the International Monetary Fund for its recent approval of a $1.5 billion loan to the Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin.


Kinetic Concepts Inc.(KNIC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Caremark International Inc.(CK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Officers in Brooklyn Slay Man in Arrest
The police shot and killed a man yesterday in a gun battle along a desolate strip of boarded-up warehouses, factories and rambling junkyards in East New York, Brooklyn, after a buy-and-bust operation went awry, a police spokesman said.
Two men and at least 10 officers, including eight serving as backup, were involved in the shooting, which occurred at 5:15 P.M. at Snediker and Glenmore Avenues, said the spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.


Take a Health Approach to Family Planning
To the Editor:
Re "Women Campaign for New Plan to Curb the World's Population" (news article, April 13):


For More Open Budget Negotiations in New York's Legislature
To the Editor:
Your editorial criticizing the deep secrecy surrounding the 1994-95 New York State budget negotiations was right on target, underscoring the need to overhaul a system that excludes both the public and most of New York's 211 legislators from any meaningful participation in the state's most important policy decisions ("Albany's Big Secret: The Budget," April 14).


Coachmen Industries Inc.(COA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Judge Rejects Motion to End Suicide Trial
A judge today rejected a defense motion to acquit Dr.
Jack Kevorkian of violating Michigan's ban on assisted suicide.
Dr.
Kevorkian's lawyers had argued that the court did not have jurisdiction.
The doctor, who says his intent has been to relieve suffering, admits that he helped Thomas W. Hyde, who is at the center of this case, commit suicide.
Dr.
Kevorkian has been present at the suicides of 20 people since 1990.


Town &amp; Country Corp.(TNC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


AT&amp;T Proposes Sea Cable That Would Encircle Africa
The AT&amp;T Corporation has proposed ringing the continent of Africa with a grid of undersea fiber optic cables to improve communications among African countries and between Africa and the rest of the world.
The company proposed the project, which would cost from $1 billion to $1.5 billion, at a meeting yesterday in Cairo of telecommunications specialists organized by the International Telecommunications Union, a United Nations regulatory agency.


Colonial Gas Co. (CGES,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ogilvy Executive Joins D.M.B.&amp; B.
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles said yesterday that it had hired Ross Sutherland, a top creative talent at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, as the chief creative officer and deputy managing director of its New York office, effective on June 1.
He will succeed Richard Levenson, who earlier assumed the post of creative director at large in preparation for leaving the agency in July.


Suspect in Sexual Assault Never Got Psychiatric Exam
A patient accused of sexually assaulting a comatose woman in Harlem Hospital was supposed to undergo a psychiatric examination when he was admitted, but the exam was never done, a senior official of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said a doctor had requested the test, and it was not clear why it was not performed.
If the exam had found that the man was unstable, he might have been kept in a locked unit, the official said.


Classical Music in Review
New York Madrigal Singers  Church of Notre Dame
Orlando Gibbons, a great church composer of the English Renaissance, published a volume of madrigals in 1612, but although he called the book "The First Set of Madrigals and Motets" and although Gibbons lived 13 more years, there was never a sequel.
The madrigals are infrequently performed, but on Saturday evening, Erik-Peter Mortensen and his New York Madrigal Singers performed the whole book, making an eloquent case on Gibbons's behalf.


Teradyne Inc.(TER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Farm Credit Issue Set to Be Priced
A $2.48 billion, three-part bond offering by the Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation will be priced today, instead of tomorrow.
The financing was moved up a day, as the Public Securities Association announced yesterday that it was recommending that the Government securities market close tomorrow in observance of a national day of mourning for former President Richard M. Nixon.


Ultrathin models in Coca-Cola and Calvin Klein campaigns draw fire and a boycott call.
AN organization is urging marketers to renounce the use of overly thin models because, its founders charge, such images encourage starvation diets and eating disorders.
The group, and the publicity it has already drawn, raises again the contentious issue of advertising's ability to influence behavior.
The name of the organization, formed by women in the Boston area, some of whom suffered eating disorders, describes its purpose: Boycott Anorexic Marketing.
It seeks to curtail the practice of featuring waif-like, wafer-thin models in ads for a variety of products by identifying companies considered to be culprits and asking consumers not to buy their wares.


Dow Jumps As Bonds Post Gains
In a surprising show of vigor, traders bid up stocks yesterday in response to a sharp drop in interest rates and better-than-expected earnings for companies whose stocks are in the Dow Jones industrial average.
Stocks also got a broad lift from recommendations by a respected investor, Peter Lynch, who spoke favorably about dozens of what he called undervalued stocks, ranging from giants like General Motors to obscure concerns like the Quixote Corporation, a maker of specialized equipment ranging from compact disks to highway-safety products.
The stocks of nearly all of the companies he mentioned rose yesterday.
Anticipating Statistics
Moreover, looking to this week's economic reports -- wage statistics due out today, durable-goods figures tomorrow and gross domestic product data on Thursday -- some analysts were saying that if the numbers encouraged a continuation of a rally in bond prices, then stocks might also show further gains.


Yankees Deliver Cruncher
Another night of considerable offense.
Another piece of evidence for the debate about juiced baseballs.
Another impeccable start by Jimmy Key.
Another victory for the Yankees.
These occurrences have been monotonous for opponents to endure, but have been magnificent for the Yankees.
Last night's game quickly tumbled into the same pleasant routine for the Yankees.
Key returned from being stung in the ribs by a line drive six days ago to pitch seven scoreless innings.
Paul O'Neill had another terrific evening with five hits.
Bernie Williams hit what resembled a fly ball to left field that soared into the seats.
Matt Nokes treated a rare start with reverence by clubbing a grand slam in the Yankees' 11-1 victory over the Angels.


Noble Affiliates Inc.(NBL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A picture yesterday with the Dance in Review column carried an erroneous caption and credit in some copies.
The picture was by Julie Lemberger; it showed Zoe Reverdin in "Lurulu," part of "3 Whips" at Woodpeckers in SoHo.


AS PREMIER TAKES OFFICE IN JAPAN, COALITION CRACKS
Tsutomu Hata took office on Monday as Japan's 51st Prime Minister, but his fractious governing coalition disintegrated this morning as the largest party in the group bolted and left Mr.
Hata heading Japan's first minority Government in four decades.
The decision by the Socialist Party to back out of the coalition stripped Mr.
Hata of his narrow majority in Parliament and cast into grave doubt his ability to enact a series of steps sought by the United States.


Confession Used to Portray Rifkin as Methodical Killer
As jurors heard the details of Joel Rifkin's confession to killing 17 women, the prosecution today sought to portray him as a methodical killer who knew that he had done wrong and who was remorseful.
Mr.
Rifkin does not deny killing the women, but says he was mentally ill and acted out of a perverse sexual passion that he could not control.


A Losing Proposition: .400 Could Win It All
The critics of baseball's new playoff format are already saying sneeringly, I told you so.
Baseball officials, who wanted the format, are praying hard that their faith in the new system will be rewarded.
What inspires such fervent feeling on opposite sides?
The American League West standing and the prospect it creates.
In case it has gone unnoticed, check the standing and see the figures next to California.


Magnetek Inc.(MAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Canada's High-Risk Oil Venture
"Starting to look pretty good, isn't she," muttered Barry Hynes to a bystander, after climbing down from a half-completed 15-story wellhead module for his lunch break.
"Let's hope it's only the beginning of new work for Newfoundland," said Mr.
Hynes, a 37-year-old welding supervisor, one of 3,200 workers at this sprawling construction site on a deep water inlet of Trinity Bay, 80 miles northwest of St.
John's, Newfoundland's capital.


The Fiercest Knick Returns to the Garden With His Own Team
The second round would have been better for Willis Reed.
The conference final would have been heaven on swamp, if not on earth.
The first round against the Knicks is what the New Jersey Nets get, but that is going to do, just fine.
That is the best offer Reed and the Nets have had in years.
"We have a chance to knock them off," he said yesterday.
"We have a chance to make people notice us, maybe expand our fan base here."


Inquiry Into Flawed Cancer Study Prompts Federal Reforms
THERE is nothing like a Congressional investigation to spur a Federal health agency into action.
Consider the case of the National Cancer Institute, the nation's premier cancer research center, which has been harshly criticized for shortcomings in the way it has overseen a breast cancer study that changed how the disease is treated and later turned out to be flawed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stock prices surged after a sharp drop in interest rates and better-than-expected earnings reports.
The Dow rose 57.10 points, and broader indexes also showed strong gains.  [ Page D1. ]
Members of two big New York commodities exchanges voted to merge.
The merger calls for the Commodity Exchange of New York, the world's largest precious-metals-futures exchange, to operate as a separate exchange owned by the New York Mercantile Exchange, the world's leading futures market for oil.  [ D1. ]
The dollar fell against the mark on signs that the Bundesbank would not feel pressure to accelerate rate cuts.  [ D15. ]
Prices of gold and other precious metals rallied after reports of violence in South Africa, a top producer of platinum and gold.  [ D15. ]
Treasury prices rose on expectations that the worst of the bond market's three-month rout might be over.  [ D16. ] Companies
General Motors' Saturn division has resumed full output of its cars a month after it had cut production because unsold cars were piling up on dealers' lots.
The move puts Saturn in a stronger position as it prepares to seek new G.M. support.  [ D1. ]
Chrysler's Jeep Cherokee has become a hit in Japan.
And the auto maker has named its first sales and marketing executive to head its expanding office in Japan.  [ D1. ]
Sun Microsystems and Fujitsu said they would broaden their collaboration and work to bolster Sun's Sparc microprocessor against competition from chips by Intel and other companies.  [ D2. ]
Tenneco is expected to spin off J. I. Case, while Varity is in talks to sell its Massey Ferguson business to Agco.  [ D3. ]
Salomon reported disappointing earnings for the first quarter as a result of trading in turbulent markets.  [ D3. ]
AT&amp;T proposed ringing the African continent with a grid of undersea fiber optic cables.  [ D3. ]
Macy bondholders said they would "vigorously oppose" any reorganization plan that valued Macy at less than $4 billion.  [ D3. ]
Toyota is said to have decided to build a front-wheel-drive replacement for the Previa mini-van at its Kentucky plant.  [ D3. ]
Digital Equipment said its senior vice president of worldwide sales and marketing had resigned.  [ D4. ]
Glendale Federal Bank will sell its Florida franchise of 60 branches for $243.5 million in cash to Barnett Banks.  [ D4. ]
Texaco and ARCO reported lower first-quarter profits.  [ D4. ]
Winnebago Industries is in a turnaround after years of losses and forays outside its recreational vehicle business.  [ D6. ]
Coca-Cola is lobbying against a bill in the Senate that would encourage schools to restrict or ban the sale of soft drinks.  [ A20. ] International
The world's biggest, heaviest and costliest oil-drilling rig is being readied in Newfoundland for the first commercial oil production in the open seas of the North Atlantic.
The high-risk project aims to create jobs for the economically depressed province.  [ D1. ]
Deutsche Bank said it had been the victim of systematic fraud by the fugitive property developer Jurgen Schneider.  [ D2. ]
Boris G. Fyodorov, Russia's former Finance Minister, assailed the I.M.F. for its new loan to Moscow without real reform.  [ D7. ] The Economy
Opposition by small businesses to any requirement that they pay a part of their workers' health insurance may test the Congressional commitment to universal health coverage.  [ A1. ] Today's Columns
Last year's outbreak of food poisoning at its Jack-in-the-Box restaurants still haunts Foodmaker.
Market Place  [ D8. ]
The use of waif-like, wafer-thin models in ads has drawn fire and a call for a boycott.
Advertising: Stuart Elliott.  [ D18. ]


Integrated Health Services Inc.(IHS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Belfast, Mired in Poverty, Pins Its Hopes on Peace
After several long spells of unemployment, Jim Collins landed a job two and a half years ago making auto parts at a new factory lured to a site on the edge of poverty-stricken West Belfast in part by subsidies from the British Government.
"Anyone who's employed now is extremely fortunate," said Mr.
Collins, a 38-year-old Roman Catholic.


J&amp;L Specialty Steel (JL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Bosnia Peace Bid And Tales of Chaos
"I came from hell," said a wounded refugee from the eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde, describing Serbian attacks on a hospital.
American, Russian and British officials announced a new effort for peace talks.
Articles, page A6.


Olsten Corp.(OLS,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Q&amp;A
Low Temperature
Q. Why does temperature drop below normal in some illnesses?


Foster Wheeler Corp.(FWC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 1


Justices to Hear Appeal On Death Penalty Errors
The Supreme Court today accepted a death penalty appeal that could produce an important ruling on how Federal courts should evaluate errors in state criminal trials that lead to convictions and death sentences.
The case is an appeal by an inmate on Louisiana's death row who is raising several challenges to his 1984 conviction for murder.
He contends that the prosecution suppressed evidence that could have persuaded the jury that he was framed, and that his own defense lawyer fell below minimal competence.


CHRONICLE
The Simon Wiesenthal Center will name LADY MARGARET THATCHER its Humanitarian Laureate tonight at a dinner to be attended by 800 people in the Marriott Marquis Hotel on Broadway.
She is being cited for her efforts to make it easier to prosecute Nazi war criminals living in Britain, for helping to convince former Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to ease restrictions on Jewish immigration to Israel and for her support of Israel.
NADINE BROZAN


Rollins Inc.(ROL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Health Plan's Big Hurdle: Role of Small Businesses
In the hierarchy of values on Capitol Hill, small business ranks right up there with national defense and intact families.
If lawmakers forget that credo, the formidable small-business lobby will happily remind them.
All of which explains why the toughest struggle of the health care war these days is over the requirement that businesses contribute to the cost of their workers' insurance.
This "employer mandate" is perhaps the principal barrier to getting a health care bill out of the Senate Finance Committee and the House Energy and Commerce Committee.


Corrections
A front-page picture on Sunday showing a flag flying at half-staff in Washington carried an incorrect credit.
It was by Reuters, not The Associated Press.


High Blood Pressure Tied to Memory Decline
FOR the elderly, chronic high blood pressure over the course of several years can lead to mental decline beyond that caused by the natural course of aging, researchers have found.
"The longer you have high blood pressure, the worse the decline, especially on tests of short-term memory and attention," said Dr.
Merrill Elias, a psychologist at the University of Maine who reported the results at the meeting of the Society for Behavioral Medicine in Boston this month.


A Plea Bargain Is Weighed In an L.I. Kidnapping Case
Prosecutors and defense lawyers for John Esposito, who was charged last year with kidnapping a 10-year-old girl, Katie Beers, and imprisoning her for 16 days in an underground bunker behind his house, are trying to work out a plea bargain that would allow the girl to avoid testifying.
The Daily News reported today that an agreement had been reached that would sentence Mr.
Esposito to a minimum of 15 years before he became eligible for parole, a settlement that would eliminate the possibility of a harsher 25-year sentence.
In return, Mr.
Esposito would plead guilty, meaning that it would not be necessary for the girl to take the stand and speak about the experience.


Equitable of Iowa Cos.  (EIC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE 37th PRESIDENT: THE OVERVIEW; Nixon's Birthplace Gets Ready for World at Funeral
With the body of Richard M. Nixon expected to arrive here on Tuesday to lie in state, nearly 15,000 mourners have already visited the birthplace of the former President, many bearing flowers and messages of condolence, the police said today.
Local officials and advance parties from Washington are preparing for an influx of dignitaries, reporters and the public in advance of funeral ceremonies on Wednesday, at which President Clinton is to be joined by all four living former Presidents.


Athletes' Safety: Drawing the Line
Steffi Graf said yesterday that she would play in the Citizen Cup tournament in Hamburg, Germany, today despite an anonymous threat to harm her.
A fan obsessively devoted to Graf stabbed Monica Seles in the back at the same tournament last year.
The police in Hamburg said they had received an anonymous letter threatening an even more dire attack on Graf if she plays in this year's tournament, which began yesterday amid extenssive security.


Oregon Steel Mills Inc.(OS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wrigley, (Wm) Jr.  Co.(WWY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
Then there is the honor to be accorded Sir JOHN GIELGUD.
He is to have his name attached to an award that is being established by the Shakespeare Guild.
JOHN ANDREWS, president of the guild, said Sunday at the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, that the prize, to be called the Golden Quill, would be given annually to a performer, director, producer or playwright whose work embodies the theatrical contributions of Sir John.


Oklahoma Hires Washington State Coach
Oklahoma ended its two-week search for a new basketball coach yesterday by announcing that KELVIN SAMPSON of Washington State was the choice to replace BILLY TUBBS, who left on April 9 to become coach at Texas Christian.
The choice of the 38-year-old Sampson turned out to be easy.
Sampson, along with his wife, KAREN, wowed Athletic Director DONNIE DUNCAN and others on the search committee during an interview Saturday.


Foreman's Fistic Follies (Or, Just What Is Your Point Anyway, George?)
What was George Foreman trying to tell Jim Lampley Friday night on TVKO after Michael Moorer defeated Evander Holyfield for the International Boxing Federation and World Boxing Association heavyweight titles?
Was he accusing promoter Dan Duva of influencing the majority decision?
Did he think Holyfield was robbed?
Or, was he just suffering from buffet envy?


Regis (RGIS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


More Bombings Rattle South Africans
Bombs exploded across South Africa today, hitting mainly black taxi terminals and polling places in a crescendo intended to demoralize the new South African electorate on the eve of its first vote.
A few hours after the worst attack, a horrific morning blast that killed 10 and sprayed human body parts and mangled minivans across a taxi park in suburban Germiston, the police said they were questioning a suspect and hoped for a breakthrough.


Constantine Simonides, 59, an Official at M.I.T.
Constantine Simonides, who was both vice president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and secretary of the M.I.T. board, died on Sunday while playing tennis at Wellesley College.
He was 59 and lived in Wellesley, Mass.
The apparent cause was heart failure, said his son, Philip.


Black &amp; Decker Corp.(BDK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Evacuees Recall Terrors of Gorazde
"I came from hell," Ismet Razanica said as he lay in a hospital room after being airlifted from the eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde.
A land mine blew off Mr.
Razanica's left leg days before nationalist Serbs started their offensive against the United Nations "safe area" of Gorazde four weeks ago.
He spent the entire ordeal, he said, bedridden in the Gorazde hospital, which the Serbians targeted with tank and mortar fire for days.


Penguins Stave Off Capitals
Penguins 3, Capitals 2
Jaromir Jagr and Kevin Stevens scored their first playoff goals to spark Pittsburgh's offense and the Penguins avoided playoff elimination by beating visiting Washington, 3-2, last night.


St. Paul Cos.(SPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Which Ex-Met Pitcher Has Gone 0 for April?
Reds 4, Cubs 3
Anthony Young once again couldn't get a break last night, remaining winless in four starts for the visiting Chicago Cubs, even though he handed a one-run lead to the bullpen.
Tony Fernandez homered on Randy Myers's first pitch in the ninth to tie it, and the Cincinnati Reds won, 4-3, an inning later on Roberto Kelly's two-out single.


SEI Corp.(SEIC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc.(AAL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ekco Group Inc.(EKO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


LeMond and Alcala Lead Field
Former winner GREG LeMOND, defending champion RAUL ALCALA of Mexico and 5 of the world's top 10 teams will compete in next month's Tour DuPont bicycle race, organizers of the event said yesterday.
A field of 16 teams with seven riders each and representing 19 countries was confirmed for the $300,000 event, which begins May 4 in Wilmington, Del.
LeMond, the three-time Tour de France winner, won the Tour DuPont in 1992, his first United States stage race victory in seven years. (AP)


Books of The Times; The Facts Behind a Fantasist's Unsettling Stories
Roald Dahl  A Biography  By Jeremy Treglown  Illustrated. 322 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.
By turns macabre and magical, fantastical and perverse, Roald Dahl's stories for children and for adults are peculiarly modern folk tales, animated by primal longings, resentments and fears.
In such classic children's books as "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory," "The BFG," "The Witches" and "James and the Giant Peach," death and loss and separation are palpable enough realities -- surfacing in the form of cannibalistic giants, tyrannical adults and spell-casting witches -- but there is also the possibility of liberation and transcendence.
Mr.
Dahl's solitary child heroes routinely triumph over their adversaries, while achieving love or knowledge or success.


Dow Corning Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Brunswick Mining &amp; Smelting Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Robert L. Krigel, 44, Physician; Led Hospital Residents' Protest
Dr.
Robert Lowell Krigel, a cancer specialist who led a 1979 campaign in New York City to relieve the grinding work schedules of hospital interns and residents, died on Sunday at his home in Elkins Park, Pa.
He was 44.
The cause was angiosarcoma of the liver, a rare cancerous tumor, the Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia reported.
Dr.
Krigel was director of hematology at Fox Chase from 1984 until last year.


Deluxe Corp.(DLX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rogovin Is Hospitalized in New York
SAUL ROGOVIN, who pitched for eight years in the major leagues and won the American League earned run average title with the White Sox in 1951, was recently admitted to St.
Vincent's Hospital in Greenwich Village where he is being treated for bone-marrow cancer.
His condition yesterday was listed as "satisfactory" by the hospital.
Rogovin, 72, years old, lives in Manhattan.
After his baseball career, he taught English in the New York City public school system -- the last eight years at Eastern District High School.
He retired from teaching in 1990.


Irene Satz, Creator of Copies Of Haute Couture, Dies at 80
Irene Satz, who was instrumental in making line-for-line copies of European couture fashions available at the Ohrbach's discount department store at a fraction of the original's prices, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 80.
The cause was lung cancer, said her sister, Marcia Israel.


Kirby Corp.(KEX,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A picture caption on Friday with an article discussing comments by Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel about the Golan Heights misspelled the name of the kibbutz shown and misstated its location.
It is Ein Gev, in pre-1967 Israel, not the Golan Heights.


Orange &amp; Rockland Utilities (ORU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Traveling Light, but Not Too Light
IT was an imaginary business trip.
The trip itself was real, a seven-day cruise from Puerto Rico to Martinique and back, with stops at four other islands.
But the business was not as real.
I took a portable computer, something I had not done since the Radio Shack 100 was a pup, and contemplated working on board and zipping a file to New York by modem.
There were no business facilities on the ship, at least not readily accessible ones, and the desire to work evaporated, but I had come equipped for it.
Any computer is a compromise, a balancing of priorities.
Small size, light weight and long battery life were my priorities, making a monochrome subnotebook a compelling choice.
If your top priority is a large color display, you pay in size, weight and battery life.
There are no enforced definitions for portables; if a notebook weighs 6 or 7 pounds, then a subnotebook weighs about 4 pounds and a laptop 10 or 12.
Cost also counts.
Is a $5,000 computer twice as good as a $2,500 one?
It all depends.


Spinoff and a Sale Loom in Tractor Business
J.
I.
Case and Massey Ferguson -- two well-known names in the farm and construction equipment business -- may soon be split from their parent companies.
Tenneco Inc. is expected to end months and even years of speculation about a possible spinoff of its Case unit at a meeting today with securities analysts in New York.
Some analysts said that at least a partial spinoff would make sense since Case was strong enough financially to stand alone.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Sports of The Times; Nixon's World Of Sports
RICHARD NIXON said that if he had his life to live over, he would like to have ended as a sportswriter.
When he was the President he was known as the No. 1 sports fan.
When I met him for the first time and we chatted, on opening day at Yankee Stadium 10 years ago, on a walk between the press box and George Steinbrenner's box, he said, "I'm sure you lead a very interesting life." I replied, "Not as interesting as yours, Mr. President."
He smiled and shrugged.
"Oh, well," he said.
A man approached and politely asked Mr.
Nixon if he would sign three baseballs.
Mr.
Nixon obliged, and took the baseballs and the man's pen.
With the baseballs signed, the man left and disappeared into the crowd.


U.S. Accepts Jordan Plea On Iraq Trade
The United States removed a major stumbling block today to Jordan's full participation in Middle East peace talks by agreeing to adopt new procedures for enforcing the trade embargo against Iraq that are far less onerous to Jordan.
After meeting with King Hussein in a London suburb, Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced that the United States had accepted Jordan's request for land-based inspections of cargo, rather than sea-based inspections, which Jordan said were hurting its economy.


U.S. Healthcare Inc.(USHC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Inevitability of Incompetent Doctors
To the Editor:
Regarding your news article "Medical Incompetence: A Whispered Factor in Rising Costs" (April 9): In every endeavor the quality of participants is distributed over a bell-shaped curve.
A small percentage each is outstandingly good and bad, and the rest are somewhere in the middle.
The same is true for medical doctors; 10 percent of the public will be treated by doctors who graduated in the bottom 10 percent of their medical school class.


U.S., Britain and Russia Form Group to Press Bosnia Accord
American, Russian and British officials announced today that they had set up a formal coordinating group that would press the feuding parties in Bosnia to lay down their arms and would develop a draft peace plan to end the war there.
American and British officials said they hoped this new group could arrange a cease-fire within the next few weeks, voicing optimism that there would be a cessation of hostilities for one to four months, during which a lasting peace plan could be negotiated and signed.


Bay State Gas Co. (BGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In Proposed Plea, C.I.A. Official Is to Admit Spying for Moscow
Federal prosecutors are preparing to indict Aldrich H. Ames, the accused spy for Moscow, and his wife on espionage charges as part of a plea agreement in which he would agree to life in prison without parole, people involved in the case said today.
Mr.
Ames, a career Central Intelligence Agency officer who has been accused of being one of the most damaging double agents in modern times, is said by some of these people to be resigned to a lifetime in prison if his wife, Rosario, is assured of lenient treatment.
But these people said Mrs.
Ames had resisted any deal that would require her to serve a sizable prison term.


Schult Homes Corp.(SHC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Donna Giuliani, the Personal and Political
In public, Donna Hanover Giuliani relishes her role as the First Lady of New York City, an ebullient partner who holds her solemn husband's hand at every opportunity and defrosts him every time she giggles.
In private, Mrs.
Giuliani, a 20-year veteran of the personable arts of television journalism, plays a subtler sort of "first."
"The first interview is sometimes me, in the sense that I'll ask him three or four questions, and he'll get a sense of what people will ask him when he's presenting a thought," Mrs.
Giuliani, a former WPIX-TV news anchor, said of her conjugal conversations with the city's No. 1 newsmaker.
"It's being a sounding board, and just being a person that's always there."


Pillowtex Corp.(PTX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Valero Energy (VLO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.(RP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


4 Companies Put Accounts in Review
Four companies confirmed reports yesterday in trade publications that they had placed accounts in review.
The Haggar Apparel Company has begun a review after 53 years at Tracy-Locke, a DDB Needham Agency, in Dallas, because "we just want to see if we have the best partner," said Stuart Redsun, Haggar's vice president of marketing communications in Dallas.
He added that Tracy-Locke would be among the agencies invited to participate in the review on the account, with billings estimated at $10 million to $20 million.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on April 6 about the choice of a chef for the White House and the eating habits of its past occupants misidentified Andrew Jackson's rival in the 1828 Presidential campaign.
He was President John Quincy Adams, not Martin Van Buren.
The article also misidentified the critic of Van Buren's fancy food habits and misstated the timing of the criticism.
Representative Charles Ogle made the remarks in 1840 during President Van Buren's re-election campaign, which Van Buren lost to William Henry Harrison.


Stewart Information Services Inc.(STC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Crane Co. (CR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Quayle Sounds Ready To Return to Politics
Dan Quayle has spent a lot of time in the last 18 months thinking about Murphy Brown, about the Republican loss of the White House and about how he became the most ridiculed politician in modern American history.
But what weighed most heavily on his mind the other morning was eggs Benedict.
The former Vice President grew impatient as waitresses at the Congressional Country Club in suburban Maryland, one of his favorite golfing spots, ignored him for more than half an hour as he tried to order.


Clinton Renewing Push for Assault Rifle Ban
In an emotional appearance at the White House today, President Clinton renewed his longstanding call for a ban on assault weapons and pledged to enlist his Cabinet in the lobbying battle when the ban comes up for a House vote early next month.
Still, it is by no means clear that the President's urgings will be enough to change the political landscape in the House, where even supporters of a ban say they are at least 15 votes shy of a majority.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COCA-COLA CO., Atlanta, opened a $35 million plant near Moscow for the production of its soft drinks.


Plea Bargain Requires Aid From Officer
A 25-year-old police officer pleaded guilty yesterday to lying to a grand jury that is looking into suspected corruption in a Brooklyn police precinct and agreed to cooperate with the inquiry in the hope of gaining leniency.
The officer, Christopher Banke, stood nervously before a Federal judge in Brooklyn and, in subdued tones, pleaded guilty to obstructing justice by lying about his knowledge of, and involvement in, illegal searches and arrests by officers of the 73d Precinct.


N.F.L. Teams Shun Ward
Charlie Ward, the all-America quarterback from Florida State and Heisman Trophy winner, was not among the 222 players taken in the National Football League draft.
It was only the third time that had happened to the winner of college football's most prestigious award.
The only other Heisman winners who were bypassed were running backs -- Mike Rozier of Nebraska in 1984 and Pete Dawkins of Army in 1959.
Rozier had already signed with the upstart United States Football League and eventually played in the N.F.L.
Dawkins faced a United States Army commitment.


Victims of Helicopter Downing in Iraq Are Remembered
President Clinton and his top military leaders today mourned the "tragic circumstance" that caused the deaths of 15 Americans when Air Force pilots shot down two Army helicopters in northern Iraq this month.
A total of 26 people from the United States, Great Britain, France and Turkey were killed on April 14 when two F-15C jets enforcing the no-flight zone in Iraq mistook the helicopters, which were on a United Nations mission, for Iraqi aircraft.


Lyondell Petrochemical Co.  (LYO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


North American Mortgage Co.(NAC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Agency Resigns Greyhound Work
The Castor Advertising Group in New York said yesterday that it had resigned an account it was awarded only three weeks ago by Greyhound Lines, to create advertising aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers.
As a result, the account, with billings estimated at $2 million, was moved to Ornelas &amp; Associates in Dallas, effective immediately.
"We felt we were incompatible," said Castor Fernandez, president and chief executive at Castor, adding, "Too many things I felt were not going to be right." Castor was awarded the account in early April from Siboney Advertising in New York.


A 50th Anniversary of Anti-Hitler Conspiracy
To the Editor:
William Safire fittingly brings up the significance of July 20, 1994, as the 25th anniversary of the manned landing on the moon (column, April 14).
But he makes no mention of that date as the 50th anniversary of the only serious attempt on Adolf Hitler's life, which is noteworthy in view of all the current Holocaust remembrance.


Detroit Diesel Corp.(DDC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Meeting Hall of Famers Will Be Costly
Baseball's Hall of Fame, which will hold its first benefit dinner on May 26 in New York, said yesterday that at least 30 inductees will be there, including JOHNNY BENCH, BOB FELLER and BROOKS ROBINSON.
The event, in the Waldorf-Astoria, will cost from $750 to $1,500 a person.
The Hall of Famers will sit among 1,000 guests.
The dinner is part of the 125th anniversary of pro baseball. (AP)


Sears Canada (SCC) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Eastman Chemical (EMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Saturday about executive changes at Liz Claiborne Inc. misstated the role of Harvey Falk there.
Mr.
Falk, the vice chairman and president, was not a founder.
The article also misidentified one of the brands that Liz Claiborne acquired last year when it bought the three divisions of Russ Togs, a bankrupt apparel company.
It is Crazy Horse, not Cherokee.


Flexsteel Industries(FLEXF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


CHRONICLE
A women's enterprise tips its hat to men: On Friday, Essence Communications, which publishes Essence magazine, gave its first awards to eight outstanding men at star-studded festivities in the Paramount Theater in Madison Square Garden.


Insilco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Review/Television; The Task That Looms After South Africa's Vote
As the momentous elections in South Africa begin, "Mandela" offers a guide to the minefields the new interracial Government will have to negotiate.
In an interview and in rallies, Nelson Mandela is seen promising jobs, schools, hospitals and electricity to the millions in squatter camps who enjoy no such amenities.
In Kliptown, a squalid corner of Soweto, where half the workers are unemployed and where emptying toilet buckets (there is no sewage system) is a desirable occupation, Michael Buerk, a BBC correspondent, finds residents who expect Mr.
Mandela to bring relief in a matter of months.
But the President-apparent has offered little in the way of specifics, and at the best, help is still years away.
This "Frontline" report leaves no doubt about the dangers of disappointment.


Acordia Inc.(ACO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


THE 37th PRESIDENT: WATERGATE; Nixon's Darkest Chapter, By Those Who Lived It
On the stage sat Jeb Stuart Magruder, a former campaign aide of President Richard M. Nixon, and in the audience, Leonard Garment, his longtime friend and counselor.
Across the room was Archibald Cox, the Watergate special prosecutor whose persistence in pursuing the scandal two decades ago so enraged Mr.
Nixon that he had him dismissed.
Barely three days after the death of Mr.
Nixon, aging aides and adversaries alike gathered today at the University of London, not to listen to funeral eulogies and tributes, but to share their own sharp and painful memories of Watergate, the darkest chapter of the Nixon Presidency.


Quebecor Printing (PQB,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Coherent Inc.(COHR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Canam Manac reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Borden Inc.(BN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bravos and a Bruise for 'Carousel' Rescuer
The angry bruise across Marcus Lovett's nose probably wouldn't be there now if he'd been wearing his mask this weekend.
But then, Mr. Lovett doesn't wear a mask any more.


Alleghany Corp.(Y,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


To Sweep, Perchance to Dream of Another Stanley Cup
Everything seems to be breaking well for the Rangers, who might (hey, they just might) win the Stanley Cup for the first time since 1940.
By completing a four-game sweep of the Islanders in the first round of the playoffs Sunday afternoon, they earned a full week of rest before opening the second round next Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.
Is it too soon to imagine the Rangers against the Dallas Stars in the Stanley Cup finals?
The Stars, in the Western Conference, and the Rangers, in the East, were the only two teams to sweep their first-round opponents.


Collins Will Not Return, Agent Says
If the Giants' second-round draft pick, cornerback Thomas Randolph, is looking for an easy transition to the National Football League, he may be disappointed.
That's because negotiations on the Mark Collins front have reached a low; the Giants have pulled their offer to Collins off the table and the agent for the star cornerback says Collins won't be back.
"The Giants are making a big mistake, a cardinal mistake by doing this," Collins's agent, Frank Bauer, said in a telephone interview.
"I think it's imminent he will not be back with the New York Giants. He won't be there. We're looking to Kansas City."


Florida Progress Corp.(FPC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lieut. Col. Charles W. Shea, 72, A Winner of the Medal of Honor
Lieut.
Col.
Charles W. Shea, who won the Medal of Honor and a battlefield commission in Italy in 1944, died on April 7 at Central General Hospital in Plainview, L.I.
He was 72 and a resident of Plainview.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


BellSouth Retreats on QVC
The chairman of the BellSouth Corporation, John Clendenin, said yesterday that his company was unlikely to make a $500 million investment in QVC Network Inc., unless QVC's stock price rallied in the next several months.
Mr.
Clendenin said yesterday at his company's annual meeting that QVC's stock "would have to go pretty far north to make it worthwhile for us to plunge in."


No Big Danger of Anti-Semitism, Russian Premier Tells Rabin
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, the highest-ranking Israeli official ever to come to Moscow, heard a promise from the Russian Prime Minister today that a new wave of anti-Semitism could not be provoked in Russia.
Mr.
Rabin, whose visit has been marked by emotional meetings with Jews in Moscow, has been seeking public assurances from high Russian officials that they will act against manifestations of anti-Semitism.
He is also here to discuss prospects for advancing the Middle East peace talks, which Moscow is co-sponsoring with Washington.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Ameritech Capital Funding, a unit of Ameritech Corp., is selling $225 million of floating-rate notes due in 1997 at a price of 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service, AA+ by Standard &amp; Poor's, and AA by Duff &amp; Phelps, the bonds are noncallable and pay interest at the three-month London interbank offered rate.


DuPont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Toyota May Build a New Van in Kentucky
The Toyota Motor Corporation has reportedly decided to build a front-wheel-drive replacement for its Previa mini-van at its Georgetown, Ky., assembly plant starting in 1997, a sign that it intends to be more aggressive in the light-truck and multipurpose-vehicle segment of the American auto market.
Articles in the trade press, confirmed unofficially by officials close to Toyota who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the new seven-seat mini-van would be based on the mechanical specifications for a new version of the Camry sedan, which is coming in 1996.
Toyota, the largest Japanese auto maker, plans to build roughly 70,000 mini-vans annually, a small number compared with the production of the American Big Three, which sold nearly 950,000 mini-vans last year.


Memberships Vote to Merge 2 New York Futures Markets
The leading exchanges for trading oil and gold futures consummated their on-again, off-again courtship last night as their members voted to merge.
The New York Mercantile Exchange will pay more than $60 million to members of the Commodity Exchange of New York.
The merger will enable the two exchanges to cut expenses by reducing duplication in computer systems and in the work force that handles marketing, accounting and product development.


Chess
In lazy middle age, Jose Raoul Capablanca, the Cuban genius who was world champion from 1921 to 1927, discovered an easy road to winning tournaments: mow down the also-rans like tenpins and take quick, effortless draws against anyone likely to present a genuine obstacle.
He was betting that he could outscore his rivals against the field, and time after time he was proved right.
For a long time now, the Capablanca policy has been successfully used by strong players, principally by such cautious souls as Tigran Petrosian, the Soviet Armenian who was world champion from 1963 to 1969.
Most recently it was put into effect by the Worcester, Mass., grandmaster Ilya Gurevich in the Winter Tournament of the Marshall Chess Club, at 23 West 10th Street.
In this event, which ran from Jan. 31 to Feb. 13, Gurevich went undefeated in amassing the winning 8-3 score.
Against his fellow grandmasters, he drew in 12 moves with Roman Dzindzichashvili of Queens and in 22 moves with John Fedorowicz of Manhattan.
FINAL STANDINGS  Player . . .
Country . . .
Points . . .
Gurevich . . .
U.S. . . . 8 . . .
Dzindzichashvili . . .
U.S. . . . 7 . . .
Fedorowicz . . .
U.S. . . . 7 . . .
Sokolin . . .
Russia . . . 7 . . .
Sagalchik . . .
U.S. . . . 6 . . .
Ashley . . .
U.S. . . . 5 1/2 . . .
Berkovich . . .
Ukraine . . . 4 1/2 . . .
Bonin . . .
U.S. . . . 4 1/2 . . .Waitzkin . . .
U.S. . . . 4 1/2 . . .
Leveille . . .
Canada . . . 4 1/2 . . .Klovsky . . .
Ukraine . . . 4 . . .
Arnett . . .
U.S. . . . 3 1/2
Gurevich defeated Rafail Klovsky of Ukraine with a sharp pawn-winning series of tactics in Round 2.
Against the Tarrasch Variation of the French Defense with 3 Nd2, Klovsky adopted 3 . . .
Nf6 to lure the white center on with 4 e5.
Quite soon, he whittled down this bastion with 8 . . . f6 9 ef Nf6 which also gave him the mobility to defend his kingside.
After 10 Ne2, it may be that Black does not need 10 . . .
Qc7.
A reasonable alternative is 10 . . .
Bd6 11 O-O O-O 12 Bf4 Bf4 13 Nf4 Ne4 14 Qc1 Ng5 15 Ng5 Qg5 16 Ne2 Qf6.
The plan underlying 10 . . .
Qc7 is that after 11 . . .
Bd6, White cannot exchange off his queen bishop against the black king bishop.
The purpose is further served by 14 . . .
Nh5, which prepares 15 Bg3 Ng3 16 hg, thus preserving the d6 bishop to guard the slightly weak dark squares.
Gurevich remarked that his 17 Nb6!? is a new move.
On 17 . . .
Ra7, the black queen rook is out of play, while after 17 . . .
Rb8, Gurevich boldly snatched a pawn with 18 Ba6!?
Klovsky did not knuckle under with 18 . . . ba 19 Rc6, nor fall into 18 . . .
Nb4 19 Bb5 Na2 20 Rc8 Rbc8 21 Nc8 Rc8 22 Qa4!
Nb4 23 Bd7, which wins a decisive pawn and simultaneously unhinges the black position.
He struck back with 18 . . .
Nd4 19 Nd4 ba 20 Nc8 Rbc8 21 Rc8 Rc8, when 22 Ne6? would be crunched by 22 . . .
Qe5!, winning a piece.
Still, Gurevich's analysis had gone a lot farther, as his 22 Re1! showed.
After 22 . . .
Bb4 (22 . . . e5? 23 Nf5! gf 24 Qd5 Qf7 25 Qd6 is overwhelming for White) 23 Qg4!
Qf7 24 Rd1, there was no defense by 24 . . .
Re8 because of 25 Ne6 Qe6 26 Qb4.
On 24 . . .
Ng7 25 Ne6!
Rc4 26 Nd4 Nf5, Gurevich coolly forced the game into a pawn-ahead ending with 27 b3 Rd4 28 Rd4 Nd4 29 Qd4.
After 38 Qb7!, there was no use for the Ukrainian to go on: 38 . . .
Qg8 39 f4 Kh6 40 Qg7 Qg7 41 Bg7 Kg7 42 Kf2 brings about an elementary king-and-pawn ending; 38 . . . d4 39 Bd4 Qe1 40 Kg2 accomplishes nothing because Gurevich had precisely guarded against 40 . . .
Qe4.
Klovsky gave up.


Camus's Last Work, a First Draft, Shows His Life and His Style
Inside a mud-stained briefcase found near the site of the car crash that killed Albert Camus on Jan. 4, 1960, were 144 pages of almost indecipherable handwriting that made up the first draft of the early chapters of a novel based closely on his life.
His widow, Francine, decided against publication.
Camus had won the Nobel Prize in literature in 1957, but at the time of his death at the age of 46 he was on poor terms with Jean-Paul Sartre and other Left Bank luminaries, and she feared publication of the rough text would expose him to more attacks.


Queens Parents Camp Out for Local Kindergarten Spots
As thousands of New Yorkers began registering their children yesterday for kindergarten classes this fall, some parents had already spent all night lined up outside an elementary school in Queens, determined to get their children seats in the neighborhood school rather than watch them be bused to another one miles away.
As in other schools throughout the city, the number of kindergarten classes offered at Public School 129 in College Point has shrunk as the number of children in higher grades has increased, partly because of immigration and partly because of new housing in the neighborhood, school officials said.
Three years ago there were four kindergarten classes.
Two years ago there were two.
And this year there is only one.


Take a Health Approach to Family Planning; Offering Alternatives
To the Editor:
We are encouraged that the comprehensive needs of women in developing countries are appearing on the international family planning agenda ("Women Campaign for New Plan to Curb the World's Population," news article, April 13).
However, we are dismayed that such narrow and outdated views as were expressed by Prof.
Charles Westoff of Princeton University still exert such powerful influence in the current debate.


In Surprise, Sales Chief Quits Digital After Loss
Edward E. Lucente resigned today as senior vice president of worldwide sales and marketing at the Digital Equipment Corporation.
The move, which surprised industry analysts, came a year after Mr.
Lucente, 54, joined the beleaguered company.
Mr.
Lucente's resignation came within days of Digital's announcement of a $183 million loss for the third fiscal quarter, a drop that surprised both Digital executives and financial analysts in its severity and caused the company's stock to plunge.
Analysts said today that they believed the loss had led to Mr.
Lucente's departure.


Confounding Fur and Faux
No need to bother about euphemisms -- those shaggy fur coats are frankly fake.
They're not trying to pass as mink, fox or any other real-life animal.
Designers are making no attempt to refer to them as real..
Marc Jacobs was surprised to find that many people looking at his tailored tawny-colored jacket had thought it was muskrat; it's really a fake.
Isaac Mizrahi calls a big shaggy coat that he designed "the beast" or "the gorilla," but he doesn't expect anyone to take his labels seriously.
"I think of it as a modern fur coat," Mr.
Mizrahi said.
"It's a little ragged around the edges, but it's lightweight and glamorous."


One More Time: Pitino Will Stay
Commenting on the eve of a news conference called by RICK PITINO, the Kentucky athletic director, C.M.
NEWTON, said yesterday that Pitino intends to stay as basketball coach of the Wildcats.
"The fact is, I intend for him to honor his contract," Newton said yesterday on his talk show on WLVK-AM radio in Lexington, Ky.
"He has indicated to me that is what his intention is."


Giuliani to Combat Domestic Violence With the Police and Computers
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, in a new program to combat domestic violence, will assign a police officer and a detective in every precinct to track wife-abuse cases and will train officers to be more aggressive in arresting violent husbands, his advisers said yesterday.
The expected announcement would come on the heels of a hearing in the City Council yesterday on the same issue, as the idea of dealing with domestic violence has been gaining political momentum in both the Council and the State Legislature.
Both the Council and the Mayor appeared to be vying to demonstrate which is more serious about tackling the problem of violence against women.


Coastal Corp.(CGP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Different Take on the 'Myth' of Inflation; Raise Taxes, Not Rates
To the Editor:
If the U.S. economy is growing too fast, why, when your Government is running a $200 billion annual deficit, would Americans choose to take the heat out by raising interest rates?


4 Defendants Ask Lawyers Be Changed
With a week to go before sentencing, all four men convicted in the World Trade Center bombing have dismissed their defense lawyers and asked to be represented by William F. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, the flamboyant legal team known for its support of radical political causes.
Mr.
Kunstler and Mr.
Kuby have appealed a decision by the presiding judge, Kevin T. Duffy, who said they could not represent any trade center defendant.
Judge Duffy said he made his decision because the two lawyers are defending two of the men in a related terror conspiracy trial to begin in September.
The judge argued that a potential conflict of interest exists for a lawyer to represent defendants in both cases.
Life Terms Expected
The four defendants -- Mohammed A. Salameh, Nidal A. Ayyad, Mahmud Abouhalima and Ahmad M. Ajaj -- were convicted last month on all counts in the trade center bombing and it is deemed a certainty that Judge Duffy will sentence them to terms of life in prison.
The sentencing is set for May 4.


Fund Is Set Up to Stabilize Mexican Peso
The United States, Mexico and Canada announced the formation today of an unusual multibillion-dollar fund to stabilize Mexico's currency and protect it from further onslaughts by global speculators.
The centerpiece of the new fund is the creation of a permanent $6.7 billion line of credit for the central bank of Mexico, with the money being put up by Mexico's partners in the North American Free Trade Agreement, the United States and Canada.


Symbols of Violence for National Crime Victims Week


Overreacting to Asia's Naval Race
Even as defense budgets shrink around most of the globe, a naval arms race is under way in Asia.
Many navies in the region are buying newer and better-armed ships, though none have yet acquired formidable fleets capable of attacking other nations far from their shores.
Washington needs to maintain a U.S. naval presence in the region.
That will help ease the security concerns of allies like Japan and South Korea.
It will also relieve the pressure on them, and in turn on their neighbors, to accelerate their naval buildups.


Corrections
The futures markets table in Business Day yesterday, in some editions, omitted futures contracts for two-year Treasury notes, five-year Treasury notes, ten-year Treasury notes, Treasury bonds, crude oil, unleaded gasoline, heating oil and platinum.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to Business Day, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology
The Administration approved a proposal to spend up to $1 billion to help American companies compete with Japan in making advanced flat-panel computer display screens, a move that is the biggest Government aid to private industry since an effort to assist computer chip makers began seven years ago.  [ Page A1. ]


Bethlehem Steel Corp.(BS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Overseas Press Club Names 16 Recipients Of Journalism Prizes
Paul Watson of The Toronto Star won the Robert Capa Gold Medal for his photography in Somalia at the annual awards last night of the Overseas Press Club of America.
Mr.
Watson was honored "for photographic reporting requiring exceptional courage" for his photo of a United States serviceman being dragged through Mogadishu.


Cilcorp Inc.(CER,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Positive Note in U.S.-Japanese Trade
To the Editor:
I would like to sound a positive note regarding U.S.-Japanese trade.
About 15 months ago, the Japanese reached a consensus to build a product in Japan that our organization is producing in the United States.
Their decision had been developed unilaterally and gained support from many key governmental areas and was the basis for a major budget approval by the Diet.


Mogilny Aide Pleads Guilty
A Russian who helped the Buffalo Sabres' ALEXANDER MOGILNY defect from the Soviet Union has pleaded guilty to a menacing charge involving the player, whom he was accused of threatening in an extortion attempt.
SERGUEI FOMITCHEV, 31, agreed to the plea on a lesser charge to avoid a long wait in jail for an extortion trial and a possible prison term of up to seven years, his lawyer, ROBERT RIORDAN, said yesterday in Buffalo.
Mogilny defected in 1989.
Fomitchev received half of Mogilny's $150,000 signing bonus and was on the Sabres' payroll for a year as an aide to the promising National League Hockey player.


AK Steel Holding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Hot-Air Balloon Ride Goes Awry


Executone Information Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


AT WORK WITH: George Fowler; Twists and Turns of a Religious Life
ASK people in this buckle of the Bible Belt their opinion of George Fowler and they either roll their eyes to the heavens or stammer for words to describe him.
Mr.
Fowler is a former Trappist monk who adhered to an oath of silence for 17 years, only to spend the next 20 preaching against the "generally oppressive world" of organized religion.
He is a former Catholic priest who was excommunicated after marrying a former nun, a theologian who once warned those guilty of sin that they would burn in hell, only later to describe his actions as a form of religious abuse.


New Jersey Nuclear Plant Faulted for Series of Flaws
The alert at a nuclear plant in New Jersey on April 7 was caused by a combination of design flaws, operator errors and longstanding equipment problems that made the operators' jobs harder, a team of inspectors from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission reported yesterday.
After a two-week investigation of a low-level emergency at the Salem 1 nuclear plant, in Lower Alloways Creek near the Delaware River, commission officials said in a report that plant managers' actions were "timely and complete" when they declared the alert and notified local, state and Federal officials.
There were no abnormal releases of radiation to the environment and damage to the plant was slight, the team found.


Bridge Column
The Bridge column now appears on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
The location is shown at the bottom of the News Summary on page 2 of the first section.


Starks Takes Court and Looks Like Starks of Old
John Starks returned to practice with the Knicks today and participated at full speed.
It was another indication that he will be ready to make an impact in the playoff opener against the Nets Friday night at Madison Square Garden.
Starks held nothing back during the 1-hour-20-minute closed practice at the College of Charleston.
He was knocked to the floor several times.
He set hard picks.
He changed direction on defense without hesitation.
And he was aggressive offensively, driving to the basket and shooting jumpers.


AMP Inc.(AMP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


First American Financial Corp.(FAF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Uncovered Short Sales on Nasdaq Show a Small Decline
Investors who bet on falling stock prices are finally cashing in a few chips -- probably because prices have indeed dropped.
For the first time in more than a year, there has been a decline in the monthly tally of Nasdaq shares sold short and not yet covered.
The National Association of Securities Dealers said yesterday that in the month ended on April 8 uncovered short sales in Nasdaq stocks fell three-tenths of 1 percent, to 715 million shares, a drop of two million shares.
In that period, Nasdaq's composite stock-price index fell more than 5 percent.
At yesterday's close, the index was off 5.5 percent for the year.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Connecticut is selling $65 million of tax-exempt general obligation bonds won by Dillon, Read &amp; Company in competitive bidding.
The serial bonds are priced to yield from 3.10 percent in 1995 to 5.85 percent in 2011, with the issue rated Aa by Moody's, AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's and AA+ by Fitch Investors Service. *
Michigan Municipal Bond Authority is selling $126.5 million of tax-exempt revenue notes through CS First Boston.
Due in 1995, the noncallable notes are initially priced to yield 3.60 percent and are rated SP-1+ by S.&amp; P.


Council Panel Passes Bill On Privatization Oversight
A City Council committee passed a measure yesterday that would allow the Council to conduct hearings on the Mayor's efforts to turn city services over to private companies.
The move sets the stage for a battle between the Council and the Giuliani administration over the Mayor's attempts to change the way some city services are delivered.


Holyfield Quits After Learning of Heart Ailment
Evander Holyfield, who fought 12 grueling, bruising rounds last Friday night and lost his heavyweight titles to the younger, faster-fisted Michael Moorer, said yesterday that he would retire on the advice of his physician.
Dr.
Ronald Stephens, a surgeon who has been Holyfield's personal physician for years, said in a telephone conference call from Atlanta that the 31-year-old fighter suffered from a heart irregularity.
The doctor described the condition as a "stiff heart," or a problem with the left ventricle, which he called "noncompliant," meaning it did not properly pump blood.


Rangers Remain Standing After Wind-Blown Victory
Rangers 6, Tigers 1
High winds blew winning pitcher Rick Helling off the mound, forced fans to be moved from the upper deck and caused a 45-minute delay last night in the Texas Rangers' 6-1 victory over the Detroit Tigers.


Officers on Streets Before Screening Is Completed
New York City's Police Department routinely gives rookie officers their badges and guns and puts them on the streets before their background checks are complete, officials investigating police corruption have determined.
The Police Department conceded yesterday that screening an officer can typically take up to two years after that officer has joined the force.
But the department's personnel chief, Michael Julian, said the most important part of the background check -- whether an applicant has a felony conviction -- is always complete before an officer is hired.


Cuomo Details Compromise Proposed in Budget Talks
In an unusual bargaining tactic, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo released details today about a compromise plan intended to revive the stalled negotiations over the $33 billion state budget, which is now 26 days late.
The plan would largely split the differences separating the Democratic-controlled Assembly and Republican-controlled Senate on two major issues: how to make $410 million in tax cuts this year and how to allocate $400 million in additional aid to local schools.


An Effort To Classify A Racist Classic
Like an orator who says all the wrong things brilliantly, "The Birth of a Nation," D. W. Griffith's 1915 epic, manages to thrill and appall at the same time.
The film, formally innovative and daring, has influenced directors from Sergei Eisenstein to Francis Ford Coppola.
But its unashamedly racist depiction of Reconstruction has made it one of the most troubling masterworks in American cinema.
Not surprisingly, the Library of Congress has not quite known what to do with the film.
While it did put "The Birth of a Nation" on the National Film Registry in 1992, certifying it as a classic, the library has otherwise treated it as if it were toxic waste.
When the library excluded "The Birth of a Nation" from its 54-work survey of early film last fall, there was an outcry.


Irgun Joins Long List of Derby Casualties
The Kentucky Derby lost one of its brightest stars yesterday when a sore right foot forced the withdrawal of Irgun, the speed horse who won the Gotham Stakes and the Wood Memorial and was considered the main threat to duel the favored Holy Bull.
Small things often create big problems in racing.
This time the small thing was probably a piece of gravel that kicked under the horse's hoof and caused an irritation and eventually an abscess.
It happened during his workout at Churchill Downs last Thursday, but no decision was made on the Derby until yesterday afternoon after he had missed the workout scheduled earlier in the day.


The Spy Who Came Into the Classroom Teaches at Boston U.
Prof.
Lawrence Martin-Bittman, a former Czechoslovak spy and propagandist now teaching at Boston University, threw himself an unusual party this semester.
His death sentence had just been lifted, 20 years after a military court in Czechoslovakia convicted him of treason for defecting to the United States.


Hours After His Arrest, Padre Pitcher Gets Save
Presumably the worst team in the National League, the San Diego Padres made the suffering Mets their fourth straight victims last night as a pitcher who had been arrested in the pre-dawn hours finished up the game.
The Mets, returning last night to Shea Stadium from a West Coast trip, have dropped three straight games for the first time this season.
"I think it's time for a little review," said Manager Dallas Green, concerned with the Mets' flailing attempts to hit.


A.L. to Name President From College Ranks
Gene Budig, the chancellor of the University of Kansas, has won the recommendation of a search committee to be the next president of the American League, two executives familiar with the committee's deliberations said yesterday.
The committee's recommendation is tantamount to election, which would presumably take place at the owners' next scheduled meeting June 8.


Amid Swirl of Activity, a Woman Is Raped in Prospect Park
A 27-year-old Brooklyn woman walking on a path in a wooded area of Prospect Park was grabbed from behind and raped yesterday afternoon, unnoticed by bicyclists, joggers and motorists passing nearby, park and police officials said.
The incident came about 15 hours after the rape of a woman in Riverside Park, Manhattan, and almost a year after another rape at Prospect Park, a 527-acre oasis of lakes and meadows, authorities said.


U.S. to Aid Industry In Computer Battle With the Japanese
In the biggest Government help for private industry since an effort to assist computer chip makers began seven years ago, the White House has approved a proposal to spend up to $1 billion on American companies competing with Japan in making advanced flat-panel computer display screens.
The Defense Department has scheduled a news conference for Thursday to discuss flat-panel displays, and the initiative is expected to be announced then.
Administration officials began notifying Congressional aides today about their intentions.


Rainy Prologue to Subdued Funeral for Nixon
In a scene worthy of "King Lear," the usually sunny California sky unleashed thunder, lightning, rain and hail today as Richard M. Nixon's body returned to his birthplace in a plain wooden coffin covered by a flag.
The former President's two sad-eyed daughters, Tricia and Julie, accompanied by their families and the Rev.
Billy Graham, followed the coffin through the raging elements and delivered him to the Nixon library, where he will be "planted," as he dryly put it to a friend a couple of years ago, under an oak tree outside the little wooden bungalow where he was born.


Rwanda Aide Calls Truce 'Last Chance'
Rebels who control half of Rwanda have said that the four-day cease-fire they began on Monday would not stop their drive to "liberate" the country and punish those responsible for the deaths of more than 100,000 people in the last three weeks.
Theogene Rudasingwa, secretary general of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, said the cease-fire was meant as a "last chance" for army forces to stop widespread massacres in Kigali, the Rwandan capital.


Off the Menu
Lee Mazzilli's Cafe
New family-oriented sports restaurants -- quite different from the typically ultra-macho sports bars -- are coming to New York.
Lee Mazzilli, the former New York Mets outfielder, is a partner in Lee Mazzilli's Sports Cafe, which will open at 208 West 70th Street in mid-May.
It is a cavernous place that will have 350 seats, 50 television screens, a sports memorabilia shop and an area with games for children.
Mr.
Mazzilli said it will be a "family-oriented place where people can bring their kids." He described the food as American with Italian flair.
The chef, Lucius Cherokee Wyatt, worked at Fat Tuesday's and the Statler-Hilton Hotel.
Mr.
Mazzilli's partners are Peter Kramer, a sports marketer who works with athletes, and Wendie Markman, who owns a large dairy.


Ballplayers Charged With Soliciting Prostitution


Wine Talk
BECAUSE of my position on wine prices over the years, this column is regularly cited by consumers who believe that for too long, wine has cost too much in far too many restaurants.
Invariably, restaurant owners have responded that the public doesn't understand how high their costs are and that a healthy return on wine sales is a must if they are to show a profit.


13 Addy Awards For DeVito/Verdi
DeVito/Verdi took top honors last night at the 1994 Best of New York Addy Awards presentation, sponsored by the Advertising Women of New York.
The agency won 13 Addys for its work for clients including Daffy's and Lucille Roberts, followed by DDB Needham New York, with 7 awards, and BBDO New York, with 6.


Cray Research (CYR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


No Headline
"Today marks the dawn of our freedom." NELSON MANDELA  [ A1:3. ]


Sports of The Times; Koss Still Carrying The Torch
THEY snuffed out the flame on the mountainside.
The trolls disappeared under the rocks.
The tourists bought their last sweaters and went home.
But Johann Olav Koss is still using the Olympic glow to help other people.
With all due respect to Jansen and Blair and Baiul and Kerrigan and Our Yank Tonya, the Norwegian medical student was the most compelling star of the Winter Games.
Not only did he win three gold medals in speed skating, but he also donated the $30,000 prize money for his second medal to the children of the world, and he urged others to do the same.
That was two months ago, but Johann Olav Koss is not finished.


Kamieniecki Is Back as Starter, With Bitter Memories
Scott Kamieniecki was asked this spring when he began considering the possibility that he might not be in the starting rotation and he blurted out Oct. 4.
He was not joking.
One day after a glorious 1993 had ended for the Yankees and Kamieniecki, he was already contemplating job security.
Kamieniecki was prophetic about questioning his future because the Yankees made Bob Ojeda their fifth starter and shoved Kamieniecki into the bullpen.
Now that the Ojeda experiment has been abandoned after two miserable starts and Kamieniecki is starting, he conceded that it was difficult to bridle his emotions during his trying tenure as a reliever.


CompUSA Inc.(CPU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 26


At Least 4 Die In Tornadoes Near Dallas
A storm system that lashed through the central United States late Monday and early today left its most severe trail of destruction here, with three people dead and the brick buildings and majestic live oaks of the Reconstruction-era town square blown to ruins.
A fourth person in a nearby town died of a heart attack as he sat out the tornado in his storm cellar.
The system caused tornadoes in two other states, Nebraska and Oklahoma, and brought blizzard conditions and more than a foot of snow to much of the northern Plains, the National Weather Service reported.


When it comes to ad spending, executives don't expect much of a sting from inflation.
THE Federal Reserve Board keeps raising interest rates because of fears that inflation will harm the economy.
But in the media, the potential for inflation does not seem so menacing.
In an annual survey of executives responsible for making advertising, marketing and media decisions at companies across the country, only 51 percent said they expected the media marketplace to become more costly -- that is, for advertising rates to rise substantially.
By comparison, in last year's survey, 54 percent said they expected media inflation.


QUESTIONS ARISE OVER SUCCESSION TO TOP MERCK POST
Merck &amp; Company surprised analysts, shareholders and employees yesterday by announcing that Martin J. Wygod, one of its biggest shareholders, would not succeed Dr.
P.
Roy Vagelos as chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Wygod, whose company, Medco Containment Services Inc., was acquired by Merck last year for $6 billion, was widely viewed as first in line to succeed Dr.
Vagelos, who will retire on Nov. 1.


Hearst Book Head Resigns
Howard Kaminsky, president of the Hearst Corporation's troubled Trade Book Group, resigned yesterday, citing personal matters that have forced him to be away from the office for much of the time.
Hearst had tried, and failed, to sell its book publishing operations for at least a year, nearly completing a sale to Putnam Berkley Group Inc. earlier this year.
The book group, consisting of William Morrow and Avon, had lost a number of key editors and authors -- including Ken Follett, David Halberstam and John Irving -- in part because of its uncertain future and in part, industry executives said, because Mr.
Kaminsky did not work aggressively enough to keep them.


Accounts
*
Provident Health Care Plans, Chattanooga, Tenn., to Austin Kelley Advertising, Atlanta, to handle its account, to be shared with Provident's in-house communications department.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million in the first year.


DeVry Inc.(DVRY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Most U.S. Markets Closed Today
Most financial markets in the United States will be closed today in memory of former President Richard M. Nixon, who died on Friday.
The stock and commodities markets will be closed.
The Public Securities Association has recommended the closing of the government securities market and money-market trading.


Leafs Win And Lead In Series, 3-2
Maple Leafs 1, Blackhawks 0
Mike Eastwood's power play with 9 minutes 53 seconds left gave the Maple Leafs a 1-0 victory over Chicago last night in Toronto and a 3-2 lead over the Blackhawks in their first-round National Hockey League playoff series.


Removing an Eyesore


German Rebound Predicted
Germany's economy is beginning to rebound from one of its worst recessions of the postwar era and a full-fledged recovery should start in the second half of this year, the nation's six leading economic research institutes said today.
"The signs of an impending pickup in the economy are increasing and the mood in business has clearly improved," the institutes said in an economic report prepared for the German Government.
"All in all, it is to be expected that gross national product will show a clear pickup this spring."


Shirley Kheel; Lawyer, 49
Shirley Ann Dungan Kheel, a lawyer and civic worker, died yesterday at her Manhattan home.
She was 49.
Mrs. Kheel died of cancer, said her husband, Robert.
Her son David was the first child to be born in New York after conception by laboratory methods.


Review/Film; A Corrosive Comedy Of Hip-Hop Manners
"Martin Lawrence: You So Crazy" is a film for people who think Beavis and Butt-head are genteel wimps.
The stand-up comedy in this concert film is raunchy, sexually graphic, intermittently funny and, because of a ratings skirmish, already semi-notorious.
When the film was given an NC-17 rating, it was dropped by its distributor, Miramax.
It is now being released without a rating by the Samuel Goldwyn Company.
But Mr.
Lawrence has higher ambitions than to throw street language and sexual gestures at mainstream audiences.
In "You So Crazy," he creates a blunt comedy of hip-hop manners, and politeness has nothing to do with it.
He paces around the stage, slipping easily and impressively in and out of many voices, accents, walks and faces.
He imitates Hispanic people commiserating with blacks about the treatment of Rodney King ("The way they beat Rodney Dangerfield was bad").
He plays both parts in a conversation between a man and a woman trapped, through every fault of their own, in a bad relationship.
And in his half-minute version of "Driving Miss Daisy," he kicks old Daisy out of the car.
That's the demure part.


The Pop Life
A Hip-Hop Night
The Source Awards, the first music prizes specifically for rap artists, were handed out on Monday night, and the big winner was Dr.
Dre, followed by Snoop Doggy Dogg and Wu-Tang Clan.
The awards show packed the Paramount in Manhattan with celebrities and aficionados from the world of rap and hip-hop culture.
The prizes grew out of dissatisfaction with mainstream awards shows like the Grammys and the American Music Awards, which rap devotees accuse of slighting their genre.
The Source, a leading monthly magazine of hip-hop music, culture and politics, decided to give rappers their own annual ceremony.


American General Corp.(AGC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Petitions Seek California Vote on Canada-Style Health Plan
Leading a nationwide push for state-run health insurance systems, a coalition of consumer, labor and doctors' groups submitted petitions today that would allow California citizens to vote this fall for a Canadian-style "single payer" plan.
Cardboard boxes containing more than a million signatures collected by 10,000 volunteers were being filed with the voter registrar in each county today, organizers said, well over the 677,000 needed to put the issue on the Nov. 8 ballot.
County voter registrars are required to verify the signatures before the measure may be put on the ballot.


Fiserv Inc.(FISV,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Alliance Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Enserch Corp.(ENS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Karl Hess, a Republican Aide Who Became an Anarchist, 70
Karl Hess, an anarchist who was once a conservative aide in the Republican Party, died on Friday at the University of Virginia Hospital in Charlottesville.
Mr.
Hess, who lived in Kearneysville, W. Wa., was 70.
The cause was complications following a heart transplant, said his wife, Therese.


CHRONICLE
MICHAEL JACKSON, who has been out of the public spotlight since reaching a settlement with the family of a 14-year-old boy who had accused him of sexual molestation, is scheduled to appear in New York tomorrow at the City Center.
He is to pick up an award from Body Sculpt, an organization that uses body building to persuade schoolchildren to avoid drugs and remain in school.
MATILDA R. CUOMO will receive the same award, Caring for Kids.
They were chosen in a poll in which 100,000 children in the New York metropolitan area, 8 to 15, voted for the people they thought had done the most for children, said VINCENT FERGUSON, Body Sculpt's founder.


Fire in a New Jersey State Forest Destroys 500 Acres


Review/Television; An Islamic Indictment of the West
"Beirut to Bosnia" attributes the rise in Islamic fundamentalism and terrorism to the West's betrayal of Muslims.
It is a contentious proposition and probably simplistic, but on tonight's evidence, there is enough to it to compel attention.
The guide to the emotions of many Muslims in Israeli-occupied territories, Lebanon, Egypt and Bosnia is Robert Fisk, a correspondent for The Independent, who, as he does not fail to remind us, has been reporting from the Middle East for the British paper for 17 years: "I've watched it. I've been a witness." He is much on camera, venturing into dangerous neighborhoods with his tote bag, seeking out fighters for groups like the Party of God and Hamas and victims of shellings by Israelis and by Serbs.


Kidnappers Seize a 2d Mexican Executive
A prominent Mexican businessman has been kidnapped, the second in six weeks, adding to the climate of uncertainty in Mexico even as a new national office to prevent crime was being created.
Angel Losada Moreno, 38, son of the owner of the Grupo Gigante chain of supermarkets and an executive vice president of the company, was abducted on Monday as he was being driven to his office in Mexico City.


Cherry Corp.(CHER,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


'Wise Use' Movement Is Anti-Environment
To the Editor:
The Information Council on the Environment, financed by the National Coal Association, and Citizens for Sensible Control of Acid Rain, financed by more than a dozen of the country's dirtiest power plants, are misleading the public with their "Wise Use" movement.


Rheaume Joins Roller Team
MANON RHEAUME, the first woman to play on a men's professional hockey team, will broaden her resume this summer as a goaltender for the New Jersey Rockin Rollers of Roller Hockey International, a league that began last year.


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Friday listing the American Stock Exchange's uncovered short sales for the month ended April 15, compared with those for the month ended March 15, included erroneous figures for Wilshire Technologies Inc. and Xytronyx Inc.
The short interest in Wilshire's stock was 505,668 shares in April, down from 524,555 shares in March.
The short interest in Xytronyx's stock was 132,872 shares, down from 142,700.


Coast Guard Bans Bias Against Gay Workers
The Coast Guard has banned discrimination against civilian employees on the basis of "sexual orientation," the first military service to adopt such a policy.
"No one will be denied opportunities because of their sexual orientation," the Coast Guard's Commandant, Thomas F. Fisher, said in a memorandum dated March 15.
As a reason for issuing the memo, he cited the declared policies of Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena, who oversees the service and has long opposed discrimination against homosexuals.


Blair Corp.(BL,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tambrands Finally Gets A New Chief
After nearly a year without a commander in chief, troubled Tambrands Inc. named a president and chief executive: Edward T. Fogarty, who now leads the domestic division of the Colgate-Palmolive Company.
Tambrands also made it clear yesterday how big a challenge Mr.
Fogarty faces by announcing that its operating earnings for the first quarter dropped by almost a third compared with the comparable period a year earlier.
Although its market share has been declining, the White Plains company's Tampax brand of feminine hygiene products accounts for about half of all tampons sold in America.


C.I.A. Officer Takes Deal For Life Term in Spy Case
A Federal grand jury today indicted Aldrich H. Ames on charges of spying for Moscow as the career C.I.A. officer signed a plea agreement accepting life in prison without parole in return for leniency for his wife, people involved in the case said.
Under the deal, Mr.
Ames has agreed to help the authorities assess the damage he caused, a lengthy process that began months ago.
Those knowledgeable about the case said he was willing to accept the deal to obtain a lighter sentence for his wife, Rosario.
She would then be able to be reunited sooner with their 5-year-old son, Paul, who is being cared for by relatives in Mrs.
Ames's native country of Colombia.


Mr. Cuomo's Sensible Budget Plan
Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York proposed a reasonable compromise yesterday to end a legislative deadlock of almost a month over the state budget.
The plan does not cut taxes as much as the Republican-controlled Senate wants, or pick up all the local costs of Medicaid -- the program of medical insurance for the poor -- that the Democratic-controlled Assembly wants.
But over all, the Governor has proposed a budget that ought to be acceptable to every part of the state.
Governor Cuomo would repeal the 5 percent tax on luxury hotel rooms, which is cruelly aimed at Manhattan's tourist industry.
He also proposes eliminating the 15 percent surcharge on corporate taxes, though more slowly than already scheduled by law.
And he refused to accept steeper cuts that would irresponsibly build up deficits in the future.


Cincinnati Milacron Inc.(CMZ,N) reports earnings for 12wks to Mar 26


A Different Take on the 'Myth' of Inflation; The Debt Factor
To the Editor:
The fear of accelerating inflation may not be as unwarranted as Laura D. Tyson claims in "Inflation: Myth and Reality" (Op-Ed, April 15).
The huge Federal debt and the continuing large deficits pose serious threats to the purchasing power of the dollar.


Getting a Science Project Off the Ground


Carillon and Agency To Give to Charities
Carillon Importers Ltd. and its new agency, Margeotes Fertitta Donaher &amp; Weissof New York, are seeking to do well by doing good, donating to 16 charities about $500,000, which they said would have otherwise gone to buy print advertisements for Stolichnaya vodka.
"When you can help, you should" is the theme of a print campaign that begins running today in The New York Times.
The ads will run every other week.
On the alternate weeks, the ad dollars will be donated to organizations like Citymeals-on-Wheels, the Design Industry Foundation for AIDS, the Rainforest Action Network and the Make-a-Wish Foundation.


Eastman Kodak (EK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Japanese Tax Cuts Are Thwarted
As Prime Minister-elect Tsutomu Hata struggles to form a Government this week, he is facing the disintegration of his ruling coalition, the most tenacious recession in decades and the anger of the Clinton Administration at Japan for not having done more to revive its economy.
But Mr.
Hata also has to face the post office, whose latest rate increase reflects just who is winning the basic conflict here between political leaders and the Government bureaucracy.


Publishers Look Hard At Content of Papers
After years of blaming things like declining literacy rates and increasing competition from television for the problems of American newspapers, the publishers of the country's big dailies have turned to a new culprit: their own publications.
"All of us have come to the same conclusion, and that is that we have a content problem," said Louis A. Weil 3d, the publisher of The Arizona Republic and The Phoenix Gazette.


Curbing Rowdy Fans
To the Editor:
On April 21, the Mets played the Los Angeles Dodgers in California.
The fans had been given baseballs as a promotional gimmick.
The Dodgers were at bat in the bottom of the fourth inning when baseballs started raining onto the field from the stands.


Residents Flee Haitian Town After Killings
Hundreds of residents have fled a coastal slum area in Gonaives after what human rights activists and local residents said was one of the worst instances of violence by the military since it seized power in a coup two and a half years ago.
The majority of homes in the seaside slum of Raboteau were locked up today, and the streets were almost deserted.
Some houses, including that of Amio Metayer, a well-known supporter of the exiled Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, had been ransacked.


George Oliver Dies; Polo Star Was 83
George Oliver, a leading professional polo player from the 1930's to the 1960's, died yesterday at his home in Sparta, N.C.
He was 83.
The cause of death was pneumonia, the family said.


Coca-Cola Bottling Consolid.  (COKE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Top Executive Is Ousted From Walt Disney Studios
In a major shake-up at the Walt Disney Studios, Ricardo Mestres was ousted today as president of Hollywood Pictures, which has produced a string of box-office flops in recent years.
Jeffrey Katzenberg, chairman of the Disney Studios, said in a statement that Mr.
Mestres had resigned his post but would continue to develop and produce films for Disney.


Cyprus Amax Minerals Co.  (CYM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Day of Remembrance
As a tribute to former President Richard M. Nixon, Congress and the Supreme Court are in recess today, most Federal offices and financial markets are shut down and regular mail delivery is suspended.
Related articles, page A14.


CHRONICLE
STEPHEN J. SOLARZ, the former Congressman from Brooklyn, will return to academia in the fall after a hiatus of 27 years.
He has been named the J. B. and Maurice C. Shapiro Professor of International Affairs at George Washington University in Washington.
He will teach foreign policy for a year starting in September.
Mr.
Solarz, who lost his bid for re-election to the House of Representatives two years ago after his district was redrawn, had been in the running to be Ambassador to India, but did not get the job.


B.A.T. Is Buying U.S. Rival
In a move that would strengthen its position as the nation's third-biggest tobacco company, B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy the American Tobacco Company from American Brands for $1 billion in cash.
The transaction, subject to regulatory approval, won applause from Wall Street analysts, who said it made sense not only for the two companies, but also for the besieged tobacco industry.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  SERBS PULL BACK FROM GORAZDE  A United Nations spokesman said the Bosnian Serbs had complied with a NATO ultimatum for pulling back their heavy weapons from the besieged town of Gorazde.
A1  VOTING BEGINS IN SOUTH AFRICA  Throngs of elderly and infirm voters came forward in South Africa to sweep aside three centuries of white rule and euphorically open its first fully democratic elections.
A1


Arbour Absent as Autopsy Begins
Still numbed, still embarrassed and still shocked by a season that ended with a shower of whisk brooms on the Nassau Coliseum ice Sunday in sarcastic commemoration of the Rangers' masterly four-game playoff sweep, Islander General Manager Don Maloney was right back on the job today.
But the veteran Islander coach, Al Arbour, was nowhere to be seen as his team participated in what has become a somber rite of spring here, the cleaning out of the lockers after an unsuccessful campaign.
This was the first time in 19 years behind the Islander bench that Arbour, who has apparently coached his last Islander contingent, elected not to bid his players farewell at the season's end.


Donald Atwood, 69, No. 2 at Pentagon During Bush Years
Donald Jesse Atwood, a retired vice chairman of the General Motors Corporation and Deputy Secretary of Defense in the Bush Administration, died on Sunday in a hospital in Royal Oaks, Ill.
He was 69 and lived in Franklin, Mich., a Detroit suburb.
He had an ulcer operation earlier that day, G.M. reported.


Theater in Review
Promiscuous  Downtown Art Company 64 East Fourth Street East Village Through May 8 Directed by Brian Jucha; lighting by Roma Flowers; costumes by Kasia WalickaMaimone; choreographic consultant, Rocky Bornstein.
Presented by Downtown Art Company.


For Devils, It Was a Night to Remember
Should this Devils team go a long way in the Stanley Cup playoffs, the signature game will be No. 5 against the Buffalo Sabres.
At the Meadowlands on Monday night, this Devils team, the best squad in the relatively short and undistinguished history of this franchise, came from two goals behind to tie the Sabres in the second period and then scored twice more in the third period to win, 5-3.


U.N. Mediator Rebuked
A senior Clinton Administration official publicly rebuked Mr.
Akashi, the United Nations mediator, today for criticizing America's refusal to send peacekeeping soldiers there and warned that such remarks would make it harder to win Congressional support for peacekeeping.
The rebuke by the United States' representative to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, was directed at Mr.
Akashi, who quarreled with NATO last weekend when he blocked air strikes against the Serbs besieging Gorazde after they continued shelling the town in violation of a NATO ultimatum.


China Says Blast Won't Slow Satellite Launchings
China's space launching agency said today that a blast on April 2 that killed one person and injured 20 would not delay the launching of three foreign communications satellites this year.
Officials said the explosion that rocked the Xichang Satellite Launching Center in southwestern China, damaging a major testing hall, would push back the national satellite program by at least three months.


Blocking Shots Beats A Room in a Hospital
Two days, 99 saves, and two dramatic playoff victories removed from an ill-timed visit to Montreal General Hospital, North America's best-known appendicitis patient sounded as if he was beginning to surprise himself.
"It's funny," Patrick Roy said.
"When I was coming in the dressing room, I was a bit tired, and when I was jumping on the ice, I felt great."


Day of Mourning
Today has been declared a day of mourning for Richard M. Nixon. NEW YORK
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal offices have option to close. State and city offices open.


John C. Russell; Playwright, 31
John C. Russell, a playwright whose works appeared in Off Broadway theaters in New York City, died on Friday in New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 31 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, his parents said.


Gymnastic Coach Faces Sex Charges
A coach at a gymnastic club in Chappaqua was arraigned today on charges that he sodomized a 15-year-old female student in 1990, the Westchester District Attorney's office said.
The suspect, Riccardo Goddard, 33, of Chappaqua, was charged with third-degree sodomy, a felony that carries a maximum penalty of four years in prison.


Eating Well
LET'S see.
Two years ago Americans were told to forget the four food groups and learn about the new Eating Right Pyramid.
Created by the Federal Government, it suggested that they eat less meat and more fruits, vegetables and grains.
On May 1, Americans will have an opportunity to study a completely different pyramid, this one brought to them by a group of researchers who disagree with the advice contained in the Government's pyramid.
The pyramid they are introducing is based on the Mediterranean diet.
Next year, they say, they will put out an Asian pyramid and possibly, at some later date, a Latin American pyramid.


DISNEY (WALT) CO. (DIS,N)
The Walt Disney Company reported record second-quarter profit yesterday, buoyed by strong domestic and international sales of classic and animated home videos and consumer products.
Top performers were "The Fox and the Hound" in domestic home video and "The Jungle Book" and "Bambi" in foreign home video.
Disney, based in Burbank, Calif., said its net income increased by 16 percent, to $248.5 million, or 45 cents a share, in the second quarter ended March 31, compared with $214.9 million, or 39 cents a share, in the comparable period a year ago.
Revenues rose by 12 percent, to $2.28 billion from $2.03 billion.


Theater in Review
Reproducing Georgia  American Place Theater 111 West 46th Street Manhattan By Karen Hartman; directed by Dana Kirchman; set by Peter Shevenell; lighting by Paul Bartlett; costumes by Karen Ngo; sound by Matt Berman; choreography by Katherine Profeta; dramaturg, by Garrett Eisler; props by Andrew Epstein; graphics by Ronit Kirchman; stage manager, Susan Felber; technical director, Sergio Cruz.
Presented by Bold Face Theater.


Miscellany
*
Grizzard, Atlanta, has spun off a direct-marketing division, called Grizzard/The Agency Team. *
Network Television Association, New York, formed an advisory council made up of 19 executives who represent advertisers and agencies including Johnson &amp; Johnson, Walt Disney, Clorox, BBDO, Leo Burnett and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a headline yesterday about Richard M. Nixon's Presidential tapes and papers referred incorrectly in some editions to the legal effort to control their release.
While suits filed by Mr.
Nixon will continue after his death, they have not been joined by his heirs.


A Promising Glimpse in Harlem
At some experimental programs in inner-city and rural schools, educators are finding evidence that advanced technology has the potential to put students of different backgrounds on a more equal footing.
In these programs, teachers report that many students who use computer networks have shown a new enthusiasm for learning and have improved their test scores.
The Ralph Bunche elementary school in Harlem, education experts say, offers a glimpse of the social potential of computer networks.
The school at 123d Street and Amsterdam Avenue is surrounded by the problems of inner-city life.
The students wrote in a recent issue of their newspaper not only about a dinosaur project and a spelling bee, but also about guns, gangs and crack.


Consolidated Edison Co.  (ED,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Condemned Can't Vote, But Share Desire to Live
An obviously weakened Blom Pule could barely muster enthusiasm for South Africa's first free election, attributing his mood less to the debilitation of a recent hunger strike than to his vantage point in death row.
"I should be outside, voting for the A.N.C.," said Mr.
Pule, who has spent four years on death row for murder and robbery.


SERBS COMPLYING WITH NATO DEMAND ON ARMS PULLOUT
The Bosnian Serb army has complied with a NATO ultimatum for the withdrawal of its heavy weapons beyond 20 kilometers from Gorazde, apparently insuring that there will be no NATO bombardment of Serbian positions there, a United Nations spokesman said today.
"All the sites in the 20-kilometer exclusion zone where Bosnian Serb army weapons were previously located have been reported by United Nations military observers as being cleared," said Comdr.
Eric Chaperon, a United Nations spokesman.


UConn's Marshall to Go Pro
A little more than a month after he missed two last-second free throws that resulted in Connecticut's elimination from the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament, the all-America forward Donyell Marshall announced that he would forgo his senior year to play in the National Basketball Association.
The 6-foot-9-inch, 210-pound Marshall, who averaged 25.1 points as a junior, made the announcement today at Gampel Pavilion.


Market Place; Wall Street is closed to honor a bear market President.
WHEN Richard M. Nixon was elected President in 1968, there was general pleasure on Wall Street.
According to the prevailing wisdom of the time, his election marked a return to traditional economic policies and good news for the stock market.
It was, as it happens, another case of Wall Street crystal balls showing only what the seers were wishing for.
Mr.
Nixon, whose funeral is today, wound up being the first President since Herbert Hoover, and only the third President of the 20th century, to have the Dow Jones industrial average decline over his term of office.


Cone Mills Corp.(COE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Whitewater Inquiry Lengthening, Officials Say
The call came through this morning on Federal Bureau of Investigation teletypes around the nation: Wanted -- agents with accounting and white-collar experience for the Little Rock, Ark., office.
The request is the latest sign that as Robert B. Fiske Jr. enters his fourth month as the independent counsel investigating the finances of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, he is concluding that the inquiry will take more time and be more complex than he originally thought.


Moorer Rejects Idea of Unification
In the afterglow of his triumph Friday over Evander Holyfield, Michael Moorer is reluctant and evasive about topics ranging from unifying the heavyweight division in a fight against Lennox Lewis to his future as a boxer.
"I don't have a burning desire to fight anyone," Moorer, the new heavyweight champion, said at a news conference in Manhattan yesterday.
Lewis holds the World Boxing Council title.
Moorer just won the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titles.


Justices Limit '91 Rights Law To New Cases
In decisions ending a divisive chapter in Federal civil rights law, the Supreme Court voted 8 to 1 today against applying the Civil Rights Act of 1991 retroactively to thousands of cases pending when the law was passed.
The 1991 law, which restored and expanded remedies for job discrimination, was enacted after the Supreme Court, in a series of decisions in the spring of 1989, restricted the reach of two of the main Federal civil rights laws.


For Tomb of Civil War Hero, The New Battle Is in Court
Ulysses S. Grant waged war in the field.
But his descendants and admirers, bent on improving conditions at the war hero's tomb, are taking their battle to court.
In a lawsuit filed on Monday in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the plaintiffs say Grant's Tomb, once one of the most popular tourist spots in the city, has been neglected and is being abused by graffiti writers, skateboarders who use its stairs as a ramp, drug users and homeless people who urinate on the monument's wall.


Rifkin Linked to an 18th Killing As Prosecution Rests in His Trial
The prosecution rested its case today in the murder trial of Joel Rifkin, with the final witness offering testimony suggesting that Mr.
Rifkin might have killed more women than the 17 he says he strangled.
The witness, an expert on blood analysis, said the blood found in a wheelbarrow used by Mr.
Rifkin to move the body of his final victim, Tiffany Bresciani, belonged to someone else.


After 300 Years, Blacks Vote in South Africa
Throngs of elderly and infirm voters came forward in the predawn Tuesday to sweep aside three centuries of white racist rule and euphorically open the first fully democratic elections in South Africa.
Three out of four were newly enfranchised black voters, the vanguard of the nation's long-oppressed black majority, who patiently crowded polling booths and celebrated the power of the ballot in their ascension from the hard subjugation of apartheid.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I was attending Wagner's "Fliegende Hollander" at the Metropolitan Opera House some Saturday evenings ago when in the middle of the performance I heard a small voice piping from somewhere in the audience.
I feared I would be facing a torrent of talk from some youngster forced by a demanding parent to endure a "cultural" event.
The piping voice was not heard again during the intermissionless three-act, two-and-a-half-hour performance.
I decided I had misheard or an extremely well-behaved child was in attendance.


Rape Charges Reinstated Against Five
A state judge reinstated rape charges today against five men who admitted having sex with a woman who had passed out after drinking too much in an upstate restaurant.
The decision in the highly publicized case nullifies the guilty pleas all five men had entered last June in a town court in St.
Lawrence County, pleas that focused attention on the criminal justice system's treatment of sexual assault.
The men, indicted in county court on felony rape charges, had been permitted to plead guilty to sexual misconduct, a misdemeanor.
Each paid a fine of $840.


Upjohn Facing F.D.A. Inquiry On Pill Effects
The Federal Government will investigate new allegations that the Upjohn Company knew of serious side effects caused by the sleeping pill Halcion but reported them falsely to the Food and Drug Administration.
The allegations were made by Dr.
Sidney M. Wolfe of the Health Research Group, a consumer advocate organization here.
An Upjohn spokeswoman said that the initial failure to report the side effects was a mistake but that all were reported later.


Review/Music; Cecilia Bartoli Finds Beauty in the Sound of Breath
If God is in the details, Cecilia Bartoli must be a very devout mezzo-soprano.
At her extraordinary recital at Alice Tully Hall on Monday night, Ms.
Bartoli, who made her debut here in 1990 at the age of 24, put plenty of wonderful effects on display: elaborate roulades, pinpoint coloratura, smooth, effortless legato.
But even in the smallest details her presence and virtuosity were powerfully felt, in the ways vowels were shaped or colored, in the ways character and meaning were created using rubato and phrasing, and, most importantly, in the sound of her breath.
This is something so subtle that it can be missed on Ms.
Bartoli's many recordings, which have built her reputation for charm and mastery, particularly in performances of Mozart and Rossini.
It is also just one element of her charismatic appeal, as the palpable excitement before Monday night's concert attested.
Outside, a line of aspiring ticket buyers stretched futilely up Broadway.
Inside, the capacity audience welcomed the singer with more enthusiasm than most artists receive after a recital.


Bicycle Messenger Killed in Accident


Review/Dance; In 'Swan Lake,' a Tribute to Many Masters, but Mainly One
Tchaikovsky wrote three ballet scores, and all are downright terrific.
How else to explain the popularity, for instance, of "Swan Lake," which made for a splendid opening of American Ballet Theater's spring season on Monday night?
For more than a century, choreographers and companies have tinkered with the choreography, scenery and plot details of the Tchaikovsky classics: "Swan Lake," "The Sleeping Beauty" and "The Nutcracker."


INSIDE
Accused Spy Agrees to Plea
As a Federal grand jury indicted Aldrich Ames on charges of spying for Moscow, the former C.I.A. officer signed a plea agreement.
Page A12.
Judge Revives Rape Charges
Rape charges were reinstated in New York against five men who admitted having sex with a woman after she passed out from drinking.
Page B1.


Acuson Corp.(ACN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Apr. 22
Apr. 15
Apr. 23
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.2
6.9
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
216.8
212.5
222.7
Distillate stocks
102.6
102.1
99.9
Crude imports, daily
7.5
6.2
6.8
Product imports, daily
1.8
2.0
1.7
Crude stocks
339.1
338.9
345.4
Crude production, daily
6.7
6.7
6.9
Refinery utilization (%)
94.2
90.9
89.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Boy Held in Derailment
A 13-year-old Queens boy has been arrested in the derailment of a Long Island Rail Road train that injured three passengers last month, the railroad said yesterday.
The unidentified teen-ager from South Ozone Park was charged with criminal mischief, criminal tampering and reckless endangerment and is scheduled for an appearance in Queens Family Court on May 15.


Baxter International (BAX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Talk of London; Opera of the Phantoms: Ghouls and Zombies Haunt the London Stage
The earth may be on the far side of the sun from Halloween just now, but four days of attending operas and plays in London suggested that shape-shifting spirits, ghosts, fairies, medieval enchantresses and singing headless knights have found new favor in the British capital.
It must have something to do with Tory arts policies.
The dark festivities began on Wednesday night at the English National Opera with the world premiere of Judith Weir's latest opera, "Blond Eckbert." The 39-year-old Miss Weir (pronounced weer) has attracted considerable attention since the success of her "Night at the Chinese Opera" in 1987, followed by "The Vanishing Bridegroom" in 1990 and a large amount of concert music.
Both previous operas had American productions in Santa Fe, N.M., and St.
Louis, respectively, and "Blond Eckbert" has long since been scheduled for a production (by Francesca Zambello) at this summer's Santa Fe Opera.


After All the Buildup, the Vote Is a Visual Letdown
Charged though South Africa's first multiracial election is with history and portent, it has so far produced no made-for-television extravaganza.
After a thunderous overture that had been going on for weeks, the curtain finally rose on proceedings that were visually quiet for all their inherent drama.
The portrait from New Zealand of Nomaza Paintin, Nelson Mandela's niece, all dressed up to cast the first vote, was merely picturesque.


Study Sees Overuse Of Ear Operation
AN evaluation of more than 6,000 children scheduled to have tubes placed in their ears to combat recurrent ear infections indicates that the procedure is inappropriate in about one-quarter of cases and of questionable benefit in another third.
The children in the study ranged in age from 22 days to 16 years.
The finding suggests that each year hundreds of thousands of children who undergo the tube procedure are unlikely to benefit from it and some may even be harmed.


Public Unions Challenge Whitman on Pension Security
Admitting they're trying to play catch up to the new administration's changing fiscal policies, leaders of unions representing teachers and state employees today attacked Governor Christine Todd Whitman's plan to reduce state payments for pensions by more than $1 billion in order to balance the budget and help pay for tax cuts.
Bob Purcell, area director for the Communications Workers of America, which repesents 50,000 state workers, said Mrs.
Whitman "got out of the gate early" and "scared the Legislature with her popularity." He said reports just completed by actuaries hired by the unions showed that the Governor's changes threatened the stability of the pension system and shifted costs onto future generations of taxpayers.


Adams Resources &amp; Energy Inc.(AE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Engelhard Corp.(EC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Thriving in What Was the Soviet Silicon Valley
Even for those who believe in fairy tales, the story of a computer software company in this Caucasus republic can leave one laughing in disbelief.
In the waning years of the old Soviet Union, when it first allowed some experimentation with private enterprise, four Armenian brothers decided to start a computer company here.
They had no money and, worse, no computers.


In This Corner, Giants' Cupboard Is Bare
The Giants knew this was probably going to happen, so when Mark Collins signed a four-year deal with the Kansas City Chiefs yesterday worth between $6 million and $7 million, it wasn't a surprise.
Nevertheless, it is a big loss for the team.
Collins's departure leaves a Giant secondary that is now as inexperienced as any in the National Football League.


Books of The Times; How a Poet Kept in Touch With Life's Prosaic Side
One Art
Elizabeth Bishop Letters
Selected and Edited by Robert Giroux
Illustrated. 668 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $35.
Molds and mildew gave Elizabeth Bishop asthma, but they also gave her esthetic pleasure.
It lay in "the black shadow, like the finest soot, that suddenly shows up, slyly, on white bread, or white walls."


Astral Commun reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Clinton Proposes Revising Pesticide Regulations
The Clinton Administration today offered a proposal for rewriting two laws that control pesticides in food.
But its prospects in Congress are uncertain because neither industry nor environmental groups support the Administration's approach.
The Administration's proposal would allow pesticide residues in food only if "a reasonable certainty of no harm" could be demonstrated.
The same standard would govern raw and processed foods alike.


Foundation Health Corp.(FH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


James Corbett, 65, Professor of Physics At SUNY in Albany
Dr.
James William Corbett, a researcher in semiconductor and solid-state physics, died on Monday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
He was 65 and lived in nearby East Berne.
The cause was brain injuries from a fall in his home, said a spokesman from the State University of New York at Albany, where he had taught for the last 25 years.


Corrections
An article on March 28 about the background of Lisa Bongiorno, who is charged with having killed two officials of the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of North and South America on March 17 in Queens misstated the ages of the two priests.
The Rev Dimitrios Frangos was 81; the Rev.
Germanos Stavropoulos was 51.


THE 37TH PRESIDENT: In School; Remembering Nixon? For some students, he might as well be George Washington.
America's high school seniors were born after Richard M. Nixon resigned.
Ronald Reagan is the first President most remember.
These students expect Presidents to be involved in scandals.
The three Presidents they've seen have all been accused of cover-ups and lying.
It can make the young cynical and affect the way they judge history.
And it makes Mineola High School students quite sympathetic about Mr.
Nixon's Watergate problem.


Borg-Warner Automotive Inc.(BWA,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Tel Aviv Journal; 'I Do' With a Difference (and a Different Rabbi)
When Dana Gerner decided to marry Guy Aharon, she resolved to steer clear of Israel's Orthodox rabbinate, which legally sanctions and performs Jewish marriages in Israel.
The Orthodox ceremony, she said, discriminated against women by relegating the bride to a passive role while the groom took her for his wife before male witnesses.


Centerior EnergyCorp.(CX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Threat Doesn't Faze Graf
STEFFI GRAF returned to the tennis court in Hamburg, Germany, where her rival MONICA SELES was stabbed last year, and easily defeated SILKE FRANKL, 6-0, 6-0, in the opening round of the Citizen Cup yesterday.
A Hamburg newspaper received an anonymous letter last week warning that Graf would be attacked if she played in Hamburg.
The No. 1-ranked Graf said Monday that she was not worried about her safety.


A Different Take on the 'Myth' of Inflation
To the Editor:
Laura D'Andrea Tyson, chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers, makes a case for low inflation ("Inflation: Myth and Reality," Op-Ed, April 15).
She does not mention the Federal Reserve, but the article is clearly meant to send a message to the Fed.
"The economy has turned in its best inflation performance in decades. . . . Favorable trends are continuing this year." But reasonable people, even supporters of low interest rates like myself, can put a different slant on the data.


Big Little Who Got Big Help
LOOKING back over his 81 years Ted Miller has to say that stealing the cue sticks from the burned down pool hall on Westchester Avenue in the Bronx when he was 10 years old was one of the better things that happened to him.
Not the stealing, but the getting caught.
He had been an adventurous kid, hitching rides on the back of trolley cars, and swimming near sewage drains in Westchester Creek.
Back in 1923 no one used words like hyperkinetic or maladjusted or troubled.
They were just bad boys.


Gorazde Cease-Fire Is Irrelevant
Although the Clinton-NATO ultimatum on Bosnia has led to a Serb pullback from Gorazde, it has put compassion on a collision course with reality.
While the U.S. and Russia pledged yesterday to strive for a diplomatic solution to the war, that solution must recognize the Serbs' supremacy on the battlefield.
Spreading the protective wing of NATO airpower over the Muslim enclaves has ended the slaughter at Gorazde, as it did at Sarajevo.
But the move is strategically and militarily irrelevant.


6 Montclair Teen-Agers Cleared of Sexual Assault Charges
Six Montclair, N.J., teen-agers accused last June of sexually assaulting a 14-year-old seventh grader have been cleared of all charges against them by a New Jersey Family Court judge in Newark.
The judge, Michael J. Degnan, acquitted five of the youths following a two-day, nonjury trial early this month and dismissed charges against the sixth youth after the girl who had accused the teen-agers last spring was unable to identify him as an assailant, according to the Essex County Prosecutor's office.


New York City Isn't Playing Favorites on the Coliseum Project
To the Editor:
You imply that the nine-year-plus delay in New York's Coliseum project at Columbus Circle has been the fault of Boston Properties, the developer, and that to reward a political supporter, the Giuliani administration is negotiating an agreement with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority that would provide us with the property at a bargain price (editorials, April 15 and 21).
Nothing could be further from the truth.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CHALLENGE PREPARED ON PLAN FOR SERVICES
A City Council committee passed a measure that would allow the Council to conduct hearings on the Mayor's efforts to turn over city services to private companies.
The move sets the stage for a battle over the Mayor's attempts to reshape how some city services are delivered.
B2.


Personal Health
SPRING, the season of weekend warriors, is also prime time for injured shoulders.
As golfers take to the green, tennis players to the courts, baseball players to the field, swimmers to the water and do-it-yourselfers to the paint brush and tree-trimmer, many also take it on the shoulder.
For while the shoulder is the body's most talented joint, it is also inherently unstable and, after the knee, it is the most vulnerable link between bone and bone.
Yet few know how to care for this important joint, which plays a crucial role in a host of routine tasks, like combing the hair, turning a doorknob, carrying a briefcase and writing a letter.
All too often, the first hints of shoulder problems are ignored or mistreated, leading to a much more serious, painful and longer-lasting injury.
Knowing how to recognize the early signs of trouble and how to strengthen and stretch the shoulder joint to increase its resistance to injury can save misery down the line.
Vulnerable Joint
Dr.
John M. Fenlin, an orthopedic surgeon affiliated with Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia who has devoted his career to the shoulder, describes it as "a very elegant joint," with both great power and great mobility.


A Surge in Earnings at Capital Cities/ABC
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that its net income for the first quarter nearly doubled to $116.08 million, or $7.56 a share, from $58.37 million, or $3.55 a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Revenue was up 19 percent, to $1.404 billion.
Analysts characterized the surge in profit as impressive, saying the company's performance generally reflected renewed health in its television network as well as Capital Cities/ABC's strong management.


ACX Technologies Inc.(ACXT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Lawmakers Express Interest In Taxing Health Benefits
Members of Congress expressed interest today in limiting tax breaks for health insurance.
But labor unions denounced such proposals as a new tax on middle-income workers, and tax lawyers said it would be extremely difficult to measure the value of any benefits that might be taxed.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, chairman of the Finance Committee, said President Clinton had raised the issue by proposing a limit on the amount of health benefits that workers could receive tax-free.
The limit, which would be effective in the year 2004, would be set at the value of a comprehensive package of doctors' services, hospital care and other medical benefits listed by Mr.
Clinton.


100 Quadrillion Calculations Later, Eureka!
An international effort to crack a tough mathematical problem has succeeded, researchers said yesterday.
The problem has stood out as a challenge to computer scientists for 17 years because it was linked to a popular coding system and was said to be proof of the system's security.
The problem was to factor a 129-digit number, breaking it into its component parts the way a molecule is broken into atoms.
This particular number was suggested 17 years ago by the inventors of a coding system that was said to be provably secure because to break it a person would have to factor a very large number.


Bears Bid Adieu to Dent, Anderson and Heyward
The Chicago Bears said yesterday that they would not pursue negotiations with defensive end RICHARD DENT and running back NEAL ANDERSON, both free agents, and they released fullback CRAIG HEYWARD.
The Bears, who earlier this year released defensive tackle STEVE McMICHAEL, also announced they had agreed to a one-year, $600,000 contract with the free-agent quarterback STEVE WALSH, who played in only two games with the Saints last season.


261 Die as Airliner Crashes in Landing Near Japan Airport
An Airbus A300 from Taiwan crashed near the runway last night while trying to land in Nagoya, Japan, killing 261 people.
Only 10 people survived.
It took about 45 minutes to extinguish a fire that engulfed the plane, officials said.
Among the passengers were 158 Japanese and at least 60 Taiwanese.


2 Major Leaguers Accused Of Soliciting Prostitution
A pitcher and a center fielder for the San Diego Padres were arrested early yesterday and charged with soliciting prostitution after the police said they propositioned two undercover police officers on a street corner in midtown Manhattan.
Scott Sanders, a pitcher, and Derek Bell, who was wearing a World Series championship ring from his days with the Toronto Blue Jays, were among more than a dozen men arrested yesterday in a continuing police effort against prostitution.
Among the others arrested overnight was a retired transit police officer, the police said.


Showalter Proves He Is Clairvoyant
Buck Showalter is often hesitant to shower players with compliments, even his own players.
So when Showalter quietly predicted before yesterday's game that California's Brian Anderson could pose problems for the Yankees, it was a revealing admission from the cautious manager.
It was also an accurate assessment.
About five hours after Showalter studied his last piece of videotape of Anderson, a rookie left-hander with a deceptive delivery, outstanding poise and nifty control, he was standing in his office again describing a future videotape that will not be pleasant to watch: yesterday's 6-3 loss to Anderson and the Angels at Yankee Stadium.
It ended New York's six-game winning streak, ended the homestand in a frustrating manner and ended any chances of possibly leaping into first place last night.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Matt Nokes, catcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Signed Bob Melvin, catcher, to a contract with Columbus of the International League.
National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Placed Brian Harvey, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Jeff Mutis, pitcher, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.


Industrial Lands Invite Russian Cooperation on Political Issues
The Group of Seven industrial countries will invite Russia to work formally with them as they develop positions on a range of political issues, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today.
Mr.
Christopher told Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, at a meeting here that Russia, which is far poorer than the Group of Seven, could take part in the group's meetings on political issues, but not on economic ones.


Clinton Forces Out U.S. Envoy to Haiti To Display Resolve
The Clinton Administration forced its special envoy to Haiti to step down today in a move aimed at deflecting criticism and showing that it is serious about coming up with a new policy.
Lawrence A. Pezzullo, appointed to the post in March 1993, presided over the Administration's unsuccessful and sometimes ambivalent efforts to restore to power Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Newman Is Feather in Reed's Cap
When Johnny Newman came to New Jersey last Dec. 10 in a trade with the Hornets for Rumeal Robinson, he was just glad to be out of Charlotte and back in the metropolitan area.
Now the deal is making the Nets' general manager, Willis Reed, look like a candidate for the National Basketball Association's executive-of-the-year award.


No Word on Impact Of Tobacco Deal
B.A.T.
Industries P.L.C. said yesterday that it was too soon to comment on the advertising or agency ramifications, if any, of its proposed purchase of the American Tobacco Company from American Brands.
"We've got to get the acquisition through first," said Ralph Edmondson, investor relations manager for B.A.T. in London, which owns the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
The $1 billion transaction requires the approval of the United States Justice Department.


Computervision Corp.(CVN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


261 Die When a Flight From Taiwan Crashes in Japan
At least 261 people died Tuesday night when a Taiwan jet crashed on landing at Nagoya Airport and burst into flames.
It was the second-worst airline disaster in Japan's history.
The plane, a China Airlines Airbus A300 on Flight 140 from Taipei, was carrying 257 passengers and 14 crew members when it crashed near the edge of the runway at 8:16 P.M, the Japanese Transport Ministry said.


Continental Medical Systems Inc.(CNM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


In New York, It's a Dream Come True
Far from the squalor of her native Soweto, history caught up with Moli Ntuli yesterday as she nervously inched toward a tent pitched on the north lawn of the United Nations Plaza in Manhattan.
Once inside, the 49-year-old Ms.
Ntuli did something she had only been permited to do in her waking dreams.
She voted.


Editors' Note
An article on March 31 described the robbery and killing of a manager of a Brooklyn plumbing supply store.
The first paragraph said that witnesses -- whom it did not identify -- saw the manager, Marvin Wildstein, fall to his knees and plead for his life before he was shot.
Mr.
Wildstein's family later objected that as a former marine, he would not have died that way.
When The Times rechecked the account, editors learned that it had come secondhand from a man who works in the neighborhood and that it could not be independently verified.
The description should not have appeared.


People
*
Lawrence L. Logan was named to the new position of senior vice president and creative director for the Oswego Co., Portland, Ore.
He was previously a vice president and creative director for the Playboy Entertainment Group, Los Angeles. *
Tom Chung was named to the new position of executive creative director for Lee Liu &amp; Tong Advertising, New York.
He was previously an art supervisor for McCann-Erickson Direct, New York.


Corrections
A picture caption in Science Times yesterday about Amy Seidl, who studies a rare butterfly species, referred incorrectly in some copies to the university where she is a graduate student.
It is Colorado State, not the University of Colorado.


Tenneco to Offer 35% of J.I. Case
Tenneco Inc. announced today that it planned to sell at least 35 percent of its J. I. Case subsidiary, one of the world's largest farm and construction equipment companies, through an initial public offering of stock.
Tenneco also released first-quarter earnings that surpassed Wall Street's expectations.
The company said its net income rose 12.2 percent, to $83 million, or 45 cents a share, from $74 million, or 46 cents a share, in the period a year earlier, mainly because of a sharp turnaround for Case.
Revenues rose slightly, to $3.29 billion, from $3.25 billion a year earlier.


CHEVRON CORP. (CHV:N)
The Chevron Corporation said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings declined 23 percent because of lower prices for crude oil and higher operating costs at its refineries.
Net income for the quarter that ended on March 31 totaled $388 million, or $1.19 a share, compared with $501 million, or $1.54 a share, a year earlier.
Quarterly revenue was $8.3 billion, down from $9.1 billion.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BROWNING-FERRIS INDUSTRIES, Houston, has won a five-year $60 million contract to dispose of solid waste at 67 Ford Motor locations in Michigan.
DEAN WITTER, DISCOVER &amp; CO., New York, said that its board had authorized the repurchase of up to four million shares.


Computers in School: Equal Access Sought
As the nation moves beyond today's computers and communications toward the so-called information highway, the Clinton Administration and growing numbers of educators and lawmakers contend that the Government must insure equal access to technology for rich and poor.
Unless Washington steps in, they warn, the increasing power of technology could become a force that divides schools -- and American society -- even further into the haves and have-nots.


Public &amp; Private; Living Will
It is difficult not to imagine that the last 20 years of his life had been leading up to this week, this day, this moment.
And as he had so many times before, against all odds, with many setbacks, Richard Nixon won.
Today he will be laid to rest amid a wave of revisionist history that has rendered him almost unrecognizable, like one of those pastel portraits done by street artists, all the harsh features smoothed away, designed to flatter and to sell.


Nixon's Funeral
President Nixon's funeral service will begin at 7 P.M.
Eastern time.
It is expected to last about an hour.
This is the tentative program of speakers.
ABC, CBS, NBC, PBS, CNN and C-Span plan live coverage.
The Rev.
Billy Graham, officiant


Senior Executive at I.B.M. Steps Down Unexpectedly
Gerald M. Czarnecki, a senior I.B.M. executive who joined the computer company less than a year ago, resigned unexpectedly yesterday.
Mr.
Czarnecki, who is 54, was one of the two senior vice presidents recruited to the International Business Machines Corporation by the company's chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., shortly after Mr.
Gerstner arrived last April to try to revive the financially troubled computer company.


A Step Toward Gift Reform
Yesterday the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee took an important step toward cleaning up a long-festering Congressional scandal: the gifts that lobbyists and other powerful interests give to lawmakers.
But in the process of doing so, a number of senators expressed resentment that anyone should think tighter restrictions are needed.
From the standpoint of government ethics or personal self-awareness, the committee's discussion was not very reassuring.


Mother of King Of Jordan Is Dead at 86
Queen Zein al-Sharaf, the mother of King Hussein of Jordan and in past years an influential figure behind the scenes in his turbulent realm, died yesterday in a hospital in Lausanne, Switzerland.
She was 86, the Reuters news agency reported, and had lived in Amman, Jordan.
Queen Zein, who was sometimes called the Queen Mother, had been being treated for a heart ailment, a communique issued by King Hussein's staff in Amman said.


Breed Technologies Inc.(BDT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Pitino Puts Rumors to Rest
Kentucky Coach RICK PITINO said yesterday that he would remain with the Wildcats and not take a job as coach of the Los Angeles Lakers.
"There have never been any negotiations," Pitino said a news conference in Lexington, Ky., responding to reports that he had talked with the Lakers while in Los Angeles.
"I was on vacation."


Interest Rates Continue to Decline
Interest rates dropped yesterday for second time this week and the sixth time in seven sessions on continuing evidence that the economy is not expanding so rapidly as some may have thought.
Treasury securities made impressive gains in mostly technical trading ahead of tomorrow's report on the gross domestic product for the first quarter, which will provide the first full picture of the period's economic growth, and March durable goods orders.
The market is closed today for the funeral of former President Richard M. Nixon.


Corrections
A chart on Monday with an article about companies that are moving into the Times Square area misspelled the name of an advertising agency.
It is D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.


List of Overseas Guests for Nixon's Funeral Is Short
Although international relations dominated Richard M. Nixon's long career, no foreign heads of state or government are expected for his funeral Wednesday at the library his friends built on the site of the failed citrus orchard where he grew up.
Mr.
Nixon counted as his greatest accomplishments the normalization of relations with China and detente with the Soviet Union.
But no high-powered delegation is coming from Beijing, which will be represented by a Deputy Prime Minister, Zou Jiahua.
Russia, too, is sending only a Deputy Prime Minister, Aleksandr N. Shokhin.


Boston Scientific Corp.(BSX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


A Cozy Bed for Salmon
THE ingredients for the bed on which a simply grilled piece of salmon is presented fulfill many of the components of a well-constructed dish: sweet and bitter, crunchy and silken.
The accompanying rice is greatly enlivened by the addition of asparagus, fennel, chives and garlic.
Salmon on a Bed of Greens And Mango


Arcadian Partners L.P.  (UAN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Teamsters' Fate Could Hang On Outcome of Truck Strike
As a strike by the International Brotherhood of Teamsters lumbers into its fourth week with little sign of cooperation at the negotiating table, the nation's longest trucking strike is shaping up as a test of the union's future.
So far, the idling of 70,000 drivers and warehouse workers has mostly been a toothless bite.
Trucks are still rolling and store shelves are full.
But the talks -- which revolve mainly around the use of part-time workers and a provision on shipping by rail -- have stalled despite the presence of a Federal mediator.
Indeed, today both sides were still trading swipes and accusations of backpedaling.


Food Notes
From Seattle to New York
Starbucks, the Seattle-based coffee company that is widely considered responsible for the current coffee mania, has been gradually moving east.
Last week, the company opened its first store in New York, at 2379 Broadway, at 87th Street.
At 3,000 square feet, this is the largest of the company's 318 stores and also one of the largest coffee bars in the city.
Besides freshly made coffee drinks, customers can buy more than a dozen varieties of coffee -- but no flavored ones -- by the pound ($7.35 to $14.95).
Coffee makers and coffee accessories and juices and tea are also sold.


Airborne Freight Corp.(ABF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


EG&amp;G Inc.(EGG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.63
3.78
2.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.85
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.24
4.25
3.00
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.82
6.86
6.02
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.10
7.15
6.90
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.93
7.94
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.29
6.30
5.96
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ball Corp.(BLL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 3


Mandate for Human Dignity
The question that most worries the lame-duck whites whose monopoly began seeping into history today, and privately worries the next Government, too, is couched in cautionary phrases about "unrealistic expectations."
But it amounts to this: what do South African blacks want?


Visions of Weaning Americans From Nicotine
ANTISMOKING forces in Washington, gaining momentum in Congress in recent weeks, have begun to imagine America with strict regulation of cigarettes.
But what would that mean?
Cigarettes by prescription only?
Nicotine-free cigarettes?
Most agree that simply banning cigarettes is not an option.
But one idea often mentioned by advocates is that the Government could gradually reduce the amount of nicotine permitted in cigarettes over, say, two decades.


Stock Market Is Listless in Slow Trading
The stock market closed essentially unchanged yesterday despite factors that ought to have prompted a rally, notably a drop in long-term interest rates and fresh employment data that indicated inflation was still under control.
Ahead of today, when most financial markets in the United States will be closed in memory of former President Richard M. Nixon, both the stock and bond markets had below-normal trading volume, probably signaling that many traders were declining to buy or sell.


In the Young, Signs That Feminism Lives; Piqued by High School Harassment
After the final bell rang and classes were dismissed on a recent afternoon, about a dozen young women at Fair Lawn High School headed for the homeroom of the Spanish teacher, Eileen Levine.
They meet there every week for what, 20 years ago, would have been called a consciousness-raising group.
"The guys in our class would say stuff about women to put them down, or about rape they'd say the women deserved it, and all of us felt there should be some place to come and talk about it," said Sue Brozina, 17.
Three years ago, a small group of female students formed a women's issues club to provide just such a place.


Wage Increases Are Small but Confidence Jumps
American workers are obtaining less in pay and benefit increases from employers these days, but they seem ever more optimistic, two surveys indicated today.
Moderating inflation in medical and other benefit costs helped hold the rise in overall worker compensation to seven-tenths of 1 percent in the first three months of the year, the smallest quarterly advance since 1986, the Labor Department reported today in its employment cost index.


Deaf Students Protest New School Head
The jets screaming by at treetop level might have spoiled another demonstration, but they were not a distraction yesterday.
The students protesting outside the Lexington School for the Deaf were chanting in American Sign Language, and they had no trouble communicating with one another.
"We want a deaf C.E.O. now!" signed a group of six students, standing on top of a low wall and drawing cheers from the 100 other students and faculty members outside the school, on 75th Street in Jackson Heights, Queens, a few blocks from La Guardia Airport.


Tribute to Graham At Next Wave Festival
A two-week tribute to the groundbreaking early work of Martha Graham, the American premiere of Philip Glass's latest opera, "La Belle et la Bete," and the American premiere of Pina Bausch's dance "Two Cigarettes in the Dark" are among the highlights of the 12th Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
With 13 events over 66 days, the festival is to open on Sept. 28 with the Martha Graham Dance Company and run through Dec. 11, with the last performance of "La Belle et la Bete," the second installment of Mr.
Glass's Jean Cocteau trilogy.


'Northern Exposure' Is Target of Protest
The Rev.
Donald E. Wildmon, whose crusade against television programming he considers unsuitable has led some advertisers to shun episodes of various series, is protesting an episode of the CBS hit "Northern Exposure" in which two male characters get married.
"It is tragic that CBS will give the homosexual life style such warm approval," Mr.
Wildmon, the president of the American Family Association in Tupelo, Miss., wrote in a letter to advertisers.
"It is regrettable that CBS and the other networks have caved in to pressure from the radical wing of the homosexual movement and agreed to promote the life style."


Books of The Times; An Intricate Plot About Hollywood
The Book of Dreams  By Craig Nova  321 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $22.95.
Despite the disconnectedness that its title may suggest, Craig Nova's latest and best novel, "The Book of Dreams," immediately catches you up with the deftness of its intricate plot.
"For a while Warren Hodges was Hollywood," the story begins.
"He went about his life in long, dark cars, the lights of the city showing on the hood and fenders as streaks of gold and silver, the colors somehow filled with all the promise of illusion."


Another Barrier to Simple Justice
The Supreme Court's refusal to apply the 1991 Civil Rights Act fully to cases pending when it was enacted adds a sour chapter to one of the saddest stories in the high court's history.
It need not be the final chapter.
But unless Congress intervenes, the Court's action will cause dismissal of thousands of potentially meritorious discrimination lawsuits -- just because the Court mangled the law before being corrected by Congress in the 1991 act.
A series of Supreme Court decisions so muddled the legal rules for job discrimination cases that Congress had to pass the new law to restore the force of longstanding former laws.
In one of the worst examples, the Court took an 1866 law safeguarding equal rights "to make and enforce contracts" and read the words "and enforce" out of the statute.


Frederic P. Kimball; Aviation Consultant, 79
Frederic Paige Kimball, a retired aviation consultant who served for 30 years as a Justice of the Peace, died on April 20 at his home in Westport, Conn.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Jeanne Bachrach Kimball.


Pentagon Tests New Policy In Subsidizing an Industry
The White House's decision to subsidize the flat-panel computer display screen industry is an experiment in changing the Defense Department's relationship with commercial suppliers, Administration officials said today.
For two generations, the Defense Department has paid contractors to build special factories to make high-technology products not available commercially from American companies, like certain kinds of high-speed computer chips.
But as foreign companies have won technological dominance in more and more industries, the Defense Department has been faced with a choice of buying from abroad or paying ever more money for goods from the small and often inefficient American factories.


Zabriski Goes for Some Extra Wheels
BRUCE ZABRISKI has been a golf professional since 1980, has won club tournaments across the country and has also played on the PGA Tour.
He never thought he would become a car dealer.


For Icon Artists, Freedom Brings Iconoclasm
Katerina Shchenitsina, one of the painters of the fine black lacquered boxes that have made this small village famous, is painting icons.
She bemoans the regimen she believes is required for devotional art: mixing the paints with baptismal water, fasting and, worst of all, abstention from television and sweets.
But she is a believer, and she can now offer her art to God.
Some 75 years after the Communists banned the icon painting that Palekh had practiced since the 15th century, replacing it with miniatures of Russian fairy tales, songs and Soviet village idylls, some Palekh artists, like Mrs.
Shchenitsina, have returned to religious traditions.


Vitamin Study Showing No Benefit Was Flawed; Variables and Politics
To the Editor:  Regarding your front-page article on vitamin supplements (April 14), I am surprised there was no mention of two related facts:


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Azalea Companions
Q.
I have a number of azaleas and would like to add several shrubs or small trees that would be good companions.
What would you suggest? -- Monica Cutler, Roslyn, L.I.


Bell Atlantic Set to Offer Wireless Data Service
In the first big commercial introduction of wireless data services over cellular telephone systems, the Bell Atlantic Corporation is set to offer a new technology that can be used for tasks like verifying credit cards or sending electronic messages over the air.
The technology -- known as cellular digital packet data or C.D.P.D. -- has been under development throughout the industry.
Using a new approach to send packets of data alongside the voice signals of regular telephone conversations, the technology could sharply reduce the cost of wireless data links and open up a host of new applications.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the formation of a fund by the United States, Mexico and Canada to stabilize the Mexican peso misstated the decline in the value of the peso.
Since Jan. 1, it has fallen 8 percent against the United States dollar, not the Canadian dollar.
The Canadian dollar, not the peso, has fallen 6 percent against the United States dollar.


Review/Ballet; Swans With Bolshoi Touch
The swans were both enchanted and enchanting when American Ballet Theater offered a repeat performance of "Swan Lake" on Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Nina Ananiashvili starred in the dual role of Odette, the swan queen, and Odile, the sorcerer's daughter who disguises herself as Odette.
Julio Bocca was Prince Siegfried, the hero, who loves Odette but is tricked by Odile.


No Apparent Front-Runner To Fill Supreme Court Seat
Senior White House officials said today that President Clinton hoped to select a nominee for the Supreme Court within two weeks, in time to hold hearings before the Senate's summer recess.
Yet as of now, the officials said, there is no clear front-runner to replace Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who is retiring when the current term ends.
The withdrawal of George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate majority leader, denied Mr.
Clinton the opportunity to select a candidate who would have probably been widely acclaimed and easily confirmed.


CHRONICLE
RICKI LAKE is on a roll: her syndicated television talk show, which went on the air last September, is now seen on 166 stations.
Her movie career is booming.
She married Rob Sussman, a political illustrator, last month, and tomorrow she is going to the White House for lunch.
So who does the talk show host-movie star-new bride most yearn to talk to at the White House?
President and Mrs.
Clinton's 14-year-old daughter, Chelsea.
"When people ask who I most want to interview," Ms.
Lake said, "it would be her."


Acquittal in Trash Plant Case
The chairman and general counsel of North American Recycling Systems Inc. were acquitted this week of felony bribery and conspiracy charges stemming from the construction of a trash incinerator in Washington County, N.Y.
A jury in Johnstown, N.Y., acquitted Robert R. Barber, the chairman and largest shareholder of North American, and William L. Nikas, the general counsel, of the charges on Tuesday.
The charges stemmed from Mr.
Nikas's actions as a Washington County official to win approval for the plant in the mid-1980's.
The plant is a financial problem for the county.


When Your Water Might Contain Lead
Millions of households that use well water have been warned by environmental groups that some submersible well pumps, made of lead alloys, can leach the toxic metal into drinking water.
Last week, the Environmental Protection Agency advised people with such wells to have their water tested for lead, renewing concerns in many families about pollution on tap in the kitchen.
Even at relatively low levels, lead can cause serious developmental and health problems, especially in children.
The following advice from experts in lead poisoning is appropriate for both well water or public water.
Testing the Water
The first step is to get the water tested.
State certified laboratories are listed in the Yellow Pages, or a list can be obtained from the E.P.A., at (800) 426-4791, which can also answer questions and send material.


Ban on Employees Who Smoke Faces Challenges of Bias
A growing number of private employers around the country are refusing to hire smokers as a quick-and-easy way to hold down health care costs.
But just as swiftly, state legislatures are coming to the smokers' defense, passing laws that prohibit hiring practices that discriminate against them.
While a hiring ban is a relatively new tactic -- less than 10 years old -- in the war against smoking, thousands of companies in the United States have forbidden their employees to smoke, even off the job.
Companies say that not hiring smokers not only saves money but also improves safety conditions, cuts down on absenteeism and minimizes the need to train new employees to replace those who retire early because of lung cancer, emphysema and other diseases related to smoking.


THE SOUTH AFRICAN VOTE: THE SCENE A Joyous Day of Lining Up to Vote for Many, but Disappointment for Some; In Rural Zulu Areas, No Ballot Boxes
Michael Mshange was in a foul mood.
He had walked for an entire day to reach this dusty hamlet in the foothills of central Natal Province and then spent a night sleeping in a damp field when the polling station here failed to open.
Today, for the second time, polling officials were nowhere to be seen, and the 70-year-old former mine worker was losing both his strength and his patience.
"Why are they doing this to us -- why are they messing with us like this?" Mr.
Mshange said, railing at unseen forces who seemed bent on sabotaging his first chance ever to vote.


Review/Television; Inspector Tennison Enters Nether World Of London Depravity
On its third time around as a mini-series, "Prime Suspect" hews to a format that proves remarkably compelling.
Jane Tennison, now a detective chief inspector, is still elbowing her way ferociously through the predominantly man's world of police work.
She's ambitious, selfish, even ruthless on the job, rarely revealing that her private life is something of a mess.
She also happens to be played by Helen Mirren, whose uncompromising performance has turned into the kind of tour de force that leaves chronic television detractors stammering.
The original "Prime Suspect," created and written by Lynda La Plante, focused primarily on the sexism Tennison faced on the job.
The second series, based on a La Plante story line, incorporated an exploration of racism, not least in the reaction to Tennison's affair with a black colleague.


First, He Parked the Truck, Then He Put Himself in Neutral


Municipal Job Buyout Plan Is Short of Its Goal
With a day left for municipal workers to decide whether to accept a severance offer to quit their jobs, city officials said yesterday that they were short of their goal by 2,500 workers.
But Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would not have to resort to layoffs immediately, even if the severance program fell short of its target of 7,600 job cuts.
But the Mayor left open the possibility that he might have to lay off some workers in the future as he tries to balance New York City's $31.2 billion budget for the next fiscal year and honors his commitment to cut a total of 15,000 jobs over the next 14 months.


THE 37th PRESIDENT: PRESIDENT CLINTON; 'He Had an Incredibly Sharp and Vigorous and Rigorous Mind'
Following is the eulogy delivered yesterday by President Clinton at the funeral service for former President Richard M. Nixon, as transcribed by The New York Times:
President Nixon opened his memoirs with a simple sentence: "I was born in a house my father built." Today, we can look back at this little house and still imagine the young boy sitting by the window of the attic he shared with his three brothers, looking out to a world he could then himself only imagine.


Philadelphia Republican Is Named Victor
After two additional weeks of testimony, a Federal judge here has reaffirmed his earlier ruling that a Democrat had stolen a State Senate election from a Republican candidate through voter fraud.
The judge declared the Republican the victor.
Judge Clarence C. Newcomer of Federal District Court ruled on Wednesday that the Democrat, William G. Stinson, had solicited more than 461 illegal absentee ballots to wrest the November special election for Philadelphia's Second Senatorial District from the Republican, Bruce S. Marks.
Judge Newcomer ordered Philadelphia's election commission to certify Mr.
Marks, a former aide to United States Senator Arlen Specter, the winner within 48 hours.


Chancellor Accuses Whitman of Trying to Silence Him
The Chancellor of the Department of Higher Education, whose job has been targeted for elimination by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, said today that the administration wanted to silence him even before it got rid of him.
So Dr.
Edward D. Goldberg used what may be one of the last meetings of his board to read into the minutes the testimony that he said the Administration had blocked him from giving before the legislative budget committee.


Gooden's Fadeaway Is Not a New Pitch
How long ago 1984 seems.
To those who measure time in linear terms, it's been 10 years since the first halcyon season of a bright new era in New York Mets history.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  31 WHITES ARRESTED IN BOMBINGS  Striking back at election terrorism, the South African police announced the arrest of 31 white extremists charged with 21 bombing deaths.
In another attack, a car bomb exploded at the airport in Johannesburg, injuring 18.
A1


Currents; An Urban Bicycle With Attitude
Maybe it's the recession and the lack of toothsome commissions.
Or the absence of a compelling new theory since deconstruction.
Whatever the case, architects and designers seem to be getting comfortable with history again.
Examples of "new but old" style -- contemporary with a retro twist -- abound.
What might be mistaken for a look backward could be the beginning of something new.
IF you're looking for an urban commuting bicycle that is tough but stylish, the Globe series by Specialized bicycles of Morgan Hill, Calif., is a good bet.
"We call it retro-moderne," said Reed Pike, a marketing administrator for Specialized.
"It's a fairly sophisticated package with a lot of functional details."


No Headline
"He stood on pinnacles that dissolved in the precipice. He achieved greatly and he suffered deeply. But he never gave up." -- HENRY A. KISSINGER.  [ A20:3. ]


'Take Our Daughters' -- A Media Photo Op
To the Editor:
Last year, when Elisabeth was 8, she was one of two girls who attended school during Take Our Daughters to Work Day.
This year she may be the only girl left in her third-grade class.


Helping Teachers and Schools to Nip Sex Bias in the Bud
WHEN a few of the first-grade boys at the City and Country School, a private school for 2- to 13-year-olds on West 13th Street in Manhattan, began to taunt the first-grade girls by calling them "sexy babes" and saying things like "Let's do sexy" to them over several weeks in January, it ignited a furor among parents.
They were disturbed both because their daughters were upset and because the girls were advised by their teacher simply to ignore the boys.
"Lots of words about sex were being used by boys for power over the girls," said Michele Cardella, 38, a writer whose daughter, Samantha Gold, 7, is in the class.
"It didn't matter that they didn't know what they were talking about."


Venezuela Proposes Opening Oil Industry to Private Investment
Breaking a 20-year taboo, Venezuela's new Government today proposed opening its oil industry, Latin America's largest, to private investment.
Oil "will no longer be an exclusive affair of the state," a new economic blueprint stated, reversing a nationalization policy adopted in the early 1970's.
"We propose, therefore, that the oil sector be opened without limitations to private enterprise, national and foreign."


Debating the Future of Women
In September thousands of people from all over the world will meet in Cairo, at the International Conference on Population and Development, to discuss some of the most urgent problems facing this small planet.
At neither of the two previous such conferences, in 1974 and 1984, were women's voices as powerful -- or their agenda as broad -- as they will be at this one.
That agenda emerged from three weeks of debate, confrontation and aggressive lobbying among delegates from 170 countries meeting at the United Nations this month.
True, it is not yet the hoped-for consensus document that could serve as a blueprint for international family planning in the 21st century.
But in recognizing that population and development policies must include the empowerment of women, it creates the right context for the Cairo discussions.
The draft document acknowledges the inseparability of population control, equal rights, the environment and development.


Home and Garden, Designed as One
IN many 19th-century English novels, the country house and its gardens and outlying lanes play a leading role.
Like many of the novelists of that era, Wilson Eyre, a Philadelphia architect who lived from 1858 to 1944, let inspiration, and not the prevalent theories of the day, motivate his work.
Mr.
Eyre was a leading architect in an American suburban style that exuded the warmth of hearth and home on a grand but never pretentious scale.
An exhibition on his work, "Graced Places: The Architecture of Wilson Eyre," runs through Sunday at the Arthur Ross Gallery at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  POLICE SUPERVISORS FACE ACTION IN INQUIRY Eight of the 22 police sergeants in the 30th Precinct in Harlem will be transferred and may be disciplined for any corrupt and brutal acts of officers under their watch, according to a law-enforcement official.
The plan is part an effort to break up what has been described as departmental indifference to corruption.
A1.
DOCTOR GUILTY OF REFUSING AID A doctor was convicted of refusing to admit a woman in labor to Harlem Hospital, forcing ambulance attendants to deliver her baby in the hospital's waiting room and of later falsifying hospital records to cover up his actions.
B3.


Accounts
*
Dean Foods Vegetable Co., Green Bay, Wis., to Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco, to handle advertising for its newly acquired Birds Eye line of frozen vegetables.
The agency previously handled the account when the brand was owned by Kraft General Foods.
Though billings were not disclosed, they had previously been estimated at $3 million.


THE 37th PRESIDENT: THE OVERVIEW; Nixon Buried on Note of Praise and Reconciliation
To the heroic strains of "Victory at Sea," the theme that comforted Richard Milhous Nixon through his darkest moments, the nation paid final tribute today to the former President who fascinated, confounded, infuriated and enthralled Americans for half a century.
Gov.
Pete Wilson, who was an advance man for Mr.
Nixon's 1962 California campaign for governor, said in his eulogy, "It's hard to imagine a world without Richard Nixon." Indeed, it was hard to imagine that there would be no more comebacks or reincarnations, no more new Nixons, same old Nixons or mellower Nixons.


No U.S. Civil-Rights Trial In Officer's Killing of Youth
The final legal question lingering from the fatal shooting of a black teen-ager by a white police officer here four years ago was removed today when the United States Justice Department declined to file any criminal charges against the former officer.
The decision, made after a two-year review, was a blow to the parents and supporters of the dead youth, Phillip Pannell, 16, who had argued that a state jury's acquittal of the officer, Gary Spath, in February 1992, was unfair.
In addition, it spared Mr.
Spath, who now works as a carpenter, from a second trial as he, his wife and their three children try to reshape their lives.


New York Jury Duty Invites Frustration
To the Editor:
"Justice for Jurors" (editorial, April 16), about proposed reforms in the operation of juries in New York State, concludes that "anyone who has experienced an unsatisfactory tour of jury duty should enroll as an enthusiastic lobbyist" for enactment of the reforms proposed by the Jury Project, an official group.
Let me enroll.


An Inspector Calls; Turning 1946 Stale Into 1994 Stunning
If there were a society for the preservation and restoration of aging plays, the British director Stephen Daldry would deserve the presidency.
Taking a 1946 potboiler by J. B. Priestley, "An Inspector Calls," he has transformed it into a steadily engrossing drama and, more significantly, one of the more astonishing spectacles on Broadway right now.
An equivalent act would be turning a Nash Rambler into a Bentley or a tugboat into a phantom schooner.
Against all odds, something that was functional and boxy has been made dark and gleaming and elegant.


PBS Vetoed Sequel for Cost, Not Content
To the Editor:
Frank Rich spins a conspiracy theory about the Public Broadcasting Service's decision not to finance a sequel to Armistead Maupin's "Tales of the City" ("The Plot Thickens at PBS," column, April 17).
Like many conspiratorial speculations, his is entertaining but off the mark.


Most Markets Shut Yesterday
The stock, bond and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday in memory of former President Richard M. Nixon, who died on Friday.
The currency markets, however, were open.


Walt Disney Reinventing Itself
Widely considered the most successful entertainment enterprise in a decade, the Walt Disney Company, which once seemed to make money as effortlessly as Mickey Mouse waved his magic wand, does so no longer and has decided that it needs a change.
The makeover is already under way, engineered by Disney's chairman and chief executive, Michael D. Eisner, and its late president, Frank G. Wells, long before Mr.
Wells's death in a helicopter accident this month.


'Guns for Goods' Hits the Target and Then Some
When residents of a New York police precinct lined up last December to trade guns for $100 gift certificates, cities across the country jumped to start "guns for gifts" exchanges of their own.
Connecticut leaped, and began the nation's only statewide program.
Operation Guns for Goods was successful; too successful for its own good.
In just five days, 4,200 guns were turned in, far more than anyone had expected, and far more than anyone could pay for.
Retailers who had pledged to finance the program and committed $100,000 found themselves nearly $400,000 short.


Alice Herrington, 75, Founder Of Friends of Animals, Is Dead
Alice Herrington, the founder and longtime president of Friends of Animals, one of the country's best known animal-protection societies, died on Tuesday at DeKalb Medical Center in Decatur, Ga.
Ms.
Herrington, a former resident of Manhattan and Little Silver, N.J., was 75 and lived in Lithonia, Ga.
The cause of death was cancer, her family said.


Abortion Clinic Fight Heads to Court
The red line painted across the driveway of the Aware Woman Center for Choice here does more than mark the boundary of the only abortion clinic in Brevard County.
For a year, it has also been the front line in the national debate over abortion, the focal point of a bitter legal battle.
But now that struggle is moving from the streets of a sedate residential neighborhood in this town south of Cape Canaveral to the United States Supreme Court.
On Thursday, the High Court is scheduled to hear arguments on the constitutionality of a permanent injunction, issued by a state judge on April 8, 1993, to keep abortion protesters away from the clinic.


Review/Music; Progress Report From Cincinnati
The Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra has made great strides in recent seasons.
When it performed in New York in 1988, a year after Jesus Lopez-Cobos became its director, the orchestra played respectably, with occasional flashes of brilliance.
Heard again 13 months ago, the players produced a polished sound and robust, high-energy performances that surmounted occasional flaws and left a strong impression.
Mr.
Lopez-Cobos brought his players back to Carnegie Hall on Monday evening, and proved that last year's performance was not a fluke.
Mr.
Lopez-Cobos's program could have been more stimulating.
Although it could be argued, in a pinch, that the Dvorak Seventh Symphony is heard too rarely, the work is hardly outside the mainstream.
The rest of the evening was given over to Brahms, beginning with a vividly played and beautifully shaped account of the "Tragic" Overture, and moving on to a less fully satisfying performance of the Violin Concerto.


A War-Weary Serbia Dares to Hope
The spring weather is splendid in Serbia's capital, and as residents stroll through parks and sip coffee in downtown cafes, they dare to hope that the war in neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina may finally be approaching an end.
With the threat of NATO bombing raids against Serbian positions near the Bosnian town of Gorazde now apparently lifted, and with foreign powers launching a new negotiating push, many Serbs here feel an unaccustomed optimism.


Discovering a Film Idol's Feet of Clay
Cyril Collard's transformation into a cult figure began on March 8 last year when, just three days after he died of AIDS, the young actor and director's first and only film, "Savage Nights," won four Cesars -- the French equivalent of the Academy Awards -- in an emotionally charged ceremony televised nationwide.
All the elements were there.
A promising career had been cut short by AIDS.
He was handsome.
He was perceived as a rebel.
"His death at the age of 35 has turned him into the James Dean of the 1990's," proclaimed Paris Match, one of numerous magazines that carried his photograph on its cover.


Furniture Parading As Fruit
AT 4:30 A.M., Richard Warholic's flock of hungry pet peacocks sound reveille, honking like the Miami rush-hour traffic the furniture artist wanted to escape when he moved from Miami to rural Florida City four years ago.
Mr.
Warholic makes furniture that appears to have sprouted from the jungle that once bore 30 varieties of avocados and engulfs his bungalow home.
In his garden, he builds tables, chests and cupboards of pine lumber, which he first allows to warp and age for months in the tropical sun and rain.
The furniture is thickly glazed with fruit-salad colors, as bright as the peacocks that Mr.
Warholic calls Vita Sackville-West, Nigel and Percy, each named for a member of the Bloomsbury group, the late 19th-century collaborative of literary and decorative artists in Britain.


Aiming at Cuomo, Pataki Starts TV Ads
Trying to prove he is the leading Republican gubernatorial candidate, State Senator George E. Pataki unveiled the first television commercials of the 1994 campaign today and aimed his fire directly at Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
In a pair of spartan 30-second advertisements, Mr.
Pataki, 48, a fiscal conservative from Putnam County, blames Mr.
Cuomo for a worsening state economy and a decline in public safety.
Those are the two issues that polls say most concern New Yorkers.


CHRONICLE
When ANTHONY D. MARSHALL was a boy, it would have been hard to predict that he would someday write a book called "Zoo," a guide to 102 zoos and aquariums in the United States.
"As a child I went to the Central Park Zoo, and after smelling the monkey house, I was more interested in the hot chocolate than in the animals," said Mr.
Marshall, a former Ambassador to Madagascar, Kenya and Trinidad and Tobago.


Topics of The Times; Hands Across the Hudson
Not often are Republicans in charge of both New York City and New Jersey, and when they are they flaunt it.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman did a joint TV "town hall" the other night.
It was more love-in than confrontation over issues that normally divide a big city and its suburbs.
But Democrats in those offices have rarely been so openly friendly, or publicly confessed they need each other.
It was easy for the two Republicans to pledge cooperation against drug dealers and their clients who shuttle back and forth across the Hudson River.
And while they agreed not to lure businesses across that river, this will be tested; on the same day, another Wall Street brokerage house announced a move to Jersey City.


James Raitt, 41, Musical Director
James Raitt, the musical director of the current productions of "Damn Yankees" on Broadway and "Forever Plaid" Off Broadway, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 41.
The cause was AIDS, said Guy Stroman, a friend.


Mentor Names a Chairman
The Mentor Graphics Corporation said today that it had named as its chairman Jon Shirley, who had been president and chief operating officer of the Microsoft Corporation from 1983 to 1990.
Mr.
Shirley, who is 56, succeeds Thomas H. Bruggere, 48, Mentor's co-founder, who resigned last month to pursue personal interests.
Mr.
Shirley has for five years been an outside director of Mentor, which is based in the Portland, Ore., suburb of Wilsonville.


Corrections
The Key Rates table on the Credit Markets page of Business Day on April 19 and 20 misstated the prime lending rates charged by banks on the previous days.
The rate was 6.25 percent to 6.75 percent on April 18 and 6.75 percent on April 19.


Elissa Ichiyasu; Graphic Designer, 41
Elissa Ichiyasu, a graphic designer, died at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan on April 13.
She was 41 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from breast cancer, her family said.


Seton Hall Adds Junior College Forward
Seton Hall announced its second basketball signing in two weeks, as ROGER INGRAHAM, a junior college transfer, signed a letter of intent to play for the Pirates in the fall.


U.N. and Bosnians at Odds on Serb Pullout
A dispute erupted today between the Bosnian Government and United Nations officials here over the degree of Serbian compliance with an ultimatum to leave the town of Gorazde, threatening to undermine new Bosnian peace talks before they have even begun.
Lieut.
Gen.
Sir Michael Rose, the commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia, said after visiting Gorazde today that all Serbian forces had moved more than three kilometers, or 1.9 miles, from the city center, apart from "six armed policemen, if you want to count them." But the Bosnian Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic, contested this view.


Prince Sports Group Chooses Chiat/Day
The Prince Sports Group of Bordentown, N.J., said yesterday that it had selected Chiat/Day in New York to handle the creative portion of its global account, which had last been handled by Brouillard Communications in New York before being moved in-house.
Billings were estimated at less than $5 million.


Duke Ellington Rarities
Rarely heard works by Duke Ellington, including his "Symphony in Black," are to be performed tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue and 53d Street.
David Berger, a composer and Ellington scholar, is to lead a big band featuring such performers as Joe Temperley, a baritone saxophonist, and Milt Grayson, a singer.
The concert is sponsored by the Duke Ellington Society.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 935-2200.


COMPANY NEWS
AMERON INC., Pasadena, Calif., a construction products concern, has won two contracts valued at about $27 million to build two concrete and steel pipelines in Southern California.
AMERIWOOD INDUSTRIES INTERNATIONAL, Grandville, Mich., a manufacturer of ready-to-assemble furniture, began construction to expand its plant in Tiffin, Ohio, by about 200,000 square feet.
The expansion will result in the addition of 150 to 200 jobs.


Bridge
Most tournament titles are won for a year, but one pair this weekend will earn a permanent victory.
The first and last NorthEast Open Pair Championship will be played in Kingston, Ontario, Wakefield, Mass., Stamford, Conn., and Wilmington, Del.
Other major events in the NorthEast Championships, the first and last authorized by the American Contract Bridge League, are: today, Bracketed Knockout Teams 8 P.M.; tomorrow, NorthEast Pairs qualifying, Stratified Pairs and Stratified Senior Pairs 1 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.; Saturday, NorthEast Pairs final, Stratiflighted Pairs and Stratiflighted Senior Pairs 1 P.M. and 7:30 P.M.; Sunday, Stratiflighted Swiss Teams and Stratiflighted Senior Swiss Teams (two sessions) 11 A.M.


McCann to Handle 2 Cat Litter Brands
A&amp; M Products Inc., a subsidiary of the First Brands Corporation of Danbury, Conn., said yesterday that it had selected McCann-Erickson New York to handle advertising for its Scoop Away and Ever Clean cat litter brands, which had been at J. W. Messner Inc. of Grand Rapids, Mich.
Billings were estimated at $6 million.
McCann was awarded the account after a review.
The other participants were not disclosed.


End of Lemieux Era? Caps Oust Penguins
Capitals 6, Penguins 3
Washington brushed aside both its dubious playoff past and the Pittsburgh Penguins last night in Landover, Md., getting 26 saves from Don Beaupre in a 6-3 victory that enabled the Capitals to win the first-round series by 4 games to 2.
The seventh-seeded Capitals will next face the New York Rangers in the Eastern Conference semifinal, which begins Sunday at Madison Square Garden.
Washington never trailed after taking a 3-0 lead within 10 minutes.


Vitamin Study Showing No Benefit Was Flawed; A Carcinogenic Dye
To the Editor:
"Vitamin Supplements Are Seen as No Guard Against Diseases" (front page, April 14) is based upon an incomplete review of the original article published in The New England Journal of Medicine on the same day.
According to the "fine print" where the study specifics are described, "all formulations were colored with quinoline yellow." This is an artificial food dye with known carcinogenic properties.
Moreover, this toxic dye was consumed for five to eight years by the men who took the vitamin supplements while participating in this study.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.42
2.88
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.87
3.87
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.24
4.24
2.98
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.82
6.82
6.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.10
7.10
6.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.93
7.93
7.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.29
6.29
5.97
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Economic Scene; Russian capital flight: the symptom or the sin?
AFTER months of agonizing, the International Monetary Fund has written a check for another $1.5 billion in aid for Russia.
But how much of the money will be used to buy critical imports to keep the economy afloat, and how much will end up in Swiss banks?
Everyone agrees that capital flight has undercut the impact of aid to Russia in the last few years.
And political opposition to stepping up grants and loans has been buttressed by educated guesses that the faucet is barely keeping up with the drain.
Why give aid, the argument goes, if it doesn't add to the pool of hard currency available to import antibiotics or computerize factories?


Kevorkian Takes Stand in Own Defense
Taking the stand for more than three hours in his trial for assisting a suicide, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian today steadfastly defended helping a 30-year-old man die last summer and said the aim was only to relieve the man's suffering.
"Any physician who is a real physician would care for nothing, nothing, nothing other than the welfare of his patient," Dr.
Kevorkian, a 65-year-old retired pathologist, said of his helping Thomas W. Hyde commit suicide on Aug. 4, 1993.
The act in the back of Dr.
Kevorkian's Volkswagen van was a deliberate challenge to a Michigan law that makes assisting in a suicide a felony punishable by up to four years in prison.


A New Start for El Salvador
Sunday's runoff elections in El Salvador were a qualified victory for democracy.
Despite some inexcusable irregularities, both sides won: the country's ruling Arena party as well as the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, or F.M.L.N., the former guerrilla coalition that laid down its arms to participate as a political party in the elections.
As expected, Arena's presidential candidate, Armando Calderon Sol, beat the F.M.L.N.'s Ruben Zamora.
But in winning some 33 percent of the vote under difficult circumstances, Mr.
Zamora established himself and his party as legitimate and important players in the country's politics.


Sports of The Times; Classic Duel Between Hot Goaltenders
THEY resemble no other athletes.
Halloween masks hide their perspiring faces.
Flak-jacket vests impede their torsos.
Pads bigger than sofa pillows weigh on their legs.
With a thick flat glove, they grip a bulky wooden stick.
With their other glove, they try to snatch the puck as a first baseman would.
And with all of this ponderous equipment, they must guard a 6-by-4-foot net while spinning, sliding and sprawling on ice.
They are goaltenders and this is their time of year.


THE 37th PRESIDENT: SUMMING IT UP; In the End, the Words Were Those He Sought
As Richard M. Nixon must have hoped it would, his funeral turned into a rite of reconciliation today, bringing to a fitting end his 20-year struggle to rehabilitate himself after the disgrace of resignation.
The nation's secular leader, President Clinton, and the closest thing the country has to a national religious leader, the Rev.
Billy Graham, came to Yorba Linda to preside at the service, as if to signify a national readiness to let bygones by bygones -- if not to forget Watergate, which would be impossible, then to set it in the context of the accomplishments that also marked the Nixon years.


Nixon on Clinton
"So what did you think of him?" I asked Richard Nixon after his first meeting with Bill Clinton.
"You know," Mr.
Nixon replied, "he came from dirt and I came from dirt. He lost a gubernatorial race and came back to win the Presidency, and I lost a gubernatorial race and came back to win the Presidency. He overcame a scandal in his first campaign for national office and I overcame a scandal in my first national campaign. We both just gutted it out. He was an outsider from the South and I was an outsider from the West."


Joseph Marshall, Ballet Dancer, 28
Joseph Marshall, a former dancer with Feld Ballets/NY, the Joffrey Ballet and Oregon Ballet Theater, died on April 14 in Portland, Ore.
He was 28.
The cause was AIDS, said Lyle Sweeney, his companion.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
More private employers are refusing to hire smokers as a way to cut health care costs, but are colliding with state legislatures that are coming to the smokers' defense, passing new laws that prohibit hiring practices that discriminate against them.  [ Page A1. ]
The Clinton Administration hopes that bolstering the flat-panel computer display screen industry will prove cheaper in the long run than making small purchases from special factories and better for national security than relying on foreign manufacturers.  [ D1. ]


The Computer Always Beeps Twice
JOHN M. WORAM went to his mailbox in Rockville Centre, L.I., recently and mailed a letter to a colleague in the Galapagos Islands, 650 miles off the coast of Ecuador.
His letter arrived there in five seconds.
A reply was waiting in his mailbox the next morning.
"My, how the mail has evolved," said Mr.
Woram, who is writing a history of the islands made famous by Charles Darwin.
"It used to take as long as seven months to get a letter there and back."


ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP.
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation, the Dallas-based information technology company owned by the General Motors Corporation, said yesterday that its first-quarter net income climbed 13.4 percent, to $171.7 million, on growing business outside G.M.
The earnings of 36 cents a share appeared to be in line with analysts' expectations.
Of EDS's revenues of $2.239 billionin the first quarter, 62.4 percent, or $1.397 billion, came from outside G.M., according to a spokesman for EDS, Jon Senderling.
During the first quarter of 1993, 59.2 percent of EDS's revenues came from outside G.M.


Surgery Found to Help Emphysema Patients
A new operation eases the effects of emphysema by removing 20 to 30 percent of the damaged lung tissue, a surgeon has reported.
The operation is not a cure for emphysema, a common lung disease that results almost exclusively from cigarette smoking.
But the author of the report, Dr.
Joel D. Cooper, a leading chest surgeon at Washington University in St.
Louis, said the surgery markedly relieved shortness of breath for those with severe emphysema, allowing most to walk and climb stairs without using oxygen supplements.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Recalled Robert Eenhoorn, infielder, from Columbus of the International League.


Blacks Seizing Their Moment: Liberation Day
They voted in mud schoolhouses under thorn trees, and in urban ghetto clinics where the usual business is the casualties of political hate, and in blue tents pitched for the day in abject shack towns.
Fully citizens at last, the blacks of South Africa voted freely in their millions today, obliterating the last redoubt of white political privilege on the African continent.


Many in Congress Deciding They Want Out
Suddenly, and with virtually no fanfare, that throng of voters whose prevailing attitude toward Congress is to throw the bums out is getting its wish: incumbents are leaving.
In droves.
Swept out by a generational change, forced out by public cynicism, unforgiving politics and unrelenting fund-raising demands, up to 90 of the House and Senate's 535 members are likely to be gone when the next Congress convenes in January.


MINNESOTA MINING &amp; MFG. CO. (MMM,N)
The Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company said yesterday that first-quarter earnings fell 7.3 percent after it took a $35 million pretaxcharge to settle breast-implant litigation.
The company reported net income of $306 million, or 72 cents a share.
The earnings would have totaled about 77 cents a share without the charge.
Per-share amounts reflect a 2-for-1 stock split last month.
Revenue rose 3.3 percent, to $3.632 billion.


Newspapers Endorse Call for a Free Press
American newspaper publishers meeting here have endorsed one of the broadest international declarations of free-press rights ever drafted.
The document, known as the Declaration of Chapultepec for the castle in Mexico City where it was written this spring, frames free-expression rights as a declaration for the Western Hemisphere.
It includes broad statements like the assurance that journalists may not "be punished for publishing the truth or criticizing or denouncing the government."


Drug Items Seized


Vitamin Study Showing No Benefit Was Flawed
To the Editor:
"Vitamin Supplements Are Seen as No Guard Against Diseases" (front page, April 14) typifies the sorry state of epidemiological "research" as it is practiced by so many groups involved in looking at the causes of cancer and heart disease.
In this particular study, vitamins E and C didn't protect against cancer, and beta-carotene increased the risk.


THE 37th PRESIDENT; Agnew Says 'Resentment' Is Over
Perhaps the biggest stir at the funeral was created by former Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, silver-haired and tan, looking as sleek as the day he left office in 1973 after pleading no contest to a count of tax evasion.
The investigation into allegations that Mr.
Agnew, a former governor of Maryland, had taken money from contractors soliciting state business erupted just as the Watergate scandal was spreading.
Mr.
Agnew has kept a very low profile over two decades, and he refused to make any comment to reporters when Mr.
Nixon died last Friday.
But today, he not only came here to the funeral but spoke of a reconciliation with the man who put him on the Republican ticket in 1968.


Mariners Donate to Yankees' Walkathon
If it had been a Little League game, the opposing managers might have agreed to interrupt play and begin hitting the ball off a tee.
They might have rescued the erratic pitchers who could not throw strikes.
But this was a major league game so Seattle's Lou Piniella did not have that option.
He had to watch the sloppiness escalate, watch the walks accumulate and watch the Yankee runs effortlessly cross the plate without hits.
In a truly pathetic sequence of eight batters in the top of the third inning, Dave Fleming and Jeff Nelson combined to walk seven batters and plunk Bernie Williams on a 3-2 pitch as the Yankees stood, barely swung and smirked as ball after ball continued fluttering and flopping into Dan Wilson's glove and far from the strike zone.
The Yankees scored five runs without one hit and, amazingly, Seattle's pitching problems actually increased.


An Improbable No-Hitter By Erickson (7.48 E.R.A.)
Twins 6, Brewers 0
Scott Erickson, who allowed the most hits in the majors last season, pitched Minnesota's first no-hitter in 27 years and the first ever in the Metrodome tonight as the Twins beat the Milwaukee Brewers, 6-0.
Erickson (2-3) struck out five, walked four -- two in the ninth inning -- and hit a batter in throwing the first shutout of the season for the big leagues' lowest-ranked pitching staff.


Essay; RN Off the Record
"Guns are an abomination," said Richard Nixon in one of our long talks last year.
He added, "You can use that now."
Which I did in a column.
The "now" referred to an agreement between my old boss and me: Some of what he said was for immediate quotation, some for private instruction, and the rest to be made public at my discretion "someday" -- by which he meant any time after the ceremony yesterday at which he joined the real Silent Majority.


Doctor Convicted of Refusing to Give Aid
A doctor was convicted yesterday of refusing to admit a woman in labor to Harlem Hospital, forcing ambulance attendants to deliver her baby in the hospital's waiting room.
A jury in State Supreme Court in Manhattan also found that the doctor later falsified hospital records to cover up his actions.
The doctor, Peter Anyakora, became the first physician to be prosecuted under a 1983 New York State law that bars hospitals from turning away a patient in an emergency, a practice commonly called dumping.


The Mets Nearly Fail Finishing School
The Mets could have finished last night's game in the ninth inning, when they had the winning run on third base with no outs.
They failed.
They could have finished it in the 10th, when they had the winning run on third with one out and Jeff Kent, their best hitter, at the plate.
They failed.


Vaulter Sets Bubka-esque Goals
Determined to be a great pole-vaulter, Lawrence Johnson saw his Ukrainian hero on cable television, copied his performance onto videotape and studied it by the hour on his parents' v.c.r.
Three years later, he has established a collegiate record of more than 19 feet.
Now 19, Johnson competes at the 100th Penn Relays this week in Philadelphia, where he wants to become the first man to vault 18 feet at the storied carnival.


31 WHITE RIGHTISTS HELD IN BOMBINGS IN SOUTH AFRICA
The South African police struck back at election terrorism today and announced the arrest of 31 white rightists charged with 21 bombing deaths in the days leading up to the current nation-wide voting for a government of national reconstruction.
The arrests, carried out in an investigative dragnet, were cited by the police as notice that terrorists would not "derail the election process" that is to lead to a new and democratic South Africa.


Currents; Baltimore Plays Connect-the-Attractions
Maybe it's the recession and the lack of toothsome commissions.
Or the absence of a compelling new theory since deconstruction.
Whatever the case, architects and designers seem to be getting comfortable with history again.
Examples of "new but old" style -- contemporary with a retro twist -- abound.
What might be mistaken for a look backward could be the beginning of something new.
SITE PROJECTS INC., a New York-based arts and architecture firm, is working with Anshen &amp; Allen Inc., architects and planners, to improve the connection between Baltimore's restored but struggling Market Place buildings and its thriving Inner Harbor core.
"The Maryland Science Center, the National Aquarium, the shops near the water are very successful," said Ed Hord, the managing partner of Anshen &amp; Allen's Baltimore office.
"But people have not wandered up the three blocks of Market Place, and businesses there have failed."


Corrections
An entry in the News Summary yesterday about the South African elections referred incorrectly to the status of prisoners on death row at Pretoria Central Prison.
They are not permitted to vote.


THE SOUTH AFRICAN VOTE: THE SCENE A Joyous Day of Lining Up to Vote for Many, but Disappointment for Some; Blacks and Whites, Waiting Together
The black housemaid, fearing violence, was balking at the chance to vote.
But Elena Theodosiou, white housewife, would brook no holdouts.
She ordered the maid into an election line that grew amazing for its size -- acres deep and seven hours long -- but even more so for serving as an ad hoc display of integration as it inched toward the ballot boxes across this posh green hamlet.
"I told her she must come and cast the first democratic vote of her life," Mrs.
Theodosiu said emphatically, spending her day in the midst of one of the more unexpected phenomena of South Africa's first free and open elections: casual but grand arrays of blacks and whites waiting in equity together, making a fact of integration in the simple act of voting from the same line, side by side.


The Attorney General Rushes to Build a Platform; Some Say Koppell's Aggressive and Effective. Others Say He's Politicizing His Office.
He promised to accomplish many things when his colleagues in the Assembly named him to succeed Robert Abrams as New York State Attorney General in December, but he pursued one goal with special vigor: Voters would know the name G. Oliver Koppell before the election this November.
In his 119 days in office, Mr.
Koppell, a brainy but awkward Democratic lawmaker from the Bronx, has issued 130 news releases, weighing in at two pounds of paper.
He has defended tenants in Manhattan and Bills fans in Buffalo.
He has despaired at the unfairness of having to eat all the cereal in a box before getting a $1 mail-in rebate.
He took the risk of personally arguing a difficult motion in a rape case in northern New York, and he won.


THE 37th PRESIDENT: HENRY KISSINGER; 'Courage in the Face of Wrenching Domestic Controversy'
Following is the eulogy delivered yesterday by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger at the funeral of former President Richard M. Nixon in Yorba Linda, Calif., as transcribed by The New York Times:
During the final week of Richard Nixon's life, I often imagined how he would have reacted to the tide of concern, respect, admiration and affection evoked by his last great battle.
His gruff pose of never paying attention to media comment would have been contradicted by a warm glow and the ever so subtle hint that another recital of the commentary would not be unwelcome.
And without saying so, he would have conveyed that it would mean a lot to him if Julie and Tricia, David and Ed were told of his friends' pride in this culmination to an astonishing life.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  U.S.
Turns Back Norway in Italy  Team USA overcame an early two-goal deficit, coming back to beat Norway, 7-2, yesterday for its second straight victory at the world championships in Alba di Canazei, Italy.
After Norway took a 2-0 lead after one period, the United States came back with four goals in the first nine minutes of the second period by Patrick Neaton, who played last season for the Pittsburgh Penguins in the National Hockey League, Quebec's Craig Wolanin, Bob Beers of Edmonton and Danton Cole of Tampa Bay.
Wolanin and Beers scored on power plays.
Shjon Podein of Edmonton added two goals in the third period and Tim Sweeney of Anaheim scored on a give-and-go from Craig Janney, a new addition from St.
Louis. (AP)
TENNIS  Graf Lifts Victory Streak to 34  Steffi Graf ran her winning streak to 34 matches by sweeping to a 6-1, 6-1 victory over Linda Ferrando of Italy yesterday to reach the quarterfinals of the Citizen Cup at Hamburg, Germany.
Graf has dropped only one set in 1994.
A letter to a Hamburg newspaper threatened that Graf would be killed if she played in the tournament in which Monica Seles was stabbed last year.
She beat a fellow German, Silke Frankl, in the first round without losing a game, but Ferrando appeared to be a tougher opponent.
Graf slammed a topspin backhand past Ferrando at the net to claim the first game, then routed her in 52 minutes. (AP)


Merck to Add To Generic Line of Drugs
Moving aggressively to expand its sales of low-priced drugs, Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it would begin marketing generic versions of widely used products originated by other big drug makers.
West Point Pharma, Merck's 18-month-old generic drug unit, said it would start by selling low-priced copies of drugs made by Upjohn, Warner-Lambert, American Home Products, Syntex and Du Pont Merck Pharmaceutical, a joint venture of Merck and E. I. du Pont de Nemours.


Coleman Clarifies Remarks On Riley
Two days before what Derrick Coleman says could be one of the greatest playoff series of all time -- Nets versus Knicks, swamp versus island, isolation versus congestion -- he was practicing a kind of damage control.
"No," Coleman said, "I didn't call Coach Riley stupid. I just said that I thought the action he took was stupid."


THE 37th PRESIDENT: PAYING RESPECTS; Beneath Hazy Moon, Chilly Wait for Last Farewell
There were so many nocturnal images of this saturnine President: visiting the Lincoln Memorial once before the sun rose to talk to Vietnam War protesters; brooding about Watergate and listening to the music from "Victory at Sea" as the rest of Washington slept; snacking on ketchup and cottage cheese.
So it seemed fitting for the quiet streets of Yorba Linda to pulsate all night under an alabaster moon with a hazy penumbra, with the sounds of people paying homage to Richard M. Nixon.
"He goofed, but I didn't see any halos above anybody else's head then in Washington or around here tonight," said Jim Schiffman of Redlands.
It was after two in the morning, and Mr.
Schiffman, a relatively recent arrival in the line far from the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace, had another five or six hours before he could view the coffin and pay his respects.


Postal Officials Apologize For Snubbing New Jersey
New Jersey politicians are fuming: a United States Postal Service souvenir sheet featuring the sites of World Cup soccer matches this summer features New York, not New Jersey, as the northeastern host.
Officials of both the Postal Service and the World Cup Organizing Committee in New York have apologized for the slight.
But they say it is too late to correct because the soccer stamps and the accompanying souvenir sheet have already been printed and are due to be issued on May 26.


Seven Killed In Fiery Crash Of Airplane
A chartered passenger plane returning from Atlantic City crashed into a fence while landing in foggy weather at Sikorsky Memorial Airport in Stratford, Conn., last night, killing seven of the nine people on board, officials said.
The two survivors, who were both badly burned, were taken to Bridgeport Hospital, where they were listed in critical condition early today.


Critic's Notebook; Performances by Winners of an Unsolicited Prize
David Pocock, the artistic director of the Gilmore International Keyboard Festival, now at its midway point here, was right the other day to caution against premature generalizations about Gilmore award winners.
True, the first two pianists to be named Gilmore Artists invite comparison.
David Owen Norris, the 40-year-old Englishman who won three years ago, and Ralf Gothoni, the 48-year-old Finn who won this year, are intelligent, enterprising pianists of many parts: accompanists, teachers, composers and festival directors as well as soloists.
But concentrated hearing of both over the first four days of the festival revealed fundamental differences, too.


Murderer Put to Death In Virginia
Timothy W. Spencer died tonight in Virginia's electric chair, becoming the first person executed in the United States for a conviction based on the DNA-matching technology popularly known as genetic fingerprinting.
Mr.
Spencer, known here as "the Southside Strangler," was convicted of raping and strangling four women over 11 weeks in 1987.
No victim survived to identify him, no fingerprints were found, and no one confessed.
Then DNA tests linked semen from the crime scenes with Mr.
Spencer's blood.


Calendar: Outdoors And In
Cherry Trees in Brooklyn  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
"Sakura Matsura," the annual festival during the spring flowering of the garden's 247 cherry trees, will be held Saturday and Sunday, from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
The festival includes demonstrations of Japanese flower arranging and origami in addition to events for children.
No charge.


In These Hard Times, Geneva Warms to Global Groups
The grim gray spires of John Calvin's cathedral rise above the southern shore of the bottle-green Lake Geneva, while on a hillside above the northern shore is the cluster of international organizations, ranged around the monumental old League of Nations headquarters.
Geneva has always held these international guests primly at arm's length, but that is changing.


From Boston to Wilmington, the Show House Season Begins
BROWNSTONES and mansions, 19th-century period rooms and contemporary designer decor, backyard gardens and skyline views are features of this spring's show houses and house tours in the Northeast.
New York City
Fort Greene, Brooklyn, Sunday -- A tour of 11 houses and the Lafayette Avenue Presbyterian Church will be held from noon to 5 P.M.
Tickets, $12 in advance at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue (Ashland Place); on day of tour, $15, or $12 for those 62 years old or older and students.
Information: (718) 624-5719.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Friday about the New York Folklore Society misidentified the source of financial backing for one of its programs.
It is the National Endowment for the Arts, not the National Education Association, that supports a program that links individuals and groups involved in folk-life programs with professional and technical consultants in areas like management, marketing and publicity.


GE Capital Acquiring Credit Unit
Shifting more of its focus to its core telecommunications business, Northern Telecom Ltd. of Canada has sold its financing arm in the United States to GE Capital, the two companies said today.
Although specific terms were not disclosed, Northern Telecom said the sale price for the Northern Telecom Finance Corporation of Nashville approximately matched the $600 million value of its portfolio of receivables.


N.B.A.'s Jam Session Is Coming to Order
The Seattle Supersonics had the best record during the regular season.
The Knicks had the top-ranked defense, and the Phoenix Suns had the top offense.
The Chicago Bulls are the three-time defending champions, but the Atlanta Hawks were the season's biggest surprise.
And both the Houston Rockets and the San Antonio Spurs have dominant centers who can carry a team.
No wonder people are calling this year's National Basketball Association playoffs the most wide-open in years.
Ten teams won 50 games or more for the first time in league history.
The only certainty is that one team will be crowned champion in June, but there will be plenty of uncertainty and excitement along the way.


CHRONICLE
BILL MAULDIN, the Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist who endeared himself to World War II soldiers with his memorable depiction of the sad-sack infantrymen Willie and Joe, regaled some 200 members of the National Press Club in Washington with his wartime experiences at a luncheon on Tuesday.
It was in Sicily in 1943, he said, that he and three journalists-turned-soldiers were commissioned by an Army colonel to produce a weekly newspaper.


Trading Loss Lowers Profit For Procter
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the country's largest maker of household goods and personal care products, said yesterday that its losses from interest-rate swaps pushed down earnings for its third quarter.
The company, based in Cincinnati, said earnings for the quarter ended March 31 slid 4 percent, falling to $482 million from $502 million in the comparable period a year ago.
The current figure includes an after-tax charge of $102 million, announced earlier this month, for the trading losses.


And to the Left, Is the Niche For Fifi . . .
LADIES and gentlemen (but please, no children under 6), welcome to the 1994 Kips Bay Boys &amp; Girls Club Decorator Show House.
And what a show house it is!
The Sara Delano Roosevelt House on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, spiffed up by 14 interior design firms, 5 decorative painters and a floral designer.
Please note that on this tour items of great interest have been identified with numbers.
And if at any time you wish to go back and review the commentary on what you have seen, there is no need to press the rewind button.
Simply read the paragraph over again.


Marketers revive an old formula for cachet: the secret ingredient.
THE secret is out: secret ingredients are making a comeback.
From the 1930's through the early 1970's, secret ingredients were as much a mainstay of hard-sell consumer marketing as snappy slogans and bombastic commercial jingles.
About 20 years ago, they began falling out of favor, victims of changing tastes in advertising strategies and consumer attitudes.


Sylvia L. Milberg; University Executive, 66
Sylvia L. Milberg, associate director of development for Pace University in New York, died on Tuesday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford, Conn.
Mrs.
Milberg, who lived in Westport, Conn., was 66.
The cause was a stroke, said her husband, Stanley Milberg.


Vermes, Former U.S. Captain, Cut
PETER VERMES, a former captain of the United States national team, was cut by the team yesterday.
Vermes's role has lessened in recent years, with more playing time given to ROY WEGERLE, ERNIE STEWART and ERIC WYNALDA. (AP)


St. Pierre Journal; A Seagirt Sliver of France Fears for Its Lifeline
Twelve miles off Newfoundland's southern coast, a French official in a blue military shirt stamps passports "Port de St. Pierre," and Renaults and Citroens edge up the cobbled streets.
Early morning is fragrant with croissants and baguettes.
Brasseries serve up mussels and skate fish wings, and the radio plays the chansons of the local Belle Riviere rock band.


Harper's Maxim: Last Shall Be First
For Derek Harper, the hardest part of being traded was telling his three children.
The deal took place on Jan. 6, forcing Harper to leave his family in Dallas until the children finished the school year.
How would Harper break the news?
He grabbed the newspaper, opened to the sports section, and found the National Basketball Association standings.
He pointed his finger at the last-place Dallas Mavericks.


Hata Named Prime Minister of a Shaky Japanese Government
After a two-day delay because of intense infighting, Tsutomu Hata was appointed Japan's 51st Prime Minister this morning by Emperor Akihito in a brief ceremony at the Imperial Palace, but he appears likely to head a weak and perhaps short-lived coalition Government.
Mr.
Hata has tried but failed so far to mend his conservative party's rift with the Socialists, who quit the governing coalition in anger early Tuesday morning, depriving it of its majority in Parliament.
The Socialists were furious after the conservative parties in the coalition, including Mr.
Hata's, hastily joined together to resist any leftward turn in the Government's economic or security policies.


Cause of Plane Crash in Japan Still a Mystery to Investigators
After their first day of investigation, the Japanese authorities said tonight that they had not figured out the cause of Tuesday night's crash of a Taiwan airliner that killed almost all of the 271 people on board.
"We don't know at all," Manabu Matsumoto, chief of aviation accident inspections for Japan's Transport Ministry, said at a news conference here.
Mr.
Matsumoto displayed the battered orange cockpit voice recorder and flight data recorder, which had been recovered from the wreckage.
He said it could take several months to analyze their contents.


Currents; Where Bauhaus and Richard Serra Intersect
Maybe it's the recession and the lack of toothsome commissions.
Or the absence of a compelling new theory since deconstruction.
Whatever the case, architects and designers seem to be getting comfortable with history again.
Examples of "new but old" style -- contemporary with a retro twist -- abound.
What might be mistaken for a look backward could be the beginning of something new.
WHAT do you get when you have a client who is a student of philosophy and an aspiring writer with a generous attitude toward experimental architecture?
"My only directive was to separate a library from a residence," said Simon Ungers, who with his partner, Tom Kinslow, created the T-House in Wilton, N.Y., for Lawrence Marcelle.
"Beyond that, I had total freedom."


INSIDE
Plane Crash Kills 7
A chartered plane returning from Atlantic City crashed and burned in Stratford, Conn., killing seven of the nine people on board.
Page B1 Basketball Gets Serious
Chicago goes for a fourth straight title, and the Knicks face the Nets, as the N.B.A. playoffs begin.
Page B11.


Anderson Wants to Move Clock Ahead
No more talk.
No more hype.
No more Nets say, Knicks say.
No more rehash of the Nets' 4-1 dominance of the Knicks during the regular season.
Kenny Anderson said yesterday he just wants this playoff series to begin.
"I wish the series started today," said the 6-foot-1-inch Anderson, who has become the focal point on this end of the Lincoln Tunnel of the first-round series that starts Friday in Madison Square Garden.
"Because now we still have two days to think about it and we're ready to play. I hope we don't get too excited about it."


POLICE SERGEANTS FACING TRANSFERS IN GRAFT INQUIRY
Eight of the 22 sergeants in the 30th Precinct in Harlem will be transferred and may be disciplined for any corrupt and brutal acts of officers under their watch, according to a senior law-enforcement official.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton would not confirm the transfer plan yesterday, but said that he would hold supervisors accountable for wrongdoing under their command, in an effort to break up what has been described as departmental indifference to corruption that goes back a generation.


Topics of The Times; An Admiral's Bounty
Fletcher Christian -- the real one, not his swashbuckling Hollywood imitators -- led the mutiny on H.M.S.
Bounty 205 years ago today, on April 28, 1789.
Christian was master's mate to the real Capt.
William Bligh, an ill-tempered, irascible commander but courageous in battle and a superb navigator.
Their clash became the classic embodiment of good versus evil in the 1932 novel "Mutiny on the Bounty."
The Bounty was transporting breadfruit trees from Tahiti to the West Indies to feed the inhabitants.
"Breadfruit Bligh," as they called him, was perhaps not as cruel as the movies made him, but the crew was restive and Bligh had just accused Christian of stealing a coconut.
Bligh's version of why they mutinied was that Christian and the crew found life and lovely maidens in Tahiti preferable to what they knew back home.


Lawmaker Attacks Agreement In Ex-C.I.A. Officer's Spy Case
A day before Aldrich H. Ames was expected to plead guilty to spying for Moscow, a member of the House Intelligence Committee today criticized the plea agreement that would send Mr.
Ames to prison for life while allowing his wife, Rosario, to go free after spending five to six years in prison.
The member, Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, said that shortly after the couple's arrest on Feb. 21, lawmakers urged the Clinton Administration to avoid a quick plea agreement that would result in a short prison sentence for Mrs.
Ames.


Rangers Relaxing Before Taking On Caps
Craig MacTavish sounded almost apologetic.
"I fell asleep during the game from San Jose," he said, "but I watched the first period." Like his Ranger teammates this week, MacTavish is playing the role of hockey fan, enjoying the Stanley Cup playoffs on television every night while taking time off and waiting for the second round.
The game he was referring to was the Detroit-San Jose game from California late Tuesday night.


Journal; 'I Am Not a Comedian'
No one wanted to hear Bill Clinton talk about Richard Nixon at the White House Correspondents' Association dinner last Saturday night.
The cheap wine had already been flowing for a couple of happy hours, and while the former President had been dead for 24, the mood among the black-tie revelers in the vast Washington Hilton ballroom was unanimous: Party on!
Ritual dictates that the President make a funny speech before the 2,500 journalists, politicos and show-biz interlopers at this annual event.
White House folk, from Lloyd Cutler down, assured anyone who asked that Mr.
Clinton would not violate tradition and turn sober just because Mr.
Nixon had died.
"He's got some funny stuff" was the Administration line.


THE 37th PRESIDENT: BOB DOLE; 'The Largest Figure of Our Time Whose Influence Will Be Timeless'
Following are excerpts from the eulogy delivered yesterday by Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, at the funeral for former President Richard M. Nixon, as transcribed by The New York Times:
I believe the second half of the 20th century will be known as the age of Nixon.
Why was he the most durable public figure of our time?
Not because he gave the most eloquent speeches, but because he provided the most effective leadership.
Not because he won every battle but because he always embodied the deepest feelings of the people he led.


Mystery Writers Give Top Honor to Block
Lawrence Block, the writer whose private eye Matt Scudder tirelessly battles his own inner demons along with the depravity of the big city, was named a Grand Master last night by the Mystery Writers of America.
Mr.
Block, author of 11 Matt Scudder novels and many other works of fiction, received the group's highest honor at its 49th annual awards dinner, at the Sheraton New York Hotel in Manhattan.
The mystery-writers group has some 2,500 members; about 750 people attended the awards dinner.


AT HOME WITH: Vicki Van Meter; Apple Pie And Afterburners
VICKI VAN METER drags a heavy duffel bag into the living room, opens it and tugs at the contents.
Out comes a fireball-red, thickly padded, head-to-toe body suit.
It looks like a Halloween costume.
But it's no joke.
This is the neoprene survival suit, designed to keep the person wearing it warm and afloat in frigid water for 24 hours, that Vicki will wear when she sets out to fly across the Atlantic the first week in June.


An Insanity Defense In L.I.R.R. Massacre
To the Editor:
Lorraine Stone's April 21 letter condemning what she terms our "black rage" defense for Colin Ferguson, the accused Long Island Rail Road murderer, perpetuates the myth that what we are proposing is a justification of violence generated by the chronic anger, bitterness and frustration of African-Americans because of their centuries-old treatment on this continent.


Whew! Sabres Win Classic Duel of Defenses to Tie Devils
More than 100 shots were fired, but not one of them hit the back of the net.
The skaters were gasping for air, their legs wobbling and feeling heavier by the minute.
The Devils and Sabres played 60 minutes of regulation.
No one scored.
They played a 20-minute overtime period.
No one scored.
They played another overtime.
No one scored.
They played yet another overtime.
No one scored.
It was Game 6 of their four-of-seven-game series, with Buffalo facing elimination.
It began at 7:40 P.M.
Thursday.
It ended at well past everyone's bedtime.
Except those 15,003 at the Aud and those bleary-eyed folks who couldn't bear to turn off their television sets.
This was classic Stanley Cup hockey.
Hannaon's Goal Decides It
Finally, at 1:52 this morning, it was over.
With the Sabres on the attack, Jason Dawe shot the puck from the right circle.
The puck was stopped Valery Zelepukin.
Tommy Albelin failed to clear the rebound, and Dave Hannan jumped on the loose puck and backhanded a shot that sailed over a fallen Brodeur.
Sabres 1, Devils 0.


Xerox Earnings Come In at Low End
The Xerox Corporation reported first-quarter earnings yesterday that were at the low end of analysts' expectations.
The company, based in Stamford, Conn., said it had earned $129 million, or $1.05 a share, compared with $189 million, or $1.77 a share, in the comparable period a year ago.


William Horowitz, Official for Charities And Bank Chief, 86
William Horowitz, a Connecticut banker who was also a leader in his state's educational, religious and civic affairs, died on Monday at the Yale-New Haven Hospital.
Mr.
Horowitz, who lived in Branford, Conn., was 86.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, David.


3 Players Banned in Game-Fixing Scandal
JEAN-JACQUES EYDLIE of Olympique Marseilles and JORGE BURRUCHAGA and CHRISTOPHE ROBERT of Valenciennes were banned from soccer yesterday until July 1, 1996, for their role in a game-fixing scandal.
The decision, taken by the emergency committee of FIFA meeting in Vienna, prevents the players from appearing with any club in the world for the next two seasons and from playing for their national teams.
They will miss the 1994 World Cup, the 1995 America Cup and the 1996 European Championship.


Giants Sign Princeton Back
KEITH ELIAS, the career leading rusher at Princeton University, is going to join the Giants.
Elias, passed over in the National Football League draft despite setting 21 school records and 4 N.C.A.A.
Division I-AA marks, has reached an agreement on a free agent contract, a source close to the team said yesterday.


I.B.M.-Hitachi Rivalry Adapts to Market
I.B.M. announced yesterday that it would supply mainframe computer and microchip technology to Hitachi Ltd., a longtime rival in the market for large computers.
With profits shrinking fast in the mainframe business, the landmark deal is an acknowledgment by both companies that they must cooperate to reduce costs.


Officer Pursuing Youths Dies in Crash
Racing to answer an officer's call for help, a police van and a patrol car collided early yesterday morning outside Prospect Park in Brooklyn, killing one of the responding officers.
The accident occurred as officers rushed toward a street corner at the park's entrance in reaction to a radio call flashing the alarm for an assault in progress.
The officers had nearly reached their destination when they crashed, the police said.


A Loyal Friend, a Link to Paradise
I WAS in Maryland two weeks ago, pruning the mock orange bushes.
It was early morning, and I was the first one up.
I had that delicious feeling of being able to listen to the birds and watch the mist rise off the fields without another consciousness, even a beloved one, commenting on the experience.
But I missed my dog, Molly, with that kind of pain that doesn't really ever go away when you have really loved someone.
She was my companion for 14 years, and last fall I had to make that decision I'd been dreading for a couple of years, as I watched her begin to limp on our walks through the meadow, or falter and almost fall as we climbed the stairs to bed, and lose control of her bladder -- a humiliating part of growing old for anyone -- which made her blink and furrow her brow with shame.


Corrections
An article yesterday about government leaders who gathered for the funeral of Richard M. Nixon misidentified the current hometown of John D. Ehrlichman.
It is Atlanta, not Santa Fe.


Market Place; A small health care company seeks its fortune in New York.
PHYSICIANS Health Services, a managed health care company with a cash hoard of $115 million and a strong base in Connecticut, would like to play with the big boys in the rapidly expanding New York market for managed care.
Although only five analysts follow the company, they all recommend it.
The stock price went from a low of $12 in February of last year to $27.50 last month in Nasdaq trading.
It fell to $22.25 in the stock market slide of March and early April but has bounced backed, closing at $25.33 on Tuesday. (The stock market was closed yesterday for former President Richard M. Nixon's funeral.)


Christopher Asks Arab Lands To Extend the Iraqi Embargo
Secretary of State Warren Christopher came to the Saudi capital today to rally several oil-producing gulf states behind extending the trade embargo against Iraq, seeking a counterweight to the growing number of countries who want to see the embargo eased.
With France and Russia pushing to ease the 32-month-old embargo, Mr.
Christopher told the half-dozen Arab Foreign Ministers that maintaining the sanctions was vital to press Iraq to comply with United Nations resolutions calling on it to recognize Kuwait's borders and eliminate its weapons of mass destruction.


Review/Dance; A Bit Short on Plot, But Filled With Energy
One of the best shows in town this week is Laura Dean Musicians and Dancers, which opened on Tuesday night with two local premieres and the 1982 "Sky Light," a Dean classic.
As a choreographer and composer, Ms.
Dean requires a special taste.
Or so the thinking has been for those who do not cotton to her ritualistic use of energy and trademarks: dervishlike spinning and complex repetitive patterns that contrast with a deliberately reduced vocabulary.


Corrections
An obituary on Tuesday about James Corbett, a professor of physics at the State University of New York at Albany, misstated the surname of his wife, who survives him.
She is M. E. Grenander.


Politics Is Breaking Out, Feverishly and Impishly
The white suburban liberal candidates come close to self-parody.
"Security provided for you and your car," promises the radio ad for a campaign rally of the Democratic Party in these joyous, but still mugger-haunted days on the South African hustings.
Right-wing white candidates know they must appeal for sympathetic votes at the nation's whirring exit doors.
"Emigration is a drastic step," pleads the Freedom Front to white separatists.
"Freedom Front is a better alternative."


Music Notes
Marketing a Concept
The American Symphony Orchestra's experiment in conceptual programming has been both lauded as a necessary revitalization of orchestral presentation and criticized as superficial trappings that pique interest but ultimately say little about music.
Now Eugene Carr, the orchestra's executive director, is weighing in with numbers that seem to support the new approach, or at least, the aggressive marketing the orchestra has done to help sell its programs.


Autodesk Founder Saddles Up and Leaves
The reclusive founder of the nation's largest maker of design software for personal computers quietly resigned last week, saying that his interests were diverging from the company that was once described as a "theocracy of hackers."
John Walker founded Autodesk Inc. in 1982 to develop office automation software, but the company has grown into the sixth-largest personal computer software company on the sales of Autocad, a program used by architects and engineers to design diverse products ranging from buildings to machines.


Review/Pop; A Party With the Gap Band
In about his third or fourth song, Charlie Wilson, the lead singer of the Gap Band, repeated the phrase "I feel all right" eight times.
A few were relaxed warm-ups; the rest crackled with signs of passion as Mr.
Wilson's vocal textures changed from nasal and dusty melismas to a low, huffing howl.
Then after a virtuosic display of how the emotionalism of gospel music can be applied to almost anything, Mr.
Wilson went on to turn the show into a party.
The Gap Band, which had its greatest success in the late 1970's and early 80's, hasn't played in New York in decades, but its influence remains strong: on Tuesday night Tramps was packed with hipsters of all ages and colors.
Not only have the band's riff-heavy songs been sampled by hip-hoppers looking for the perfect beat, but Mr.
Wilson's voice has made him the biggest influence in the new-jack swing movement.
Without him, Aaron Hall, among the most distinctive singers of the style, wouldn't exist.


Wrestling Promoter Fights Steroid Charges
When a professional wrestler thinks he's gotten a bum deal, he snarls into the nearest camera and promises to wreak havoc on his opponents.
When Vincent McMahon Jr., owner of the World Wrestling Federation, appears tomorrow before a Federal judge in Uniondale, L.I., he will doubtless be more soft-spoken but every bit as determined.
Mr.
McMahon reinvented pro wrestling in the mid-1980's, blasting it across cable channels, and drowning the incredulous reactions of media pundits with the ovations of sellout crowds at Madison Square Garden, the Nassau Coliseum and other venues.


New York Area Braces for Onslaught of Visitors in June
An extraordinary conjunction of events -- World Cup soccer matches, the Olympic-style Gay Games and a sprawling 25th anniversary celebration of a gay-rights uprising -- is expected to bring vast throngs of visitors to New York City and northern New Jersey during nine days in late June.
If all goes as planned in the frenetic peak of June 18-26, organizers and public officials say, about 1.2 million people from across the nation and more than 60 countries will be housed, fed and moved in a logistical ballet that has been months in choreography, and there will be hoopla aplenty and a huge economic windfall for the region.


Debris Today, New Housing Tomorrow


Currents; Pain-Free Office Chairs
Maybe it's the recession and the lack of toothsome commissions.
Or the absence of a compelling new theory since deconstruction.
Whatever the case, architects and designers seem to be getting comfortable with history again.
Examples of "new but old" style -- contemporary with a retro twist -- abound.
What might be mistaken for a look backward could be the beginning of something new.
RESTORING a classic modernist approach to furniture, Fritz Hansen, a luminary manufacturer of Scandinavian design, and the Italian designer Vico Magestretti have hooked up to create a line of office chairs for ICF.
Mr.
Magestretti's Vico chair is designed to be comfortable during those long business meetings when everyone winds up with a sore back.


Benjamin A. Rowe; Real-Estate Executive, 80
Benjamin A. Rowe, a real-estate executive, died on Wednesday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
Mr.
Rowe, who lived in Greenwich, was 80.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Marjorie.


Rangers Said Good Night Knowing Next Opponent
At least the Washington Capitals did not put the Rangers through the late-night torture the Devils experienced at the hands of the Buffalo Sabres.
By beating Pittsburgh, 6-3, in Game 6 in the earlier finish of those two playoff games Wednesday night, the Capitals let the Rangers know their next opponent.
With that knowledge in hand, the Ranger players didn't lose much sleep over the New Jersey-Buffalo game Wednesday night.
Captain Mark Messier said he turned off the Capitals-Devils game after the second period of sudden-death overtime.
And Ranger goaltender Mike Richter eventually gave up checking for up-to-date scores, because all he could find was that the two clubs were still in a scoreless tie.
Keenan Stays Up Late
Of course, Ranger Coach Mike Keenan, known for his tireless work ethic, watched and waited until Buffalo scored in the fourth overtime period to beat the Devils, 1-0, at 1:52 A.M.


John Byington, 46, Expert in Marketing
John W. Byington, a market research expert, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 46.
The cause was AIDS, according to the NPD Group Worldwide Inc. in Port Washington, L.I.
Mr.
Byington was a former president of the group, a market research company.


No Moorer, No Lewis, Bowe Eyes Lesser Title
RIDDICK BOWE, who is unlikely to be granted title fights against either MICHAEL MOORER or LENNOX LEWIS ("those other two clowns") any time soon, said yesterday that he was considering fighting for the World Boxing Organization crown.


Keeping R.O.T.C. Won't Change the Military on Homosexuals; Denied Citizenship
To the Editor:
Brandon del Pozo suggests excellent reasons that R.O.T.C. is vital for maintaining America's military superiority (Op-Ed, April 12).
However, he fails to recognize that achieving civil rights is not a "game of symbolism" for homosexuals.
The military's discrimination against homosexuals is but one more concrete instance in which gays are routinely denied the dignity of citizenship.


Review/Art; Dream Images of Mother and Home
The sculpture produced by Louise Bourgeois, now 83, during the last decade is some of the best of her career; it is also some of the most audacious done by anyone during that time.
The exhibition titled "Louise Bourgeois: Locus of Memory, Works 1982-1993" at the Brooklyn Museum is the first chance many New Yorkers will have to see a representative sampling of it, and the event could not be better timed.
Not only has Ms.
Bourgeois recently expanded her formal range in a series of highly evocative installations, some of which were first shown at the 1993 Venice Biennale (the Brooklyn show is an expanded version of her Venice contribution).
But fashion has also finally caught up with her.
The concerns with the body, with sexuality, and with childhood damage and loss that shape the work of many young American artists today have been her vital, insistent fields of inquiry for almost 50 years.


Keeping R.O.T.C. Won't Change the Military on Homosexuals
To the Editor:
Brandon del Pozo, a Dartmouth sophomore, says that booting Army Reserve Officers Training Corps units off college campuses is "unfortunate" not only because the program produces good officers but because allowing R.O.T.C. to remain on campus would "help the military change with the times" ("Everybody's Corps," Op-Ed, April 12).


China's Difficulty With Democratic Ideals
To the Editor:
Prof.
Xu Liangying's statement that "the number of intellectuals in China who really understand democracy does not exceed 100" (Beijing Journal, April 16) is no exaggeration.
It is also safe to assume that Professor Xu himself may not be counted as among the rare 100.


AT&amp;T Will Provide Chinese With Switches and a Lab
The AT&amp; T Corporation signed a new agreement today with the Chinese Government to supply communications equipment and services, which will include building a research laboratory and two plants for assembling high-speed switches.
The agreement does not commit China to particular purchasing contracts, but it solidifies AT&amp;T's position as one of five authorized suppliers of big network systems and services.
Doubling of Business Predicted
Company officials disclosed today that AT&amp;T had secured sales contracts totaling $500 million since AT&amp;T signed a memorandum of understanding a year ago to explore a broad relationship with the Chinese.
They predicted that the total volume of contracts would double, to $1 billion, in the next 12 months.
The current contracts will be carried out over the next three years.


Abroad at Home; Miracle With Reasons
By the standards of today's world the election in South Africa is a political miracle.
Many would have predicted that white domination would end in a cataclysm of violence, not a one-person-one-vote election supported by all major parties and population groups.
But it is a miracle created by human beings.
A series of calculated political judgments made possible the relatively peaceful transition to a new South Africa.


U.S. Expects U.N. to Toughen Haiti Embargo
A senior Clinton Administration official predicted today that the United Nations Security Council would vote next week to impose tough new sanctions on Haiti in its latest effort to force the military dictatorship there to step down and allow the return of the country's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The American representative to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, said that there was now "a major consensus" in favor of the Administration's latest plan for stepping up pressure on Haiti's military rulers, who overthrew President Aristide in 1991.
Ms.
Albright said she expects the Security Council to endorse the plan early next week.
"Our goal, as always, is the restoration of democracy in Haiti," she said at a news conference here.


Are Happy Days Here Again? Art World Prepares for a Test
ARTISTS may moan that theirs is a lonely profession.
But the people who make the international art world move -- the dealers, collectors and auction-house experts -- tend to travel in packs.
And their destination, for the next two weeks anyway, is New York City.
Art shows are happening all over Manhattan during this period, at conventional spots like galleries and the Seventh Regiment Armory and at more offbeat sites like a ship terminal and a hotel off Gramercy Park.
Each show has been timed to coincide with the spring sales of contemporary, Impressionist and modern art that start at Christie's and Sotheby's on Tuesday evening. (The public viewings of the art that will be auctioned begin this weekend at the two houses.)


Justices Appear Sympathetic To Anti-Abortion Protesters
The Supreme Court appeared sympathetic today to an argument made on behalf of anti-abortion protesters that a judicial order intended to keep demonstrators from harassing a Florida clinic's patients and staff was so broad as to violate the First Amendment.
Even some Justices who support the right to abortion expressed concern about the scope of the challenged injunction, which keeps demonstrators from entering a 36-foot buffer zone around the Aware Woman Center for Choice in Melbourne, Fla.
The state court's injunction also bars demonstrators from making uninvited approaches to individual patients within 300 feet of the clinic and from gathering within 300 feet of staff members' homes.


Review/Music; Battle and Levine in Recital at Carnegie
It was difficult to come to Kathleen Battle's recital in Carnegie Hall on Wednesday night with anything like the proverbial blank slate.
This was, after all, the lyric soprano's first full-scale solo recital since being fired by the Metropolitan Opera for "unprofessional" behavior.
Moreover, her piano accompanist was the artistic director of that very institution, James Levine.
And while there were elaborate displays of mutual affection and admiration onstage -- Mr.
Levine applauding Ms.
Battle, Ms.
Battle passing a rose to Mr.
Levine -- at least until the encores, much of the audience reaction seemed muted, as if listeners were no longer quite certain about Ms.
Battle's superstar status.
The applause that consistently interrupted the groups of songs was polite and noncommittal, although one fan's exuberance was so unqualified his cries seemed an embarrassment.
That changed by the end of the evening, though, and at least as far as vocal quality was concerned, the experience of recent months has done no harm.
Ms.
Battle's mellifluous sound was still intact and perhaps even more controlled and polished than it has been in recent years.
She can make a song seem entirely constructed of vowels, eliding all the disruptions of consonants.
The voice can slip effortlessly into the ear, leaving behind a silky afterglow.
There were some signs of wear, to be sure: a few slides up to pitch, a handful of wavery intonations, a couple of edgy highs.
Ms.
Battle also shied away from repertory requiring too much technical display.
But she can still produce one of the most sensuous sounds on the current opera circuit.


Jets Play Salary-Cap Game And Out Goes Thomas
Call it a post-college draft austerity move.
The Jets yesterday cut the veteran cornerback Eric Thomas, who was one of their expensive free-agent acquisitions just a year ago, giving themselves some extra money under the $34.6 million salary cap.
When the Jets selected cornerback Aaron Glenn of Texas A&amp;M in the first round of the college draft last Sunday, it meant that something would have to give in their secondary, which accounted for more than $5 million of the team's payroll last season.
Thomas, who was scheduled to earn $900,000 plus bonuses this season, was the odd man out.


Judge Turns Down Couple in Their Quest for Anti-Smoking Order Against Neighbors
Valerie Pentony came to New Jersey Superior Court today looking for an anti-smoking order against her downstairs neighbors in the Fox Hill apartments in Dover.
What she and her husband, William, got was some sympathy from the judge, along with his order that the apartment complex directors' try to solve the squabble outside of court.


Mariners Use Rookie To Get Yanks Out
Thank you, Roger Salkeld.
By the way, where were you hiding Wednesday night?
We could have used you to throw strikes.
Those were the sentiments Seattle Manager Lou Piniella probably was uttering to Salkeld tonight after the rookie right-hander pitched a splendid game in powering the Mariners to a 6-0 victory over the Yankees while also recording his first major league triumph.
It took a 23-year-old to restore a bit of sanity to the Mariners' pitching staff in the Kingdome.


TV Weekend; How a Confederate Widow Became the Oldest
Like the best-selling novel by Allan Gurganus, the television adaptation of "Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All" is a big old sprawling affair, beginning in the 1980's at a North Carolina home for the elderly and riding memories that reach back to the Civil War.
The four-hour production will be broadcast on Sunday and Tuesday, at 9 P.M.
The title character is feisty Lucy Marsden, now 99 and played by Anne Bancroft.
Widowed for nearly 50 years, Lucy is looking forward to her 100th birthday and an elaborate celebration planned by the town.
Meanwhile, she confides that "the memories have been swarmin' lately." She thinks about 1899, the year she met and married Capt.
William Marsden, a Civil War veteran.
She, played by Diane Lane ("Lonesome Dove"), is 14 and, for no discernible reason, convinced that she isn't pretty.
He, portrayed by Donald Sutherland, is 50, and, although basically gentle and genteel, is haunted by the war, particularly the death of his beloved boyhood friend.


A Day Daughters Skip School and Go to Work
In Brooklyn, Chaunte Davis learned how to splice telephone cable.
In LaConner, Wash., Diana Gross glass saw that Swinomish Indian women could run the tribe's fishery.
And in Cincinnati, Laura Sorrell learned how her mother juggles six children with a seventh on the way.
In the second annual Take Our Daughters to Work Day, millions of girls around the country gladly skipped school to sit in boardrooms, run cranes, test perfumes, mix slime, trade commodities by satellite and design video games.
The day, begun last year to raise girls' self-confidence by broadening their exposure to work, has grown into a nationwide event.
About three million girls, at least three times as many as last year, took part, according to estimates by the Ms.
Foundation for Women.


The Curious Flood of Praise for Richard Nixon; Saddened by the Loss
To the Editor:
Having had the privilege of serving President Nixon as Deputy Assistant for Congressional Relations (1971-74), I am saddened once again by the loss of this brilliant and singular man.
"Once again" because first the "Beltway," obsessed with Watergate's histrionics, helped deny the world his leadership.


5 Charged With Murder In Crash Fatal to Officer
Five teen-agers were charged with murder last night after the authorities said their effort to flee a crime scene had caused two police vehicles to crash, killing an officer.
The youths were accused of felony murder -- a death caused by someone committing or fleeing a crime, in this case the attempted robbery of a man near Prospect Park in Brooklyn early Wednesday.


Sciclone Shares Plunge On Treatment Test Data
In a stern reminder of the high-risk factors in many biotechnology stocks, shares of Sciclone Pharmaceuticals Inc., a small drug marketing company, plunged yesterday after preliminary test results indicated that thymosin alpha 1, an experimental treatment for hepatitis, was about as effective as plain water.
Shares of Sciclone dropped $7.5625, or 59 percent, closing at $5.1875 in heavy Nasdaq trading.
The company has exclusive rights to sell thymosin, a new drug for chronic hepatitis B, which is made by Alpha 1 Biomedicals, based in Bethesda Md.


Peripatetic Life of TNT Announcer Lists a Stopover for Fresh Clothes
To qualify as a TNT basketball announcer, one must love travel, especially at playoff time.
Herewith, Doug Collins's intense first-round itinerary:
Yesterday: Game 1, Heat-Hawks, in Atlanta.


Topping Off the Quarks
After nearly two decades of searching, scientists have found evidence for the elusive "top quark," the last undetected member of a family of particles that are believed to constitute the basic building blocks of all matter.
The discovery, if confirmed, will be a prodigious triumph of experimental physics.
A huge team of scientists sifted through the electromagnetic debris from billions of particle collisions at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory to find clues to the existence of this extremely rare and evanescent quarry.
More important than the feat itself, proof that the top quark exists will verify that the scheme by which physicists describe matter and forces -- the so-called Standard Model of elementary particles -- is essentially accurate.
Had they been unable to find the predicted quark, this edifice of modern physics would have collapsed.


Meadowlands Sports Agency Proposing a Direct Rail Link
Seeking to keep pace in the furiously evolving entertainment business, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority today unveiled an $850 million plan for its Meadowlands complex that calls for a rail line to lure visitors to a grab bag of new attractions, from a conference center to an amphitheater to an ice rink.
At the core of the project is a proposal to ease the increasingly burdensome traffic congestion in the area by using about $133 million in Federal transportation funds to lay down the one-mile rail line.
It would allow some of the millions of visitors who come for Giants football, Nets basketball or a host of other events every year to ride trains from Manhattan and New Jersey to the center of the complex.


U.S. Joins Whistle-Blower Suing Rockwell
The Justice Department said today that it had joined a whistle-blower in a lawsuit accusing the Rockwell International Corporation of overcharging NASA, possibly by millions of dollars, for contracts to build parts for the space shuttle.
The lawsuit charges that Rockwell employees routinely charged their time to space shuttle accounts, even when they were working on a variety of other projects, Jennifer Bremer, an assistant United States attorney in Los Angeles, said in a statement.


The Spoken Word
BLACKLIST SYMPOSIUM, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza.
Discussions with entertainment figures affected by the political blacklists of the 1940's and 50's, including Kim Hunter and Ring Lardner Jr.
With an exhibition, "The House I Live In: American Performances in the Era of Blacklisting," showing documents and photographs from the period, on view through Aug. 27.
Tomorrow, 12:30 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 870-1630.
ZEV KEDEM LECTURE, Neuberger Museum of Art, State University College at Purchase, N.Y.
The film maker, a Holocaust survivor who was a consultant on the film "Schindler's List," discusses personal and professional experiences; part of the Yassen Lecture Series on Film and Photography.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Admission: $12.
Information: (914) 251-6200.


A Scandal Undetected
A trading scandal at Kidder, Peabody began two years before the company discovered it and escaped detection by auditors, the company said.
Business Day, page D1.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the demolished Christopher Columbus Homes in Newark misstated the number of public-housing town houses planned for the site.
The maximum would be 300; the figure of about 1,800 is for town houses planned citywide.
The caption also referred to the building at the rear incorrectly.
It is not scheduled to be demolished.


Jewish Settler Gets Life for Slaying Palestinian
A Jewish settler was convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison today for slaying a Palestinian who was bound hand and foot after a stabbing attack last year in the occupied West Bank.
The verdict followed a recent Government crackdown on Jewish militants after a settler massacred at least 29 Muslims at prayer in a Hebron mosque on Feb. 25.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.69
3.15
2.94
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.86
3.87
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.26
4.24
2.95
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.99
6.82
5.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.26
7.10
6.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.06
7.93
7.83
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.29
5.95
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Spy Voices Shame and Defiance Before Receiving a Life Sentence
Minutes before a Federal judge sentenced him to prison for the rest of his life, Aldrich H. Ames, a C.I.A. officer, expressed profound shame today for betraying his country.
But he said he had spied for Moscow because American intelligence agencies had grown into "a self-serving interest group, immeasurably aided by secrecy."
In a meandering statement that alternated between apology and defiance, Mr.
Ames expressed regret that agents working for the Central Intelligence Agency in the former Soviet Union might have been imprisoned or executed as a result of his betrayal of them.
But he said of himself and his wife, "We made similar choices and suffer similar consequences."


High-Technology Accounts Shifted
Two high-tech companies yesterday selected new agencies to handle their accounts.
The Data General Corporation in Westboro, Mass., named Pagano, Schenck &amp; Kay in Providence, R.I., to handle its worldwide account, which had been at Lois/U.S.A. in New York before that agency declined to participate in a review.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


A Hole in the Middle
With the five-time All-Star BRAD DAUGHERTY still nursing a sore back, the Cavaliers disclosed yesterday that Daugherty's replacement, JOHN WILLIAMS, has an injured right thumb and is lost for the playoffs.
The other center on Cleveland's roster is TIM KEMPTON, signed two weeks ago. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SOUTH AFRICA EXTENDS VOTE  Citing severe disruptions at polling stations, South Africa's political leaders decided to allow voting to continue today in several rural regions, including troubled Zulu strongholds.
A1  WHITE RIGHTISTS RALLY  Outflanked by democracy, the band of white supremacists known as the Afrikaner Resistance Movement tried to rally in a white town.
They seemed like a shrinking troupe of actors caught up in a tragicomic costume drama.
A10


Robinson Set to Go Pro
Purdue's GLENN ROBINSON, who swept national player of the year honors after his junior season, has apparently made up his mind about moving on to the National Basketball Association.
Robinson, the probable No. 1 selection in the June 29 draft if he opts for the pros, announced yesterday that he would hold a news conference Monday to disclose his plans.
The 6-foot-8, 225-pound forward led the nation in scoring with a 30.3 average last season.
Robinson previously said he planned to remain in college and would call a news conference if he changed those plans.
"I imagine because he's having a press conference he is leaving," Purdue Coach GENE KEADY said. (AP)


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE TRAGEDY OF RICHARD II," Joseph Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Shakespeare's historical drama; with Michael Stuhlbarg, Andre Braugher, Earle Hyman and Carole Shelley; directed by Steven Berkoff.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50.
Information: (212) 598-7150.


Review/Film; Who Wouldn't Try to Run From Annoying Convicts?
You think it's easy to make a no-brain action movie?
"No Escape" demonstrates how hard it really is.
Ray Liotta plays a prisoner in the year 2022, shipped to a privately owned maximum-security prison in Australia.
The high-tech prison actually looks like a bunch of cheap metal canisters on pilings, and he doesn't stay there long.
He is dropped on a jungle island, where he's caught between two no-tech groups of prisoners: the ruthless Outsiders, and the peaceful Insiders.
He tries to . . . escape!
On paper, this might have seemed like a foolproof mix of elements borrowed from other, proven action movies.
Take a bit of "Mad Max," add a dash of "Demolition Man," mix with a soupcon of "Escape From New York." The plan backfires.
"No Escape" is long and lethargic.
The action looks fake, and the special effects are cheesy.


Rifkin Shows Severe Psychosis, Expert Says
Joel Rifkin tested "off the scale" as a paranoid schizophrenic, showing an extreme inability to think logically or experience time, a clinical psychologist testified today in the trial of Mr.
Rifkin, who has confessed to strangling 17 women.
"His mind is like a videotape in that it fast-forwards, then suddenly rewinds," said the psychologist, Dr.
Barbara R. Kirwin, who has worked with the criminally insane for 20 years.
"There is no normal time sequence in his thinking."


Reviews/Film; 2 Sisters as a Mirror of Modern Britain
The English playwright David Hare has always excelled at creating characters whose psychological struggles mirror deeper social and political stresses.
In his 1988 play "The Secret Rapture," which dramatized the bitter personality clash of two sisters after their father's death, he created a disquieting parable of ideological combat in Margaret Thatcher's Britain.
"The Secret Rapture" came to Broadway five years ago in an intriguing if stiff production directed by the playwright.
The film version, adapted for the screen by Mr.
Hare and directed by Howard Davies, who oversaw the original London production, is by no means easygoing.
But its emotional texture is considerably richer than the Broadway production.
And its wrenching performances and dark, clammy atmosphere cast an unsettling chill.


James Liebertz, 80, Kings Point Official
Capt.
James W. Liebertz, who served as athletic director of the United States Merchant Marine Academy at Kings Point, L.I., from 1950 to 1972, died on Monday.
He was 80 and lived in Stamford, Conn.
He died at a Stamford convalescent home after a long illness, the Academy said.


Serbs Hold Part of Gorazde, Paralyzing Efforts for Peace
Despite assurances by NATO that the Bosnian Serbs have complied with its ultimatum to withdraw from Gorazde, Serbian forces are refusing to leave a southern area of the town because, they say, it was populated by Serbs before the Bosnian war erupted.
A senior Western official who visited the area, called Zupcici, on Wednesday said today that Serbian civilians appeared to have been brought in to this part of Gorazde since the offensive on the eastern Bosnian town began one month ago.
He said that at least 65 armed Serbs were now guarding the civilians.


Berton Roueche, Medical Writer For The New Yorker, Dies at 83
Berton Roueche, a staff writer at The New Yorker for nearly 50 years who originated the Annals of Medicine series that chronicled the war against disease in elegant narratives of medical intrigue and detection, died yesterday at his home in Amagansett, L.I.
He was 83 years old.
He committed suicide, said his wife, Katherine Eisenhower Roueche, who discovered the body.


Dues-Paying Knicks Say It's Time to Collect
The Knicks departed from Charleston today, confident that they had prepared themselves for whatever it takes to win a championship.
New York eagerly opens the playoffs Friday night at Madison Square Garden against the Nets, in a three-of-five-game series that has the makings of a classic.
By beating the Knicks in four of five regular-season games, the Nets clearly established themselves as a dangerous opponent.
For the Nets, this emotional series is a chance to gain the respect that they feel has been denied them.
For the Knicks, this is the first step in what they hope will be a championship run.


Father Is Not Charged in Shooting of Son
A man who shot his son after the two argued over the son's drug use will not be charged with attempted murder but will face a weapons charge, the Queens District Attorney's office said yesterday.
Michael Robertson, 62, was arrested April 21 after he called police and told them he shot his son in the family's home in the Jamaica section of Queens.
Ronald Robertson was hit six times in the torso, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.


The Curious Flood of Praise for Richard Nixon; Insulted Institutions
To the Editor:
On Wednesday this country was asked to commemorate the memory of a President who contravened the U.S.
Constitution and was ejected from office for seriously breaking the law.
Had he not been given a Presidential pardon, Richard Nixon would have gone to jail like the other Watergate conspirators.
I can understand Bill Clinton's motives for flying the flag at half-staff -- he too would like assurance of immortality from the Presidents' Club.
But us?
What reason could we have for remembering a man who insulted our political institutions?
ELLIOT NEAMAN  San Francisco, April 28, 1994


Critic's Notebook; Private-Public Moment, Beamed Into History
To review a funeral as if it were a television program may strike even the hardened critic as a coldblooded exercise.
Yet in this video age, it is only safe to assume that all public events are made for television and can be treated accordingly.
And the hourlong Nixon-funeral special, carried live on Wednesday evening by the major commercial networks as well as by PBS, CNN and C-Span, had its stars, its scripts and plenty of display, along, of course, with a plot.
The setting and the direction struck an often stirring note of Americana.
There was the frame house where Richard M. Nixon was born; the men and women of the armed forces, too young to have their own memories of the Presidency they had been ordered to commemorate, going smartly through their routines; the music from the patriotic repertory, and especially the current First Couple and the four living former Presidents and their wives in the front row like a Norman Rockwell sketch for a new Mount Rushmore.


Reviews/Film; The Psyche of One Sex In the Body of the Other
"I Am My Own Woman," Rosa von Praunheim's crude, sometimes touching semi-documentary film about the life and times of a celebrated German transvestite, brings to mind the adage that what doesn't kill you makes you stronger.
Given the story she relates, it's remarkable that Charlotte von Mahlsdorf, nee Lothar Berfelde, who was 65 when the movie was made two years ago, survived to tell it.
A gentle esthete with a passion for collecting late-19th-century bric-a-brac, Charlotte projects the flighty gentility of an eccentric older woman who couldn't hurt a fly.
Wearing plain dresses, a strand of pearls and no makeup, she relates her story with a vague, wispy smile on her face and a faraway look in her eyes.


Economy Grows 2.6% In Quarter
Throttling back from a breakneck autumn, the economy grew at a moderate 2.6 percent rate in the first three months of 1994 as bad weather, the California earthquake and weak exports restrained activity, the Commerce Department reported today.
At the same time, some gauges of inflation moved higher and some traders and investors concluded that the new data understated the pace of growth.


Moonlight Unbecoming
Assemblyman Herman Farrell Jr. is a busy man.
In February, the veteran lawmaker was named chairman of the New York State Assembly's Ways and Means Committee -- the chamber's top fiscal committee.
In addition, Mr.
Farrell wears a second hat as he continues to serve as leader of Manhattan's Democratic Party.
That is one hat too many.
For officeholders to moonlight in influential, time-consuming party posts is an unhealthy concentration of power.
The public deserves elected leaders who see their duty clearly and unambiguously: to serve all the voters, and the greater public good, not just the party agenda.


John Preston, 48, Author, Editor And Advocate in AIDS Causes
John Preston, a writer and editor and a leader of groups involved with gay rights and treatment of AIDS, died yesterday at his home in Portland, Me.
He was 48.
He died of AIDS-related causes, said Melinda Mullin, his New York publicist.


On Stage, and Off
Secondhand Smoke
This is a story of what happens when a theatergoer suspends his disbelief, but not his belief.
On April 21, at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, Judy Geeson, who plays Grace, the distraught and weary wife of the title character in Brian Friel's play "Faith Healer," was in the midst of her monologue, chain-smoking as usual, when a man stood up in the audience and approached the stage.


Treasuries Fall Sharply Long Bond Yield Surges
Prices of Treasury securities collapsed yesterday, losing nearly two- thirds of what they had gained in the last 10 days, as investors and dealers signaled they were not yet convinced that the economy was slowing and that inflation was no longer a threat.
The 30-year bond fell 124/32 , to 8726/32 , as the yield, which moves in the opposite direction, jumped to 7.26 percent, from 7.10 percent on Tuesday.
Its rise of 16 basis points was also the biggest one-day surge in yields since Aug. 6, 1990, shortly after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, when the yield on the 30-year bond jumped from 8.55 percent to 8.79 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


The Curious Flood of Praise for Richard Nixon
To the Editor:
De mortuis nil nisi bonum: "say nothing of the dead unless it be good" is all very well, but the sudden flood of praise for Richard Nixon, now that he is dead, by television and print pundits is mainly hypocritical piousness.
It is less surprising that William Safire should declare him "America's greatest ex-President" (column, April 25) than that even journalists like Sam Donaldson should join in hagiographic appraisal.


Ames Depicts Espionage Trade as Sham
Although he protested that the business of spying was an absurd game, Aldrich H. Ames confessed today to what the Government called the most grievous betrayals in the annals of American intelligence.
He said he handed over to Moscow the identities of at least 12 Soviet and Eastern European espionage agents working secretly for the United States in the 1980's.
They are said to be dead or missing.
He boasted of "the huge quantity of information on United States foreign, defense and security policies" that he revealed.
He said he worked to make the budgets, strategies and technologies of large sectors of American intelligence, which are kept secret from Americans, an open book to the Soviet and later the Russian Government.


Serbia's Suffering in Holocaust Is Exaggerated
To the Editor:
As a South Slavic specialist for the last 20 years, and as a Jew, I read with interest Michael Pravica's letter of April 17 ("Holocaust Memories Make the Serbs Fear Their Neighbors").
His is typical of Serbian propaganda designed to turn the victims, Croatian and Muslim, into villains in the Serbian war of aggression in Croatia and Bosnia.


CHRONICLE
LISA MARIE PRESLEY and her husband, DANNY KEOUGH, are planning to divorce, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Ms.
Presley, 26, the daughter of Elvis Presley and Priscilla Presley, issued a statement that read: "Danny and I will always love each other. However, friendship was more suitable for us than marriage."


Review/Photography; Surrealism in Black and White
With its emphasis on the links between reality and dreams, Surrealism held a special appeal for photographers, whose essentially realistic medium can be used to create fantastic and richly suggestive images as well.
That attraction was as strong in this country as it was in France, as "American Surrealist Photography," now at the Museum of Modern Art, demonstrates.
The show's organizer, Sheryl Conkelton, associate curator in the museum's department of photography, describes her project in a wall label as an attempt to examine "Surrealism's impact on photography in America." That covers a lot of ground, and a major problem in assembling a show like this is simply figuring out whom to include.


Protest in Hartford Against Cuts in Welfare


Give Knicks the Edge but Give the Nets a Chance
The first order of business in the Knicks-Nets showdown that begins tonight is to state the belief that, beyond any other conviction, the series will not go five games.
The Knicks will beat the Nets in three or four, or the Nets will beat the Knicks in four.
A stronger case can be made for the Knicks winning the first-round playoff series.
Among other things, they have home-court advantage and Pat Riley has had a week to prepare.
Those two factors are why I'm picking the Knicks, though only a fool would discount the Nets' regular-season success against them, not to mention the breath of un-Knick-like spontaneity Kenny Anderson and Derrick Coleman bring to every Nets possession.


Denver Airport Date Firm
Denver city officials are sticking to a plan to open their new $3.2 billion airport on May 15 despite a request from United Airlines to delay the opening because of glitches in the airport's computerized baggage system.
Briggs A. Gamblin, a spokesman for Mayor Wellington Webb, said the city was committed to the opening date.
He said that a three-day, 7,000-bag test of the innovative system was under way and that final results of the test would not be known until Sunday morning.


An Encore After This? Yes, and One the Devils Must Win
Now comes the tense part.
After a classic Game 6 that took more than six hours, covered more than six periods and became the sixth-longest playoff game in National Hockey League history, the Devils and the Sabres will play again at Byrne Meadowlands Arena Friday night to determine which team moves to Round 2.


Review/Film; Some Collegiate Help for a Homeless Zany
The concept of "With Honors" shouts cliche: a group of Harvard students befriends a homeless man and learns there is more to life than grades.
Any knowing moviegoer will cringe at the thought of those insufferable rich kids adopting a man -- bound to be smart, spunky and down on his luck -- as if he were a pet.
Surprisingly, the film is far more engaging than it sounds.
The well-meaning plot about homelessness turns out to be the insufferable part, but the appealing actors who play the four roommates give the film a casual charm.
The director, Alek Keshishian, went to Harvard and has a powerful feeling for the comfortable, insular, anxious lives of its students.
This may be the first movie set at Harvard that actually likes the place ("Love Story" thought it was snobbish and "The Paper Chase" resented it), and that attitude almost saves "With Honors" from its mawkish, manipulative story.


In a First, Man Convicted on DNA Is Executed
Timothy W. Spencer died Wednesday night in Virginia's electric chair, becoming the first person executed in the United States for a conviction based on the DNA-matching technology popularly known as genetic fingerprinting.
Mr.
Spencer, 32, known here as "the Southside Strangler," was convicted of raping and strangling four women over 11 weeks in 1987.
None of the victims survived to identify him, no fingerprints were found and no one confessed.
Then, DNA tests linked semen from the crime scenes with Mr.
Spencer's blood.


6,100 TO GIVE UP MUNICIPAL WORK IN GIULIANI OFFER
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that at least 6,100 municipal workers had accepted voluntary severance packages to give up their jobs, an important first step in the new Mayor's drive to cut the city work force and reduce the budget.
The number fell short of the Mayor's severance goal of 7,600, however, and Mr.
Giuliani said he might still have to resort to layoffs to cut the payroll further.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL PROPERTIES -- Announced that Frank Simio, vice president of finance and administration, has resigned to become the vice president for the National Baseball Hall of Fame effective Aug. 15.


Air Quality Inside Jetliners Is Not Harmful, Study Says
The reduction of fresh air in airline cabins since the mid-1980's poses no harm to passengers and crew members, according to a study commissioned by the airline industry that was made public today.
"Both older aircraft, with an all-fresh air system, and newer aircraft that have a combination of fresh and recirculated air, meet or exceed standards that are designed to insure a healthy environment," said Jim Landry, president of the Air Transport Association, which financed the study and represents major airlines.


Parish Wants to Play
ROBERT PARISH said yesterday that he wants to play in the National Basketball Association next season but doesn't know if he will be with the Celtics.
Parish, 40, said his first choice was to finish his career with Boston.
But the center, who has a $4 million annual salary, said he was aware that the team might face problems with the salary cap.
"I've decided I'm going to play another year," Parish said at a Boston news conference.
"Whether that's with the Celtics or another team I don't know." Parish, the 12th-leading scorer and eighth top rebounder in N.B.A. history, has played 18 years in the league, 14 with Boston. (AP)





Benjamin Hurt in Crash
On his way to practice yesterday, BENOIT BENJAMIN was involved in a minor automobile accident, but the Nets' center is expected to play in tonight's playoff opener against the Knicks at Madison Square Garden.
The team said that at about 10:30 A.M., Benjamin's car was struck on the driver's side by another car near a parking lot for Fairleigh Dickinson's Rothman Center, where the Nets work out.
Benjamin was taken by ambulance to Hackensack Medical Center, where he was treated for a sore left shoulder and released.


Testing Power, Cortines Will Seize 6 Bad Schools
Testing the boundaries of his powers, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he would take over six of the city's worst elementary and junior high schools because their leadership has permitted failure for so long that it amounts to "educational corruption."
Mr.
Cortines's plan is the most sweeping intervention in the operation of local schools by any chancellor since the system was decentralized in 1970, school officials said.
In addition to the six school takeovers, Mr.
Cortines also said he would order a variety of emergency programs for 34 other schools.


On-the-Job Learning for Girls


Doyle Swaps Sneaker Accounts
Doyle Advertising in Boston said yesterday that it had gained one athletic footwear account while losing another.
Puma USA in Brockton, Mass., selected Doyle to handle its advertising and promotional account, which had been at Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot in Boston for a year and a half.
Billings have yet to be determined.


No Headline
"I volunteered to the KGB informaton identifying virtually all Soviet agents of the C.I.A. and other American and foreign services known to me. To my enduring surprise, the KGB replied that it had set aside for me $2 million in gratitude for the  information. ALDRICH H. AMES.  [ A16:1. ]


Corrections
A brief report on April 21 about "Beauty and the Beast" misstated its ranking in one-day box-office receipts.
The show is second, with $603,494 in receipts, although that figure broke the Broadway box-office record for ticket sales on the day after an opening.
First is "The Phantom of the Opera," which took in $920,271 when its box office opened on Nov. 23, 1987, two months before its first performance.


Yeltsin Wins Peace Accord In Parliament
With far more pomp than substance, President Boris N. Yeltsin won approval today for a national peace pact with most of his political opponents.
The treaty, signed in the Kremlin and broadcast to the nation on television, is supposed to guarantee that there will be no political violence before the next presidential elections, scheduled in 1996.
That would give the Government two years of calm to focus on economic recovery.


CHRONICLE
For P. MICHAEL TIMPANE, the president of Teachers College at Columbia University, the dinner for 250 people at the Plaza Hotel on Wednesday evening was a good way to begin saying his farewells as he approaches retirement.
Considering the guests, it was an educator's dream.
Among them were Madeleine Kunin, the Deputy Secretary of Education and a former Governor of Vermont; Lamar Alexander, a former Secretary of Education and a former Governor of Tennessee; Thomas H. Kean, the president of Drew University and a former Governor of New Jersey, and Donald Stewart, the president of the College Board.


Side Issue May Decide Kevorkian Verdict
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian has said for months that he wanted his day in court to challenge what he sees as an unconstitutional ban on assisted suicide -- a statute that Michigan legislators passed in direct response to his practices.
But now that charges against him have gone to the jury, it seems that Dr.
Kevorkian may be judged more on the geography of his participation last year in the suicide of 30-year-old Thomas W. Hyde Jr. than on the larger question of a physician's proper role in the face of terminal illness.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Chrysler's new Neon campaign is just the latest by an auto maker to focus on the black car buyer.
THE question of whether auto makers should give the job of aiming advertising at black consumers to a black-owned agency was replaced long ago by the question of which black-owned agency was best for the job.
Since January, the answer for the Chrysler Corporation has been Don Coleman &amp; Associates of Bingham Farms, Mich., a suburb of Detroit.
The agency, which is seven years old, has just completed a campaign meant to draw car buyers' attention to Chrysler's crucially important new Neon subcompact.
The television commercials and print advertisements focus on the distinctive attributes of the Neon, including its eye-catching exterior styling.


Books of The Times; A Family Is Destroyed By a Sexual Chimera
Remembering Satan
By Lawrence Wright
205 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
For years, Paul R. Ingram had been a respected member of his community.
As Lawrence Wright reports in his absorbing new book (parts of which have appeared in The New Yorker), Mr.
Ingram was the chief civil deputy of the sheriff's department of Olympia, Wash.; chairman of the local Republican Party, and an active member of the Church of Living Water, a fundamentalist congregation.
His wife, Sandy, who operated a day-care center at their house, thought of their marriage as happy, stable and old-fashioned.
Their neighbors described them as "ordinary folks" who were strict but loving parents to their five children.


Hata Forms a Minority Government in Japan


Market Place; What selloff? Mutual fund investors pump in the money.
A LOT of mutual fund investors were frightened by the stock market turbulence in March and April.
But even more thought it provided a buying opportunity.
"It's a positive sign that the first-quarter selloff has not hurt investor confidence about wanting to be in mutual funds," said Bruce Speca, a spokesman for the New England group of funds, who reported that new accounts invested 50 percent more money in April than in the comparable month last year.


Home Video
Business of CD-ROM's
Plying their CD-ROM's in video stores, software makers are learning to stay flexible.
In the case of Sanctuary Woods Multimedia, a small software publisher in Victoria, British Columbia, that means both bending to the winds and hanging on to your principles.


Aamco Selects Ally &amp; Gargano
Aamco Transmissions Inc. in Bala- Cynwyd, Pa., said yesterday that it had selected Ally &amp; Gargano in New York to handle the creative portion of its account, which had been handled by Ayer Inc. in New York for four and a half years before being moved in-house.
Billings were estimated at more than $15 million.


13 Boats to Risk Dash to New York
Heading north in a boat at this time of year, with its potentially unsettled weather, is likely to involve risk.
But the challenge is compelling enough to draw 13 powerboats to the start line today of the Cannonball Offshore, a newly organized race from Miami to New York.
Brock Yates, a writer for Boating Magazine, the event's sponsor, is organizing this first Cannonball powerboat race.
It is patterned after the Cannonball car races, a series of five cross-country competitions that Yates developed in the 1970's.


3 States to Check Welfare Rolls In a Search for Double Dipping
New York will begin comparing its welfare rolls with those of New Jersey and Massachusetts next month to prevent people from fraudulently collecting payments in more than one state.
The agreement, announced by officials of those states yesterday, was prompted by the discovery earlier this year that 425 Newark residents had illegally collected more than $1 million in welfare benefits in New York City.
Welfare officials discovered the fraud when people caught trying to beat the fare on PATH trains were found to be carrying welfare cards for both New York and New Jersey.


Review/Film: When a Man Loves a Woman; A Woman Under the Influence
IN "When a Man Loves a Woman," Alice Green (Meg Ryan) makes a terrible confession.
She tells of having been out doing errands, driving drunk and arriving home to realize she had mislaid her baby daughter along the way.
So intoxicated that she couldn't even remember where she'd been, Alice had to depend on luck to locate her child, but that kind of luck doesn't last forever.
"When a Man Loves a Woman" means to provide a sobering look at what happens to Alice when her luck runs out.
As such, this film is well situated to explore the 12-stepping of American culture, a topic that so dominates best-seller lists and daytime talk shows that it ought to be a natural on screen.
Clearly, there's a great wave of interest in addictive behavior, co-dependency, substance abuse, enabling and all the related buzzwords that can be used to describe this story.
But discussing these matters is very different from dramatizing them, as this film makes all too clear.
The Hollywood esthetic, with its intrinsic prettiness, overwhelms the painful, unglamorous realities that this cautionary tale is supposed to be about.


Handcuff Alternative: The Zap of 50,000 Volts
When Richard Allen Davis was brought before a California court last month for a hearing on charges of murdering Polly Klaas, one thing about his outward appearance seemed entirely remarkable.
Although he is a twice-convicted kidnapper now accused of the most violent of felonies, he wore no belly chains, leg irons or even handcuffs.
Indeed, he moved just like a free man.
The reason was a new piece of technology that is the answer to every bailiff's dream and is also finding occasional favor with criminal defense lawyers eager to take the edge off adverse pretrial publicity that shackles can help create.


Taxes May Fuse School Districts; Rising Expenses Test New Jerseyans' Love of Local Control
For more than two decades, state officials have tried and failed to consolidate New Jersey's patchwork of tiny school districts in the name of better education.
Now, with state aid to most schools set to decline, they are trying again, this time in the cause of lower property taxes.
The present system, state officials agree, is a mess.
While other states, including New York and Connecticut, have been consolidating school districts so schools can offer more courses and operate more efficiently, New Jersey has been going the other way: creating new districts.


Art in Review
Jack Pierson
Luhring Augustine  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through May 7
Jack Pierson is a romantic whose subject is beauty, loneliness, unrequited love and the basic discomfort of getting through the day.
He's also a stylish iconoclast who works in several media with studied disregard for esthetic hierarchies and divisions: his drawings can seem illustrational; his hazy photographs of flowers and transvestites, inept; his interests literary, almost cinematic.
His wall pieces, made from the wood and metal letters of discarded signs, spell out words whose ineffable poignancy has the clear, unrestrained emotionalism of popular culture.
In all, his artistic ancestors would seem to include Warhol, Hockney and Piaf.


Scientists Say Cigarette Company Suppressed Findings on Nicotine
Scientists at the Philip Morris Company found evidence 11 years ago that a substance in cigarettes was as addictive as nicotine, and that the two combined far exceeded the addictive power of either, two scientists testified at a Congressional hearing today.
But the research was halted by the tobacco company, and efforts to publish that and other work were blocked, the researchers said.


Man's Signature Leads to Robbery Arrest
A man who went on a five-week spree of robberies at beauty parlors and real-estate and travel agencies was caught after he signed his name on a job application at a beauty shop, the police said yesterday.
Javar Torres, 26, was arrested Wednesday night at a Queens motel and charged with 28 counts of robbery, said Sgt.
Joseph McCluskey, a police spokesman.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in The Home Section yesterday about spring house tours in the Northeast misstated the site of a series of garden tours.
The Southport Garden Festival, from May 21 to 23, is in Connecticut, not New Jersey.
In addition, the name of the sponsor of a benefit house tour in Manhattan on May 15 was omitted.
It is the Village Community School.


Corrections
An article on April 20 about faculty tenure misidentified the San Diego university of which Thomas Day is president.
It is San Diego State University, not the University of California at San Diego.


In Shift, Prudential Concedes A Whistle-Blower Was Right
After six months of battling a former senior executive's accusations of improprieties, the Prudential Insurance Company of America conceded yesterday that the whistle-blower it fought in court and then dismissed had been right all along.
After two reports by outside lawyers and auditors confirmed the whistle-blower's basic assertions, the company offered to reinstate him to his previous level.
It also demanded the resignation of two executives, including the chief executive of a Prudential division who was the former boss of the whistle-blower, Mark Jorgensen.


Avrett, Free Wins Cepacol Assignment
The J. B. Williams Company in Glen Rock, N.J., said yesterday that it had named Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg in New York to handle advertising for its newly acquired Cepacol mouthwash and lozenges brand.
The account had been handled by Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York when the brand was marketed by SmithKline Beecham.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $7 million.
Avrett, Free, which already handles J. B. Williams brands like Aqua Velva, Brylcreem and Lectric Shave, was awarded the account without a review.


Galbraith, a Former Envoy, Enters the Gubernatorial Race
Evan G. Galbraith, a businessman who was Ambassador to France in the Reagan Administration, formally announced his candidacy today for the Republican nomination for governor, joining a field that now numbers five.
In brilliant sunshine on the steps of the State Capitol, Mr.
Galbraith, 65, outlined a platform to reduce state personal and corporate taxes by about half, institute the death penalty for all homicide-related crimes, eliminate most forms of welfare and cut the state payroll by 25 percent.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about Bosnia described the scene incorrectly.
It showed the launching of an F/A-18 warplane from the American carrier Saratoga in the Adriatic Sea, not the preparation of missiles.


G.M.'s Profit Jumps 66.5% in Quarter
With auto sales booming in North and South America and strengthening in Europe, the General Motors Corporation reported today that its first-quarter profits jumped 66.5 percent from a year earlier, to $854 million.
The robust earnings, which at 81 cents a share exceeded the expectations of automotive securities analysts, came despite a previously announced $758 million charge G.M. took to account for benefits for some former employees.
Without the charge, G.M., the world's largest auto maker, earned $1.6 billion.


METRO DIGEST
6,100 IN CITY JOBS TO TAKE SEVERANCE
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said that at least 6,100 New York City workers had accepted voluntary severance packages to give up their jobs, an important first step in the new Mayor's drive to cut the municipal work force and reduce the budget.
A1.
CORTINES SEIZING FAILING SCHOOLS
Testing the boundaries of his powers, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said that he would take over six of the city's worst elementary and junior high schools because their leadership has permitted failure for so long that it amounts to "educational corruption." A1.


Apartheid's Heirs Strut a Final Hour on South Africa's Political Stage
Outflanked by democracy, the band of white supremacists known as the Afrikaner Resistance Movement was a sorry, surly sight today as they lugged rifles and shotguns, pistols and bayonets, picnic baskets and baby strollers into the woods outside of town in angry mourning over the death of white minority rule.
"We are Boer people! We are fighters!" thundered the commanding officer, Eugene TerreBlanche, a gray-bearded man in battle khakis who not too long ago attracted or frightened thousands with warnings of a guerrilla war in defense of white rule.


Norfolk's Daring Duo Answers the Mets' S O S
Whenever they turned on the television for updates, the message always seemed to be the same.
The Mets' bullpen was in trouble.
The Mets' bullpen had raised concerns in the organization.
The Mets' bullpen needed new blood.
In Norfolk, home of the Mets' Class AAA franchise, Mauro Gozzo and Josias Manzanillo watched these bulletins and waited.
They were the top two pitchers in the Mets' minor league system the first few weeks of the season, so they figured they would get a call sometime soon.
And they did, last Monday, right after the Mets returned from a disappointing road trip to the West Coast.


Big British Independent Makes Bid for Oil Rival
Enterprise Oil P.L.C., one of Britain's largest independent oil producers, offered $2.19 billion in stock yesterday for a rival, Lasmo P.L.C., in what analysts said could be the start of a long hostile-takeover battle.
Lasmo, which has been considered a takeover target because of its depressed stock price and attractive assets, rebuffed the offer.


Teamsters Reach Accord to End Strike
The International Brotherhood of Teamsters tonight reached a tentative agreement to end the longest truckers' strike in its history.
John Calhoun Wells, national director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, said the agreement was reached at 8:15 P.M. after "some of the most difficult, complex and explosive negotiations" he had ever been involved in.
He called the resolution a "win-win" conclusion that took into account the trucking industry's long-term future.


Review/Art; A Netherlandish Master Of the Small and Subtle
The Petrus Christus exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is the first significant show in more than 30 years that an American museum has devoted to early Netherlandish panel painting, which may partly explain why Americans aren't as familiar with this art as with Italian art.
Fra Angelico is probably a better-known figure here than Jan van Eyck, though van Eyck is as great as any Renaissance painter.
Christus painted in Bruges after van Eyck's death there in 1441.
For years scholars assumed he was van Eyck's protege because his style seemed to be influenced by the great master.
Christus died sometime between late 1475 and early 1476.
A small group of works are attributed to him, some of them signed, signatures being still a new device in Netherlandish art, adopted by Christus from van Eyck.


For Wild Thing, the Plate's Still Moving
Cubs 5, Astros 3
April 1994 isn't much different than October 1993 for Mitch Williams.
Williams, known as the Wild Thing, had another tough outing in Houston yesterday against the lowly Chicago Cubs, putting the go-ahead run on base in the 11th inning with a two-out walk and allowing another run to score on a wild pitch in Houston's 5-3 loss.
His earned run average has ballooned to 6.75.


At Delta, a Drastic Plan for Recovery
Delta Air Lines took a clean sheet of paper and sketched out a rebound plan yesterday that is unlike anything proposed by its industry rivals.
To help generate lower fares and compete profitably against a fleet of leaner competitors, the nation's third-largest carrier said yesterday that it would cut up to 15,000 jobs, or 20 percent of its work force, and reduce costs by $2 billion a year by mid-1997.


Reviews/Film; A Feminist Perspective On Sex, Fantasy and Guilt
Sex comedy usually has a masculine outlook, but "The Favor" has a sneakily feminine sense of humor.
Consider its opening sequence, in which Kathy Whiting (Harley Jane Kozak) sashays brazenly in a tight red outfit, then wordlessly seduces a hunky young football player.
Cut to reality: Kathy is jolted awake to face her two small daughters and her husband of 10 years, a mathematician named Peter (Bill Pullman).
Peter is sweet, and he has the amusing habit of playing blues harmonica while working on equations, but that doesn't keep Kathy from dreaming.
When a man in a movie fantasizes about Bo Derek, the movie tends to be a lot more guilt-free than "The Favor." Sure, Kathy is obsessed by memories of Tom (Ken Wahl), her football-playing high school boyfriend.
But she feels pretty bad about imagining she could run off with him if her husband had a fatal accident in church. (On the Sunday when she cooks up that thought, the subject of the sermon is "God Knows All Our Dreams.") So perky and clean-cut that she even sees herself as Donna Reed in one fantasy sequence, she's much too timid to act out her rogue thoughts.
So adultery by proxy becomes her only option.


Potvin Closes Out A Team and A Stadium
Maple Leafs 1, Blackhawks 0
Felix Potvin stopped 27 shots for his third shutout of the series as Toronto beat Chicago, 1-0, last night to clinch the opening-round National Hockey League playoff series in the final hockey game at venerable Chicago Stadium.


Alabama Requires Boaters to Get Licenses
Gov.
Jim Folsom signed a law today that makes Alabama the first state to require pleasure-boat operators to be licensed.
While many states require certification and mandatory education for teen-age boater operators, Alabama's law requires people 40 years old and under to pass a written test for a license.
No boating test is required.


Restaurants
"My customers," says Nicola Marzovilla apologetically.
He sighs, shrugs and looks to the heavens.
Three enormous men, their bellies preceding them by a good two feet, have just pushed us aside in their rush for the door.
Mr.
Marzovilla glares at their departing backs and leads us to a round table in the corner.
As he holds out a chair he murmurs, "For you, Signora, the best table in the house."
He undoubtedly says this to every woman; that does not in the least dilute its charm.
Mr.
Marzovilla is a born restaurateur, a man of endless grace who wants to make everyone who walks through his door happy.
He has great success.


Getting Serious About Guns
Congressional efforts at gun control have thus far been worthy but piecemeal.
Advocates of gun control have concentrated on getting small pieces of legislation -- any legislation -- through Congress.
That has meant choosing measures fashioned to seem most innocuous to those who fear the intimidation campaign of the National Rifle Association.
So far, that tactic has proved its worth, most notably in getting the Brady law passed, which demands a five-day waiting period before buying a handgun, and in getting Congress accustomed to the notion that the gun trade is a fitting target of legislation.
Some members think Congress is now ready for a broader approach.
Late last year Representative Charles Schumer of New York and Senator Howard Metzenbaum of Ohio introduced a "kitchen-sink" bill that covered everything from licensing to lists of weapons to be prohibited.
It proved politically ahead of its time.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Prudential Insurance conceded that a whistle-blower it fought in court and then dismissed from his job was correct that the values of certain properties in two real estate funds for institutional investors had been inflated by the company.  [ Page A1. ]


Wobbly on Iraq
In the wake of the tragic helicopter accident over northern Iraq two weeks ago, some are calling for a change in our policy toward that country.
They argue that we should find a way to end our confrontation with President Saddam Hussein.
The implication is that Baghdad is ready to make amends and that we are somehow responsible for prolonging the confrontation.
This view is misguided.
It ignores the basic fact that Iraq is not now in compliance with any of the obligations the Security Council imposed at the end of the Persian Gulf war -- even those it accepted as a condition of the cease-fire.


The Ghost in Kidder's Money-Making Machine
A year ago, Michael A. Carpenter, the chief executive of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, sat down at a polished conference table to go over a list of candidates for promotion with Edward A. Cerullo, the man who had transformed Kidder from an also-ran into a trading powerhouse on Wall Street.
As the two friends discussed who would be the new chief of government trading, a critical element of Kidder's profit machine, the obvious choice was Joseph Jett, a young trader whom Mr.
Cerullo had brought along carefully since hiring him two years earlier.


CHRONICLE
Over the years, ENID A. HAUPT has donated millions of dollars to the New York Botanical Garden, where the conservatory, which she rescued from demolition, bears her name.
This afternoon, Mrs.
Haupt is to perform a good deed richer in symbolism than monetary worth.
She will plant a sugar maple tree at the garden in the Bronx to commemorate Arbor Day.


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON (JNJ,N)
Johnson &amp; Johnson, the world's largest diversified health care company, reported solid earnings growth yesterday, with profits rising nearly 8.2 percent, to $544 million, in the first quarter from the comparable period a year earlier.
Per-share earnings increased 10.4 percent, to 85 cents, reflecting the company's $500 million buyback of 12.3 million shares in 1993.


A.D.L. Acknowledges Nonracist Skinheads
To the Editor:
Stephen Donaldson is obviously not familiar with the Anti-Defamation League's work in fighting the neo-Nazi skinhead menace (letter, April 19).
The seven reports the A.D.L. has produced on the subject emphasize the differences between racist and nonracist skinheads.
We have urged the public and media to understand that not all "skins" are racist or neo-Nazi, even though the ones who are may be indistinguishable in appearance from those who are not.


Howard Sochurek, A Photographer, 69
Howard Sochurek, a photographer for Life magazine on assignment throughout the world and later a pioneer in computer-assisted imaging, died on Monday in Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami.
Mr.
Sochurek, who lived in Boynton Beach, Fla., was 69.
The cause was liver cancer, said his wife, Tania.
Mr.
Sochurek joined Life in 1950 and worked in the Soviet Union, the Middle East, Mongolia and Vietnam.
He also served in the magazine's bureaus in New York, Chicago, Detroit, New Delhi, Singapore and Paris.


Art in Review
Emmet Gowin
Pace/MacGill Gallery  32 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through June 4
Human intrusion on the land is the subject of Emmet Gowin's aerial photographs.
Mr.
Gowin records coal-mining operations in the Czech Republic, circular fields of farms in the western United States, and other motifs.
Whether of mining or agriculture, the photographs have an eerie, romantic beauty despite the often damning records they provide of the destruction of the land.


Art in Review
Roni Horn
Matthew Marks  1018 Madison Avenue (near 78th Street)  Through tomorrow
As a sculptor, Roni Horn is inclined to give relatively immaterial forms of expression -- poetry, drawing and photography -- a distinctly physical, therefore sculptural, existence.
The paired abstract shapes in the small drawings she has made for more than a decade are actually little piles of dry pigment varnished into place on separate sheets of paper.
Her sleek metal sculptures are often embedded with letters that spell out the words of Emily Dickinson poems on different facets or edges.
And the forms in her photographs of different landscapes, especially in Iceland, and buildings frequently qualify as inadvertent sculptures.


Levine Named 9th President At Teachers
Arthur E. Levine, a Harvard education expert who once posed as a high school student for a research project, even taking the S.A.T.'s, was named president of Teachers College at Columbia University yesterday.
Mr.
Levine, a product of New York City public schools and the State University system, will become the ninth president of the 106-year-old graduate school, which trains professionals in education, psychology and health services.


At Beginning of Penn Relays, Villanova Finishes First
On a glorious spring afternoon, the 100th edition of the Penn Relays, America's oldest, largest and most prestigious track and field carnival, began today.
And there were glorious performances, too, especially by the Villanova women in the distance medley relay.
In a sense, this has always been a home meet for Villanova, whose Main Line campus is only 10 miles west of Franklin Field.
And after this season, Marty Stern, who has coached the Villanova women for 10 years and the men for 4, is retiring.


Police Inquiry in Rape Report Stirs Confusion
A woman's report of being raped in Brooklyn's Prospect Park on Tuesday -- a widely publicized account that has raised public fears of a rapist on the loose -- remained under investigation yesterday, amid some confusion over the evidence and a published report that it was a hoax.
A day after senior officials said privately that no evidence had been found to support the woman's account of an attack on a wooded hill on the southwest edge of the park, the police said last night that a laboratory analysis of a rape test administered Tuesday night had found semen in the woman's vagina and on her running shorts.


Egyptian Court Sentences Absent Sheik to Prison
Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the Egyptian cleric accused of plotting a terror campaign in New York, was sentenced by an Egyptian security court today to seven years in prison on charges of inciting riots and the attempted killing of two policemen.
The incidents took place in 1989 in Mr.
Abdel Rahman's hometown of Fayoum, 60 miles southwest of Cairo.


Critic's Choice/Film; Skewing Italy's Scandals


AT&amp;T Consolidates Direct Marketing
The AT&amp;T Corporation said yesterday that it had selected Bronner Slosberg Humphrey of Boston and Wunderman Cato Johnson of New York as the primary agencies on its consumer long-distance direct marketing account, currently handled by dozens of direct marketing shops.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $200 million to $300 million.
Bronner Slosberg previously had the largest share of the account, while Wunderman gained a substantial amount of billings.
At the same time, Worldwide 1 on 1, a new direct marketing joint venture of Ayer Inc. and Ross Roy Communications, was assigned a special direct mail project.


Report Sees Rise in AIDS For Children
A rising number of infant and childhood deaths from AIDS is beginning to set back years of hard-won improvements in childhood survival rates in the third world, the Census Bureau said in a report today.
The report, which makes projections on AIDS in 13 sub-Saharan countries, Brazil, Thailand and Haiti, predicted that unless there was a sharp slowing in the rate of infection in these countries, childhood mortality rates would triple by the year 2010.


Jets, Giants Open on Sept. 4
The Jets will open the 1994 season on Labor Day weekend with a road game against the defending American Conference champion Buffalo Bills and the Giants will end theirs at home on Christmas Eve against the Super Bowl champion Dallas Cowboys.
In between, the two teams will have anything but a holiday, according to their 16-game schedules released yesterday.
The Giants open at home on Sept. 4 against the Philadelphia Eagles, the first of three straight games against Eastern Division opponents.


U.S. Outlines Subsidy Plan
The Defense Department announced a broad plan today to build an internationally competitive laptop computer screen industry through a program of matching Federal subsidies.
The goal of the program is to encourage companies to build at least four giant factories in the United States that would supply 15 percent of the $4 billion world market for advanced flat-panel display screens, said Kenneth S. Flamm, a Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense.


Corrections
A news analysis article yesterday about the legacy of Richard M. Nixon misstated the date of his Checkers speech in some editions.
It was in 1952, not 1960.


South Africans Extend Voting To Fourth Day
South Africa's political leaders agreed today to extend voting to a fourth day in six rural regions, including the troubled Zulu stronghold of Natal, after reports of severe disruptions at polling stations.
With voting drawing to an orderly close today in most of the country, election officials said that because of logistical problems, polling in parts of Natal, the Eastern Cape and the Northern Transvaal would be seriously flawed unless polling places were allowed to remain open through Friday.


Accounts
*
Celebration Co., Orlando, Fla., to West Advertising &amp; Marketing, Tampa, to handle advertising and public relations for the Walt Disney Co.'s proposed residential and commercial town scheduled to open in 1996 in Osceola County, near Walt Disney World, which was previously handled on a project basis by Austin Kelley Advertising, Atlanta.
Billings were estimated at $5 million through 1996. *
Panasonic Battery Sales Group, Secaucus, N.J., to QLM Associates, Princeton, N.J., to handle its account, previously handled by various agencies on a project basis.
And the Panasonic Communications and Systems Co., Secaucus, named the agency to handle a project for its pager division.
Billings were not disclosed.


INSIDE
Pact in Teamster Strike
Negotiators for the union and the owners of 22 freight companies reached an agreement that could end the longest truckers strike in the industry's history.
Page A14.
Israel and P.L.O.
Near Deal
Israeli and Palestinian officials hope to sign an agreement next week establishing Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
Page A6.
Economic Growth Slows
The economy grew at a moderate rate of 2.6 percent in the first three months of 1994, the Commerce Department reported.
Page D1.


COMPANY BRIEFS
A.
T.
CROSS CO., Lincoln, R.I., a manufacturer of writing instruments and leather products, authorized the repurchase of one million class A common shares, or 6.7 percent of its 15.2 million class A shares outstanding.
CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES INC., Los Angeles, will seek to change its name to Broadway Store Inc. at its annual meeting on June 17.


After 50 Years, Fascists Return to Italian Government
Silvio Berlusconi, whose party was the leading vote-getter in national elections a month ago, was formally invited today to form a new Italian government that will include fascists for the first time since World War II.
After the 26 months of corruption scandals that rendered the country's onetime political elite -- the Christian Democrats and their allies -- no more than bystanders to his rise to power, Mr.
Berlusconi promised his government would be "stainless."


Working Their Way to the Top


Rutgers's Bellamy Signs
Rutgers defensive back JAY BELLAMY has signed a free agent contract with the Seattle Seahawks, the school announced yesterday. (AP)


Haitian Impasse -- A special report.; Failure on Haiti: How U.S. Hopes Faded
The cameras had been turned off and the formal interview at the White House was over last week when President Clinton was asked about Randall Robinson's hunger strike to protest the Administration's policy toward Haiti.
In an extraordinary statement for an American President, Mr.
Clinton not only admitted that his policy had failed, but also left the impression that he was somehow powerless to change course.


Diner's Journal
Spring Magic
At this time of year, it is hard to resist the River Cafe.
Flowers are everywhere, in the driveway, at the bar, on the tables.
Huge bouquets of apple blossoms spread their branches against the wall, and each table has a vase of peonies, sweet peas and roses.
With the lights in the trees, the Manhattan skyline in the background and the Brooklyn Bridge throwing itself across the river in a great arc of lights, the place is magical.
Go early and watch the sun set.
Go late and look at the moon.
Go anytime and enjoy the cooking of the latest chef, Rick Laakkonen, who seems intoxicated by spring.


15 Vials of Sperm: The Unusual Bequest of an Even More Unusual Man
Over the last few years, Deborah Ellen Hecht has become a familiar and exasperating figure at California Cryobank Inc.
Six times in 1991, as her lover contemplated suicide and fatherhood simultaneously, she accompanied him to the Cryobank, nestled on the second floor of a faux Art Deco-era brick building here, where he made deposits of his sperm.
And she has revisited the sperm bank often since the day in October 1991 when that man, Bill Kane, a figure at once astoundingly brilliant and confoundingly mysterious, killed himself at the age of 48 in the penthouse suite of the Mirage Hotel in Las Vegas.


Review/Music; Feminism As Organizing Principle
Singers must be watching in bemused wonder as orchestras, seeking attention and subscribers, unfurl the banner of thematic programming.
In the vocal world, theme concerts are not only nothing new but are also almost unavoidable.
A concert of soprano arias, for example, might present a parade of seemingly unrelated heroines -- saints and sinners, historical figures and fictional creations -- but there is inevitably a lowest common denominator: all are sufficiently strong-willed to hold center stage as grand passions and great events swirl around them.
This was enough of a theme for Jessye Norman, who gave an aria concert with the Orchestra of St.
Luke's at Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday evening.
Miss Norman called her program "Women of Legend, Fantasy and Lore," and Lincoln Center, which is eager to sell its programming as fresh and dynamic, sent the concert over the PBS airwaves as part of the "Live from Lincoln Center" series. (It is to be repeated on Channel 13 at 1 P.M. Sunday.)


Nizhny Novgorod Journal; Camelot on the Volga, With 2 Bold Antagonists
Outsiders often describe this special place led by a bold, idealistic Governor and his round table of young advisers, some Russian, others American, as a kind of free-market Camelot.
Nizhny Novgorod, 250 miles east of Moscow, is the model for Russian capitalism.
It is an internationally acclaimed experiment in privatization to which the best Russian and Western minds -- and the most American dollars -- have been applied.


Art in Review
Matthew Weinstein
Sonnabend Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through May 14
Threaded through many of Matthew Weinstein's recent paintings are verses from Arthur Rimbaud's hallucinatory poem "The Drunken Boat." Each letter has been clipped from a magazine, and the letters are pasted together to form thin, looping lines that enter from one corner of the canvas and exit from another, like a recitation that periodically becomes audible, then fades away.


Giuliani Says Council Undermines Labor Talks
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday accused City Council leaders of meddling in labor negotations on behalf of municipal unions by pushing through a bill to allow Council hearings on any plan to turn city services over to private companies.
But the Council Speaker, Peter F.  Vallone, rejected the Mayor's contention, saying that the bill would simply force the administration to disclose the ramifications of selling off city services.
It does not give the Council the power to stop such efforts, he said.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Greens Fine, Thank You  Andrew Magee could have been among those complaining about the greens in the first round of the Houston Open at the Woodlands yesterday.
He didn't because he was too busy making seven birdie putts in a round of 65 that gave him a one-shot lead over Bob Gilder and Dave Barr.
Dick Mast, Steve Elkington and Mike Heinen each finished strong to share fourth place with five-under-par 67s.
There were complaints about some of the greens, damaged weeks ago when a non-golf course herbicide got into the irrigation reservoir used to water them.
"The greens are great, huh?" Elkington asked.
"No, just kidding." But Magee couldn't knock the greens at the Woodlands' TPC course.
He two-putted from 30 feet for birdie on the first hole and nailed a 20-footer for birdie on No. 3. (AP)


Intel and Synoptics in Accord on New Products
The Intel Corporation and Synoptics Communications Inc. said today that they had a technology exchange and joint marketing agreement to introduce faster networking products.
The new products will offer a tenfold improvement in performance while maintaining compatibility with existing equipment based on the Ethernet system, the dominant technology used to link multiple personal computers across a network.


Sports of The Times; Long Night's Journey Into Day
IT wasn't merely 0-0 in OT; it was 0-0 in OOOOOOT, the third-longest 0-0 game in Stanley Cup hockey history.
Suddenly, at 8 minutes to 2 o'clock here Thursday morning, after 5 minutes 43 seconds of the fourth overtime period, after 65 minutes 43 seconds of overtime, after 125 minutes 43 seconds of shots and saves altogether, after 6 hours and 12 minutes since the game started, Martin Brodeur, the New Jersey Devils' rookie goaltender, was sprawled on the ice as Dave Hannan of the Buffalo Sabres swatted a backhand shot high into the net.


Disney Puts One Executive Over Its 3 Film Operations
The Walt Disney Studios, which has long had one of Hollywood's most stable management teams, was thrown into turmoil today with the promotion of David Hoberman, the president of Disney's Touchstone Pictures unit, to a new job in charge of all motion pictures produced by Disney.
The appointment includes responsibility for pictures made by all three arms of the Walt Disney Company's principal movie-making operation: Touchstone, Hollywood Pictures and Walt Disney Pictures.
It also signaled a shift from the kinds of films Disney has released in recent years.


The Curious Flood of Praise for Richard Nixon; A New Record
To the Editor:
Whatever else might be said about the passing of Richard Nixon, it marks an end to the longest period in American history -- about 15 months -- that there have been six living Presidents.
The previous record lasted from the March 4, 1861, inauguration of Abraham Lincoln until the death of John Tyler on Jan. 18, 1862, with former Presidents Van Buren, Fillmore, Pierce and Buchanan still living.


Art in Review
Philip Taaffe  Gagosian Gallery 136 Wooster Street SoHo Through May 14
Philip Taaffe continues to be one of the best painters working today.
Unlike many of his colleagues, he has assiduously extended both the physical discipline, or craft, of his medium, and its meanings, and he has done so by straying selectively beyond painting's borders.


Another Chance for Rape Justice
A New York State gang-rape case in which the accused got off with wrist slaps in an evasion of proper justice is apparently headed for reconsideration.
That is welcome news indeed -- but what of the prohibition against subjecting defendants to double jeopardy?
The case began two years ago in a restaurant in the town of Gouverneur, in St.
Lawrence County near the Canadian border.
A 26-year-old woman who had passed out from alcohol was sexually attacked by five male acquaintances.
The defendants, indicted for first-degree rape in the County Court, were instead allowed to plead guilty to sexual misconduct, a misdemeanor, before a Town Court justice, who imposed $840 fines but no jail time.
The County Court then dismissed the more serious indictment it was considering.


Russia and Syria Sign Military Agreement
As part of a campaign to revive old friendships with the Arabs and buttress its role as co-sponsor of the Middle East peace effort, Russia has signed a military and technical cooperation agreement with Syria, believed to be the first of its kind since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
The two countries also signed protocols for expanding trade and economic and scientific cooperation, reports from Damascus said today.


Sports of The Times; A Standout's Chance To Be Outstanding
THE first thing you notice about Craig MacTavish on the ice is the shaggy brown curls, gliding amid all the shiny helmets, Clint Eastwood in a latter-day western called "The Last of the Bare Heads."
The next thing you notice about Craig MacTavish in a hockey game is the utter discipline.
He does not make a move he does not mean, which allows him, at the age of 35, to play both ends of the rink.
There have been recent years in the Ancient Mariner saga of the Rangers when there was no one person who was experienced and big and unselfish and talented and a trifle mean, all at the same time.


On My Mind; Only In America
Shortly after Richard Nixon chose to resign the Presidency rather than be thrown out, an Iranian general and a French Ambassador asked me whatever was going on in the United States.
The general served in the court of an Emperor who had just told me that he ruled not by ordinary, generalized divine right but by specific divine decision conveyed to him by a heavenly messenger.
The Ambassador served a President to whom political messages were conveyed only by voters, or, between elections, by farmers demonstrating for higher cheese subsidies.


Macy Tries to Drive Wedge Between Bondholders
Employing the time-honored tactic of dividing and conquering, R. H. Macy &amp; Company has revised its proposed bankruptcy reorganization plan in such a way as to fracture its opposition, at least temporarily.
The company is trying to drive a wedge between Macy's senior bondholders and two other groups of bondholders by offering the senior class a juicier package of stock and warrants as part of a plan to repay creditors and get out of bankruptcy.


For Children
Mothers of Chinatown Tour
Chinatown History Museum  70 Mulberry Street, second floor  (212) 619-4785  Recommended ages: 8 and up  Sunday
The spirits of Chinatown mothers -- merchants' wives, schoolgirls, garment workers, labor organizers, war brides -- will be hovering as Vernon Takeshita, a historian and the tour guide for the Chinatown History Museum, takes participants through this slice of Manhattan a week before Mother's Day.
Mr.
Takeshita starts his program with a slide show describing the neighborhood's inception in the 1830's; he then leads a tour through Chinatown's skinny streets to cut free, metaphorically speaking, the maternal spirits.
Only then, as he tells several of their stories, can they describe their roles in Chinatown's 160-year history.
One example is a woman who, by tradition not allowed to go outside, sat at a tenement window and watched people visiting Transfiguration Church on Mott Street day after day.


Heat Stuns Hawks on Late Run
Heat 93, Hawks 88
Glen Rice got the screen he needed from John Salley, broke free across the lane and tipped in the biggest basket of the game, helping the Miami Heat post its first playoff victory in franchise history.


Cause Is Sought In Fatal Crash Of Airplane On Casino Trip
Emergency workers at Sikorsky Memorial Airport stood outside their firehouse Wednesday night and watched a small charter plane descend out of thick fog, speed by and disappear again before crashing into an embankment at the end of the runway and bursting into flames.
Tonight, Federal officials said they did not yet know whether fog played a role in the crash, which killed eight people and critically injured a ninth.
Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board found skid marks only 545 feet from the end of the 4,677-foot runway, suggesting that the plane nearly overshot the airport in attempting a landing.
But readings from the control panel in the burned-out cockpit, fragments of the pilot's records and witnesses' accounts of shifting weather conditions did not add up to an explanation, they said.


Israel and P.L.O. Hope to Sign Self-Rule Pact Next Wednesday
With only a handful of issues still in dispute, Israeli and Palestinian officials announced today that they hoped to sign a long-delayed agreement next Wednesday that would establish Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho.
Coming after seven months of intensive negotiations and nearly derailed by terrorist incidents, the agreement would be one of the first concrete steps toward Israel's relinquishing control of the occupied territories since it captured them in 1967.


Reviews/Film; A History of Bluegrass And Its Courtly Father
"High Lonesome: The Story of Bluegrass Music" is one of those enthralling documentaries that draw their heretofore-unexplored subject matter with supreme ease.
You need not have the slightest interest in bluegrass music to find this film a fascinating bit of Americana, a patchwork of historical, moral and cultural influences that conspired in creating an unusually pure American folk tradition.
Rachel Liebling, who makes this an exceptionally enterprising musical portrait, communicates vast, toe-tapping enthusiasm for her material.
She also displays prodigious research, as well as a deep understanding of the forces that conspired to create bluegrass.


Review/Film; Correcting the Correctors on a Politically Correct Campus
Politically correct thinking is the target of choice for satirists these days, and for good reason.
"Please note," writes James Finn Garner, after retelling the story of the Three Little Pigs in a slender new book called "Politically Correct Bedtime Stories": "The wolf in this story was a metaphorical construct. No actual wolves were harmed in the writing of the story."
As for the wolf in Little Red Riding Hood: "He burst into the house and ate Grandma, an entirely valid course of action for a carnivore such as himself. Then, unhampered by rigid, traditionalist notions of what was masculine or feminine, he put on Grandma's nightclothes and crawled into bed."


Excerpts From Statement by C.I.A. Officer Guilty in Spy Case
Following are excerpts from a statement made by Aldrich H. Ames and released by his lawyers after Mr.
Ames pleaded guilty today to espionage and tax evasion charges in Federal District Court:
I bitterly regret the catastrophe which my betrayal of trust has brought upon my wife and son and upon any who have loved or cared for me.
No punishment by this court can balance or ease the profound shame and guilt which I bear.


METRO DIGEST
BRATTON APOLOGIZES FOR DOUBTS ON RAPE
New York City Police Commissioner William J. Bratton publicly apologized for comments from someone in his department that raised doubts about a Brooklyn women's report that she had been raped.
Page 1.
TO COMPETE, NURSING HOMES DIVERSIFY
As a way of staying competitive with home care and the widening array of alternative services for the elderly, nursing homes in the New York area and around the country have begun offering programs and services that reach beyond the traditional, residential institutions that so many people now say they want to avoid in favor of aging at home.
Page 1.


South Africa, Reborn
What might have been a nightmare in South Africa turned into a peaceful festival of democracy.
Having waited 300 years to vote, millions of blacks shrugged off threats of extremists and waited for hours without complaint during an election week when their country was literally reborn.
On Wednesday, the old flag was struck and a new banner rose over a united South Africa whose first moments shine with hope.
"It's an incredible experience," said Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Nobel laureate, on casting his first vote -- "like falling in love." Linda Khaba, a local magistrate in Durban, reported that ballots delivered on an extra voting day had been able to reach remote rural areas.
"It's like the birth of a baby," she said, "problems, anxiety and joy." And all this was evident to millions of viewers watching the drama unwind on television.


Lorenzo Bianco Schlick, Dancer, 61
Lorenzo Bianco Schlick, a dancer whose stage name was Larry Bianco, died on March 16 at his home in Brooklyn.
He was 61.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Newspaper Guild Is Last of 12 Unions at The Times to Approve a Contract
Members of the New York Times unit of the Newspaper Guild of New York decisively approved a new contract with the newspaper yesterday that is to run through the year 2000, guild officials said last night.
With the ratification, The Times has secured contracts with all of its 12 unions through the end of the century.
All of the newspaper's union contracts now contain no-strike clauses.
The guild represents about 1,600 news, advertising, clerical, cafeteria and other employees.
When voting was completed last night, officials said 577 members had voted yes and 86 had voted no, with 3 abstentions.


Johnson Is a Frequent Flier at Sprint
If frequent flier miles were birdies, Trish Johnson would have a couple of legs up on the L.P.G.A.
Grand Slam by now.
As it is, Johnson has to settle for a mild case of jet lag and a one-stroke lead after two rounds of the $1.2 million Sprint Championship, the richest tournament in women's golf.
Johnson, the 28-year old British player who has made four transoceanic flights in the last five weeks, added a 68 to her first-round 67 today and stands at nine under par.
That is one stroke better than Michelle McGann, Kelly Robbins and Sherri Steinhauer, all of whom shot their second straight rounds of 68.
Four Birdies
With warm winds buffeting the rather tame 6,355-yard layout at Indigo Lakes, Johnson overpowered the par-five holes, birdieing all four of them, and managed to fight off the weird and weary state of mind that generally stalks a globe-trotting golfer like a bad caddie.


Q. &amp; A.
Retiring Abroad  Q. What are the economics of retiring to a foreign country as far as Medicare and Social Security are concerned?
GEORGE VAKKUR, Northampton, Mass.
A.
Medicare does not cover any health services outside the United States, except for a few cases involving Canada and Mexico.
For example, Medicare will pay for emergency care in a qualified Canadian or Mexican hospital for United States residents if it is more accessible than an American hospital.


Mr. Clinton's Risk in Macedonia
Greece is slowly strangling independent Macedonia's economy with a dangerously misguided blockade.
The collapsing economy, in turn, is generating explosive friction among Macedonia's diverse peoples, which could endanger the lives of 500 American peacekeepers dispatched to Macedonia to contain ethnic strife.
The risk should have moved President Clinton to press Greece to lift the blockade when he met with Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou last week.
Instead he reportedly bowed to the Greek-American lobby, well placed in Congress and the White House, and soft-pedaled his opposition to Athens's perverse policy.


Roll Over, Michael Jordan; Pippen's Bulls Triumph
Bulls 104, Cavaliers 96
Scottie Pippen scored 31 points and Scott Williams had 13 of his 21 points in the final quarter last night as the Chicago Bulls began their quest for a fourth straight National Basketball Association title by beating the visiting Cleveland Cavaliers, 104-96.


South African Voting Ends And Most Judge It Fair
South Africa's first democratic elections ended tonight after an extra day of balloting intended to overcome delays, ballot shortages and administrative confusion, particularly in remote rural areas.
Although some places continued to experience problems, there was consensus among the country's political leaders, international observers and analysts that the voting would be judged fair.


Pole Makes Hollywood Formula His Own
A new Polish movie, a fast-paced contemporary thriller brimming with blood and brutality, has set box-office records since opening here three weeks ago and appears to be establishing a new taste in Polish film making: flick entertainment instead of moody introspection.
Bluntly called "Dogs 2" -- the title comes from the colloquialism Poles use for the police -- the film meshed the story of a former Communist secret agent turned mafia gun-runner with some glances at the meaning of modern-day male bonding.


Review/Dance; City Ballet Celebrates 100th Season
The New York City Ballet has always managed to honor classical traditions while making choreographic innovations.
So it was appropriate that the company celebrated the opening of its 100th New York season on Thursday night at the New York State Theater with Peter Martins's production of "The Sleeping Beauty."
Mr.
Martins preserves much of Marius Petipa's traditional choreography of 1890, and even though David Mitchell includes such newfangled devices as slide projections, his magical scenery evokes the lavish stage spectacles upon which audiences doted a century ago.
But this is also a streamlined version.
Chunks of choreography have been cut, and the production zips by at a breakneck clip.


Corrections
The Funds Watch table in Your Money on April 9 included erroneous data from Morningstar Inc. on the first-quarter returns for five mutual funds that invest in adjustable-rate mortgages.
The correct return for the Pilgrim Adjustable Rate Securities Trust I is 0.61 percent; the Trans america Adjustable U.S.
Government Trust class A, 0.28 percent; the AIM Adjustable Rate Government fund, minus 0.03 percent; the Benham Adjustable Rate Government Securities Fund, 0.28 percent, and the Asset Management Adjustable Rate Mortgage Portfolio, 0.39 percent.
The table failed to include all dividend payments in March for these five funds.


Sales of New Homes Jumped by 11.1% in March
Encouraged by a buoyant economy and a snapback from poor weather, sales of new homes climbed 11.1 percent in March, to an annual pace of 739,000, the Government reported today.
The unexpectedly brisk sales, the highest since September, pushed inventories of unsold homes back under five months' worth, and suggested that the industry's activity would continue at a high level for some time, despite higher mortgage rates.


Armed Man Held at CBS
A 27-year-old New Jersey man was arrested yesterday outside the studios of CBS News in Manhattan with a small arsenal of handguns, knives and tear gas, the police said.
The police could not say why the man, Mathew Pante of Hackettstown, went to the studio wearing a military belt that held two 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistols and carrying a briefcase containing two handguns, three boxes of bullets, a hacksaw, a military knife, a switchblade and tear gas.
He was charged with several counts of illegal possession of weapons, the police said.


Stocks End 2-Day Drop After Fed Acts on Dollar
After a two-day decline, the stock market rose slightly yesterday in active trading, following the Federal Reserve's effort to prop up the dollar.
The dollar rally helped bond prices rebound somewhat from a steep early sell-off, and that in turn helped stock prices.


Russell Kirk Is Dead at 75; Seminal Conservative Author
Russell Kirk, who was the author of more than 30 books and hundreds of essays, reviews and syndicated columns and was a founder of the modern conservative movement in the United States, died yesterday at his home in Mecosta, Mich.
He was 75.
Dr. Kirk died of congestive heart failure, said his son-in-law, Jeffrey Nelson.


U.N. Military Aide Says Plight of Gorazde Is Exaggerated
After a weeklong review of the Bosnian Serb assault on Gorazde, a senior United Nations military officer here has concluded that reports by United Nations relief workers and others substantially exaggerated the fighting and casualties there.
The senior United Nations officer, who insisted on not being identified, said that damage to the Gorazde hospital and other buildings was not as great as had been suggested and that reports of 700 dead and up to 2,000 wounded were inflated with a view to stirring up international outrage.


Inquiry Finds Hospital Had 2 Categories
For the second time in six months, the State Health Department has found that a Manhattan hospital essentially ran two separate maternity wards, one for mothers with private insurance and the other for those covered by Medicaid or without insurance.
Saying he suspected that the problem may be even more widespread, the Health Commissioner, Dr.
Mark R. Chassin, said that investigations of two other hospitals are under way and that others may be initiated.
He said he hoped the investigations would serve as a warning to any hospital that might be providing different levels of care or accommodations to patients based on their type of insurance.


Many Doctors Don't Offer Their Workers Insurance
One in three doctors' offices does not provide health insurance for employees, the American Medical Association reported today.
In this respect, it said, doctors are like many other small businesses: they would incur additional costs if they were required to provide coverage for employees, as President Clinton and many other Democrats have proposed.


For 3 Penn Relay Winners, Speed Is Not All There Is
Competitive running is all about speed, but speed alone does not win.
You need the ability to focus your thoughts and not underestimate your opposition.
You need mental toughness.
And, as you grow older, you need to be smart, to know how to prepare a body that is not as supple and responsive as it once was.
For affirmation, consider today's performances in the 100th Penn Relays by winners in three major relay races -- the Arkansas men's distance medley team, Carole Zajac of the Villanova women's 6,000-meter team and Butch Reynolds of the Foot Locker team in the men's open distance medley.


Clinton Meets Indians, Citing a New Respect
President Clinton held a historic meeting today on the White House lawn with representatives of hundreds of American Indian and native Alaskan tribes to underscore their new stature in dealings with the Federal Government.
In becoming the first President to summon the leaders of all 547 federally recognized tribes, Mr.
Clinton issued a directive calling on his Administration to treat them with the same deference given to state governments.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7 EXODUS FROM RWANDA
More than 250,000 Rwandans were reported to be streaming into Tanzania to escape the mounting carnage in their country.
The United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, asked the Security Council to consider taking "forceful action" to end the massacres.  1


Gaza-Jericho Economic Accord Signed by Israel and Palestinians
Israel and the Palestinians signed a sweeping agreement today setting out the terms for economic relations between Israel and the lands coming under Palestinian self-rule while laying the groundwork for the future development of these poor areas.
Under the agreement, Palestinians in the West Bank town of Jericho and the Gaza Strip will be able to open their own banks, collect their own taxes and conduct their own exporting and importing -- including such vital goods as oil, which their neighboring Arab allies have promised to provide virtually at cost.


Korean Dish Auctioned For $3.1 Million
A 15th-century blue-and-white dish was auctioned late Wednesday for $3.1 million, a record for any porcelain object and for Korean art.
One of the earliest blue-and-white Korean porcelains, the rare vessel from the Chosen Dynasty was sold at Christie's in New York to an anonymous buyer.
The seller's name was also not disclosed.
Smaller than a dinner plate at eight inches in diameter, the dish is awash with blue peonies, vines and leaves inside a scrolled border.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.75
6.75
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.88
3.66
3.01
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.86
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.28
4.26
2.96
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.03
6.99
6.01
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.30
7.26
6.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.09
8.06
7.87
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.37
6.32
5.96
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Classical Music in Review
Hermann Prey  Baritone 92d Street Y
Schubert's "Schwanengesang" is a musical drama without plot or sustaining characters but a drama nonetheless.
The dreamy lover of "Liebesbotschaft" is not the apprehensive soldier of "Kriegers Ahnung." Whether or not either is the yearning suitor of "Fruhlingssensucht" and "Standchen" is not told to us.


CHRONICLE
HANNAH LOESSER was only 7 when her father, Frank Loesser, the composer and lyricist of Broadway shows like "Guys and Dolls," died, but she has vivid recollections of him constantly drawing, even in the midst of conversation.
In fact, she said the other day, "I remember him drawing even more than I remember him writing music."
On Thursday, the public will have the chance to see his artistry for the first time, in conjunction with that of his daughter, Hannah, now 31, who is a full-time artist.
The Williams Gallery in Princeton, N.J., is having a month-long show of their works.


Federated Plans to Buy Horne Chain
Federated Department Stores Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Joseph Horne Company, a financially troubled chain of 10 department stores in Pittsburgh and Erie, Pa., that had been seeking a buyer since January.
The deal would be the first addition to Federated's retail holdings, which include 220 stores in 26 states, since the company emerged from bankruptcy protection in 1992.


Uncontrolled Logging Disrupts South Pacific
To the Editor:
It is dismaying that there has been no coverage of the logging of rain forest resources in the Southwest Pacific countries of Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands.
As a result of exhausted resources elsewhere and continued legality of exporting raw logs, a logging boom has hit these countries with sudden ferocity and frightening speed.


When a Medical News Embargo Caused Harm
To the Editor:
"Early Report by ABC News Is Criticized" (news article, April 14), on the breaking of The New England Journal of Medicine's embargo prohibiting public reports of Journal articles earlier than 24 hours before publication, does not mention that the embargo is also enforced, with stringent sanctions, against the authors of articles appearing in The New England Journal.
In at least one instance, that application of the embargo was very harmful indeed.


L.I.R.R. and Critics Clash Over the Extent of Crime
Five months after a gunman opened fire in a crowded commuter train and killed six passengers, Long Island Rail Road officials clashed with critics today over the extent of crime on the railroad.
While railroad officials acknowledged at a public meeting that there were problems in the parking lots and the areas surrounding the stations, they said that their count of 289 felonies committed throughout the rail system last year was the lowest number in more than a decade and that car thefts had dropped substantially in the last year.


U.S. Changes Aim of S.&amp; L. Enforcement
Federal savings and loan regulators announced today a new enforcement policy that focuses on active institutions, rather than failed ones, ending another chapter in the effort to go after wrongdoers from the nation's costliest financial crisis.
The Office of Thrift Supervision, which is part of the Treasury Department, said the change in enforcement priorities stemmed from the improved financial condition of the industry.


Nursing Home Contract Needs a Close Reading
A nursing home resident lives under a kind of superlease, an admissions agreement that might govern everything from life-saving care to the dispensary's charge for a nail file.
And a growing thicket of state and Federal regulations has made these contracts ever more complicated.
So it is a shame, lawyers say, that so many residents sign without reading them.
"Most people going into nursing homes feel powerless," said Seth B. Goldsmith, a professor of health policy at the University of Massachusetts, a lawyer and author of "Choosing a Nursing Home" (Prentice Hall 1990).
"And most families are just glad to get somebody in, and they don't sit around and read contracts.


Push Turkey Toward Peace With Kurds
To the Editor:
"Tragedy in Turkey" (editorial, April 4) rightly calls to public attention a war against Kurdish insurgents of the P.K.K. that promises, if unaddressed, to degenerate into another United States foreign policy disaster.
You are correct: "America is necessarily involved." Unfortunately, the nature of that involvement is counterproductive to longer-range American interest in achieving security and stability in the region.


Rabbis Draw Up Ethics of Nonmarital Sex
In a report on sexual ethics, a commission of rabbis of the Conservative branch of Judaism has upheld marriage as the appropriate context for sexual intercourse but has nonetheless proposed a set of ethical standards for unmarried Jews who are sexually active.
"Rather than ignoring nonmarital sex, which people are engaged in anyway, we are trying to imbue it with Jewish moral and ethical values," said Rabbi Gerald Zelizer, president of the Rabbinical Assembly, which represents 1,500 Conservative rabbis.


Carlo Rossi Is Dead; Wine Promoter, 90
Carlo Rossi, who became a television and radio personality promoting the Gallo jug wines that were named for him, died on Wednesday in Modesto, Calif.
He was 90.
His family said he had been ill for a long time.


Warning To China On Trade
President Clinton has decided to designate China as one of the world's biggest pirates of American products, a step that could lead to new trade sanctions against Beijing by the end of the year, Administration officials said today.
The officials said Mr.
Clinton reached that decision after his top trade and economic advisers recommended unanimously this afternoon that he take steps to punish China for its pirating of American compact discs and computer software.


Bruins Bombard Roy and Oust Canadiens
Bruins 5, Canadiens 3
Patrick Roy had a bad game, and the Boston Bruins eliminated the defending Stanley Cup champion Montreal Canadiens with a 5-3 victory last night at the Boston Garden in Game 7 of their opening-round playoff series.


INSIDE
Inflated Toll in Gorazde
Far fewer people were killed in the assault on Gorazde than monitors reported, the United Nations command in Bosnia has concluded.
Page 3.
Knicks Beat Nets in Opener
The Knicks opened thier three-of-five-game N.B.A. playoff series against the Nets with a 91-80 victory at Madison Square Garden.
Page 31.


16 High Schools Marked For Remedial Measures
A day after announcing that he would take over six of New York City's worst-performing lower schools, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said yesterday that he was recommending remedial measures for 16 of the city's 160 high schools because of their academic failures.
Mr.
Cortines announced reform plans for two of the 16 earlier this year: Erasmus Academy in Brooklyn and James Monroe High School in the Bronx are to be phased out, beginning in September, and replaced by 10 small new high schools.
But Board of Education officials had not previously acknowledged the extent of the problems at most of the 14 other high schools, or outlined any strategy for change.


Pope 'Excellent' After Surgery to Replace Part of Thighbone
Pope John Paul II fell and fractured his thighbone as he climbed from his bathtub in the Vatican on Thursday night.
After a two-hour operation in Gemelli Hospital in Rome, in which surgeons inserted a metal replacement for part of the right thighbone, the papal spokesman, Joaquin Navarro-Valls, described the 73-year-old Pope as being in "excellent overall condition."


Review/Music; A Trenchant Tribute To Songs Of 50's Films
"An Affair to Remember," Mary Cleere Haran's touching and funny salute to movie songs of the 1950's at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), is more than simply the best-sung cabaret act of the year; it is also the wittiest.
You would have to search hard to find a more amusing and trenchant analysis of the iconography of 50's Hollywood movie songs than that in the commentary Ms.
Haran slips in between musical numbers in this show, which runs through May 28.
Ms.
Haran has always come down firmly on the side of a lighthearted romanticism, and woe to those who would rather wallow in tears and suds.
In her introduction to "With a Song in My Heart," Ms.
Haran chastises 1950's movies for their lack of humor and cites Susan Hayward as a star "who could not deliver a funny line if her life depended on it."


Curry Says He's Clean
DONALD CURRY, a two-time world boxing champion, has denied involvement after having been indicted by a Federal grand jury in Detroit on drug conspiracy charges.
The former Fort Worth fighter and two Detroit boxers, DARRELL CHAMBERS and WILLIAM LONGSTREET, were named in the indictment, which was unsealed Thursday.
"I don't know anything about this," the 32-year-old Curry said yesterday from his home in Arlington, Tex.
"I'm guilty by association. I've never had anything to do with drugs."


Despite E.R.A., Expos' Rueter Still Doesn't Know Defeat
Expos 3, Padres 1
Kirk Rueter became the first major league pitcher since Fernando Valenzuela in 1981 to start his career with a 10-0 record, leading the Montreal Expos past the San Diego Padres, 3-1, last night at Olympic Stadium.


One-Year Anniversary That Can't Be Ignored
It has been a year since Monica Seles, then the undisputed and too often unchallenged champion of women's tennis, was stabbed in the back at a tournament in Hamburg, Germany, by an insensible fan of Germany's Steffi Graf.
An unprecedented act of violence that sent shock waves through the tennis community and beyond, the attack has continued to have significant repercussions, not the least of which is Seles' refusal to make the speediest possible return to the WTA Tour.
Paranoia has not only become justified, it has also become protocol.
This week in Hamburg, it was Graf who received, and defied, a death threat -- but was never urged not to compete by her sport's governing body.


Japan's Stocks Shine in the Pacific Group
This year's winners and losers in the Pacific stock fund group split along a clean line: funds that own Japanese equities and funds that don't.
Japanese stocks roared through the 1980's and collapsed in 1991, finally reviving in the first quarter of this year.
Stocks traded on the Southeast Asian markets sizzled in 1993 because of the red-hot performance of the Hong Kong market, only to begin a dizzying downward spiral in 1994.


Belgrade Journal; Tito Lives Again but Like Ex-Nation, Is Bewildered
Tito, long the absolute ruler of Yugoslavia, strides forth, resplendent in his marshal's uniform, surrounded by a generally bedraggled throng, some offering flowers, others spitting in disdain.
A Serbian woman approaches and points a finger.
"I cried when you died, and then I regretted my tears," she said.
"But now if you really would return, I suppose I would vote for you."


Night Flight Ends In Sudden Death; Victims Were on a Day Trip
This was not a high roller's casino junket, with stretch limousines at the curb and meals on the house.
For Edwin B. Glovaski, a 76-year-old retired cost accountant at Bullard's Casting in Bridgeport, $50 was enough to have a good time playing the slot machines.
His wife, Regina, 71, loved their little monthly trips for their novelty, and because flying so was much faster than the buses they used to take.
"He told me, 'You don't need $500,' " said Noberto Olivera, a 63-year-old neighbor whom the Glovaskis tried to enlist this week for what would prove to be their last trip.
" 'You take a couple of hundred and we'll have fun down there.' "I said no," Mr. Olivera said. "If I go with you I need at least $500 in my pocket." Couple and Son Died
The Glovaskis and their 45-year-old son, Thomas, were among the eight people killed on Wednesday night when their small charter plane crashed and burned while landing in fog at Sikorsky Airport in Stratford, Conn., under circumstances still being investigated.
One passenger, Paul Hagopian, 37, of Mystic, survived and is being treated for burns at Bridgeport Hospital.


Alabama's Boat Law
Reports on the dangers of recreational boating have been a staple of American journalism for a couple of decades.
The fatality statistics strike an appalling contrast to the aura of freedom and adventure conjured by the sight of a motorboat zipping across spacious seas.
The problem is that the seas, lakes and rivers of the United States are not as uncrowded as they were in the 1950's, when the boating boom began and millions of Americans became boat owners.
At the same time, the power of marine engines and the speed of most boats increased dramatically.
Not too long ago, 30 miles per hour was a fast speed for a skiing or fishing vessel.
Now many of these boats hit 50 to 70 miles per hour.


Metropolitan Soap Opera: Knicks Take Episode 1
The Knicks opened the playoffs with a victory last night, and Charles Smith won over some critics in the process.
Scoring 11 of his 17 points in the decisive fourth quarter, Smith helped lift the Knicks to a 91-80 victory over the Nets in Game 1 of their three-of-five-game playoff series at Madison Square Garden.
After a regular season in which he was booed by home fans and hampered by a sore left knee that required arthroscopic surgery, Smith vowed that the playoffs would be different.
In this game, he delivered.


Federated Details Proposal to Merge With Macy
Ending four months of rampant speculation, Federated Department Stores Inc. disclosed its proposal yesterday for merging with its rival retailer, R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
Federated's proposal for getting Macy out of bankruptcy values Macy at $3.51 billion, far more than it had previously indicated it would be willing to pay.
The higher value seems to show the company's determination to acquire Macy and become one of the largest department store operators in the country.


A Prenuptial Agreement Protects a Business
Steven M. Artsis, 44, three times married and divorced, hasn't had much luck in love.
But his personal life has made him a wiser businessman.
After a difficult second divorce disrupted his small business, the New York City entrepreneur asked his third wife to sign a prenuptial agreement protecting his business interests.


Pope Rests in Clinic After Thigh Surgery
Pope John Paul II underwent a two-hour bone replacement operation in Rome after falling and fracturing his right thigh as he climbed out of his bathtub.
Vatican officials said the Pope, 73, was in "excellent" condition but would probably remain in the hospital for three to four weeks.


CHRONICLE
JOHN MELLENCAMP, the rock singer, and his wife, ELAINE IRWIN, have a son, born Wednesday night at Bloomington Hospital in Bloomington, Ind., The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The baby, who weighed a healthy 9 pounds 4 1/2 ounces, has been named HUD J. MELLENCAMP.


Giuliani Puts Off Plan to Merge Ambulances With Firefighters
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has for now dropped plans to merge the Emergency Medical Service with the Fire Department, one of his administration's efforts to streamline New York City government, in part because the city would lose reimbursements from the state.
But the Mayor said he was still pursuing a plan to merge the administration of the city's Police Department, the transit police and the housing police, and hoped to include it in his executive budget for the fiscal year that begins on July 1.


Prosecution Claims Records Prove Rifkin Is Not Insane
Joel Rifkin, who has confessed to killing 17 women, was an honor student in high school, made the dean's list in college and scored in the superior category on intelligence tests, according to evidence presented today by the prosecution in his murder trial.
Fred Klein, the prosecutor, also produced reports by a Nassau County jail psychiatrist indicating that since Mr.
Rifkin's arrest on June 28 in the slaying of Tiffany Bresciani, 22, of Manhattan, he has not been psychotic, appeared able to discern his situation without emotion and has occupied himself with his legal defense.


When the Corruption Is Academic
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, wants to take over at least six lower schools that are not fulfilling their duty of educating students, and take strong remedial action at 16 high schools.
His dramatic move is just the right medicine for the city's most egregiously failing schools.
The Chancellor will seek additional authority from the State Legislature to make such intervention stick against potential legal attacks.
He deserves a positive response from all legislators determined to root out chronic, inexcusable failure to provide decent education to vulnerable youngsters.


Internet Commercials Are O.K., but Be Polite
To the Editor:
The problem with Laurence Canter's advertisement over the Internet (Business Day, April 19) was not that he used the Internet for commercial purposes.
Commercial usage is legal.
The real problem is that he posted his message to thousands of news groups unrelated to the topic.


Bridge
There are times when a bridge expert, like a conjurer, provokes the spectator to ask himself: "How did he do that?" An example is the diagramed deal, which contributed to the defeat of the defending champions in the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in Cincinnati in March.


Russian Nationalism Vexes Ukraine Politics
To the Editor:
In "Ukraine's Unsettling Vote" (editorial, April 19) you write that 16 million ethnic Russians live in Ukraine.
According to the latest census, in 1989, that figure is closer to 11 million.
You also underscore greater support given nationalist candidates in western Ukrainian rural constituencies, when election results do not show significant differences.


CHRONICLE
It's not always easy to convince music industry executives to go out and hear music.
"The music industry is as jaded as you can get," said TOM FRESTON, chairman and chief executive of the MTV Networks.
The industry -- including such executives as Clive Davis, Ahmet Ertegun, Tommy Mottola and Clarence Avant -- is to turn out in force on Monday to hear ERIC CLAPTON at Avery Fisher Hall.
The 2,700 tickets for the show, which cost from $750 to $3,500, are sold out.
The event benefits the T. J. Martell Foundation, founded by Tony Martell after the death of his 19-year-old son from leukemia in 1973.
Mr.
Martell is the executive vice president of Epic Records.
The foundation now supports research in leukemia, cancer and AIDS.


A Brown Seeks Her Own Political Identity
Kathleen Brown was in tears.
In a few hours she would announce her candidacy for governor of California, and her brother, Jerry, a former governor himself, had told her that he would not join dozens of other family members at her speech in San Francisco.
Mr.
Brown resented being trotted before the cameras when his father was Governor and was not about to play a prop again for his younger sister.
"I've got my own ideas on how you do these things," he said.
"Maybe a little of the schmaltz is all right. But that's not the way I would have done it."


Hudson Shad Festival
Shad from the Hudson River, in baked, pickled or fish-cake form, will be among the offerings at the annual Hudson River Festival and Shad Bake in Rockland County today at the Charles A.M.E.
Zion Church, 127 Valentine Avenue (Route 340), Sparkill, N.Y.
There will also be live entertainment, a crafts display and an aquarium with local fish.
Hours are noon to 4 P.M.; admission is free.
Information: (914) 359-0316 or (914) 359-4530.


Benefit Concert for Guitarist
Grover Washington Jr., Bob James, Steve Gadd and Larry Coryell are among the jazz musicians who are to take part in a benefit concert for the guitarist Eric Gale at 8 P.M. on May 7 at Zanzibar, 73 Eighth Avenue, at 14th Street, East Village.
Mr.
Gale has cancer, and proceeds from the concert are to go toward his medical expenses.
There is a suggested contribution of $25.
Information: (212) 924-9755.


Kidder Trader Wants Funds Freed
Until yesterday, Joseph Jett, the Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company bond trader who earned a $9 million bonus last year, was having trouble hiring a lawyer.
The reason: his millions were deposited in Kidder accounts and the firm had frozen them after he was dismissed two weeks ago amid accusations of fraudulent trades.
Kidder had filed a $10 million arbitration claim against Mr.
Jett, and the firm's executives said they wanted to conserve his funds so they could recover his bonus, salary and other expenses.


As Competition Expands, Nursing Homes Diversify
From the corner outside his apartment on 51st Street in Borough Park, Brooklyn, Anthony Nardi can see patients from the Metropolitan Jewish Geriatric Center's nursing home one block away, sitting outside in their wheelchairs, their creased faces turned toward the warm noon sun.
That single-block distance pleases him immensely: he, too, is a patient of Metropolitan, having suffered two heart attacks and a stroke that left him weak beyond his 62 years -- but he is served by the staff in his home.


Franklin B. Dryden, Tobacco Lobbyist, 78
Franklin B. Dryden, a leading lobbyist and public relations executive for the tobacco industry in Washington for 14 years, died on Thursday at the Manor Care Nursing Center in Arlington, Va.
He was 78.
The cause was respiratory failure, said his son, Steven Dryden.


S.I. Man Dies After Injury In Struggle With an Officer
A 23-year-old Staten Island man died late yesterday after suffering a head injury during a struggle with a police officer in the Clifton neighborhood, the police said.
Details of the incident were sketchy early this morning, but some neighborhood residents said that the man, identified as Ernest Sayon, was beaten by officers.
Scores of residents marched through the streets of the neighborhood and around the 120th Precinct station house, chanting and yelling.


MANDELA SPEAKS OF RECONCILIATION
As the elections that will almost certainly elevate him to the presidency stuttered to a fitful conclusion today, Nelson Mandela laid out a vision of his government as a grand negotiating forum in which every party will have a voice, past crimes will be forgiven and the power of the majority will rarely be used.
Rather than a dramatic break with the past, or a frantic first 100 days of presidential activism, Mr.
Mandela said in interviews over two days, the first themes of his new presidency would be reconciliation and consensus.


Edison Unnerved as Cable Falls Near a Gas Transmission Main
An overhead electrical line, crackling and burning, fell near a gas pipeline early Thursday, rekindling memories of the natural-gas main explosion here five weeks ago and creating a new round of safety jitters in City Hall.
The downed 13,000-volt electrical line, in a secluded area in southeastern Edison, burned a 2 1/2-foot-deep hole in the ground, reaching within two feet of a gas transmission line, before the electricity was turned off, Mayor George A. Spadoro said today.


Bicycle Messengers Mark the Death of a Compatriot


Court Splits Injury Cases
A Federal judge in Hauppauge, L.I., has told plaintiffs' lawyers that there is no basis for making New York courts the focal point of complaints related to hand, wrist and arm injuries suffered by office and retail workers around the country.
Responding to a series of motions from some of the 100 manufacturers and distributors of keyboards, checkout scanners and similar equipment cited in the suits for repetitive stress injuries, Judge Denis R. Hurley sent cases consolidated in the Brooklyn court of the Eastern District of New York back to the states in which individual plaintiffs live.
The opinion outlining the April 20 decision has just begun reaching the parties.


N. C. Kiefer; Health Official Is Dead at 89
Dr.
Norvin C. Kiefer, a Federal public health official and chief medical director of the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States in New York, died on April 18 at North Bay Medical Center in New Port Richey, Fla.
He was 89 and lived in New Port Richey, where he retired from the Bronx in 1989.
He was born in Lorain, Ohio.
He graduated from Western Reserve University and received his M.D. from the University of Michigan.
He also held a master's degree in public health from Johns Hopkins University.


Classical Music in Review
Laurel Ann Maurer  Flutist Weill Recital Hall
Aaron Copland was well beyond his prairie-music days when he wrote his Duo for Flute and Piano in 1971, but when he completed the folksy, lyrical piece, he said that the nature of the flute militated against any other approach.
Others have disagreed: Luciano Berio and Elliott Carter have written more acidic works that have found their way into the repertory.
Still, in her recital of contemporary American flute music on Tuesday evening, Laurel Ann Maurer presented Copland's case, using the Duo and recent, relatively like-minded works by Meyer Kupferman, Augusta Read Thomas, Joan Tower and Ellen Taaffe Zwilich.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Coast Guard policy toward civilian employees who are gay described Pentagon regulations incompletely.
The regulations allow homosexuals to serve in the military as long as they do not engage in homosexual conduct and do not disclose their sexual orientation.


Joseph Lopez Jr., 15, Co-Author Of Book on Coping With Illness
Joseph Luis Lopez Jr., a co-author of "I Will Sing Life: Voices From the Hole in the Wall," an award-winning book by and about children with life-threatening medical problems, died on Thursday at his family home in Jersey City, N.J.
He was 15.
He died of AIDS after being in a coma for two weeks, said his stepmother, Susan Lopez.
The youth liked to call himself Joe Louis Lopez, after the boxer Joe Louis.


Observer; Cleopatra Cat
The Editor begs me not to do this, but I will do it anyhow.
I will give the facts to thousands of readers who have written in: I will tell them who mehitabel was.
The Editor expostulated vigorously on my decision.
"In the first place," he expostulated, "those weren't thousands of readers who wrote asking who mehitabel was. They weren't even tens of readers."


A Quick Recompense For MetroCard Error
To the Editor:
Regarding "Used Incorrectly, Cards Bill Subway Riders Double Fare" (news article, April 22): I may have been the first MetroCard user to be charged a double fare when using the new MetroCard at Rockefeller Center, which was one of the first sites to get them in February.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Purchased the contract of Dave Otto, pitcher, from Iowa of the American Association.
Placed Blaise Ilsley, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to April 27.


Bratton Says Police Were Wrong to Air Doubt in Rape Case
New York City's Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, publicly apologized yesterday for comments from someone in his department raising doubts about a Brooklyn woman's report that she had been raped.
Mr.
Bratton made the apology amid a growing controversy over the department's handling of the case, a controversy that raised the sensitive subject of police treatment of rape victims.


U.S. Enters Currency Market To Prop Up Tumbling Dollar
The Clinton Administration intervened in foreign exchange markets today to prop up a sagging dollar and faltering investor confidence that was already pushing interest rates higher at home.
The Federal Reserve, acting for the Administration, bought dollars and sold yen as the dollar tumbled to near its lowest point against the Japanese currency since World War II.
It also sold marks for dollars as the American currency seemed to accelerate its slide against the German currency.
The dollar stabilized quickly against the yen and the mark after the intervention.


Review/Music; A Schoenberg Biography by Piano
Listening to Marilyn Nonken negotiate the entire piano literature of Arnold Schoenberg at Christ and St.
Stephen's Church on Wednesday night was to engage in a chronological drama, part heroic adventure and part tragedy.
The repertory is small and relatively brief; Schoenberg lived 20 more years after the final two Piano Pieces (Op. 33) were written in the late 1920's and early 30's.
As in the case of Beethoven's sonatas, however, the piano has written a composer's biography: the Brahms-infatuated Three Pieces of 1894, the post-tonal explorations of the Three Piano Pieces (Op. 11) and Six Little Pieces (Op. 19); the fully fledged 12-tone works of Opus 23 and Opus 25, then Opus 33, and finally from the keyboard, silence.


Mexican Official Accused of Ignoring Reforms
In the first test of recent electoral reforms intended to separate the Mexican Government from the ruling political party, a powerful Cabinet member has been accused of using public funds to support the party's presidential candidate.
The Cabinet member, Carlos Hank Gonzalez, is one of the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party's hard-liners.
The controversy opens a window on the current condition of the PRI, showing how the old guard, represented by Mr.
Hank, may be maneuvering for influence with the party's dominant modern wing, represented by Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, its presidential candidate.


Collins Says Youngsters Are No Replacements
Before the former Giants cornerback Mark Collins caught a plane to Kansas City this week, he thanked his former team for all the good times.
He then pulled out a cannon and proceeded to blast away.
Some of the poor people caught on his radar screen were members of the Giants' secondary, which had suddenly become a lot younger with Collins's departure.
Collins was asked if young players like Phillipi Sparks, who is now the probable starter at left cornerback, and Corey Raymond, the probable starter at right, are ready to step into the spotlight.


23 Million People Found Living Where Air Particles Exceed Code
Nearly 23 million people in the United States live in areas where air pollution in the form of particles violates Federal standards, according to a report today by the American Lung Association.
The report also estimates that an additional 92 million people live in areas that do not meet the stricter air quality standard for particles that is now law in California.
The particles measured include dust and dirt and may also come from factory and utility smokestacks, vehicle exhaust systems and open burning.


The Joys of a Hateful Character
"Weep. Full weep. Cry. Laughter. Face crumbles. Weep. Giggle. Weep." Myra Carter was cataloguing, with some exasperation, the dizzying stage directions for the character she plays in Edward Albee's Pulitzer Prize-winning play "Three Tall Women." "I told Edward: 'It's just impossible to act this woman. To cry on cue and laugh on cue so quickly.' "
But cry and laugh she does, sometimes in the space of seconds, eight shows a week Off Broadway at the Promenade Theater in Manhattan, as she brings to life the domineering, senile nonagenarian known only by the letter A.


New Airport Keeps Denver Waiting Still
In what has become the sorest civic embarrassment here since the last Super Bowl drubbing of the football Broncos, the opening of the new Denver International Airport appears likely to be delayed a fourth time, a consequence of glitches in the baggage conveyor.
The $3.2 billion project, the first new airport to be built in the nation since Dallas-Fort Worth 20 years ago, is already eight months behind schedule and more than $1 billion over budget.


Ex-Top Judge Ends Rhode Island Appeal With a Guilty Plea
The former Chief Justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court, Thomas F. Fay, pleaded guilty today to charges that he assigned the court's legal work to a business partner, used the court's money to pay for personal expenses and obstructed justice by ordering his secretary to destroy financial records.
Mr.
Fay's guilty pleas ended an appeal of an earlier conviction.
He agreed to turn in his license to practice law and was given a five-year suspended sentence by Judge Mark A. Pfeiffer of Providence County Superior Court.


On Return, Gay Native Son Is Killed, And a Hometown Is Looking Inward
Two years ago, Paul Edward Steckman gave up his Manhattan apartment and moved back to this tiny town on the Youghiogheny River to care for his ailing mother, leaving behind the career he had nurtured over two decades in New York playing the piano at restaurants, hotels and piano bars.
Mr.
Steckman, then 44, moved into his mother's home, one block from the church where he used to play the organ -- and from the spot where he was beaten to death last month at 1:30 A.M. by a 17-year-old man who said that Mr.
Steckman had made sexual advances.


Hitting the Boards: Spring Break Ends for the Rangers
The Rangers probably won't dominate the Washington Capitals the way they did the Islanders.
But they still match up favorably against their second-round opponent in the four-of-seven-game series that begins Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.
The Rangers have an advantage because they haven't played since last Sunday, when they completed a four-game sweep of the Islanders.
The Capitals played Wednesday night, when they eliminated Pittsburgh in Game 6 of their series.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Graf Struggles but Wins  Top-ranked Steffi Graf dropped her second set of the year before defeating Magdalena Maleeva, 7-5, 3-6, 6-0, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Citizen Cup in Hamburg, Germany.
Graf's semifinal opponent will be third-seeded Jana Novotna, who beat Barbara Rittner, 6-2, 6-2.
Second-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario defeated Leila Meskhi, 6-2, 7-6 (7-3), and will face Sabine Hack, a 6-3, 6-3 winner over Anke Huber. (AP) Washington Beats Agassi: MaliVai Washington beat Andre Agassi, 6-4, 7-5, last night to reach the semifinals of the $300,000 AT&amp;T Challenge in Duluth, Ga.
An all-United States semifinal round had already been assured earlier when top-seeded Michael Chang, No. 2 Todd Martin and qualifier Wade McGuire all advanced with victories over Swedish opponents. (AP) Stich Advances: Michael Stich, ranked second in the world, reached the semifinals of the BMW Open in Munich, Germany, by battling past Wayne Ferreira, 6-4, 6-7 (3-7), 7-6 (7-1).
Stich next faces Andrei Chesnokov, who beat David Rikl, 6-3, 7-6 (7-1).
In the other semifinal, Petr Korda faces Bernd Karbacher. (AP) Edberg Loses: Unseeded Jaime Yzaga beat top-seeded Stefan Edberg, 6-4, 6-2, in the quarterfinals of the Madrid Open, ending the Swede's string of 15 straight-set victories over the last two years in the tournament. (AP) GOLF Kite on a Hot Streak  Tom Kite used a five-hole run of four birdies and an eagle en route to a seven-under 65 yesterday and held a two-shot lead over Mike Heinen after the second round of the Houston Open.
Kite was one-under through 11 holes when he birdied No. 12, eagled the 13th and birdied the next three holes to reach 11-under 133 after two trips around the Tournament Players Course at The Woodlands. (AP) HOCKEY Nordiques Help Russia  Andrei Kovalenko and Valery Kamensky of the Quebec Nordiques each scored a goal to lead Russia to a 4-1 victory over Austria yesterday in the world hockey championships in Alba di Canazei, Italy.
Kamensky leads the event with four goals.
Also yesterday, Finland defeated Norway, 5-1, and Italy routed Britain, 10-2.
The Austrians held Russia scoreless for the first 17 minutes 20 seconds until Aleksandr Smirnov scored.
Austria tied the score at 16:54 of the second period on a power play, but Russia went ahead again at 18:02 on a shot by Ilya Byakin of the Edmonton Oilers. (AP)


House Is Demolished In Explosion on S.I
A wood frame house exploded and collapsed early this morning on Staten Island, seriously injuring at least one person, the authorities said.
The explosion occurred about 12:20 A.M. at 125 Hallister Street in the southwest section of the borough, the authorities said.


COMPANY BRIEFS
EMC CORP., Hopkinton, Mass., a data storage and retrieval products concern, has received a $12 million order from MCI Communications Corp., for an information storage system.
FIRSTIER FINANCIAL INC., Omaha, signed a definitive agreement to acquire Cornerstone Bank Group, Council Buffs, Iowa.
Terms were not disclosed.


Polonia Sparkles To Rescue Yankees
Luis Polonia enjoyed himself immensely as he tossed a baseball with Melido Perez before the game and acted as if it was about to plunk anyone who walked near him.
He fooled several pedestrians with the old trick and laughed loudly every time he succeeded.
The fun never ended for Polonia tonight.
While Polonia did not tease the Oakland Athletics with any silly tricks once the game began, he aggravated them with his lethal bat and confounded them with his improving glove.
See Polonia slap one double, then another and then another.
See him save Jim Abbott three runs by swiping a probable homer with an amazing catch.
See him get caught off second base on a line out.
Well, nobody's perfect.


Ford Posts $904 Million Profit, Highest Since 1989
Rounding out a spate of positive financial news from the nation's auto industry, the Ford Motor Company today reported its best quarterly results since 1989, posting a first-quarter profit of $904 million, or $1.66 a share.
That sum, up 58 percent from a year earlier, reflected an extraordinary charge against earnings of $440 million from the sale of First Nationwide Bank, a savings and loan.
A year ago, Ford reported a first-quarter profit of $572 million, or $1.02 a share.
On Thursday, the General Motors Corporation posted a first-quarter profit of $853.7 million, or 81 cents a share, a 66 percent gain from a year earlier.
Last week, the Chrysler Corporation reported a record quarterly profit of $938 million, up 77 percent from a year earlier.
Big Gains in U.S.
Like the gains at Chrysler and G.M., Ford's improved results stemmed largely from higher United States automotive sales.
Ford also gained from a better performance overseas as well as from its financial services group, absent the First Nationwide write-off.
On April 14, Ford agreed to sell First Nationwide to First Madison Bank for $1.1 billion.


University Is Ordered to Consider Inquiry Into Cancer Studies
Federal health officials said yesterday that they had ordered the University of Pittsburgh to determine whether a formal inquiry should be made into possible misconduct by two scientists who had led the flawed breast cancer studies that changed the way the disease is treated.
Federal officials said an inquiry was needed because the two scientists, Dr.
Bernard Fisher and Dr.
Carol Redmond, had published a number of articles in medical journals after learning that data submitted to the study had been falsified by a Canadian researcher, and because they had not disclosed the facts to co-authors and editors of the journals.


Agassi Out of Cup
ANDRE AGASSI has decided not to play Davis Cup for the United States in the quarterfinals against the Netherlands in July so that he can focus on raising his world tennis ranking.
Agassi, ranked No. 20 after an injury-plagued 1993 and off-season wrist surgery, said he wants to concentrate on returning to the top 10.
"I don't want to be available," Agassi said yesterday during the AT&amp;T Challenge in Duluth, Ga.
"I will not come through just because other guys might say no. I've done that for too many years." TOM GULLIKSON, the first-year team captain, said earlier this month that he would hold a place on the team for Agassi if the 1992 Wimbledon champion was interested in playing.


Mets Nail Down A Late Victory
From the tips of their toes to their heads, the Mets were having trouble last night.
And then they got lucky and defeated the Dodgers, 6-4, at Shea.


THE FINE PRINT -- A periodic look behind the law; I.R.S. Chiefs Will Play Musical Cars to Beat Tax
"Anyone may so arrange his affairs that his taxes shall be as low as possible."
That maxim, written by Judge Learned Hand in a famous appeals court opinion 60 years ago, apparently applies to the tax authorities at the Internal Revenue Service as much as anyone else.


No Headline
"The Pope will heal. His hip won't be like God made it, but like a bioengineer made it. But he'll heal." -- DR.
GIANFRANCO FINESCHI.  [ 3:1. ]


Israelis Urge Syria to Show It Seeks Peace
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin gave Secretary of State Warren Christopher a peace plan today to take to Damascus and urged President Hafez al-Assad of Syria to take steps soon to show Israel's impatient public that he wants peace.
Mr.
Christopher is scheduled to fly to Damascus on Saturday with the new plan, which fleshes out suggestions that Mr.
Rabin made last week that call for dismantling Israeli settlements in the Golan Heights in exchange for a comprehensive peace with Syria.


Glanville Behind Wheel
JERRY GLANVILLE, the former National Football League coach, becomes a driver today and will start 22d in the ARCA Food World 500k stock-car race at Talladega (Ala.) Superspeedway.
The 52-year-old Glanville qualified for the 42-car field in time trials Thursday on a lap of 186.430 miles an hour. (AP)


Italian Financier Gets 8 Years
A financier associated with Italy's big Ferruzzi industrial group was convicted and sentenced late Thursday to eight years in prison in a case that dramatized for millions of Italians the maze of graft and corruption that enveloped the country's business and political leadership in recent years.
In passing sentence on the defendant, Sergio Cusani, a panel of three judges in Milan added one year to the seven-year sentence asked by the prosecutor.
The court also imposed a $10,000 fine and ordered Mr.
Cusani to pay damages totaling $91 million to two companies of Ferruzzi, which collapsed in 1992.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The Clinton Administration intervened in foreign exchange markets to prop up a sagging dollar and faltering investor confidence that was already pushing interest rates higher in the U.S.
The Federal Reserve, acting for the Administration, bought dollars and sold yen as the dollar tumbled close to its lowest level against the Japanese currency since World War II.  [ Page 1. ]


U.N. COUNCIL URGED TO WEIGH ACTION ON SAVING RWANDA
As more than 250,000 Rwandan refugees were reported streaming into Tanzania to escape the mounting carnage in their country, the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, asked the Security Council today to consider taking "forceful action" to "restore law and order and end the massacres."
In a letter to the Council, the Secretary General, who in the past has personally supported deploying a large United Nations force in Rwanda to crush the violence, told members that the reduced peacekeeping force of some 450 soldiers currently left in the capital, Kigali, "is unable to bring the massacres under control."


Review/Music; The Blues, As Explored In Texas
Doyle Bramhall knows his Texas blues guitarists.
He worked with Stevie Ray Vaughan, and wrote songs for and with him, before Vaughan started Double Trouble; he also influenced the way Vaughan sang.
Now, he leads a four-man group with two impressive guitarists, Robin Syler and Zonder Kennedy, while he sings from behind his drum kit.
On Wednesday night, Mr.
Bramhall treated Tramps like a roadhouse, playing a leisurely two-hour set of shuffles, slow blues, and just a few rhythm-and-blues songs to break the 12-bar routine.
He didn't try to break any genre boundaries, just to fill the old forms with life, mixing songs from blues masters (Muddy Waters, John Lee Hooker) with his own material, including a handful from Vaughan's repertory, notably "Change It."


Sports of The Times; Mason: Caught On Radar
HIS name is Rich Anderson, but he was more commonly known as Radar.
This was 1983, a year when New York City had more great high school guards than possibly any time before or after.
Mark Jackson attended Bishop Loughlin; Kenny Smith starred at Archbishop Molloy; Dwayne (Pearl) Washington was at Boys &amp; Girls; Ed Davender played at Alexander Hamilton, and Kenny Hutchinson sparkled at Martin Luther King.


Officers Who Rejected Bribe Are Hailed
After weeks in which officers have been whisked away in handcuffs, and "testi-lying," the police slang for perjury, has been added to New York City's vocabulary, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday brought five officers to City Hall and honored them as heroes -- for refusing to take a bribe.
With television cameras whirring and the officers and their commander from the 34th Precinct arrayed behind him, Mr.
Giuliani praised the men for refusing a bag filled with $254,564 in cash Thursday night from a driver they stopped for running a red light in Washington Heights.


Short Positions Suggest Market Rally to Some
"DON'T sell it short" is a gentle way of suggesting that something is not a stinker.
The term, of course, comes from a "short sale," the unsporting method of betting a stock price will fall.
The data on short sales have long been used as a measure of bearish market sentiment.
It was the hottest of indicators in the 1960's and 1970's, but fell into disuse in the 1980's with the onset of other, even more esoteric, gauges.


Public &amp; Private; Second-Stage Smoke
The day the leaders of the tobacco companies came to testify before Congress, you could have shot a cannonball across the long table where they sat and not hit a candid character.
One by one they temporized, fudged and waffled about two simple facts that everyone knows to be true: that cigarettes are addictive, and that they cause mortal illness.
The only people in the United States who still deny this are the ones whose paychecks carry the imprints of the cigarette manufacturers.
And even they say they wouldn't want their own kids to smoke.
That's what the top guys at the big seven tobacco companies said when they appeared recently before the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Health and the Environment.
They wouldn't want their own sons and daughters to do it.
They were simply in the business of selling the stuff to other people's sons and daughters.


30th Precinct Is Helping the Community
To the Editor:
The children, residents, staff and management of Hamilton Heights Apartments, at 135 Hamilton Place at 143d Street and Amsterdam, and 500 West 144th Street, would like you to know about the good work being done by the Community Patrol Officer Program (CPOP) team at the 30th Precinct, which has come in for bad publicity recently with police-corruption charges.


Art Imitates Life in the Hudson River


Dr. Barbara Liskin; Psychiatrist Was 41
Dr.
Barbara Ann Liskin, a specialist in psychiatry for adolescents and young adults who was long associated with Columbia University, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
She was 41 and lived in Ridgefield, N.J, where she had a private practice.
The cause was breast cancer, her family said.


Classical Music in Review
Riverside Symphony  Alice Tully Hall
The Riverside Symphony aims for a judicious balance of contemporary works, lesser-known pieces by well-known composers and the established favorites.
Wednesday's program achieved exactly that, bringing together Stephen Hartke's Symphony No. 2, Prokofiev's Fifth Piano Concerto and Mozart's "Jupiter" Symphony.
The Hartke symphony wanders unpromisingly into mildly dissonant, mid-century idiom early on, but its principal lyric material is quite distinctive, and the third movement gathers a powerful mood of elegiac intensity.
At first, the work seems to come to rest on a plush, Howard Hanson-like chord, but the solo cello then plays a long, descending figure that erases (in the composer's phrase) notes of the chord one by one, leaving a telltale silence in its wake.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the mood in Belgrade misidentified Slobodan Milosevic.
He is the President of the Serbian republic, not the Yugoslav federation, which also includes the republic of Montenegro.


Seizing The Bullets In Drug War
ON the streets of the city, they are more common than dog droppings, lying by curbs and in doorways like seashells at low tide or, more appropriately, spent cartridges on a battleground.
Clear plastic inch-long crack vials have become part of the urban landscape, twinkling for the downcast as they search for discarded diamonds or avert eye contact with the unknown and therefore suspect.
In 10 minutes along Columbus Avenue, 25 were found.
Along Riverside Drive they lay plentifully next to seed casings.
There are thousands on Christie Street, dull capsules with highs consumed before the winter's snows and others as fresh and shiny as yesterday's dawn.
Their colorful uncapped lids lying nearby resemble pegs from a toddlers busy box, but children do not collect the vials and caps as they once gathered bottle tops or cigar bands.
Perhaps there are too many, or maybe they are rightly seen as threatening.


Trial Starts in Killing of Cyclist in Prospect Park
Nearly a year after a drama teacher was shot to death in Prospect Park in Brooklyn, a teen-ager went on trial on murder charges yesterday, accused of firing the fatal shots after the victim refused to surrender his bicycle to a group of youths.
The killing of 42-year-old Allyn Winslow shattered a brilliant, sun-bathed spring afternoon in one of the city's largest and most popular parks and led the police to intensify patrols amid its sprawl of meadows, woods and lakes.
Although the police said violent crime in Prospect Park had traditionally been low, they took the action to allay concerns that had been sparked by the killing last June 1 and by a series of other crimes in and near the park shortly before.


Giuliani Extends Deadline for Workers' Severance Plan
As a last-minute surge of municipal workers accepted voluntary severance packages to leave New York City's payroll, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani announced unexpectedly yesterday that he would extend the severance offers until the middle of next week.
The Mayor said he extended the offer to have more time to push the number of takers over his target of 7,600 workers, adding that he was now "remarkably close" to that goal.


8 of 10 Largest U.S. Papers Have Declines in Circulation
Many of the country's largest newspapers have seen significant daily circulation declines, according to figures released this week.
Of the country's 10 largest newspapers, there were declines in daily circulation at 8, including The New York Times, USA Today and The Washington Post.


Weakness in the Dollar Depresses Bond Prices
Treasury prices fell yesterday, but ended above their lows, as the weakening dollar continued to put downward pressure on bonds.
The dollar fell close to a record low against the Japanese yen early yesterday, and bond prices quickly followed the dollar down.
But in midmorning, the Federal Reserve intervened in the currency markets and bid up the dollar against the yen and the German mark.
That helped the bond market rebound somewhat.


Officials Focus on Weather in Crash Inquiry
Federal investigators said today they were focusing on the weather as a factor in the crash of a charter plane at Sikorsky Memorial Airport on Wednesday that killed eight people.
The officials also said they had no evidence that the pilot, 33-year-old Brian Darcy of West Hartford, was attempting an instrument-aided landing.
Mr.
Darcy had filed an instrument-aided flight plan before taking off from Atlantic City, they said, but had never informed a control tower that he was activating it.


McNall Resigns Post
BRUCE McNALL, under investigation by a Federal grand jury, resigned yesterday as chairman of the National Hockey League board of governors, citing personal reasons.
McNall, owner of the Los Angeles Kings, was scheduled to complete his two-year term in June.


Nicholls Couldn't Hide Rib Injury From Sabres
The urgent secrecy of playoff medicine being what it is, the Devils made a simple enough mistake when they maintained that Bernie Nicholls missed three games of the playoff series with the Buffalo Sabres because of a knee injury.
When the stakes are this high, it is easy enough to mistake a bad knee for torn rib cartilage.
Not that the strategic mistake mattered.


Sanders, a Free Agent, Could Leave Falcons
The Atlanta Falcons have made DEION SANDERS an unrestricted free agent, perhaps ending the two-sport star's year-round Atlanta residency.
The Falcons rescinded Sanders's status as a transition player yesterday.
He can now sign with any other National Football League team.
"We want to keep talking, trying to find a way," said TAYLOR SMITH, the Falcons' president.


Devils' Tomorrow Guaranteed After Victory in One Night
Inspired by an electrified atmosphere normally reserved only for Rangers games, the Devils shook off any lingering effects of their marathon game of two nights ago and won their first playoff series in six years.
The Devils played with gusto and energy and beat the Buffalo Sabres, 2-1, tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena in the seventh and deciding game of the Eastern Conference quarterfinal series.


JPS TEXTILE GROUP AGREES TO SELL SOME UNITS
JPS Textile Group Inc. of Greenville, S.C., has agreed to sell its automotive products and industrial fabrics business to Foamex International Inc. for about $272 million, including the assumption of long-term debt.
JPS Textile originally planned to sell the business to the public through a stock offering.
JPS Textile is a manufacturer of textile and textile-related products.
Foamex International Inc., with headquarters in East Providence, R.I., is the largest manufacturer and marketer of flexible polyurethane foam and foam products in North America.


Harper Just Plays Me and My Shadow With Anderson
Derek Harper stood in front of Kenny Anderson, and waited.
He waited for the man with the magic dribble to cross midcourt, the ball on his celebrated string.
Derek Harper, with his head shaved like a swimmer looking for improved water resistance, waited for Anderson, his eyes fixed on the left hand, his feet poised to move as fast as they could go.
Time after time, Anderson would start in one direction, pull back, drop a shoulder, pull back, dart right.
He couldn't lose the shadow with No. 11 sewn on its back.
He was suddenly in the longest dance of his life, with a partner he couldn't get rid of.
Derek Harper wasn't going anywhere.
Neither was Kenny Anderson.


Joy, and Fear, Across the Limpopo
Forbes Njolomole gunned the accelerator of the aging black cab from London -- one of two that an entrepreneur has imported to add continental dash to this bustling African capital -- and declaimed enthusiastically about the elections that were bringing a new age to South Africa.
It was, he said, about time apartheid was buried: "Forty years, 50 years, how long have people been living like that? It is not a human system." Now the need was for peace, he said.
"If there is going to be peace in South Africa, it will be good for all African countries because you know South Africa is rich. But if there is going to be fighting and war . . ." his voice trailed off in the midafternoon traffic, lost in imponderability.


Kevorkian Jury, Deliberating, Seems to Focus on Site of a Suicide
The jury considering charges against Dr.
Jack Kevorkian, who assisted last summer in the suicide of Thomas W. Hyde Jr., continued deliberations today, asking to review testimony and evidence relating to where Mr.
Hyde actually died.
That request in Michigan's first assisted-suicide trial reflected the jury's apparent concern with fixing the location where Mr.
Hyde committed suicide by inhaling carbon monoxide as he lay inside Dr.
Kevorkian's van.


Knicks' Defense Was Hard To Crack
During the past week, when Chuck Daly took his New Jersey Nets through three straight days of workouts at Fairleigh Dickinson -- their most intense consecutive drills of the season -- someone asked if he might be working them too hard.
"You mean getting over-prepared?" Daly asked.
"No I don't ever think anyone can ever accuse us of that."


Teamsters' Leaders Lift Strike But Split Over Pact Agreement
In an emotional meeting, leaders of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters voted today to suspend a 24-day strike by about 70,000 workers against 22 trucking companies and allow the members to vote on a tentative agreement reached on Thursday.
But in a rebuke to Ronald Carey, the union's president, all 400 officials of local freight unions refused to endorse the agreement.


Review/Dance; 2 Portrayals Of Odette And Odile
The double portrayal of the good Odette and the bad Odile in "Swan Lake" is one of the great plums in the repertory of roles for ballerinas.
Performances by Julie Kent and Amanda McKerrow in the American Ballet Theater production of the ballet, on Wednesday afternoon and evening at the Metropolitan Opera House, suggested that the role is as difficult as it is juicy.
In terms of technique, Ms.
McKerrow scored the highest points.
This was an almost perfectly danced performance, though the arm-snapping in her glittering third act became tedious.
But it was hard to care about this perfect, pallid creature or to believe very much in her outward signs of emotion.


Beliefs
This weekend every sidewalk preacher and religious tract distributor in Times Square runs a high risk of being interviewed.
A hundred or so members of the Religion Newswriters Association, journalists who report on religion for the nation's daily newspapers, news agencies, magazines and a few television and radio stations, will be talking shop and looking for stories in New York.
They are having their annual meeting in conjunction with the 60th anniversary celebration of the Religious News Service.
Although it has changed hands twice since 1934, the Religious News Service was founded by the National Conference of Christians and Jews to provide accurate religious reporting across denominational lines.


