Off the Menu
One Fifth, No More
One Fifth, a restaurant and cafe at 1 Fifth Avenue (Eighth Street) that in its latest incarnation opened about a year and a half ago, has closed.
Its owners, Jerome Kretchmer, Alfred Portale, Jeff Bliss and Rick and Robert Rathe, decided to cut bait on this venture, which began as a seafood restaurant but had started featuring more meat, poultry and game in an attempt to bolster business.
"The cafe part was doing well," Mr.
Kretchmer said yesterday.
"But the back had problems, and we didn't see the possibility of keeping it going through the summer. We don't have definite plans for now."


Bank of Nova Scotia (BNS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Tom Kerrigan; Arts Publicity Agent, 50
Tom Kerrigan, a publicity agent whose clients included the Martha Graham Dance Company, the Soloists of the Royal Danish Ballet, the composer Gian Carlo Menotti and the Spoleto Festival U.S.A., died on Sunday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 50 Years old and lived in Brooklyn.
His lawyer, Michael Kane, said the cause was AIDS.


Cuomo Looks Ahead to Good Old Days
As Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo prepares to run for a fourth term, with his popularity dangerously low, he has been talking a lot about the good old days.
His approach is a politics of nostalgia, Cuomo-style, aimed at reminding voters why they once admired him.
He pines for his chronological youth -- for days when jobs were plentiful and trouble on the streets meant fist fights, not guns and drugs.
And he talks of his political youth as well: those glorious first two terms when New York's streaking economy and Mr.
Cuomo's Presidential prospects made him one of the most popular governors in state history.
"Everybody says stop looking backward, look forward," said the 61-year-old Governor, who will be nominated here Wednesday at the convention of the Democratic State Committee.
"But if you take those years '83 through '89, it's hard to separate them from my rationale. Those years were so good you wanted me to be President. I haven't changed."


Ballesteros in Open
Following expansion of the United States Open field by three players, SEVE BALLESTEROS, winner of three British Opens and two Masters, and BEN CRENSHAW, who won the Masters in 1984, were given special exemptions yesterday to play in this year's event, June 16-19 at Oakmont Country Club outside Pittsburgh.
Both Ballesteros, who has played in 15 consecutive Opens, and Crenshaw, a veteran of 20 Opens, would have had to play in regional qualifiers if not granted the exemptions.
Ballesteros had said he would not play unless granted the exemption.


A Devilish Deed in a Manhattan Store
It was the work of the devil in the shop of the angels.
Sometime Monday night, someone broke into Angels Everything, a Manhattan store and mail order business devoted to angel products, and took flight with merchandise, money and machinery valued by the owner at some $5,000.


Mediterranean Flavor With Quick Polenta
QUICK-COOKING polenta is not new.
It is nothing more than finely ground cornmeal that does not require the long cooking traditionally associated with polenta.
The dish is ready in a few minutes instead of 45, but it has less texture.
It is worth the trade-off in this Mediterranean meal of lamb over polenta, with peppers and onions on the side.
Game Plan Prepare pepper recipe through step 3.
Prepare lamb recipe.
Add vinegar and seasonings to peppers; cover.
Prepare and cook polenta.
Polenta
2 1/4cups no-salt-added chicken stock  1/2 cup fine-ground or instant polenta  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
Bring stock to boil, then slowly stir in polenta and cook over medium-low heat until mixture has thickened, a couple of minutes.
Season with salt and pepper.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 150 calories, 2 grams fat, 5 milligrams cholesterol, 200 milligrams sodium, 5 grams protein, 25 grams carbohydrate.
Lamb With Tomatoes And Olives
6 ounces boneless leg of lamb  1 large clove garlic  1 28-ounce can no-salt-added peeled tomatoes  1 tablespoon fresh rosemary or 1 teaspoon dried rosemary  12 oil-cured olives  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Trim fat from lamb and cut into bite-size pieces.
2.
Heat nonstick skillet until it is quite hot; reduce heat to medium and add lamb, sauteing in its own fat until it is brown on both sides.
3. Mince garlic and add to lamb as it browns.
4.
Use half the tomatoes, breaking them up as you add them to pan, and all of the juice.
Reduce heat.
Add rosemary and continue cooking.
5.
Pit olives, add to sauce with pepper.
Cook a few minutes or until rest of meal is done.
Spoon over polenta.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 210 calories, 10 grams fat, 55milligrams cholesterol, 485 milligrams sodium, 20 grams protein, 11 grams carbohydrate.
Peppers and Onions
12 ounces whole onion or 11 ounces sliced, ready-cut onions (2 to 2 1/2 cups)  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 1/2 pounds red, yellow, orange and/ or purple peppers or 18 ounces sliced, ready-cut peppers (4 1/2 to 5 cups)  3 tablespoons sherry vinegar  1/4 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Slice whole onion in processor.
2.
Heat nonstick skillet until it is very hot; reduce heat to medium high and add oil.
When it is hot, add onions and saute while preparing peppers.
3.
Wash, trim and seed peppers; slice in food processor and add to onions, cooking for a couple of minutes until they begin to soften.
4.
Add vinegar, salt and pepper; cover and continue cooking over medium-low heat for about 10 minutes, until peppers are soft.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 145 calories, 3 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 280 milligrams sodium, 5 grams protein, 25 grams carbohydrate.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Give States Control of Water Quantity, Too
The Supreme Court ruled in an important environmental case today that states have broad authority under the Federal Clean Water Act to protect not only the quality of their water but also the quantity of water that flows in streams and rivers.
The 7-to-2 decision upheld the State of Washington's right to insist on a minimum water flow that its Ecology Department believes is necessary to protect the salmon and steelhead trout in a river in the Olympic National Forest.


CHRONICLE
A note to all you smokers sneaking a puff in forbidden places: try to get invited to the party in Washington next week honoring CHRISTOPHER BUCKLEY and his new Random House novel, "Thank You for Smoking," a spoof of the lobbying business.
The hosts -- Harold M. Evans and Charles Peters, nonsmokers; Art Buchwald and Marlin Fitzwater, who favor cigars; G. Gordon Liddy, who reportedly has promised to be a smoker for the night, and Fran Lebowitz and Taki Theodoracopulos, both smokers -- have invited guests to what they are calling "the ultimate smoke-filled room,"at the Ritz-Carlton on June 9.


If It's Another Victory, It Must Be Overtime
Overtime has been a big part of the Canucks' success this spring.
Last night's 3-2 triumph over the Rangers was Vancouver's sixth in 18 games in its drive to win the Stanley Cup.
"We just have a pretty good feeling going into it," said Greg Adams, who scored the game-winner with 34 seconds remaining in overtime.
"I've been on teams that were scared going into overtime, but not this team. We have a different attitude going into it."


Getting Tougher on Student Smokers in New Jersey; Responding to Complaints, 3 High Schools Are Resorting to Court Fines in Crackdown
Until the crackdown in mid-April, student smokers had practically taken over the four bathrooms at Hopewell Valley Central High School here, filling them with a thick haze between classes.
"Really gross," said Amy Consoli, a sophomore.
And Dennis Lin, a senior on the tennis team, said, "Smoke would get on your clothes, in your hair and on your skin." Nonsmokers often emerged from the bathrooms to have teachers accuse them of smoking.


Look to Television's Role in Youth Violence; What of the Rest?
To the Editor:
You filled more than two pages May 17 with your articles on young criminals in New York City.
Grim as the articles were, they spoke of the worst in our city.


Mexican Rebels Gather to Rule on Government's Peace Offer
Peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas sealed off areas under their control today for what they said would be a final assembly to decide whether to accept the peace settlement offered by the Government nearly three months ago.
In a communique published in Mexican newspapers today, leaders of the Zapatista National Liberation Army said they had finished a long series of meetings on the proposed settlement with the peasant communities that support them.
In the coming days, they said, they will close their strongholds to journalists, count the votes, and reach a decision.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.63
4.19
3.33
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.23
4.16
3.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.67
4.61
3.22
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.14
7.11
6.05
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.43
7.39
6.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.25
7.82
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.39
5.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Clinton Aides Often Used Helicopter
White House officials said today that aides to President Clinton had used the Presidential helicopter for their own purposes on a dozen occasions, but the announcement deemed legitimate all but one of the trips -- the outing to a golf course last week.
The list of 11 other flights disclosed by the White House today nevertheless raised new questions about the use of helicopters from the Presidential fleet.
While most of the missions were described as training flights by White House military aides or officials from the White House military office, one was listed as a "classified" mission in which the passengers were Henry G. Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and Alice M. Rivlin, the deputy director of the Office and Management and Budget.


Packing for Europe, Clinton Hopes to Find a Boost in Ratings
As President Clinton leaves Wednesday for an eight-day trip to Europe, the White House has embarked on a major public relations effort to reverse perceptions that he has fumbled his handling of foreign policy.
With top advisers warning Mr.
Clinton that plunging ratings on foreign policy are undermining his political standing in a significant way, some outside the White House have even suggested that he respond by shaking up his foreign policy team, a step the President said over the weekend that he has rejected.


Knicks May Need More Than the Garden
For the second consecutive season, the Knicks have squandered a 2-0 lead in the Eastern Conference finals.
Once again, they have backed themselves into a pressure-packed Game 5 tonight at Madison Square Garden, needing a victory to avoid a perilous situation.
Can the Knicks loosen the vise-grip of the Indiana Pacers' defense?
Or will the Pacers continue to exploit the Knicks' offensive shortcomings and become the first team to win a road game in this series?


In Debate on Myopia's Origins The Winner Is: Both Sides?
ARE myopic eyes born or made?
When it comes to nearsightedness, the nature-versus-nurture argument, smoldering for nearly a century, has never been more heated.
And as proponents of each view marshal new evidence to support their own perspectives, it is becoming increasingly clear that both are probably right: myopia, the inability to bring distant objects into clear view, appears to develop in response to various environmental influences most often in children who are somehow genetically predisposed to this visual aberration.
In the last few years, research in myopia has mushroomed, and animal and human studies have begun to shed new light on its causes and to suggest potential treatments.
Even before scientists have deciphered exactly what roles genetics and environment play in human myopia, their research is pointing to various possibilities for forestalling its development.


New Service Is Planned For On-Line Marketing
The Mecklermedia Corporation, a publishing and trade-show company, will announce on Wednesday the formation of Mecklerweb, an on-line service intended as a cross between an information center and a computerized shopping mall that many industry executives believe is an emerging electronic model for advertising, marketing and commerce in the information age.
The venture by Mecklermedia, of Westport, Conn., is one of a growing number of commercial efforts being unveiled for the Internet, a global collection of computer networks connecting more than two million computers and about 20 million people.
The service, which will begin in September includes more than 40 companies in a range of industries including the computer maker Digital Equipment, the computer-services company E.D.S., the advertising agency Ogilvy &amp; Mather, and the publisher McGraw-Hill.


Rockets Beat Jazz and Reach Finals
What started out as a romp to the National Basketball Association finals for Houston wound up as a thankful escape tonight after the Rockets nearly blew a 24-point lead but hung on to defeat Utah, 94-83, and win their first Western Conference championship since 1986.
Houston took the series by 4 games to 1.
"This is a great feeling" said Rockets Coach Rudy Tomjanovich.
"I've been there as a player, been there as an assistant coach, but this is the sweetest."


Seeking to Create Database On Emotionally Disturbed
Spurred by cases like that of Larry Hogue, the mentally ill man who accosted Upper West Side residents for years, the New York City Police Department is beginning a pilot program to improve how it gathers information about people with serious emotional problems who are taken to hospital emergency rooms.
Since 1980, the number of people classified as "emotionally disturbed" who were taken to emergency rooms has grown threefold, from 7,300 in 1980 to 22,600 in 1992, according to department statistics.
Mental health officials say the increase is partly because of increased drug use that causes bizarre behavior, and also because of court rulings that released mentally ill people from psychiatric hospitals and sent them to local communities for treatment.
Documenting Behavior
Under a pilot program at two city hospitals, officers will for the first time be required to document the behavior of emotionally disturbed people whom they apprehend.
If the three-month program is deemed successful, it will be expanded to other hospitals and the department will establish a database.


Fusion Reactor Experiment Sets A Power Record, Scientists Say
Scientists at the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory announced yesterday that their experimental fusion reactor had set a world record, producing a burst of nine million watts of fusion power.
Although the promise of cheap, plentiful fusion energy remains decades in the future, Princeton scientists said the latest achievement was a significant step.


Reviews/Theater; The Desperation of Life in McCullers Country
When the unhappy dreamers in Carson McCullers's novel "The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter" muse about the world, these residents of a Depression-era Southern town have no cozy illusions of living in a harmonious community like Thornton Wilder's Grover's Corners.
Leading lives rooted in poverty, ignorance and racial animosity, they share a despair and frustration that is almost apocalyptic in its scope.
One of the triumphs of David Willinger's masterly dramatization of the novel, at Theater for the New City through Sunday, is the way he builds many interwoven vignettes into a hallucinatory mosaic of a community suffocating in its own wretchedness and cruelty.
Using slides, pantomime and artful spotlighting, Mr.
Willinger has staged the novel as a flashing cinematic nightmare.
An ensemble of 13 actors conveys the characters' dreams, fantasies and frustrations in an expressionistic style that hits explosive peaks.


Why Exiles From Russia Stay Abroad
Nostalgia for the homeland has been a constant motif of Russian emigre life, stretching across centuries and continents.
Yet now that the way has opened, few Russian political exiles of his generation have chosen the return home that Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn began late last week.
For most who were forced by decree or circumstance to leave Russia, the countries that received them have become home.


Ex-Companion Kills Woman And Himself
A woman who had obtained two orders of protection against her former companion was killed today when the man broke into her home, shot her in the head and then killed himself in front of their two sons, the Suffolk County police said.
The police said the woman, Hilda Rivera, 31, had obtained the orders of protection after telling authorities that her former companion, Louis Barcelo, 34, of the Bronx had made telephone threats against her.
They said warrants were issued for Mr.
Barcelo's arrest in connection with the threats.


Japan Is Considering Optical Fiber Network
The Japanese Government is considering creating a multibillion-dollar communications network to connect every home and business in Japan with optical fibers by the year 2010.
The plan, which was recommended today by the Telecommunications Council, an influential Government advisory board, is expected to be adopted by the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications.
It would form the core of Japan's response to similar plans in the United States for a national information infrastructure, sometimes called the information superhighway.
As in the United States, most of the actual work would be left to the private sector.


Herbert Bienstock, 71, Official Who Invested Figures With Flair
Herbert Bienstock, a former regional commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics with the Department of Labor, died on Monday at his home in Bayside, Queens.
He was 71 and died of a heart attack, his family said.


Croat to Lead New Alliance With Muslims
The nascent Muslim-Croatian federation in Bosnia elected a Croat as president today, cementing an alliance formed last March that is strongly supported by the United States.
A constituent assembly of Muslims and Croats, meeting in Sarajevo, voted unanimously for Kresimir Zubak, a 46-year-old former judge who was injured in the Bosnian war in 1992, and elected a Muslim, Ejup Ganic, as Vice President.


Crash Victims Are Identified In New Jersey
After delays and public appeals for help, the authorities have learned the identities of all three teen-agers killed in the crash of a stolen car Sunday night in front of Irvington High School.
The three, all Irvington residents, are Horace Howell, 18, Jonathan Beaumont, 18, and Kevin Miller, 16, Police Chief Bernard DeLucia said.


Corrections
An obituary on May 21 about Paul Lenti, a theatrical reporter and critic, described the cause of his death incompletely.
A spokesman for the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, where he died, pointed out that although Mr.
Lenti's death was indeed caused by complications after heart surgery, the surgery had taken place nearly two months earlier.
In the interim, he was discharged from the hospital, and spent several weeks in good health before becoming ill again.


The Rostenkowski Indictment
Representative Dan Rostenkowski's supporters stress his remarkable legislative skills and his important role in the current health care debate.
The 17-count felony indictment filed yesterday by U.S.
Attorney Eric Holder offers a much less flattering portrait of the Illinois Congressman, depicting him as an official who for more than 20 years abused his office for personal gain.
The case may not be resolved for years.
Mr.
Rostenkowski denies wrongdoing and is plainly entitled to the presumption of innocence at trial.
"Truth," he insists, "is on my side."


North Korea's Dangerous Lurch
Enough is enough.
North Korea has responded to the United States' patient and hopeful diplomacy with recalcitrance and provocative nuclear maneuvering.
The recalcitrance was tolerable when talks were inching toward progress.
But now the North is rushing to unload spent fuel from its nuclear reactor while delaying talks.
If that is a negotiating tactic, it is one that the North Koreans must abandon immediately as deal-breaking brinkmanship.
The U.S. has been right to hold out for a negotiated nuclear-free Korean Peninsula.
But North Korea seems intent on demonstrating that patient diplomacy will elicit only duplicity and defiance.
It if intends to send some other message, it must do so quickly or else it may leave the U.S. no recourse but to seek economic sanctions and prepare for any military reactions.


For Eagle Breeders, Spring Is Bouncing, Bald and Bountiful
Giving eaglets a beak-to-talon medical exam is not all that difficult; the tricky part is getting them down from their nest atop a 75-foot pine tree near Union Lake here.
That is how Lawrence J. Niles, of New Jersey's Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife, came to be scaling the tree, and lowering two six-week-old eaglets, one at a time, in a blue canvas gym bag.
Their parents, curious but not outwardly hostile, circled and screeched far above him.


The Pyongyang Puzzle
When North Korea first began playing cat-and-mouse with the Clinton Administration over nuclear inspections, Washington's goal seemed simple: the Communist leaders of one of the world's most unpredictable states could not be permitted to possess a nuclear weapon.
But in the ensuing 18 months, as Washington and its allies have alternately tried to pressure, sweet-talk and threaten the North into giving up its bomb project, reality has set in and the objectives have grown far more complicated.


Excerpt From Government Announcement of Indictment
Following is an excerpt from the statement today by United States Attorney Eric H. Holder Jr. at a news conference announcing the indictment of Representative Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a private transcription service:
The allegations contained in today's indictment represent a betrayal of the public trust for personal gain.
In essence, this indictment alleges that Congressman Rostenkowski used his elective office to perpetrate an extensive fraud on the American people.
The wrongful expenditure of taxpayer dollars by and at the behest of Congressman Rostenkowski rolls into the hundreds of thousands of dollars.


A Chicken-and-Rice Dish That's Not Just for Sundays
IN 16th-century France, the good King Henry IV proclaimed that each family should have a chicken in its pot every Sunday.
Even without a royal proclamation, this is still the case in most households in France.
The classic poulet au riz from that earlier period was generally made with a hen that was cooked a long time with rice and sometimes a vegetable.
Today, as then, this is an ideal dish for a Sunday family dinner and is equally as good during the week, especially on cool evenings in late spring.


Corrections
A report in the "Sunday" pages of The Times Magazine on May 15 referred incorrectly to the technology known as wireless cable.
It is in fact a viable technology, not nonexistent.
It competes with conventional cable television systems by using microwave frequencies to transmit signals from a central tower to subscribers' antennas.


INDICTMENT OF A CONGRESSMAN: The Overview; U.S. INDICTS ROSTENKOWSKI IN BROAD CORRUPTION CASE; HE IS OUT OF KEY HOUSE POST
A Federal grand jury indicted Representative Dan Rostenkowski today on 17 criminal charges, accusing him of engaging in a two-decade pattern of corruption, including the embezzlement of more than $500,000 from his official expense accounts "to benefit himself, his family and his friends."
The broad felony indictment charges Mr.
Rostenkowski with fraud, concealing material facts, tampering with a witness and conspiracy.
Prosecutors said Mr.
Rostenkowski would be arraigned within two weeks.
The most serious charge, tampering with a witness, carries a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison and $250,000 in fines.


Perry Williams Joins the Jets
The Jets yesterday signed cornerback Perry Williams, an unrestricted free agent who played 11 seasons for the Giants.
Williams is the second veteran defensive back they have added after their first-round selection of cornerback Aaron Glenn in the college draft.
The terms of Williams's contract were not disclosed.
By signing Williams and the Rams' Pat Terrell, whom they acquired last month, the Jets made the re-signing of safety Lonnie Young a moot point.
General Manager Dick Steinberg confirmed that the team wasn't going to re-sign Young, who is an unrestricted free agent.


Shelby C. Davis, Envoy and Philanthropist, 85
Shelby Cullom Davis, a New York investment banker, philanthropist and former United States Ambassador to Switzerland, died on Thursday at his house in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 85 and lived in Tarrytown, N.Y.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.


Private Colleges Are Criticized for Their Brand of Justice
Max Fraad-Wolff began the fall semester as a junior at Vassar College and ended it as a pariah.
He was accused -- falsely, he says -- of leaving a vicious message on a fellow student's answering machine.
It is not so much the accusation that makes him angry as the way the college judiciary handled it.
Summoned before a judicial board, he was not permitted to bring a lawyer or his parents.
He was not allowed to present evidence that his accuser had blamed someone else and had then withdrawn the complaint.
Two witnesses against him were never identified; a third person presented their testimony.
The most frustrating thing, he says, is that Vassar did not permit a voice analysis of the answering-machine tape.


Review/Film; Orphans in the Hold of an Evil Authority
Whenever 10-year-old Kevin Reevey (Johnny Morina) is sent for an evening visit to the office of Brother Peter Lavin (Henry Czerny), the other boys at St.
Vincent's orphanage in Newfoundland exchange furtive, embarrassed glances.
They know too well what those visits are about, and they know they have no recourse.
Within the cloistered, terrifying world of St.
Vincent's, it will do no good to complain.
It won't help because the All Saints Brothers, who run the orphanage, exercise absolute authority over their charges.
Their authority is as physically overwhelming as the size difference between Brother Lavin and shy little Kevin.
It is as morally daunting as Brother Lavin's stories about hell, which he avidly tells the children.
"You will be forced out on the street and you will have nowhere to go but the gutter," the orphans are angrily told, once rumors of physical and sexual abuse leak out and the events at St.
Vincent's threaten to get out of hand.


Canucks Leave the Rangers With Echoes of Defeat
The sound is sometimes just a simple Ding! or occasionally a louder Clang!
It is sort of what you hear when a hammer strikes an anvil or a horseshoe hits a metal pole at the holiday picnic.
It is one-note music to the ears of a goalie like Vancouver's Kirk McLean, who had earned his good luck Tuesday night when the speeding, rising, rubber puck struck the metal crossbar behind him in the final minute of overtime.


Vatican Asks U.N. for 'Safe Area' in Rwanda
The Vatican asked the Security Council today to declare a "safe area" around a big religious complex in Rwanda where some 38,000 mainly Tutsi refugees are in danger of being killed.
The move followed an appeal by a group of Rwandan bishops to Pope John Paul II asking him to obtain the neutrality of the religious center at Kabgayi, five miles south of Gitarama in southwest Rwanda, to prevent what could become one of the worst catastrophes of the country's two-month-old tribal war.


Book Notes
Tote Bags and Chocolate
Special to The New York Times  LOS ANGELES, May 31 -- As publishers promote their lists for the important fall season, there's no way of predicting which new books will end up selling the most copies.
But at this year's American Booksellers Association Convention, which ended today, publishers sought to whip up excitement for forthcoming titles through clever promotions, lavish parties and intensive cosseting of the booksellers whose job it is to actually sell the books to the public.
The point wasn't to introduce many new titles; the country's largest stores have for the most part already placed their fall orders.
Rather, publishers sought to show their support for their books, support that could be accurately gauged by how much money they were willing to shell out for gifts, parties and attention-getting devices.


The Ghost of Mussolini Keeps Rattling His Chains
The two moments were days apart in different cities, yet they depicted perfectly the splintered soul of Italy's neo-Fascists.
In Vicenza in early May, 200 young men, many with shaved heads, threw the straight-armed salutes of the Fascist era, hoisted banners emblazoned with swastikas and paraded through the streets, lauding the memory of Mussolini and Hitler in a display of what Italians call nazi-skin protest.


Look to Television's Role in Youth Violence; Too-Early Pregnancy
To the Editor:
The image of single, teen-age parents raising children kept recurring in your series of articles on violent children (May 15-18).
However, in discussing possible solutions, you neglected prevention of teen-age pregnancy, despite the existence of effective initiatives to fight this problem.


Inheriting the Helm of a Vital Panel
After 32 years in Congress, 13 of them in the shadow of the larger-than-life Dan Rostenkowski, the relatively obscure Sam M. Gibbons today became acting chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, the most powerful panel in the House of Representatives.
Mr.
Gibbons, who has been on the losing side of previous leadership battles in the House, has long aspired to the chairmanship.
But in the end, the 74-year-old Tampa Bay Congressman ascended on the basis of seniority, a system he once deplored.
Once Mr.
Rostenkowski was indicted, the title of acting chairman went automatically to the person next in line.
Had there been a vote, some said privately, Mr.
Gibbons would probably have lost.


O'Neill Is Fan Favorite Without the Formalities
Paul O'Neill insisted a month ago that he was not irked about being left off the American League All-Star ballot while sporting the highest batting average in the major leagues.
He also said he was not glamorous enough to receive heavy write-in votes.
Apparently, O'Neill was wrong.
Even though he is not 1 of the 42 outfielders listed on the ballot, O'Neill's 21,728 votes are second only to Seattle's Ken Griffey Jr. (37,899) after more than three weeks of voting for the July 12 All-Star Game at Pittsburgh's Three Rivers Stadium.
If he remains one of the top three vote-getters, O'Neill, who still leads baseball with a .428 average, will be the first American Leaguer to start as a write-in player since the voting was returned to the fans in 1970.
Rico Carty of the Atlanta Braves (1970) and Steve Garvey of the Los Angeles Dodgers (1974) were write-in starters in the National League.


Justices, in Ruling on Free Speech, Put Limits on Government
Defining the free-speech rights of public employees, a splintered Supreme Court today placed new limits on the ability of government agencies to punish employees for what they say.
A plurality of four Justices held that government workers cannot be dismissed or otherwise punished for their words unless the employer has a reasonable basis for believing that the speech was either disruptive or that it involved a matter of purely private concern, outside the scope of the First Amendment's protection.


CHRONICLE
The Rev.
ARTHUR CALIANDRO never forgot the first wedding he performed when he arrived in 1967 at Marble Collegiate Church, where he is now the senior minister.
The bride's name was LEA WEEKS BELL, and "what I remembered most about her was that a tear came down her cheek and stayed there for the whole wedding," he said yesterday.
On Sunday, Mr.
Caliandro, 60, will stand at the altar once again with Ms.
Bell, now 53 and a real estate executive in River Edge, N.J.
But this time as the bridegroom.


Victory for Salazar
ALBERTO SALAZAR won a major race for the first time in nearly a decade yesterday, capturing the 50-mile Comrades Marathon in Pietermaritzburg, South Africa.
The 35-year-old former world marathon record-holder was timed in 5 hours 38 minutes 39 seconds.
Second place went to NIC BESTER of South Africa, who sprinted in at 5:42.52. (AP)


Helping Kin Of Those With AIDS
NITA PIPPINS was telling the seven out-of-towners how angry she would get when Nick, her only child, was dying of AIDS.
"I'd tell him, I'm angry that you have this disease, I'm angry you are gay and I'm angry that I'm going to have to put you in the ground." She paused to sip her coffee in the almost empty diner before continuing in her Southern accent.
"Nick would hug me and say he couldn't help any of that and he'd be happy to put me in the ground first if he could."


Bombardier Inc.(BBD.B) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Books of The Times; A Jazz Legend and How She Grew
Ella Fitzgerald
A Biography of the First Lady of Jazz
By Stuart Nicholson Illustrated. 334 pages. Charles Scribner's Sons. $23.
Some performers win our hearts with their imperfections; others seem so gifted that our love is always accompanied by reservations.
That must be why Ella Fitzgerald still arouses so much discontent, fame and fortune notwithstanding.


Dow Edges Up 1.23 in Listless Trading Day
Following the long Memorial Day weekend and capping a cautious month, yesterday was another listless day on Wall Street, with below-average trading volume and the major indexes closing mixed but barely changed.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 1.23 points, to 3,758.37, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 fell 0.82 point, to 456.51.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index was up 2.05 points, to 735.19.


Return to Starting Role Suits Kamieniecki Fine
Scott Kamieniecki had not started in 16 days for the Yankees so he wanted to prove to Manager Buck Showalter that his bullpen seat should be retired.
Wade Boggs had not employed a home-run trot for four games so he wanted to unveil it again.
Luis Polonia was getting no respect from Chicago's shallow outfielders so he wanted to display his muscles.
Fortunately for the Yankees, all three players realized their wishes last night.
Unfortunately for the White Sox, Alex Fernandez probably wishes that he never made the start because nothing promising followed for him.
The Yankees bashed him, made him feel more queasy than he did with the stomach virus that prevented him from pitching Monday and sailed to a 10-1 victory at Yankee Stadium.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about investigations of a department head and a former department head at the Nassau County Medical Center misidentified a county law office in some editions.
The notice of a possible lawsuit against one department head was filed with the County Attorney, not the District Attorney.
James Gallagher, who is handling the case, is the chief of the County Attorney's Medical Services Bureau.


Charges Against Tong President Threaten a Chinatown Institution
A few dozen elderly men gather each day in the main hall of the Tung On Association on Division Street in Manhattan to drink tea and play mah-jongg beneath dusty paintings of George Washington and the Chinese leader Sun Yat-sen, restlessly clacking their colored tiles against the tops of worn wooden tables.
Members of the Tung On like to say that their association is as innocent as their afternoon gatherings.
But Federal prosecutors say they can prove otherwise, and they have charged Clifford Wong, the Tung On's longtime president, with leading a criminal enterprise that killed 10 people and participated in many other crimes, like armed robbery and heroin trafficking.


Future of Faith Worries Catholic Leaders
It was an awesome scene: nearly 400,000 Catholic teen-agers encamped last August in a Rocky Mountain park to join in sung praise and solemn prayer with Pope John Paul II.
Amid this army of young believers, it was hard to imagine that the Roman Catholic Church in the United States, 60 million strong and growing, is fraught with anxiety about its future.
No one imagines that American Catholicism's vast numbers and impressive network of parishes, schools, hospitals, universities and social services will soon disappear.
But church leaders increasingly wonder whether the church, even as its ranks increase and it draws new energy from the latest waves of immigrants, is losing its distinctive identity.


Resume Service Ends for Times
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it would no longer participate in an electronic resume distribution service called Fastrak.
The New York Times announced in November that it would offer a new interactive system for employers to advertise jobs and for prospective employees to send resumes.
The service, which began in January, had a strong response from users, the company said.


Review/Film; A Landscape of Strife From the Cows' Vantage
"Cows" was shown as part of last year's New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Stephen Holden's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 30, 1993.
The film opens today at the Papp Public, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village.
Every so often in "Cows" ("Vacas"), Julio Medem's epic portrayal of two feuding families in the Basque region of northern Spain, the camera draws away from the tumultuous passions of its characters to focus on the eyes of the cattle that are essential to these people's livelihoods.
After contemplating their expressionless faces, the camera returns to the drama, but detachedly, as though the director has decided to observe the world and its butchery through uncomprehending bovine eyes.


Bad Choices for the School Board
During his mayoral campaign, Rudolph Giuliani promised to re-invent New York City's government, shake up lackluster bureaucracies and improve management of city agencies.
But given a real opportunity to bring dramatic change to the school system, the Mayor has played politics as usual, recycling two mediocre appointees to the central Board of Education, Ninfa Segarra and Irene Impellizzeri.
At best, that means continuing the status quo on the school board -- a profound disservice to city schoolchildren.
Ms.
Segarra and Dr.
Impellizzeri have been in the majority of a divided 4-to-3 board that has been less preoccupied with education than with social issues, like AIDS education and a curriculum that would teach tolerance of homosexuals and different cultural groups.
The seven appointees to the central board are responsible for overall policy and the high schools.
Each of the five borough presidents appoints one member and the mayor chooses two.
The four-year terms of the current members expire on June 30.


California's Fast-Forward Politics
Democrats and Republicans will go to the polls on June 7 to nominate candidates in the California Governor's race, but conventional political wisdom and opinion surveys long ago jumped ahead of the primaries and nominated two contenders: Gov.
Pete Wilson, the Republican, and State Treasurer Kathleen Brown, the Democrat.
They have been squaring off for the better part of 15 months, and the latest polls show Mr.
Wilson pulling closer to Ms.
Brown.
A single issue is dominating what is probably the most important state election in the country this year: the California economy, which is still struggling to pull out of a recession.
Crime is an important secondary issue.


Spreading Profits From Bank Sales
Under pressure from Congress to curb insider profits in the sale of mutual savings banks, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation made two proposals today to assure that depositors benefit from these deals.
The nation's 1,200 mutual savings banks, which hold $200 billion in assets, are technically owned by their depositors.
But the depositors have no legal rights to enforce their ownership, so the directors and managers have a free hand in running the institutions.


Corrections
An article in the Long Island Weekly on Sunday about Beau Bauman, au thor of "The Most Important Thing I've Learned in Life," misstated the date for his book signing at Pindar Vineyards in Peconic, L.I.
It will be this Saturday, from 5 to 8 P.M.; it was not last Saturday.


Invade Haiti? A Sure Way To Make a Bad Policy Worse
The United States is in danger of making a bad situation in Haiti even worse.
We seem to be laying the groundwork for military intervention, which would get us into a quagmire.
If the Administration orders an invasion to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, it will be making a grave mistake.
There are better ways to help the democratic process.


Clinton's Sudan Envoy to Visit African Capitals
President Clinton's new special envoy to the Sudan is to visit several African capitals this week as part of a stepped-up American effort to end the Sudanese civil war and to speed the flow of relief to a nation where American officials say millions are threatened with starvation.
As part of her trip, Melissa F. Wells, the special envoy appointed on May 20, plans to urge the Sudanese Government to allow an increased flow of aid to sustain the 2 million people in Sudan's rebellious south and 1.3 million in the Government-controlled north who rely on food aid.


Helen B. Baldwin, Writer, 87
Helen Bruce Baldwin, the widow of Hanson W. Baldwin, former military-affairs editor of The New York Times, died on Saturday at her home in Roxbury, Conn.
She was 87.


North Korea Tests Cruise Missile Designed to Sink Ships
In an effort to strengthen its military capability, North Korea today tested a new cruise missile designed to sink ships, Pentagon officials said.
The test, in the Sea of Japan, took place against the backdrop of rising tensions as North Korea continued to remove fuel from its nuclear reactor at Yongbyon despite warnings by the United Nations.


U.S. to Help With Supercomputer Software
The Department of Energy will soon announce a federally backed effort by Cray Research Inc. and 16 other companies to develop advanced software for supercomputers, the Secretary of Energy, Hazel R. O'Leary, said yesterday.
The program, which will also involve two of the Energy Department's national laboratories, is meant to develop practical business applications for the powerful "massively parallel" supercomputers made by Cray and other American companies, including the Thinking Machines Corporation, which is also taking part.


Homes Sales and Spending Slump in Signs of a Slowing
Fresh signs of economic slowing emerged today as new-home sales and personal spending slumped in April after two months of hefty gains, Government figures showed today.
And consumer confidence slipped in May, according to a tabulation by the Conference Board, with seven of nine regions posting declines.
New England and the South Atlantic were the exceptions.


Navy Chief Trying To Make Amends Over Harassment
Lieut.
Darlene Simmons was a successful Navy lawyer with an impeccable reputation and a promising future.
That is, until she accused her boss of sexual harassment.
Since that moment two years ago, Lieutenant Simmons has been forced to undergo a psychiatric examination (in which she was found to be fit), given poor marks on her evaluations and scheduled to be discharged in August.
She says her superiors have answered her pleas for help with retaliation.
"I am regarded as a troublemaker with no future in the Navy," she told the House Armed Services Committee in March.


Arbour Is Likely To Quit As Coach
A month after they were humiliated by the Rangers in a four-game playoff sweep, the Islanders called a news conference for today at which Al Arbour is expected to announce that he will step down as coach after 19 seasons with the team.
The Islanders wouldn't confirm that the 61-year-old Arbour, the National Hockey League's oldest and most experienced coach, had decided to call it quits after 22 seasons in the league over all.
But a person in the organization said Arbour was virtually certain to relinquish the coaching duties and assume another assignment with the club.


Rangers' Nasty Habit Is Hard One to Break
The Rangers went to the locker room at the close of regulation and they did not know whether to feel confidence, frustration, or simply disgust.
They had been one minute away from victory in the first game of the Stanley Cup finals, and then the Vancouver Canucks snuck in some back door.
The players cannot put a finger on what they were feeling at that moment, but it was an all too familiar sensation, that they knew for sure.
For the third time in eight playoff games, the Rangers had blown a lead in the final minute of regulation, and for the fourth time in eight games they were headed into overtime.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
S.
C.
Johnson &amp; Son trailblazed among American companies in Ukraine.
Its experience in dealing with a crumbling economy has been painfully educational, but the maker of Johnson's Wax says it is in Ukraine for the long haul.  [ Page D1. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  CAT AND MOUSE WITH NORTH KOREA  News analysis: President Clinton's initial goal of insuring that North Korea does not have a nuclear bomb is now virtually unattainable.
If the North has developed one, the chances of finding it soon are next to nil.
As a result, the allies are arguing over what to insist on, and North Korea is capitalizing on the confusion.
A1  North Korea tested a new cruise missile in the Sea of Japan.
A12


Sampras's Roll Stops on a Line In the Clay
At war with his racquets, which weren't properly strung to pass the afternoon grinding away beneath a blinding sun against the most dogged clay-court player in the business, Pete Sampras fell to seventh-seeded Jim Courier, 6-4, 5-7, 6-4, 6-4, today in the quarterfinal round of the French Open.
The world's No. 1 player, the man who prevailed at each of the last three Grand Slam tournaments, had too much tension, his racquets too little.
After vowing to go down volleying if he had to go down at all, Sampras instead wound up wavering on the baseline, a hesitation in tennis limbo that virtually guaranteed Courier the match.


Same Old Monotonous Semifinals
There may be some surprising occurrences in women's tennis, but they rarely happen on the court, and the field for the French Open's semifinal round that emerged from today's quarterfinal matches proved no exception to that trend.
The defending champion, Steffi Graf; a perennial semifinalist, Arantxa Sanchez Vicario; Spain's other clay-court sensation, the third-seeded Conchita Martinez; and France's most famous transplant, the 12th-seeded and currently invincible Mary Pierce, all advanced today over their overmatched opponents.


Zale Corp.(ZALE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Grand Scale of Abuse Depicted in Indictment
It was the number of times that Representative Dan Rostenkowski is accused of abusing his office that took people by surprise today, and it is precisely those numbers that will make it a lot harder for him to defend himself at a trial.
Indeed, the 17-count indictment handed up against the 66-year-old Illinois Democrat included many charges that had not been disclosed until United States Attorney Eric H. Holder Jr. finally showed his hand today.


How New York State Will Downgrade Multiple Choice Testing
To the Editor:
You characterize well why New York, along with most other states, is moving away from traditional multiple-choice testing and toward more performance-based assessment in your report on coming revisions in the New York State testing system (news article May 1).
Multiple-choice tests can be scored easily, but most experts now agree they are not highly valid measures of what students know and can do.
More important, they don't help students learn to perform well on real-world tasks.


Bid-Rigging Is Charged
Seven contracting companies and their owners plotted to rig bids and divide Westchester County for asphalt sales in the early 1980's, State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell and five Westchester towns have charged in a lawsuit filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan.


In America; Time to Act on Haiti
A few years ago when I was on an assignment in Haiti, a man took me to the back of his pickup truck and pointed to two young children.
They were sitting in the bed of the truck and both were shivering, although the evening was quite warm.
It was obvious that they were ill.
The man said the children were his and he begged me to smuggle them into the United States, where they would be safe and "grow strong." After listening to me explain how that was impossible, the man quietly said thank you, and with an expression of absolute despair, climbed into the cab of the truck and drove away.


Comptroller Warns on Budget
City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said yesterday that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's proposed first budget includes measures that may fall hundreds of millions of dollars short of Mr.
Giuliani's anticipations.
While he applauded the general direction of the budget, Mr.
Hevesi said the Mayor's plan "is still a work in progress."


A New System for Video Games
Newleaf Entertainment and Sega of America said today that they would test-market a new electronic delivery system for video games in several Blockbuster Video stores this summer.
Newleaf is the joint venture of I.B.M. and Blockbuster formed last year to explore new ways to deliver music, movies, video games and other entertainment media.


California Insurance Crisis Seen
With property insurance companies facing worse-than-expected claims from the California earthquake, the industry is signaling homeowners that they can expect higher premiums, tougher guidelines on what will be insured and fewer companies offering earthquake policies.
Steve Young, director of a trade group representing insurance agents and brokers, said the desire of insurance companies to limit their exposure to future earthquake losses was "a crisis in the making for California insurance consumers." In the months since the January earthquake, more and more California property owners have been trying to buy earthquake insurance.


Pacers Can Play With Knicks
The Pacers left town this afternoon feeling pretty good and mighty tough, if not absolutely certain that they can beat the Knicks in New York.
What they do know is what the numbers tell them.
They have climbed back into the Eastern Conference finals, tied at 2-2 a series few believe they can win, and granted themselves the opportunity to at least mouth what was unfathomable a couple of months ago.


St. Petersburg Journal; The Russians Revisit Stalin's Never-Never Land
The old man stood rock still, his back straight as a girder, contemplating Stalin.
He seemed transfixed by the huge 1937 painting by Grigory M. Shegal called "Leader, Teacher and Friend." Under a huge statue of Lenin, Stalin pays a visit to a 1935 congress of collective farmers and industrial workers.


Treasury Securities Post Drop
Prices of Treasury securities declined yesterday after a sharp upswing in commodity prices heightened fears of inflation.
The general decline in the market was also aided by growing concern ahead of Friday's employment report for May, the first look into last month's economy.
Traders said some of the other reasons bonds were down yesterday included end-of-month position squaring and weakness in foreign bond markets.


Marcel Bich, 79, Dies; Cheap Pens Yielded Riches
Baron Marcel Bich, whose inexpensive Bic disposable pens, lighters and razors made him wealthy enough to sustain an 11-year quest for the America's Cup, died on Monday in Paris.
He was 79 and lived in suburban Neuilly-sur-Seine.
After fixing up a leaky shed in Clichy, a northern Paris suburb, after World War II, Baron Bich and a partner, Edouard Buffard, began turning out inexpensive penholders and pencil cases.
Later he obtained the patent rights to a ball-point pen invented by a Hungarian, Ladislas Biro, and formed Societe Bic in 1953. (The baron's name and the pen's are pronounced beek in French.)


Ex-Citicorp Officer Now Deal Maker
Richard S. Braddock, who abruptly resigned as president of Citicorp nearly two years ago and had subsequently either held or been rumored to be in the running for the top slots at some of the country's biggest corporations, has apparently decided to be a deal maker instead.
Following extensive discussions with a number of Wall Street firms, Mr.
Braddock, who is 52, has accepted a partnership at Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice, the leveraged buyout firm.


Critic's Notebook; The First Spoleto Without Menotti
"A fake festival," Gian Carlo Menotti called it from afar on the CBS program "Sunday Morning." Odd, but the real thing seemed to be happening in the teeming streets right outside my hotel window here as the city was awakening to the fifth day of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A.
Mr.
Menotti, who founded the event in 1977 and guided it through 17 seasons, is, of course, entitled to his bias.
And the current season, which runs through next Sunday, might not have been to his liking in any case.
But he was not speaking from firsthand experience.
In fact, Mr.
Menotti has had no contact with the festival or the city of Charleston since he resigned as artistic director in October after a protracted series of squabbles, which need no further rehearsal here.


Police Raid Brooklyn Ring Holding Smuggled Children
Smashing what they described as a smuggling ring that brought children to Brooklyn from Jamaica, detectives raided a Flatbush apartment yesterday and arrested five adults they accused of collecting thousands of dollars from anxious immigrant parents.
Two children had arrived from Jamaica over the weekend -- a boy and a girl, each 9 years old, the police said.
They were sharing bunk beds in the cramped two-bedroom apartment with six younger children who are relatives of the adults who were taken into custody.
All eight appeared to be in good condition, the police said, but as a precaution they were taken to local hospitals for observation.


INSIDE
Public Workers' Free Speech
A splintered Supreme Court defined the free-speech rights of government employees, placing new limits on the power of agencies to punish workers for what they say.
Page A18.
Cuomo's Good Old Days
As Governor Cuomo prepares to run again, with his popularity dangerously low, his approach is a politics of nostalgia aimed at reminding voters why they once admired him.
Page B1.
Canucks Win the Opener
After a shot by Brian Leetch of the Rangers hit the crossbar, the Canucks' Greg Adams scored and Vancouver beat New York, 3-2, in Game 1 of the Stanley Cup finals.
Page B11.


Padres Give Pirates Triskaidekaphobia
Padres 15, Pirates 5
San Diego tied a team record by scoring 13 runs in the second inning as the Padres won their fifth straight game, 15-5, over the visiting Pittsburgh Pirates last night.
The Padres set a club record by having the first 11 batters reach base in the inning, and matched a club mark for runs and hits in an inning set last Aug. 24 in the first inning against St.
Louis.


In School
In April, as part of an exchange program, nine top seniors from Window Rock High School on the Navajo reservation journeyed to Connecticut to spend six weeks at one of the nation's premier prep schools, Choate Rosemary Hall.
The Navajos were quite nervous.
"I was worrying," said Thelma Woodie, who's among the top 25 seniors at Window Rock and will be attending Scottsdale Community College this fall.
"They told us President Kennedy went to Choate. They go to Harvard, Yale, Williams -- I've heard of those places, but we're not ready for those schools yet."


Personal Health
IN hopes of shedding the need for corrective lenses to drive a car, navigate a sidewalk or recognize a friend from across the street, hundreds of thousands of nearsighted people have undergone an increasingly popular yet still controversial eye operation called radial keratotomy.
Those for whom it has meant new-found freedom from eyeglasses and contact lenses swear by the procedure and often urge their myopic friends to follow suit.
But despite a high rate of satisfaction -- six years later, 74 percent of 328 patients in a study said their preoperative goals were completely met -- many experts believe there is good reason for caution.
A primary concern is that healthy eyes, albeit with poor distance vision, are being operated upon, possibly injured and in a way rendered permanently abnormal.


WORKING OUT WITH: Thomas S. Foley; A Veteran Logroller Works on His Triceps
Any way you slice it, Thomas S. Foley, the Speaker of the House, is a big man.
He stands 6 feet 3 inches.
He weighs 225 pounds.
His biceps measure 16 1/2 inches around.
As he lopes into the University Club gym here for his daily predawn workout, you immediately comprehend the ancient primal correlation between size and leadership.
But with his purple tank top ripped at the seams to accommodate his bulging chest, the Speaker looks more like a Beastie Boy than the official who is two heartbeats away from the Presidency.
Mr.
Foley, who is 65, has been on a health kick for four years.
Although he remains sizable, he was once even bigger.
Those old televison shots of him presiding over joint sessions of Congress, pictures that you thought were screen distortions because he seemed so outsize, were not optical illusions.
At his biggest, he checked in at 287 pounds.


Harry Levin, Literary Critic, Is Dead at 81
Harry Levin, a founder of comparative literature as a discipline and a literary critic, died on Sunday at Youville Hospital in Cambridge, Mass., where he lived.
He was 81.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said Harvard University.


City Asks $100 Million for Coliseum Parcel
A day before the start of the trial to determine whether Mortimer B. Zuckerman's $338 million contract to build at the New York Coliseum is valid, the city and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday formally agreed to offer him half the site.
In an agreement which has still to be accepted by Mr.
Zuckerman, he would pay $80 million for half the property and $20 million would come from city subsidies from annual tax payments generated by the project.


Saint or Sinner, the Voters Say, Rostenkowski Isn't Washed Up
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the powerful, gruff, burly son of ethnic Chicago, was indicted on Federal corruption charges in Washington today, but back here in his Fifth Congressional District, no one was ready to write his political obituary just yet.
The smart money says old Rosty may not beat the Feds, their 17-count indictment or their buckets of money, and he already has to step down immediately as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, but, come November, he will be re-elected, just like the 17 other times the voters have returned him to Congress with a pat on the back for bringing home so much bacon.


Sports of The Times; Getting The Rangers' Number
NOW 1940 isn't the only number haunting the Rangers.
How about 19:26?


Bank Buying The Building Named for It
The Bankers Trust Building, which takes up the block from 48th to 49th Street on Park Avenue, is no longer that in name only.
In a complicated transaction, the bank is buying the part of its headquarters building that it does not already own.
The deal should close by late fall.
The bank is exercising an option to buy the property according to a formula based on its fair market value as of Jan 1, 1993.
The bank and the owner of the property, Sigmund Sommer Properties, could not agree on an appraisal of the building.


Look to Television's Role in Youth Violence; Illegitimacy Problem
To the Editor:
"A Boy in Search of Respect Discovers How to Kill" (front page, May 15) paints a tragic picture of Shaul Linyear's growth into a teen-age killer.
You also convey the sadness and pain his mother suffers.
What you fail to address is the marital history of Shaul's mother.
As best I can tell, she has four children, is not married, and no man has ever really been involved in her children's lives.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST UNION CORP., Charlotte, N.C., a financial holding company, agreed to acquire Home Federal Savings Bank, Washington D.C., for about $25 million in stock.
NORTHERN TELECOM LTD., Mississauga, Ontario, said it had received orders for more than $82 million worth of switching equipment from the Chinese provinces of Tianjin, Shaanxi and Hebei.


Wine Talk
ON Aug. 15, 1944, 10 weeks after D-Day, another Allied force disembarked on the beaches of France.
On that day, some 1,000 vessels stood off the Mediterranean coast and put several hundred thousand American and French troops ashore at St.-Raphael, St.-Tropez and Marseilles.
Their mission: to race north through the Rhone Valley to join the Allied forces fighting their way eastward from the Normandy beaches toward Paris and the Rhine.
The landings and the campaign that followed were known as Operation Anvil.


850 Workers At Chrysler Go on Strike
About 850 salaried workers who design Chrysler cars and trucks walked off the job this morning in a dispute between the auto maker and the United Automobile Workers union over subcontracting work to nonunion workers and companies.
The workers who went on strike earn $16 to $27 an hour as draftsmen, clay modelers, designers and clerical assistants, said David Corless, financial secretary of U.A.W.
Local 412 in Warren, Mich.
The union, he said, objects to the hiring of nonunion companies to do similar work and to having nonunion workers stand "shoulder to shoulder" with union members at the technical center.


Jamaica and U.S. Near Deal On Haitian Processing Center
After weeks of looking for a country where American officials can process fleeing Haitians, the United States is close to obtaining agreement from Jamaica, American officials said today.
William H. Gray 3d, President Clinton's special adviser on Haiti, flew to Jamaica today to work out final details in the negotiations, officials said, adding that the Clinton Administration was seeking to determine whether the processing would be done on Jamaican land or in American ships anchored off Kingston, the Jamaican capital.


Coleman Enters Plea
DERRICK COLEMAN pleaded not guilty yesterday to charges that he assaulted three teen-agers outside a Manhattan night spot on April 30 after being taunted about a playoff loss to the Knicks.


Seneca Foods Corp.(SENE) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Chased by Mistaken Officers, A Man Dies in Fall From Roof
Two undercover investigators seeking inmates who absconded from state prison work-release programs spotted a man in Brooklyn yesterday whom they believed closely resembled one of the escaped inmates.
After a chase, the man fell to his death from a building roof, the police said.
The police later determined that the man was not the person they were looking for, but said that he had been wanted on an unrelated drug charge.


Cause of Cystic Fibrosis Is Traced to the Stone Age
The most common mutation that causes cystic fibrosis, a deadly genetic disease of the lungs and pancreas, is far more ancient than anybody suspected.
The mutation arose in Europe midway through the Stone Age and spread across the continent along with the restless bands of hunters and gatherers who bore it, scientists have reported.
Using genetic samples from 15 different European groups to reconstruct molecularly the origin and evolution of cystic fibrosis, a widespread hereditary disease, researchers have concluded that the mutation is at least 52,000 years old, 10 to 20 times the age previously accorded it.


Let's Be Clearer About Haiti Invasion
To the Editor:
The report that President Clinton might seek to justify the use of military force in Haiti on the ground that continued military rule may cause a refugee outflow to the United States is somewhat disturbing (front page, May 20).


German Echoes From 1943 Set Off A Book Sensation
Inside the ghostly hall of a church that was heavily damaged in an Allied air raid in 1945 and has not been rebuilt, a semicircle of German actors gathered over the weekend to read from an extraordinary historical work that has become a publishing sensation here.
The book, called "Echolot: A Collective Diary," is a 2,400-page mosaic documenting just two months in German history, January and February 1943.
This was when Nazi troops lost the epic battle for Stalingrad and when many Germans began to fear that they might not win the war after all.
It was also a period of intense repression in Germany and daily mass murder in death camps throughout the Reich.


Look to Television's Role in Youth Violence
To the Editor:
"When Trouble Starts Young," your May 15-18 series on the explosion of youth violence in the United States, focuses on the contribution of media violence to this growing and horrible problem.
How can we expect children not to act violently when they spend three to four hours a day watching television that carries violent images into their homes?
By the time the average American child finishes high school he or she has witnessed 18,000 entertaining television murders -- presented without clear vision, guilt or remorse.


Comair Holdings Inc.(COMR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


The Pop Life
A 'Lion King' Preview
In the next few weeks, Walt Disney will discover whether its magic touch extends to soundtracks as well as animated films.
Yesterday, two million copies of the soundtrack for Disney's latest cartoon feature, "The Lion King," went on sale around the country.
This is the largest initial shipment of a recording Disney has ever sent out.
Although sales of Disney's "Aladdin" soundtrack didn't hit the two-million mark until a full year after the movie was released, the company's sales department expects this shipment of "The Lion King" to last just 30 to 60 days.
Disney also sent out one million copies of products related to the soundtrack, like sing-along, read-along, and play-along cassette packages for children.
The "Lion King" soundtrack is in department stores, toy stores, and Wal-Mart and Kmart stores, as well as drugstores, grocery stores, bookstores and, of course, the Disney stores and theme parks, said Mark Jaffe, a vice president at Walt Disney Records.
Mr.
Jaffe called the blitz "the most extensive marketing and promotional effort we've ever put together."


On MTV this summer, sun and fun may blur the line between ad messages and entertainment.
IF life's a beach, as bumper stickers proclaim, MTV Music Television might assert that the beach is life.
MTV, the music video cable television network, is again centering its youthful summer marketing and promotional activities on beach motifs.
With Memorial Day weekend marking the unofficial start of the summer season, MTV's two-part beach-oriented programming efforts are already under way: Beach MTV, a series of visits to beaches across the country, and the MTV Beach House, a home in East Quogue, on eastern Long Island, from which the network presents regular features like video hit parades.


Herva Nelli, 85, Soprano and Chef
Herva Nelli, an Italian-born soprano who became a professional cook when her singing career ended, died yesterday at the Sharon Country Manor in Sharon, Conn.
She was 85.
Her sister, Delfa, said the cause was leukemia.


The Strategies Driving An E.D.S.-Sprint Deal
To understand why the long-distance company Sprint is eager to merge with the computer-services provider E.D.S., talk to a potential customer, Jim DiGiore.
As the manager of information systems at Empire of America Realty, a mortgage company based in Buffalo, Mr.
DiGiore has developed a high-speed computer network that links lending officers in 20 cities.
Loan applications, home appraisals and credit reports fly across the network electronically as the company seeks to speed up loan approvals and pull in more business.


Market Place; Opinion is divided on what the future holds for BellSouth.
FOR BellSouth, 1994 has been one affront after another.
Earlier this year, QVC Network, BellSouth's partner, lost its bid to win Paramount.
Moreover, the QVC alliance saddled BellSouth with a worthless option to buy large amounts of QVC stock at what is now twice the market price.


A Disappointed Angler and the Ones That Got Away
When Ron was a little boy in Minnesota, he dreamed of growing up to marry someone special, own a resort and catch the biggest fish in the lake where he has a little ice-fishing cabin ("no girls allowed").
Now, with an arctic storm howling down out of the north, the grown-up Ron is out on the frozen lake with a couple of six-packs of beer and his bait box and fishing tackle -- all alone, trying once again to get a hook into the Big One.


Intermagnetics
Intermagnetics General's main business is making superconducting wire, though investors have been betting it will win more immediate profits from a new ozone-friendly refrigerant.
But an article over the weekend in Barron's cast doubt on the product and said Intermagnetics, trading at more than 100 times earnings, might be overvalued.
The stock price dropped sharply.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CHARGES THREATEN AN INSTITUTION
A few dozen elderly men gather each day in the main hall of the Tung On Association to drink tea and play mah-jongg.
Members like to say that their association is as innocent as their gatherings.
But Federal prosecutors have charged Clifford Wong, the Tung On's longtime president, with leading a criminal enterprise that killed 10 people and participated in armed robbery and heroin trafficking.
A1.


Executive Changes
PIEDMONT BANKGROUP INC., Martinsville, Va., a bank holding company, named Michael Brenan chairman, president and chief executive.
SCOTT PAPER CO., Philadelphia, appointed Russell A. Kersh senior vice president of finance and administration and John P. Murtagh senior vice president and general counsel.


Following Melee, Parks Department Alters Policy on Concert Permits
A day after 20 concertgoers were arrested in a bottle-throwing clash with the police in Tompkins Square Park, the New York City parks commissioner said that the department would make it more difficult for promoters to obtain permits for concerts in public parks.
The policy changes, Commissioner Henry J. Stern said, will target the kinds of music that he said attract fans prone to violence.
He cited punk rock and heavy metal.


Keeping Track


Howard Stern to Star, Condensed, on TV
Howard Stern, who has been entertaining and offending radio listeners for years, is to bring his distinctive brand of humor to cable television this month under a deal announced yesterday by E Entertainment Television.
Starting in mid-June, E is to position six robotic cameras in Mr.
Stern's radio studio in New York each weekday morning at 6 for his five-hour show on WXRK (92.3-FM).
The cable channel, which is based in Los Angeles, plans to edit his commentaries and interviews to a half-hour.


Effort Is Begun By Dominicans To Seal Border
The Deputy Secretary of the Armed Forces stomped along a dirt path by the muddy Massacre River, glaring at hundreds of Haitians on the other side sitting under trees or wading out to probe for a place to cross.
Every few dozen yards on the Dominican side of the river was a freshly arrived paratrooper in the black beret of the elite Airborne Brigade, blocking the countless trails worn toward places selling gasoline or other scarce goods.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about the Indianapolis 500 misstated the comparison between the race's television rating strength and those of Nascar stock car races.
The Indianapolis 500 gets better ratings than the average Nascar race.


Kmart's Spinoff Plan Drawing Opposition
Angry shareholders are raising the heat on the Kmart Corporation, threatening to derail its plans to spin off fragments of some of its specialty store units and lashing out at its management and directors for failing to stem slipping market share and profits.
Yesterday, the College Retirement Equities Fund said it would vote its 1.14 million shares against a proposal to sell 20 to 30 percent stakes in four of Kmart's specialty store chains to the public and against the company's slate of directors.


Democratic Convention: Fete for Incumbents
Unlike last week's Republican State Convention, where nominations were decided in three days of back-room deals, the Democratic convention at the Buffalo Convention Center on Wednesday and Thursday has been scripted as a coronation of incumbents.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine, State Comptroller H. Carl McCall, Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell and United States Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan are all expected to be nominated during the two days of the convention.
Each will deliver an acceptance speech, with Mr.
Cuomo's address scheduled as the convention finale on Thursday afternoon.
The Committee
The delegates to the convention are the 357 members of the Democratic State Committee, who are elected to represent their Assembly districts.
Their votes are weighted to reflect the relative strength of the Democratic vote in their districts in the 1990 gubernatorial election.
That means that Democratic strongholds like Brooklyn, Manhattan, Queens, Nassau County and Erie County hold the most influence.


Public &amp; Private; The Nurse Paradigm
An apple a day keeps the nurse away? Don't worry, you'll get used to the idea.
Because one of the most revolutionary parts of health care reform in America is bound to be the burgeoning role that nurses will play, including providing many of the services that were once confined to physicians.
Their new prominence will benefit patients -- and raise some questions about the importance of tender loving care and the economic value of medical services.


Corrections
A chart in The Week in Review on Sunday showing the corporate holdings of Rupert Murdoch's company, News Corporation Ltd., referred incorrectly to five units.
Barnes &amp; Noble Inc. was never owned by Mr.
Murdoch or any of his companies.
The San Antonio Express-News was sold by News Corporation in 1992.
Fox Television Stations has 184 affiliates, not 140.
The Herald &amp; Weekly Times Ltd. is in Victoria, Australia, not London.
Ansett Transport Industries Ltd. is an airline, not an air cargo carrier.


A Giant Void in Congress
While many Americans, politicians included, have switched to grilled fish and wine spritzers, Dan Rostenkowski has stuck with rare steaks and martinis.
He is a throwback to an earlier era -- to a time when Congress was dominated by a few giants, when big-city political machines were central influences in the Democratic Party, when personal loyalty was valued more in politics than ideology and when passing laws was more important than public relations.


Krzyzewski to Stay As Coach at Duke
Duke averted an even bigger loss than its 1994 title-game defeat by Arkansas as MIKE KRZYZEWSKI announced yesterday that he would remain as coach.
Last week, the 14-year Duke coach conceded that he was examining other job opportunities, reportedly in the National Basketball Association.
"I wasn't in a career crisis," said Krzyzewski at a news conference in Durham, N.C.
"It wasn't looking so much at professional as it was just looking at everything."


No Headline
"The allegations contained in today's indictment represent a betrayal of the public trust for personal gain. In essence, this indictment alleges that Congressman Rostenkowski used his elective office office to perpetuate an extensive fraud on the American people." ERIC H. HOLDER JR., United States Attorney.  [ A1:6. ]


Bart Simpson, Meet Bobby Bo: Fox Could Steal Home With the Right Pitch
Does Rupert Murdoch's Fox Network want baseball?
Fox is a network that loves to tweak the television establishment.
It proved that by agreeing to pay $1.58 billion for National Football League rights last December, and again last week by investing $500 million in a company that owns or will own 12 stations -- eight of them strong CBS affiliates.


Eckerd Corp.(ECK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Reviews/Television; Tony Bennett and MTV: Talk About Bedfellows
For people who were still teen-agers around 1950, Tony Bennett is embedded in memory.
His renditions of songs like "Because of You" and "Blue Velvet" dominated every jukebox in just about every ice cream parlor and saloon across the country.
The waiter from Astoria could sing, no doubt about it.
So what if he wore a toupee and wasn't as conventionally sexy as Frank Sinatra?
Jump ahead 44 years.
Who is one of the biggest pop music phenomena of the moment?
Tony Bennett has not just bridged the generation gap; he has demolished it.
He has solidly connected with a younger crowd weaned on rock.
And there have been no compromises.


Foot Notes
Lemonade Festival
With summer on the doorstep, the City Bakery, at 22 East 17th Street and Sony Plaza, 550 Madison Avenue (55th Street), is beginning its monthlong lemonade festival.
It starts today at noon, with free lemonade and popcorn.
For the rest of the month, the lemonade will be $2 a cup.
Maury Rubin, the bakery's owner, has come up with lemonades in shades including pale gold, brown, pink and red.
The flavors include a subtle ginger, an alluring darjeeling tea, and champagne.
Boiled Peanuts by Mail
Boiled peanuts are a Virginia specialty, but they are sometimes difficult to find even on their home turf, to say nothing of towns north of the Mason-Dixon line.
But Matthew Lee, who grew up in Charleston, S.C., has started selling them by mail.
He is also selling to some restaurants and plans to have retail outlets soon.


Fed Did Right in Raising Interest Rates
To the Editor:
Re "The Fed's Latest Mistake" by Sam Nakagama (Op-Ed, May 19):


First, There Must Be Compost


CHRONICLE
To the world, she was Marilyn Monroe, the quintessentially glamorous movie star.
To BERNIECE BAKER MIRACLE, she was Norma Jean Mortensen, a long-lost half sister.
Along with her daughter, Mona Rae Miracle, Mrs.
Miracle has written "My Sister Marilyn," a book being published by Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill today, which would have been the actress's 68th birthday.


Couples Looks to Buick
FRED COUPLES, who has been sidelined since March 6 with a herniated disk in his lower back, will return to the PGA Tour next week at the Buick Classic at the Westchester Country Club in Rye, N.Y., according to people familiar with his plans.
Although the entry has yet to be made official, the only thing that could prevent Couples's appearance at the tournament, which runs June 9-12, would be a recurrence of the back injury that forced him to withdraw before the final round of the Doral-Ryder Open.
The original injury, suffered while he was warming up before the final round, kept Couples out of 13 PGA Tour events.


Village Super Market Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 23


Lawyer to Propose Settlement for Suit on Crown Heights
The lawyer for a group of Hasidic leaders in Brooklyn said yesterday that he would propose a settlement in the Federal lawsuit against New York City and former Mayor David N. Dinkins stemming from the racial violence in Crown Heights in the summer of 1991.
The lawyer, Franklyn H. Snitow, would not say what the terms the plaintiffs would accept but said any settlement would include a cash payment by the city and a consent decree from officials to react more forcefully when disturbances flare up.


In Shift, State Farm Will Insure Battered Women
Weeks after receiving adverse publicity on the issue, State Farm Insurance announced today that it would no longer deny life insurance or health insurance to the victims of domestic violence.
"We're just not the kind of company that wants to make victims out of victims," said K. C. Eynatten, a spokeswoman for the company.
"It became clear to us that that's what was happening."


N.J. Bike Helmet Law Is Found to Save Lives
WITH cycling season now in full swing, millions of people, young and older, are still riding around without protection against serious and possibly fatal head injury.
But not Tiffany Thompson, an 11-year-old girl from Medford, N.J., who was struck by a car while biking two summers ago, just two months after the state's helmet law took effect.
As the law mandated, Tiffany was wearing a safety helmet; she was spared injury more serious than a broken leg when she was flung head first into the front grill of a Mercedes Benz.
Her helmet broke, but not her head.
Her kind of experience is not unique.
According to James A. Arena, director of New Jersey's Department of Law and Public Safety, in the first full year of New Jersey's bicycle helmet law, bicycle-related fatalities among the youngsters covered fell 80 percent, from 10 deaths to 2.
The law, which took effect on July 1, 1992, states that bike riders and passengers under age 14 must wear helmets that meet accepted safety standards, either the ANSI Z90.4 standard of the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1990 standard for protective headgear.
Helmets meeting these standards are so labeled.


Ukraine: Not for the Fainthearted
S.
C.
Johnson &amp; Son Inc., the $3 billion family-owned company that makes clothes, floor wax, furniture cleaners, bug killers and air fresheners, has traditionally been challenged by new frontiers.
When the company opened a plant in Britain 80 years ago, it was one of the first American corporations to go abroad.
At the end of the cold war, it trailblazed again -- this time into the uncertain precincts of Ukraine.


Police Head Ousted In Mount Vernon
The Mayor of Mount Vernon, N.Y., said that he had ousted the city's Police Commissioner yesterday, citing unspecified discontent with the police force.
He said the move was unrelated to the arrests of three officers three weeks ago on graft charges.
The Commissioner, Clyde A. Isley, could not be reached for comment.
He became the commissioner a year ago, after having served as deputy commissioner.


Review/Television; For News-Magazine Fans, a Double-Feature Opportunity
News of the arrival of another news magazine may not jolt many viewers out of their prime-time doze, but it does makes CBS the first network to offer two such programs one after the other.
"America Tonight" has been scheduled to lead into good old "48 Hours," perhaps in hopes of attracting news-magazine fans who have had to sit around and wait for their fix until 10 P.M.
So why is the new program different from all other such programs?
Well, the main presences are Deborah Norville, lately of the late "Street Stories," and Dana King, who was a co-anchor of ABC's "Good Morning America Sunday" before she joined CBS a few months ago.
The reporters are Bob McKeown, Peter Van Sant and Bill Geist.
Also promised, though not available for preview, are a guest commentator and some sort of viewer participation.


To French Soccer Owner-Politician, There's No Bad Publicity
Besieged by judges, creditors, tax inspectors and political foes, a French industrialist-turned-politician seems to be living proof that all publicity is good publicity.
Despite his troubles, Bernard Tapie's political career is flourishing.
Almost daily, French newspapers have carried articles about judges demanding that his immunity as a Member of Parliament be lifted, about a major bank threatening to seize his property to cover $215 million in debts and about accusations of a tax dodge involving his yacht.


Look to Television's Role in Youth Violence; Mistaken Approach
To the Editor:
What is the point of your series on juvenile murderers?
Identifying the killers by name and face may only add to their sick psyches.
The few cases I have read seem to have no remorse.
I can just hear one bragging: "Look! My picture's in The New York Times!" Certainly, these children need attention.
Yet, this tragedy besetting some of our country's youth deserves the front page.
Perhaps you should rethink how to report it.
MARION BERNSTEIN  New York, May 20, 1994


Johnson Drives In Clincher
When "Let's Go Rangers" is louder than "Let's Go Mets" at Shea Stadium, it isn't the Mets' night.
But it was a night for Howard Johnson.
Wearing a Colorado Rockies uniform and trying to get accustomed to the visitors' dugout last night, Johnson found himself a key player in his team's 3-2 victory.


McLean Gets Sweet Justice From Canucks
In the glare of the competition for a Stanley Cup, and in the aftermath of one of the most memorable goaltending performances in a recent final playoff series, Pat Quinn, the coach of the Vancouver Canucks, was talking about justice.
Quinn's team had just come from behind to beat the Rangers, 3-2, in the first game of the series.
His goaltender, Kirk McLean, had just made the most saves in the finals in 23 years.
His team had taken McLean's excellence for what it was -- an inspiring second chance to win a game that easily could have been lost.


Interactive Communication Is Focus of Digital Center
The Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that it would establish a center in Tarrytown, N.Y., this summer to transform information contained on paper and other conventional forms into digital signals suitable for distribution on interactive video networks in the future.
Charles F. Christ, vice president of Digital Equipment's storage business unit, said the center, and others now being planned, would help the company develop new business, by filling a gap between companies who produce entertainment and forms of information and those who distribute it, like cable companies and regional telephone companies.


UAL Revises Buyout Price
The UAL Corporation, the parent company of United Air Lines, has lowered for the second time its estimate of what shareholders will get from a planned employee buyout, citing changes made to satisfy the pilots union.
The board of UAL now values the deal at $143 to $147 a share for existing stockholders, down from as much as $170 a share in late December.


War Exercise With Russia Is Postponed
In what Western diplomats said was a concession to nationalist sentiment here, the United States has agreed to postpone joint American-Russian military exercises scheduled for early July in Russia.
Officials said the Russian Government had requested the postponement, citing nationalist opposition to the presence of American troops on Russian soil.
The officials said they hoped the exercises, which have been supported by the Russian Defense Ministry, would take place later and begin in the United States rather than in Russia.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
After many years in Manhattan, we moved to Park Slope.
With a garden in back, Prospect Park half a block away, and the quiet, tree-lined streets, we feel more in harmony with nature than we ever did in the city.
Except, that is, for the car alarms.
Parked cars, school kids, trash collectors and even loud noises are enough to set them off.
It's enough to drive a person crazy.


Prosecutor No Stranger To Corruption in Politics
Within hours of becoming the chief Federal prosecutor in the District of Columbia in October, Eric H. Holder Jr. found himself in his new office poring over the files on what was to become the biggest case of his career: the corruption investigation of Representative Dan Rostenkowski.
Mr.
Holder was the third and, it turns out, the last of three Federal prosecutors to oversee the investigation that led to a 17-count indictment of Mr.
Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, on Tuesday.
The broad felony indictment charges Mr.
Rostenkowski with embezzling more than $500,000 from his Congressional office over 20 years.


Israel Land Development Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Wickman Can't Pass Yankees' Closer Test
Bob Wickman was left on the mound in the dramatic ninth inning last night against the White Sox.
Left to prove himself as the closer the Yankees have been futilely searching for.
Left to try to navigate through perhaps the most precarious situation of his career.
Wickman was given the chance to shine but instead made the Yankees shudder.
No matter what Manager Buck Showalter mumbled after the White Sox had scored three runs in the ninth to swipe a 5-4 victory at Yankee Stadium, this was a test of the bullpen.
It was a significant test.
It was Wickman's chance to snare the closer's role and sprint with it.
But Wickman stumbled.
So did Steve Howe.
So did the Yankees.
Even if Showalter denied it, this was a test and Wickman failed.


Corrections
An article on May 9 about research on silicones at the Dow Corning Corporation that led the company to manufacture silicone breast implants misattributed the statement that documents about the research had been turned over to a Federal grand jury by a scientist, Dr.
Robert S. Lake.
It was made by a lawyer for the plaintiffs in a class action lawsuit against implant makers, not by Dr.
Lake's lawyer, A. Wayland Cooke.


Litton Industries(LIT,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Home Hopes Spiked With One Choke Sign
Was it Reggie Miller turning the Garden into his own party, crashing the Knicks' good time with a supreme shooting performance simply out this league, out of this world?
Was it that the Knicks' offense was, once again, simply exposed with bad passing, hesitant shooting and overall sloppy play?
Was it only that the Knicks by playing superior basketball only in spurts have helped create a monster in the Pacers?
Was it Spike Lee?


Hartford Whalers Are Sold
The Hartford Whalers were sold last night for $47.5 million to two Michigan computer company executives who intend to keep the National Hockey League team in Hartford.
The new owners, PETER KARMANOS and THOMAS THEWES, are the two principal owners of Compuware Corporation, a Michigan computer company. (AP)


We Need Goodwill Games Aquatic Facility
To the Editor:
As a competitive masters swimmer, I believe Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's criticism of the proposed aquatics facility for the 1998 Goodwill Games (news article, May 21) shows that he is unaware of some basic facts about aquatic sports.


Commencements; Lani Guinier at Hunter: 'Silence Is Not Golden'
Lani Guinier told the Hunter College graduating class yesterday that the lesson she learned from her brush with Washington politics last year is that silence is not golden.
During her speech, Ms.
Guinier said that after President Clinton withdrew her nomination as assistant attorney general for civil rights, some said that she should not have been so vocal about her views.


Bias Charged In Selection Of U.S. Juries
For years, the Federal court district that covers three New York City boroughs and Long Island has brought many people in from Long Island -- with its mostly white population -- to serve on juries in Brooklyn.
But people from the city portion of the district -- with its larger percentage of minority residents -- do not serve on juries in the district's two Long Island courthouses.
Defense lawyers have increasingly argued that the disparity is unfair to black and Hispanic defendants, and the Federal prosecutor for the district also wants the system changed because, he says, this perception undercuts confidence in the courts.


Clinton Accuser to Begin Speaking Out, Supporter Says


AT WORK WITH: Christine Dunham, Lucette Katerndahl and Cheryl Yeager; And Baby Makes Pas de Trois
THE no-nonsense stagehands at the Metropolitan Opera House did a double take last Friday morning.
A strange sound, not attributable to any known composer, drifted through the air.
It was the lyrical giggles of children under walking age.
"Hey," one of the men shouted in a Bronx bellow, "The Babies are here."


Essay; Reactor Roulette
Stalinist North Korea watched the way Serbia diddled the "Great Powers" of the West -- a promise here, a false concession there -- and proceeded to use the same technique on the "Great Powers" of the East.
Duplicity worked again; years of hand-wringing diplomacy gave North Korea time to produce enough fissionable material for perhaps a half-dozen nuclear bombs.


Commissioner Speculates on Why He Lost Job
Clyde A. Isley, who was dismissed Tuesday as this city's Police Commissioner, speculated today that the action stemmed from his failure to inform Mayor Ronald A. Blackwood about a Federal investigation into police corruption here.
Mr.
Isley said the Mayor offered him no explanation when he asked for his resignation on Tuesday morning.
Mayor Blackwood has denied that he removed Mr.
Isley because he did not notify him of the investigation.


Settlement for Cabby Shot by Policeman
A Haitian cabdriver who was shot by a New York City police officer two years ago, even though he had his hands up, won $1.5 million from the city and $5,000 from the officer in a settlement approved yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The driver, Jacques Camille, 38, who was shot once in the abdomen, has been unable to work since the shooting.
The settlement will amount to about $1 million for Mr.
Camille, after legal fees.


Peat Marwick Eliminating 400 to 500 Jobs
KPMG Peat Marwick, the big accounting firm, is eliminating 400 to 500 jobs nationwide, mostly among junior-level staff, a spokeswoman said yesterday.
The spokeswoman, Barbara A. Kraft, called the layoffs normal "seasonal adjustments" undertaken each year once tax and auditing work on public companies is completed.
She confirmed the layoffs in response to calls from reporters.


Arbour Won 4 Cups, Many Hearts
THEY keep bringing these high-profile coaches to New York to win one championship, just one stinking championship.
Riley and Keenan are trying to muck one out in the Garden this month.
Daly and Neilson came and went.
Green and Reeves are trying to import their touch from other places.
Just one championship, and the whole metropolitan area would go nuts.
Meanwhile, here was Al Arbour, retiring once and for all yesterday, and he won four straight Stanley Cups.
Arbour was the most successful handler of athletes in New York since Charles Dillon Stengel won five World Series from 1949 through 1953.
Casey used to say his job was to separate the five players who hated him from the five who weren't sure, and sometimes the numbers got higher.
But Arbour produced athletes who love him.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A scientist at AT&amp;T has discovered a flaw in the technology that the White House supports to let law enforcement officials eavesdrop on telephone and computer conversations.  [ Page A1. ]
After years of advising companies Harvard Business School Professor Michael E. Porter is turning to the inner cities.  [ D1. ]


Brooklyn Alma Mater Honors Justice Ginsburg


Reviews/Jazz; An Optimistic Way With the Saxophone
The saxophonist David Sanchez opened his second set at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night with a long version of the standard "Falling in Love With Love." It had a relaxed and improvisatory feel to it, like a tune that opens a recording session but is never intended to be on a recording.
Then he soloed, and the performance became taut.
Mr.
Sanchez, at 25 one of the finest young saxophonists in New York, can grab your attention.
He does it because he swings, and because his sense of swing is so appealing.
He has a nice lope in his playing, and when he finds himself boxed into a harmonic corner, when he's traveled as far from the chords as he can, he'll flick a rhythm and breeze right into a consonant note.
And he has a good sense for note choices, knowing exactly when to peel away from the harmony, when to accent a curdled note, when to turn a consonant note into a rhythmic battering ram so that it means something.
But everything comes back to his sense of swing, easy and optimistic without being simplistic.


Police Seeking 3 Teen-Age Girls In Killing of Cabby in Brooklyn
Three teen-age girls were being sought yesterday in the killing of a livery-cab driver in East New York, Brooklyn, in what may have been a robbery attempt, the police said.
The driver, Carlos Uzhca, 33, of Elmhurst, Queens, was shot about 4:30 P.M. while sitting in his cab outside 1082 Crescent Street, said Sgt.
Robert McDonald, a detective in the 75th Precinct.


Books of The Times; A Dark Moral Tale of Old New York
The Waterworks  By E. L. Doctorow  253 pages. Random House. $23.
The inspiration for E. L. Doctorow's haunting new novel, "The Waterworks," clearly comes from a mysteriously sinister four-page story, "The Water Works," which appeared in the author's 1984 collection, "Lives of the Poets." In the story, the narrator follows a black-bearded man to an artificial reservoir somewhere north of a city, and watches as the man pulls a drowned child from the water and drives away in a carriage.


No Headline
"My 8-year-old son asked me just this morning, 'Mama, why are all the presidents of the world living in their own country except ours?' He is only 8 years old, and he asks that. I was very much astonished. I told him that our president will soon be here." -- NADIA HAMDONI, a Palestinian in Jericho, referring to Yasir Arafat.  [ A1:3. ]


Calendar: City Gardens To Visit and Restore
Greenwich Village Gardens  Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, 47 Fifth Avenue (12th Street); (212) 924-3895.
There will be a self-guided tour of seven private gardens on Sunday, from 1 to 6 P.M., to benefit the society.
Horticulturists and landscape designers will be available in each garden to discuss design and materials.
Reservations are required.
Tickets, $50; members, $45.


Democrats Pick New York Slate Of Incumbents
Girding for a challenge from newly unified Republicans, New York's Democrats smoothly blessed a ticketful of incumbents for re-election at their state convention today, beginning with unanimous endorsements of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
But they could not mask undercurrents of apathy, anxiety and dissension -- or avoid contested primaries for Senator and State Attorney General.


Hearing on Douglas Death Date
With an estimated $100,000 at stake, the lawyer for the estate of Anne Scripps Douglas, the newspaper heiress, petitioned Surrogate's Court here today to change the official date of death of Mrs.
Douglas's husband, Scott, who has been accused of killing her.
The change would mean that Mr.
Douglas died before his wife and would thus prevent his estate from inheriting about $50,000 from Mrs.
Douglas and retaining an estimated $50,000 in assets that he had owned, said the lawyer, John Quinlan Kelly.


Germany Opts to Redo Old Ministries in Berlin
Criticized for trying to upholster its long-delayed move to the national capital in Berlin, the German Government said today it had decided to save $600 million by moving into spartan, existing buildings rather than try to complete comfortable new ones by the target date, the year 2000.
The Berlin city government has been pleading with the German federal Government to get the move underway before foreign investors and swarms of lobbyists who have already bought up prime real estate around Berlin give up and leave.
For a long time, Chancellor Helmut Kohl seemed the main obstacle to an expedited move, saying he didn't want to work out of an improvised office.


Ancient as China, New as a Sunrise; Men and Songbirds Keep a Ritual Alive on Lower East Side
Around 7 every morning, from early spring to late fall, the bird walkers of Chinatown take up their position at Sara Delano Roosevelt Park.
About 30 silver-haired men, cages in hand, stroll to the Delancey Street corner of the park, where they gingerly line up their cages, covered in cloth so their pets don't wake too early.
The men then retreat to benches and wait for the day to warm up and for their hua mei to sing.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a diagram yesterday explaining the extraction of plutonium from nuclear fuel rods referred incorrectly in some editions to the country suspected of diverting plutonium from its nuclear power program to make weapons.
It is North Korea, not South Korea.


As D-Day's anniversary nears, a cry is heard: The marketers are coming! The marketers are coming!
JUNE 1944: Dwight D. Eisenhower says, "O.K., let's go."
June 1994: Madison Avenue says, "O.K., let's sell."


Boost for the Netherlands
Still reeling from the defection of RUUD GULLIT on Monday, the Netherlands soccer team received a surprising boost last night when MARCO VAN BASTEN, the injured striker and three-time European player of the year, was pronounced 95 percent likely to play in World Cup games later this month.


Sidney Gilliat, 86, British Screenwriter And Movie Director
Sidney Gilliat, a British screenwriter, film director and producer who with his partner, Frank Launder, made a string of successful suspense and comedy films from the 1930's to the 1960's, died on Tuesday at his home in Pewsey Vale, England.
He was 86.
The cause was leukemia, his family said.


Journal; The Paleo-Hucksters
It wasn't the Devil who made me do it.
I had no choice.
If you were with your kids over the long Memorial Day weekend and they were dying to go to the movies and everyone was eager to get out of the house before cabin fever turned lethal, then you, too, made your way to "The Flintstones." It was the only new "family" movie at the multiplex for the holiday.
This is why "The Flintstones" took in a record $37.5 million last weekend, and it is also why those millions of ticket buyers went back to school or work on Tuesday a bit more bummed out than usual.
While it would be wrong to pin the decline and fall of Western civilization on 92 minutes of evanescent pap, a phenomenon like "The Flintstones" speaks volumes about why many children, not to mention adults, are alienated from so-called mainstream American cultural values -- and why they would rather consume violent, antisocial pop culture than family entertainment.
If "The Flintstones" is the norm in mass culture, a counterculture couldn't arrive a moment too soon.


Fleming Cos. In an Accord For Scrivner
The Fleming Companies agreed yesterday to buy Scrivner Inc. for $1.085 billion, in a deal that will make the combined companies the nation's largest food distributor, with sales of $19 billion.
"Every 10 or 20 years an opportunity this significant becomes available," said Robert Stauth, Fleming's chairman, in an interview.
"This is tailor-made for what we do."


People
*
Larry Conely was named to the new position of senior vice president and senior creative director at Ross Roy Communications, Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
He was previously a senior vice president and group creative director at Young &amp; Rubicam Detroit. *
Don S. Maurer, senior vice president and director of account services at Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., is leaving to join a client, the Timberland Co., Hampton, N.H., in the new position of senior vice president of worldwide marketing.
A successor at Mullen has not been named.


Margaret S. Gordon, 83, Dies; Economist and Prolific Author
Dr.
Margaret Shaughnessy Gordon, who became a prominent economist in an academic discipline long dominated by men, died on Saturday at her home in Berkeley, Calif.
She was 83.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Paradise Revisited; Harlem, Bot Intimate and Grand
DAY after day, dozens of tour buses drive through Harlem.
Their passengers, primarily European and Asian visitors, attend gospel brunches at the Cotton Club on West 125th Street (the original nightspot was farther uptown), eat soul food at Sylvia's on Malcolm X Boulevard, and afterward walk along 125th Street, buying souvenir T-shirts, caps and African textiles.
Then they go home, having seen a few highlights but not "the real Harlem," said Michael Henry Adams, the founder of the Upper Manhattan Society for Progress Through Preservation.
"They've missed the area's most architecturally or historically significant sights," he added.


Now, the Small Generation
Megan has the use of 72 words.
Of these 72 words, at least 10 are dedicated to colors, like red, blue, green, yellow and orange.
Though Megan can say orange, she cannot really distinguish that color from the color blue and sometimes, when looking at a clear summer sky, she points and says "orange." As far as orange juice goes, she likes it only when mixed with apple juice and calls both of these things "milk."
Megan, who recently turned 18 months, is part of a new generation, a group born after the Rodney King affair but before Rwanda, after Desert Storm but before "testilying," a generation that has known no President other than Bill Clinton and seems likely to call Hillary Clinton mother.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Erhaab Captures English Derby  Erhaab closed with a rush in the final 100 yards under 52-year-old jockey Willie Carson and won the English Derby by 1 1/4 lengths yesterday at Epsom, England, before 100,000 spectators, including Queen Elizabeth II.
King's Theater finished second ahead of Colonel Collins.
Near the halfway point of the mile-and-a-half race, Willie Ryan was thrown from Foyer.
He possibly broke ribs. (AP)
YACHTING  Could a Photo Finish Be in Sight?
The closest leg finish in the history of the Whitbread Round the World Race loomed yesterday as two yachts were within two miles of the leader with two days to go.
The Maxi entry New Zealand Endeavor held the slight advantage over Whitbread 60 Class yachts Yamaha and Tokio as the boats sailed the North Atlantic some 640 miles from the finish of the sixth and final leg at Southampton, England.
All three boats are on course to break by four days the previous Whitbread record for the 3,818-mile leg from Fort Lauderdale, Fla. (AP)


Clinton, in Rome, Starts Tour of Europe to Burnish Image
Bill Clinton began the second major European trip of his Presidency today in much the same way he began the first, still struggling to convince the principal allies of the United States that he is a worthy leader of the world's only fully functioning superpower.
Air Force One landed at Ciampino Airport, southeast of Rome, a few minutes after midnight, and Mr.
Clinton will plunge into a characteristically ambitious program this morning.


On Broadway, the Numbers Are on the Rise
Broadway attendance this season rose to its highest level in six years, according to statistics released yesterday by the League of American Theaters and Producers, a North American trade association for the commercial theater industry.
A total of 8.1 million people saw performances in one of Broadway's 35 theaters during the just-concluded 1993-94 season, up from 7.9 million a year ago.
The total audience was the largest since 1987-88, when about 30,000 more people attended Broadway shows.
The record, 11 million, occurred in the 1980-81 season; the record low, 5.4 million, in 1972-73.


Japan Stocks Retreat a Bit After a Surge
The Tokyo stock market slipped today after a nearly weeklong surge that had been buoyed by prospects that Japan was finally on the verge of recovering from its long recession.
In trading this morning, the Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 138.13 points, to 21,191.24 by the midday recess.
But the Nikkei retreated in afternoon trading, closing down 44.11 points, or about two-tenths of 1 percent, at 21,009.


Village Without Residents to Stay That Way


Despite Hopes, Budget Eludes Lawmakers
New York State's $33 billion budget is now two months late, and despite a week of close calls and optimistic smiles, no one could say today exactly how close the Governor and legislative leaders here were to finally striking a deal.
Though the budget fight is now the second longest in more than a decade, it is unclear what impact the delay has had on cities, towns and school districts that depend on state aid.
Thanks to $5.5 billion in emergency appropriations from the Legislature over the last two weeks, there has apparently been little borrowing and few layoffs or delays in public projects or in meeting payrolls.


Lower Profits Cast Shadow on Wall Street Hiring
Wall Street, a lonely source of employment growth during the early 1990's, may be on the verge of stalling, or even contracting, as other sectors of the economy are stepping up plans for hiring.
At the moment, the signs of a slowdown, or out-and-out layoffs, are faint.
But the sharp drop in first-quarter profits from last year's record levels, combined with sluggish market performance so far in the second quarter, have raised warning flags at many firms during the last few weeks.


Ukraine's Lawmakers in Warning to Crimea
The Ukrainian Parliament confirmed its decision to suspend the Constitution of its Russian-dominated region of Crimea today and demanded that President Leonid M. Kravchuk draw up a list of responses by Monday to stop Crimea's slide toward independence.
Though the new resolution set no deadlines, nor suggested what might be in store for the pro-Russian leadership of Crimea, lawmakers said they felt they had made a tough statement by rejecting Mr.
Kravchuk's proposal to submit the Crimean problem to a Constitutional Court, whose creation would take at least a month.


Market Place; Questions Over Accounting Send IDB Shares Tumbling
If the figures don't add up right, find some new figures.
That seems to be the accounting philosophy at IDB Communications Group Inc., which provides international long-distance telephone services.
Its outside audit firm has resigned, citing what the company said were "questions concerning its ability to rely on management's representations."


Attention Spellers, P-A-T-I-E-N-C-E


U.S. Roster Selected For the World Cup
The United States pared its World Cup roster to the 22-player limit last night.
It's a list that includes only six players who competed in soccer's world championship four years ago in Italy.
Among the three players cut was defender Brian Bliss, who was called up to the national team for two exhibitions last week but tore cartilage in his left knee upon returning to his club team in Germany.


CHRONICLE
For most of its 69 years in print, the "TRB From Washington" column in The New Republic bore no byline.
But now it is about to acquire not one, but two.
MICKEY KAUS and ROBERT WRIGHT will write the column on alternate weeks.
They will succeed MICHAEL KINSLEY, who has written TRB since 1983 and who will now write longer articles and continue as a senior editor of the 80-year-old weekly.


Petrie Strives for Playoffs As Vice President of Kings
GEOFF PETRIE was introduced yesterday as vice president of basketball operations for the Sacramento Kings, and he said his immediate goal was to take the team to the National Basketball Association playoffs.


Search for 2 Escaped Killers Is Slowed as Freed Hostage Is Sought
As investigators continued to search for two killers from New York City who escaped from a state psychiatric center at gunpoint Friday night, state police officials said yesterday that their investigation had been slowed because they had been unable to find the hospital worker who was taken hostage, then released.
Robert J. Kamrowski, the hospital aide, who the two men took hostage at the Mid-Hudson Psychiatric Center in Orange County, apparently left on a 14-day vacation the next morning.
Police officials interviewed Mr.
Kamrowski on Friday night but said they wanted to re-interview him because there were elements in his account that investigators did not understand.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Shelby Cullom Davis, a New York investment banker, philanthropist and former United States Ambassador to Switzerland, misstated the date of his death in some editions.
It was Thursday, May 26, not Sunday.


Laurentian Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Review/City Ballet; Balanchine's Legacy Pervades Two Premieres
"The New Blondes" by John Alleyne and "Episodes and Sarcasms" by Richard Tanner, the latest entries in the Diamond Project, ushered in the final week of the New York City Ballet's choreographic showcase on Tuesday night.
Both premieres stuck close to the project's ground rules.
The reference point of the choreography was ballet's classical idiom, not modern dance.
And budget considerations excluded extravagant costumes and sets.
But as usual, Holly Hynes did wonders with her variations on leotards and tunics, and Mark Stanley excelled again with ingenious lighting that provided a fresh theatrical context at the New York State Theater for each work.


Harper Signs With Dallas
Wide receiver ALVIN HARPER signed a one-year contract worth $866,000 with the Dallas Cowboys yesterday and will become an unrestricted free agent next year.


15 Floods in 25 Years, Town's Moving
There is nothing like a flood to bond a small community in a watery battle to save lives and property.
Almost a year ago, the Iowa River spilled over its banks, and most of Chelsea's 330 residents worked side by side for weeks to feed the elderly, repair utilities and rebuild homes and businesses.
But there is also nothing like well-meaning ideas and a river of cash from Washington to end such unity and divide an old river town like never before.


Kellwood Co.(KWD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Sports of The Times; This Time It's Worse, Much Worse
THREE HUNDRED and sixty-four days later, it happened again.
The Knicks confronted the ghost of fifth games past, but instead of conquering that specter they staged one of the classic collapses in their history.
Last year in Game 5 it was Michael Jordan and eight other arms swatting at poor Charles Smith, who couldn't push the rock up the hill and therefore became a symbol for one unfortunate moment.


Give Choreographers Credit, Too, Protesters Say


Snatch It Back, Mr. Mayor
There is still time for New York's Mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, to withdraw the sweetheart deal his staff has cooked up for Mortimer Zuckerman, and thereby avoid a lasting blot on his record.
Common sense, and the wise counsel of political figures as diverse as former Mayor Edward Koch and the City Council member Ronnie Eldridge say that $100 million is too low a price for half the Coliseum site that was once going to bring $338 million.
Deputy Mayor John Dyson's plan to keep Mr.
Zuckerman's cost to $80 million by having the city contribute $20 million is simply unconscionable and undermines Mr.
Dyson as a trustworthy steward of public money.
Mr.
Giuliani does not have to tie himself to Mr.
Zuckerman and Mr.
Dyson.
As of last night, Mr.
Zuckerman had not formally accepted the offer.
Mr.
Giuliani is not one to accept advice when he has gotten the bit in his teeth.
But he would be smart to snatch the paper back before Mr.
Zuckerman can sign it.
Otherwise, this deal will go into the history books as a signal error of Mr.
Giuliani's first year and one that will permanently damage his reputation for judgment and probity.


G.M. to Extend Warranties For Some Used Cadillacs
The Cadillac division of the General Motors Corporation will offer an extended warranty on cars up to five years old in a campaign to prevent a inventory buildup of used cars at dealerships caused by the expiration of two-year leases.
Cadillac is the latest luxury car division, following Toyota Motor Corporation's Lexus division and the Ford Motor Company's Lincoln-Mercury division and others, to extend warranty coverage or lease terms for used cars as a way to keep inventories low.


TBWA to Handle Glenlivet Whisky
The House of Seagram unit of the Seagram Company said yesterday that it had expanded its relationship with TBWA Advertising of New York by awarding the agency responsibilities for its Glenlivet single-malt Scotch whisky, which had been handled by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide of New York.
Billings, estimated at $5 million, are expected to grow when a new campaign begins.


No Headline


Banking Chief in Albany Quits to Join Law Firm
Derrick D. Cephas, the New York State Superintendent of Banks, has resigned to join the Wall Street law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft.
Barbara N. Lucas, the chairman of Cadwalader's banking group, said Mr.
Cephas would start next week and specialize in regulatory issues and bank mergers.


From Harvard, Help for Inner City
After years of advising companies, countries and even professional sports on how to be more competitive, Michael E. Porter is turning to the outcasts of corporate America: the inner cities.
Easily one of Harvard Business School's brainiest professors, he spent a day recently scampering over mud and construction debris, dodging plates of soul food and twirling sugar cane during a tour of businesses in some of Boston's toughest neighborhoods, which have been his classroom over the last two years.


NBC Gets U.S. Open Golf
NBC Sports yesterday acquired the rights to the United States Open from 1995 to 1999, giving NBC a major golf tournament for the first time since the network televised the Open in 1965.


A Chic TV Set With Tongue in Cheek
A NEW cable television channel called FX is betting on the drawing power of stylish interior design.
The channel, an offspring of Fox Inc. that began national telecasts yesterday, is offering 12 hours a day of campy reruns like "Wonder Woman" and "Nanny and the Professor," plus 7 hours of live news and banter.
But the star of the show may be the set.
FX designers have given a 6,500-square-foot studio the look and shape of a suave five-room apartment, complete with bathroom, that takes its cues from every current trend.


Drunken Driver Detectors
Over the last 15 years, the incidence of deaths involving drunken drivers has been cut by around 30 percent.
There are many reasons for this good news: public-service campaigns promoting sensible drinking and designated drivers; major lawsuits that have caused bartenders to think twice about serving intoxicated customers; society's growing distaste for public drunkenness.
Yet the deaths of three pedestrians in New York City this spring at the hands of a man with a long history of drunken driving, Abraham Meyers, was a dramatic reminder that we have a long way to go.
The killings provoked justifiable, widespread outrage over lax laws and meager enforcement.
Yet few mentioned that the accident might have been averted through simple technology.
In a few feet, a car can transform a driver's failings -- drunkenness, anger, momentary inattention -- into a body count.
Since cars are essential to everyday life, they cannot be banned, but they can be engineered to keep drunks from getting behind the wheel.


Firefighters Cite A Year of Valor


INSIDE
Verdict in Rodney King Suit
A jury refused to award Rodney King punitive damages from the police officers present during his videotaped beating in 1991.
Page A16.
Immigrants Long for Children
The arrest of five people in a Jamaican child-smuggling operation illuminates some immigrants' desperation to regain their children.
Page B1.
Broadway's Numbers Are Up
Despite the pessimism that has afflicted the theater, attendance has been rising.
This year, it reached the highest level in six years.
Page C13.
Advantage, Pacers
With Reggie Miller scoring 25 points in the fourth quarter and the Knicks only 11, Indiana rallied to win, 93-86, and take a 3-2 lead in games.
Page B9.


Salvador Rightist Inaugurated, Pledging to Fulfill Treaty
Armando Calderon Sol took office as President today, leading a right-wing Government that has pledged to complete the political changes promised to end the 10-year civil war.
After receiving the sash of office from his predecessor, Alfredo Cristiani, Mr.
Calderon Sol sought to calm fears that he will dilute the progress envisioned by the 1992 peace agreement, saying he will support programs to encourage democracy.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Optioned Julian Tavarez, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.
National League
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Optioned Kirk Rueter, pitcher, to Ottawa of the International League.
Called up Heath Haynes, pitcher, from Ottawa.


50 Years Later, Presidents and Tourists Remember Normandy


Cape Town Journal; In Land of Smokers, Mandela Heads Resistance
South Africans smoke in crowded elevators.
They smoke on television.
There are nursery schools where teachers smoke in the classroom.
Iraj Aedian, an anti-smoking economist at the University of Cape Town, recently walked into the maternity ward of a private hospital and was horrified to find a crowd of visitors puffing happily among the newborn.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Plants by the Sea
Q.
We've rented a house near the sea and wondered if you might suggest what to plant. -- Jeremy Brody, Providence, R.I.


Developer and M.T.A. Reach Agreement on Coliseum Site
Nine years after he first agreed to pay $455 million for the right to build a huge complex on the site of the New York Coliseum, Mortimer B. Zuckerman reached an agreement yesterday to buy half the site for less than a quarter of the original price, officials said.
Under the agreement, expected to be completed today, Mr.
Zuckerman will pay $80 million for one of the potentially most valuable development sites in New York City.


Miller's Tale: Pacer Guard Shreds New York in 4th
Every shot that Reggie Miller made in the fourth quarter was like a bolt of lightning to the Knicks, leaving them shocked, stunned, almost paralyzed.
It was the most spectacular performance of Miller's career, a 25-point fourth quarter, including five 3-point shots, that lifted the Indiana Pacers to a remarkable 93-86 comeback victory in Game 5 of the Eastern Conference finals last night at Madison Square Garden.


Agency Rent-A-Car Inc.(AGNC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Marriott Picks Shop For Direct Marketing
Marriott Hotels, Resorts and Suites said yesterday that it had selected Worldwide 1 on 1 of New York to handle its direct-marketing programs aimed at reinforcing customer loyalty, which were handled by FCB Direct of New York for the last five years.
Though billings were not disclosed, executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity estimated that Marriott had spent $20 million to $25 million a year on direct marketing.


Economic Scene; Democracy's hardened arteries and Washington's problems.
HEALTH care reform stalled?
Welfare reform on hold?
You've heard the reasons before and you'll hear them again: Nothing ever gets done in Washington because the Government has been taken over by plutocrats.
Well, not quite, argues Jonathan Rauch, the author of "Demosclerosis" (Times Books) and contributing editor to The National Journal.
"The problem isn't gridlock," he says, "the wheels are out of alignment." Democracy as practiced on the Potomac, he says, has become a bazaar for thousands of interest groups who represent just about everybody -- a place where "too much gets done and too little undone."


In a New House, an English Opera Tradition Returns


Bad Memories in Italy
A stinging historical irony awaits President Clinton when he begins his tour of emotive World War II battle sites with a visit to Italy's Nettuno cemetery tomorrow.
Buried there are thousands of valiant U.S. and Allied soldiers who died holding the embattled Anzio beachhead on their way to expelling Nazi occupiers from Rome and destroying the remnants of Benito Mussolini's Fascist regime.
Like those soldiers a half-century ago, Mr.
Clinton encounters an Italy where Fascism is a political force and followers of Mussolini hold high office.
The President, the first Western leader to meet Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi since he included ministers from the Fascist-descended National Alliance in his coalition Cabinet, correctly insists on judging the Alliance by its deeds, not its ancestry.
But those deeds already warrant close scrutiny.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 27
May 20
May 28
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.4
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.2
3.0
Gasoline stocks
215.8
218.3
223.4
Distillate stocks
110.3
106.8
100.6
Crude imports, daily
6.4
7.0
7.0
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.3
2.0
Crude stocks
333.2
336.0
352.2
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
95.3
94.1
91.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


No Hedging Now on World Trade Agreement; Legitimate Questions
To the Editor:
"Mr. Gingrich's False Alarm on Trade" (editorial, May 8) suggests that an effort to critique the proposed World Trade Organization, the oversight body provided for in the new General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, is "bizarre." Yet you ignore key facts about the proposed World Trade Organization.


Tax Credit Program Helps Cut Welfare
To the Editor:
"Far Apart on Welfare Reform" (editorial, May 23) urges President Clinton to resist the call of the Mainstream Forum and Republican welfare reform plans to limit the duration of subsidized jobs for former welfare recipients.
There is a way to limit subsidized jobs, increase private employer participation and not abandon those who need help most.


Carbide/Graphite Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Bridge
A player who scored an upset victory in the prestigious Goldman Pairs Championship in 1987 did so again Sunday at the Sheraton New York Hotel in Manhattan.
Carleton Lett of Manhattan, a winner seven years ago with Lapt Chan, won this time with David Gurvich, also of Manhattan, and became one of the very few players to have won the Goldman twice.
The standings were: 1st, Lett and Gurvich, 824.69 match points; 2d, Lynda Horn of Passaic, N.J., and Marvin Rosenblatt of Hartford, Conn., 794.77; 3d, Steve Becker of Cos Cob, Conn., and Richard De Martino of Riverside, Conn., 788.


23 Women Are Named to America   Crew
Bill Koch's America
team released the names yesterday of 23 crew members it has chosen to sail in the 1995 America's Cup defense trials.
Besides veteran sailors, the first all-female cup crew includes a body builder, two Olympic rowers, two professional divers and a world-class weight lifter.
"It wasn't an opportunity that was there when I graduated from college 10 years ago," said J J Isler yesterday about making the first all-female team.
"I feel lucky that I'm in the right place at the right time."


Warner-Lambert and Wellcome Take Venture to Europe
The Warner-Lambert Company and Wellcome P.L.C. of Britain yesterday took their new joint venture in selling nonprescription drugs to Europe, a growing market expected to reach $13 billion a year by the end of the decade.
Drug manufacturers are scrambling to convert their prescription drugs into milder, less costly versions, which are then sold over the counter.
With the help of heavy advertising and promotion the companies can create new profitable brands from existing products.


Time Warner Rebuffed on Channel
In its first move to enforce a new law aimed at promoting competition in cable television, the Federal Communications Commission decided today that Time Warner Inc. could not have exclusive rights to Court TV in Manhattan.
The ruling means that Time Warner, a principal owner of the popular cable network, which broadcasts live court trials, must license the channel to Liberty Cable Television, a competitor in Manhattan.


Pentagon Ordered to Reinstate Nurse Forced Out as a Lesbian
A Federal judge in Seattle ordered the military today to reinstate a highly decorated nurse who was forced out of the Washington State National Guard after acknowledging that she is a lesbian.
The judge, Thomas S. Zilly of Federal District Court, ordered Col.
Margarethe Cammermeyer back to the job she held in 1992, ruling that the military's policy on homosexuals at that time was based solely on prejudice and was a clear violation of the Constitution's equal-protection clause.


Vancouver Hopes to Start As Quickly as It Finishes
A day after they won a game in which they were outskated, outshot and outplayed by the Rangers, the Vancouver Canucks acknowledged that they would have to play much better as a team to be successful in the rest of the series.
The Canucks escaped with a 3-2 overtime victory in Game 1 Tuesday night, but only because their goaltender, Kirk McLean, turned in a magnificent performance against a barrage of Ranger shots.
Vancouver Coach Pat Quinn said his team couldn't count on that in Game 2 tonight, or beyond.


Crime Rate Drops Again in New York, Hastening a Trend
Reports of major crime in New York City dropped by 11 percent in the first five months of this year, according to preliminary police figures, accelerating the downward trend of the last few years.
Police Commissioner William J. Bratton and outside experts attributed the decline in seven major crimes -- murder, robbery, rape, aggravated assault, burglary, grand larceny and auto theft -- mainly to an expansion of the police force and the deployment of officers in a highly visible way, on foot in neighborhoods, in what is called community policing.
But Mr.
Bratton said that unusually harsh winter weather might also have helped.


The Mets Are Facing Payday or Doomsday
The Mets aren't putting too much emphasis on the annual free-agent amateur draft, are they?
"This is arguably the most important draft in the history of the franchise," Gerry Hunsicker, assistant vice president of baseball operations, said of the three-day selection process, which begins today.


Neo-Fascists of Italy Present Tough Diplomacy for Clinton
President Clinton will fly straight into an unscheduled diplomatic challenge when he meets Italy's new leaders on Thursday, under pressure to endorse a Government condemned elsewhere in Europe as the harbinger of a neo-Fascist revival.
Since Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi took office on May 11, his administration has invested much time and diplomacy in seeking to convince its European allies that Italy's ties with the Fascist past have been broken.


Trumpeter With Restraint Shows a Different Face
In previous appearances in New York City, with the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra and the pianist Marcus Roberts, the trumpeter Marcus Printup played odd, offhanded ideas with a restraint that marked him as a thinker.
In retrospect, he was being respectful of his employers.
At Iridium next to Lincoln Center on Tuesday night, he showed the restraint of a pit bull on a bad day, attacking tunes with a ferocity and freedom that suggested he was on his way to becoming an important new voice on his instrument.
Backed by two other fine young musicians, Kevin Bales on piano and Reuben Rogers on bass, along with Carl Allen on drums, Mr.
Printup, who is appearing through Saturday, blared squat melodies, then let fly long lines that streamed like kite tails.
Sometimes he played phrases, brittle and hard, that seemed to have come from a turn-of-the-century American melodic sensibility that was absolutely distinct, only to move into the harmonically daring territory of a trumpeter like Booker Little and follow that with a swing trumpet phrase.
Mr.
Printup is both eccentric and knowledgeable.


Jamaica to Let U.S. Anchor Ship Off Coast
Jamaica agreed today to let the United States anchor ships in its waters so American officials can hold shipboard hearings to determine whether fleeing Haitians qualify for refugee status.
The Jamaican decision represents a diplomatic victory for the Clinton Administration, which promised last month to provide individual hearings for Haitian boat people rather than forcibly send them back without hearings.
Later, the Administration realized it did not have a suitable place to conduct such hearings.


Rockets Go On Retreat
The Rockets head south to Galveston Thursday morning.
For the last two seasons, Galveston has been a retreat where they can focus on the task at hand.
This year, it's the National Basketball Association finals.
On Tuesday, Houston earned its third trip to the finals with a convincing 94-83 victory over Utah in Game 5 of the Western Conference finals.
With one more obstacle to clear -- and a week to think about it -- the Rockets will try to strike a balance between relaxing and maintaining their competitive edge.


Plan for Nassau Legislature Is Delivered
The Nassau County charter commission's final plan for a county legislature was delivered today to the Federal judge who a year ago declared Nassau's present form of government unconstitutional.
Under the plan, a 19-member legislature would replace the current 6-member Board of Supervisors, who represent town and cities of widely varying size by using a weighted voting system.
The judge found that violated the one-person, one-vote principle.


Rangers' Strategy: The Vision Thing
Before Andrew Giuliani hopes to become the grand marshal in a potential Stanley Cup victory parade, his father the mayor should be informed of the strategy the Rangers will use in their attempt to eliminate the one-game deficit in the final series created by Vancouver goaltender Kirk McLean.
"More traffic," said Stephane Matteau.


Three City University Schools Hold Commencements


Arafat's Return: Jericho Wondering When
Now that the police have arrived and some of the novelty has worn off, Jericho is letting its imagination play on the next big question of the young Palestinian self-rule: When is Yasir Arafat arriving?
Those who may know are not saying, and those who are saying presumably do not know.
So many possible June dates have been tossed out that some calendars here carry almost as many circles as numbers.


Vietnam Vet Suicide Didn't Drink at End
To the Editor:
Much has been written and said about the life and death by suicide May 11 of Lewis B. Puller Jr. (news article, May 14), veterans' advocate and Pulitzer Prize winner for "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet." Most of it has been accurate.


Rich Saudi Bails Out Disney Unit
A Saudi prince who provided cash to Citicorp at a crucial time in its restructuring has agreed to acquire a major stake in Euro Disneyland, the struggling French theme park, and to provide $100 million to build a convention center considered crucial to the park's survival, the parent Walt Disney Company said today.
Under the agreement, Prince Walid bin Talal, a nephew of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, will acquire 13 percent to 24 percent ownership in Euro Disney, through a stock rights offering.


Hollis Ingraham, 86, Health Official
Dr.
Hollis Steadman Ingraham, New York State Commissioner of Health under Gov.
Nelson A. Rockefeller, died on Tuesday in Albany Medical Center Hospital.
He was 86 and lived in Slingerlands, N.Y.
He suffered a brief illness, his family said.
Dr.
Ingraham devoted his career to public health.
He was born in Brookline, Mass., and graduated from Harvard College in 1930.
He received his medical degree cum laude at Harvard Medical School and also graduated from the Harvard School of Public Health.


CHRONICLE
The topic of a meeting to be held by the United States Information Agency in Atlanta tomorrow and Saturday is "Investing in People: The United States-South Africa Conference on Democracy and Economic Development," and it may be the hottest ticket around.
"The idea simply struck fire with a number of people, and we now have more who are interested than we can possibly accommodate," said Dr.
JOSEPH D. DUFFEY, the agency's director.


Carl Johnson, 79, Education Professor And Psychotherapist
Carl Thomas Johnson, a retired psychotherapist and educator, died last Friday at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 79 and lived in Riverdale, the Bronx.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


Duty Free Int'l(DFI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Rostenkowski and His Lawyer May Part
One day after his indictment on 17 criminal charges, Representative Dan Rostenkowski was close today to ending his relationship with Robert S. Bennett, the prominent white-collar defense lawyer who has represented him for the last 10 months, people following the case said.
They said Mr.
Rostenkowski and Mr.
Bennett, in several telephone conversations with each other today, expressed serious reservations about continuing their relationship.
Mr.
Rostenkowski, a Chicago Democrat, said he was unsure of Mr.
Bennett's resolve to fight the criminal charges, these people said, and Mr.
Bennett expressed uncertainty whether Mr.
Rostenkowski would grant him control over trial strategy and sought an assurance that his fee would be paid.


Wright's Own Home: A Lifelong Work in Progress
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT'S own house in Wisconsin, Tali esin, is as big as 40 Seth Peterson cottages: Designed to accommodate not only Wright and his family but to provide working and living space for the dozens of apprentices and fellows who made up his architectural practice, it sprawls over nearly 37,000 square feet.
And while it was never completely abandoned, as the Peterson cottage was, it has suffered gravely over the years from indifferent maintenance and the ravages of Wisconsin winters.
Putting Taliesin back in shape will cost roughly $24 million, according to Robert Burley, the architect who is executive director of the Taliesin Preservation Commission, an independent organization chartered by the state of Wisconsin to oversee putting Wright's house in order.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  A LONG WAR SAPS AZERBAIJAN  With billions of gallons of oil and rich agricultural resources, Azerbaijan would seem to have it all.
But a war with Armenia governs every aspect of life in the Caucasus country, pounding people from their homes and miring many in poverty.
A1


One 'Ghost' In Indictment Goes Public
When Representative Dan Rostenkowski and his clan gathered for weddings or parties at the family retreat over the years, they often hired Anthony Ramirez, a moonlighting fireman, to record the events as a freelance photographer.
Federal prosecutors now say Mr.
Ramirez was one of the "ghost pay rollers," a group of 14 people who were described as employees of the Congressional office who did little official work but who were not named in an indictment issued on Tuesday.


Rangers Look Nothing Like First Place
Brewers 8, Rangers 1
Brian Harper drove in three runs and Cal Eldred pitched a six-hitter yesterday as the Brewers defeated Texas, 8-1, in Milwaukee and broke the Rangers' three-game winning streak.
The Rangers are clinging to first place in the American League West, four games below .500 with a 23-27 record.
Division winners get into the four-team league playoffs.
The fifth-place team in the East and the fourth-place team in the Central -- both in five-team divisions -- have better records.


Health Insurer Pays $6.2 Million To Settle Florida Overcharge Case
Humana Inc., one of the nation's largest health care companies, agreed today to pay $6.25 million to customers in Florida as part of a settlement of accusations that the company systematically overcharged thousands of its consumers throughout the state.
The payment will be distributed among 37,000 Florida residents who were insured by Humana and also treated at hospitals owned by the company.
The agreement results from a state investigation that found that Humana was requiring some of its customers to pay a greater portion of their hospital bills than their insurance policies required.


Ivanisevic Leaves His Game at the Portal
Feeling like a big target for his far smaller opponent rather than the lean stringbean of a serving machine who regularly does all but decapitate any underdog across the net, Goran Ivanisevic was drummed out of the French Open quarterfinals in straight sets today by 23d-ranked Alberto Berasategui of Spain.
Unseeded but not unheralded on the red clay, the 20-year-old Berasategui (pronounced ber-ah-sah-TEH-ghee) made short work of the Croatian giant atop the simmering Center Court, dismissing him by 6-4, 6-3, 6-3 in just 96 minutes.


Azerbaijan, Potentially Rich, Is Impoverished by Warfare
This is a country sundered by war.
With more than a million of its citizens homeless, Azerbaijan has been humiliated by six years of relentless Armenian advances across its rugged mountains and onto its breathtaking plains.
Despite vast oil reserves, poverty is epidemic.
But you would never notice any of that in Baku, the languorous capital, where young men in trim blazers gather each day to play pinball, sip Turkish coffee and avoid the draft.
In this teeming city on the Caspian Sea, where the average monthly wage is $8 and a cup of tea costs 50 cents, indifference is the general approach to life, not urgency.


The Talk of Hollywood; Got a Screenplay? Make It Derivative And Send It, Fast
Seated on black leather chairs in a conference room at International Creative Management in Beverly Hills, a group of literary agents were happily examining an alphabetic list of nearly 20 screenplays, mostly by unknown writers, that have been sold by the agency in the last six months.
The prices ranged from $250,000 to the low seven figures.
"Suddenly, it's a very healthy market now," said one of the I.C.M. agents, Steve Rabineau.
"There hasn't been this kind of spurt in years. Look at the list."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK DEMOCRATS BACK INCUMBENTS Girding for a challenge from newly unified Republicans, New York's Democrats smoothly blessed a ticketful of incumbents for re-election at their state convention, beginning with unanimous endorsements of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
A1.
CRIME RATE DROPS, HASTENING A TREND Reports of major crime in New York City dropped by 11 percent in the first five months of this year, according to preliminary police figures, accelerating the downward trend of the last few years.
A1.


Corrections
An obituary headline on Tuesday about a Japanese neurosurgeon, known internationally for advancing the brain tumor treatment known as the boron neutron capture therapy, misspelled his given name.
He was Dr.
Hiroshi Hatanaka.


Colombia Reimposes Curbs On Marijuana and Cocaine
Stung by charges that this capital was becoming an "Amsterdam in the Andes," Colombia's Government has squashed Latin America's first fling with legally free drug use, reimposing tight curbs on the use of cocaine and marijuana.
On Tuesday night, the Government decreed a series of restrictions that essentially limit drug consumption to private residences where children are not present.


It's Not Too Late to Stop Zaire Anarchy
To the Editor:
Your May 24 front-page report from Kinshasa describes Zaire's drift toward anarchy.
What is most surprising about Zaire is that, with isolated exceptions, it has not been engulfed by the violence of Rwanda, Somalia and other African countries.
But there is still time.
President Mobutu Sese Seko's "long and complicated political game with the opposition" is far from over.


Cygne Designs Inc.(CYDS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Edith K. Bergtraum; Elementary Teacher, 76
Edith K. Bergtraum, a teacher at Public School 143 in Corona, Queens, for 25 years, died on Sunday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
Mrs.
Bergtraum, who lived in Kew Garden Hills, Queens, was 76.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter, Judith Bergtraum.


Courting Analysts, Macy Looks Beyond Bankruptcy
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company met with analysts yesterday for the first time since it went private in a leveraged buyout in 1986, in an effort to whet Wall Street's appetite for the shares the company will issue as part of its plan to emerge from bankruptcy protection.
Myron E. Ullman 3d, chairman and chief executive of Macy, and his top executives predicted moderate growth fueled by sharp merchandising, close attention to costs, and remodeling and renovation to keep its stores up to date.


White House Plaque
To the Editor:
Your fascinating May 20 obituary of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis contained the following: "Before she left the White House, she placed a plaque in the Lincoln bedroom that said, 'In this room lived John Fitzgerald Kennedy with his wife, Jacqueline during the 2 years, 10 months and 2 days he was President of the United States -- Jan. 10, 1961 - Nov. 22, 1963.' Mrs. Richard M. Nixon had the plaque removed after she and her husband moved in in 1969."


U.S. Surgical
U.S.
Surgical, a manufacturer of surgical devices and other medical supplies, saw its shares rise sharply yesterday after traders speculated that Ciba-Geigy of Switzerland might buy the company.
U.S.
Surgical has been trading mostly in the mid-teens for much of the year, but recent drug industry mergers have helped lift its share price.


The N.B.A Finally Finds a New Playoff Hero: Reggie!
A series that was mired in overwhelming mediocrity finally found greatness last night.
It found Reggie Miller behind screen after Indiana Pacer screen.
Miller found the basket, again and again, and the Knicks found out that living on the edge is no way at all to live in the playoffs.
The Knicks thought home court would be their answer, their savior.
They were wrong, like last season, when the greatest player ever came to Madison Square Garden and ruined Game 5 and stole the season right from their building.


Manana Too Late for New Jersey Schools
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's plea for more time to close the gap in funding between rich and poor New Jersey school districts comes as no surprise.
In the 20-odd years since the State Supreme Court ordered equal funding, no governor has come up with enough money.
But Mrs.
Whitman has made the problem harder for herself -- and for underfinanced school districts -- by slashing taxes.
Trouble began in the mid-1970's, when the Court ordered schools closed to force the state to focus on adequate funding for poor districts.
At that point, the Legislature finally approved a tax on personal income to pay for more school aid.


Executive Changes
BP AMERICA INC., Cleveland, a subsidiary of the British Petroleum Company, appointed David J. Atton chief financial officer.
COMMERCIAL INTERTECH CORP., Youngstown, Ohio, named Kipton C. Kumler president and chief operating officer and Mark G. Kachur senior vice president of its Fluid Purification Group.


Bob Evans Farms Inc.(BOBE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Lennox Industries Chooses GSD&amp;M
Lennox Industries, a heating and cooling systems manufacturer in Richardson, Tex., has selected GSD&amp;M of Austin, Tex., to handle its account, which had been at Ross Communications of St.
Louis for the last 20 years.
Though billings were not disclosed, trade publications estimated them at $10 million.


U.N. Lists Four Nations at Risk Because of Wide Income Gaps
Egypt, South Africa, Nigeria and Brazil are among countries now in danger of joining the world's list of failed states because of wide income gaps between sections of their populations, a new United Nations report warns.
Disastrous social upheavals and explosions could result, it says.
The warning comes in the United Nations Development Program's annual Human Development Report, a widely respected work that seeks to measure the development progress each country is making, not in terms of increasing its overall wealth but in how it uses that wealth to improve the longevity and literacy of its people and reduce poverty.
The report does this by compiling a Human Development Index that compares different regions and ethnic groups.


Punitive Damages Denied In Beating of Rodney King
A jury refused today to award Rodney G. King punitive damages from the police officers who were present during his beating in 1991, absolving them of individual responsibility for the kicks and baton blows that shocked the nation.
The same jury had earlier ordered the City of Los Angeles to pay Mr.
King $3.8 million in compensation for the beating.


Paradise Revisited; Where Earth and Sky Meet: A Wright Cottage, for Rent
There are Frank Lloyd Wright houses that can be visited because they have become museums, like Fall ingwater and Wright's own Taliesin, and there are Frank Lloyd Wright houses that can be bought to live in forever, usually at a substantial price.
But there is only one Frank Lloyd Wright house that anyone can possess, in its entirety, for a night.
It is called the Seth Peterson Cottage, and it is where people go to decide for themselves what the Wright mystique is all about.
The cottage is one of the most remarkable things that Wright ever designed: A compact, intense composition, an 880-square-foot summary of his late work, it has a spectacular living room of glass and wood that appears to burst out of a simple stone structure.
Sharply angled yet serene, the house possesses an extraordinary quality that can only be called monumentality in miniature.
It confers on its visitors both the gift of architecture and the gift of privacy, and together these two things create an experience that is equaled by no other Wright building.


Officer in Harlem Corruption Case Pleads Guilty
A New York City police officer charged in the 30th Precinct police corruption scandal pleaded guilty in Federal Court in Manhattan yesterday to drug trafficking, conducting illegal searches and tax evasion.
Ruben Garza, 34, became the fifth officer from the Harlem precinct corruption case to plead guilty.
Fourteen officers were initially implicated in connection with what law-enforcement officials say was a widespread pattern of corruption and physical abuse.


Forstmann &amp; Co.  (FSTM,NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to May 1


Senator Might Leave G.O.P. If North Wins Its Nomination
If Virginia Republicans nominate Oliver L. North on Saturday to run for the Senate, and the party remains under the control of the conservatives who support him, the state's senior Republican, Senator John W. Warner says he would consider running outside the party organization in his own campaign in 1996.
"One way or another I will go before the people of Virginia in 1996," Mr.
Warner said today in a telephone interview from Rome, where he is beginning a European trip that will include the D-Day anniversary ceremonies in France.


Manchester Goes Catalan, With a Creak
Leaden skies hung overhead and a chill wind cut through this proud but bleak northern English city.
But on the streets were the colorfully costumed members of Gog i Magog, a company from Barcelona, Spain, that calls itself a "medieval street theater troupe of the 20th century."
Stalking about on stilts in the city's shopping center with their band blaring and thumping in the background, troupe members acted out an age-old tale of a dragon, a damsel in distress and a none-too-competent knight on horseback.
Finally, the knight managed to dispatch the dragon and the troupe sauntered off to its van, to prepare for another performance a mile away.


New Fund Raises $1 Billion For Investment Plan in Asia
While Asian stock markets have been plummeting and tepid investor demand led the Tiger Management Corporation to cancel plans for an investment fund in emerging economies, the American International Group has raised more than $1 billion for a fund to invest in large infrastructure projects in Asia.
With an illustrious history that began in Shanghai in 1919, American International is seen by corporate America as something of a "China hand," and is the most internationally minded of American insurance companies.
Its links to China and other Asian countries are more than just historical.
American International is a well-established insurer in many Asian markets, including China, where other companies are struggling to enter.


CHRONICLE
ROBERT TAUB could hardly hope to play the piano for more rarefied audiences than the ones who will hear him in Princeton, N.J., in the next few years.
Mr.
Taub has been named as the the first artist-in-residence at the 70-year-old Institute for Advanced Study, a research center for scholars in the sciences and humanities.
"His appointment will be a combination of scholarship and performance, and an interesting experiment," said PHILLIP A. GRIFFITHS, the institute's director.
"We haven't done anything like this since T. S. Eliot was here in 1958. While he was here, he wrote 'The Cocktail Party.' "


FLAW DISCOVERED IN FEDERAL PLAN FOR WIRETAPPING
A computer scientist at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories has discovered a basic flaw in the technology that the Clinton Administration has been promoting as a way to allow law enforcement officials to eavesdrop on electronically scrambled telephone and computer conversations.
Someone with sufficient computer skills can defeat the Government's technology by using it to encode messages so that not even the Government can crack them, according to the Bell Labs researcher, Matthew Blaze.


No Hedging Now on World Trade Agreement
To the Editor:
There is much talk now about a "waiver" of recent budget rules to relieve the Government of accounting for the costs of a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade as part of the costs of government.
Senator Max Baucus tells us that GATT will produce great benefits in increased economic growth, which will more than offset its estimated costs of $14 billion over 5 years and some $43 billion over 10 years.
A waiver will simply allow "reality" to check in and save us all from the inconvenience of attempting to reduce the growth of the Federal deficit.


Separated From Children, Immigrants Grow Desperate
For many West Indian women in New York, long-term separation from their children is a heartbreaking fact of immigrant life.
And for some, like the Jamaican mother whose son was held for ransom by smugglers this week, it is just too much to bear.
The arrest of five people in a Jamaican child-smuggling operation on Tuesday illuminates the desperate methods that some immigrants will employ to be reunited with their children.


Review/Television; A Pregnant 16-Year-Old Examines Her Choices
Jacqui is 16 years old, pregnant and facing a wrenching choice: keep the child, put it up for adoption or have an abortion.
And "Jacqui's Dilemma," on ABC tonight at 8, points up the dilemma commercial television has these days when venturing near the emotional subject of abortion.
Don't ask us to decide, the nervous networks plead.
Let the viewer decide.


Veto Delayed By Giuliani On Job Shift
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, in a surprise move, said yesterday that he would delay vetoing a bill, passed last month by the City Council, that would allow the Council to hold hearings on the Mayor's attempts to turn over some municipal services to private companies.
Mr.
Giuliani has long denounced the bill and had promised to veto it even before it had passed a Council committee for submission to the entire body.
Administration officials had stated their intention to take the matter to court to block the bill.
But yesterday Mr.
Giuliani held a public hearing on the bill -- required by law before the Mayor signs or vetoes a measure -- and said he wanted to wait before vetoing it.


Big Payoff In Lottery Shows Lure Of Dreams
With New Jersey's Pick-6 lotto jackpot at $35 million, the second largest ever, Frank Shain figures his lucky lottery number will most certainly be lucky this time.
So at the Garden State News here in mid-afternoon, Mr.
Shain opened his billfold and pulled out a frayed slip of paper bearing 1-5-6-13-18-22 in faded pencil and bought a $1 ticket for Thursday night's drawing.
This is the week, he said, his number will repay years of loyalty and faith with a big lottery payoff.


U.S. Stocks End Steady Amid Inflation Anxiety
Stocks dropped sharply in Europe overnight and on Wall Street in the morning yesterday, but United States stocks recovered strongly by the closing gavel as an unusual and confusing confluence of inflation anxieties swept through American, European and Japanese stock and bond markets.
What is unquestionably clear is that international stock traders are becoming increasingly worried.
Like their counterparts in America, they seem to growing more concerned about inflation because of the convergence of an ebullient American economy, a surprisingly resurgent Europe and a recession-racked Japan that seems to be showing unexpected strength.


Mets Aggressive, but Not When It Counts
A wrongheaded play by the Mets nearly led to a fight in the dugout between Bobby Bonilla and Ryan Thompson last night as New York dropped another one-run game to the Colorado Rockies.
The 4-3 defeat at Shea Stadium allowed the Rockies to sweep the three-game series and drop the Mets under .500.
Thompson complained that Bonilla had "shown me up" by gesturing toward him after his fielding lapse in the sixth inning.
The play set up the Rockies' winning run.


Fox Is Under F.C.C. Review
The Federal Communications Commission is re-examining the ownership structure of Rupert Murdoch's Fox television stations, based on new information that Mr.
Murdoch's News Corporation may be in violation of laws prohibiting foreign companies from owning American broadcast stations.
The examination could pose a serious threat to Fox, possibly even forcing it to sell off its television stations, which include WNYW, Channel 5, in New York, as well as stations in Los Angeles, Washington, Chicago, Dallas and Houston.


Gathering to Meet, Perhaps to Marry
There were no ground rules at the gathering of Jewish singles at the Pines Hotel here in the Catskills.
The 500 participants in the weekend event were operating on either instinct or experience.
The experienced (who had attended anywhere from one to 10 singles weekends) and the fast learners had their own guidelines.
Among them:


Djibouti Journal; By Ancient, Languorous Boat to a Frightening City
There is a breed of sailors, smugglers and pilots ready, perhaps even eager, to take you to places you should not visit.
They take only cash.
They scoff at insurance agents.
They are pitiless in danger.
And they are the only ones left willing to travel to the besieged port city of Aden.
The city of 350,000, the southern stronghold in Yemen's civil war, is surrounded by northern troops.
Its airport has been bombed, and its residential areas have been bombarded with missiles.


Review/Film; In Search of the Perfect Wave, or Something
Surfing has come a long way since those lazy, hazy, crazy days of the early 1960's when the sport was a cult phenomenon in Southern California and Hawaii.
As "Bruce Brown's 'The Endless Summer II' " makes abundantly clear, it has grown into a worldwide network of enthusiasts with its own professional tour circuit and star galaxy.
But while "The Endless Summer II" notes many of the changes in the sport, from the shortening of surfboards to the overcrowding of popular beaches, its main goal is to recapture the innocent mystique of Mr.
Brown's 1964 film, "The Endless Summer." It was 30 years ago that this modest, 16-millimeter feature film became an international hit and did much to popularize the sport around the world.
In that movie, which had the perky ingenuousness of an early Beach Boys anthem, Mr.
Brown trekked around the globe with two young surfers on a quest for the so-called perfect wave.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $156 million of noncallable notes due 2004 priced at 100 to yield 7.31 percent through CS First Boston Corp. and $50 million of noncallable floating-rate notes due 1996 priced at 100 to float 20 basis points below the three-month London interbank offered rate through First Chicago Capital Markets.


Jets to Take a Look at Mann
The Jets, still in the market for a decent pass rusher, will work out former Redskins defensive end Charles Mann on Monday.
Mann, 33, was cut by Washington on March 14.
He is one of several aging, highly paid veterans released by the Redskins in their efforts to trim their payroll and get under the National Football League's salary cap.
The Jets have also worked out another of Mann's former teammates, receiver Art Monk, who was another player cut by the Redskins in March.
Mann was scheduled to earn $1.6 million in 1994 and $1.7 million in 1995.
The Jets are not interested in him at anything close to that price.
Mann worked out for the Los Angeles Raiders last week and was in Philadelphia with the Eagles yesterday.


Sally Belfrage Memorial
A memorial gathering for Sally Belfrage, an author of memoirs who died on March 14 at the age of 57, will be held on Wednesday at 5:30 P.M. at the Century Club, 7 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
Ms.
Belfrage's last book, "Un-American Activities" (HarperCollins), is to be published on June 29.


Eric Gale, 55, Dies; Versatile Guitarist
Eric Gale, a guitarist best known for his work as a side musician with numerous pop and jazz luminaries, died on May 25 in a hospital in Baja California, Mexico.
Mr.
Gale, who lived in Los Angeles, was 55.
The cause was lung cancer, said his daughter Gretchen, of Brooklyn.


Triumphant Rangers: Happy Days Are Here Again
Even before the Rangers beat the Vancouver Canucks at Madison Square Garden last night to even the Stanley Cup finals at one game each, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was on MSG Network, planning the victory parade.
When asked if City Hall would arrange a civic celebration if the Rangers win the cup for the first time since 1940, Giuliani replied: "Darn right. A big one. We've been waiting a long time."


I.R.S. Backs Companies in Land Cleanups
In a ruling seen as generally favorable to thousands of companies with contaminated land, the Internal Revenue Service announced today that the costs of environmental cleanup may be claimed as tax deductions right away rather than spread over many years.
The decision reverses a so-called technical ruling the agency made a year ago that clouded the issue, brought protests from around the country and led to challenges of an undetermined number of tax returns.


Clintons Meet Pope and Prime Minister in Italy


Art in Review
Andras Borocz  Tibor de Nagy Gallery 41 West 57th Street Through June 11
The pencil is a drawing tool for most artists, but for Andras Borocz, who immigrated to New York City from Hungary four years ago, it is the stuff of sculpture.
His first solo exhibition is populated by tiny figures, all meticulously carved from one or more pencils.
Some depict embracing couples; others are pierced by arrows in the manner of St.
Sebastian; nearly all give a new specificity to the film title "Eraserhead." These figures have a charming, slightly illustrational appeal similar to that of Saul Steinberg's objects, while their delicate recycling has something in common with Donald Lipski's transformations of tiny found objects.
They also evoke, in a minor key, a long history of carved figures, including African, German Expressionist and Romanesque.


TV Weekend; 'Alice' in Wasteland: It's Really a Wonder
"Great Books" begins its second season tomorrow with a look at "Alice in Wonderland." The talking heads include, of course, the Red Queen, who wants to chop off everybody else's.
Using animation, puppets, re-enactments, photographs from Victorian times, the famous illustrations of John Tenniel and whatnot, the program tells the story of Charles L. Dodgson, who became Lewis Carroll, and of Alice Liddell, who became simply Alice.
The relationship of a lovely child and an unmarried professor of mathematics given to drawing nude prepubescent girls invites speculation about his sexual longings and propensities.
They are alluded to here, but propriety reigns.


Attention, Gotham Shoppers
New York likes to think of itself as ahead of the curve, but it is not when it comes to the latest trend in retailing: superstores.
Those huge, warehouse-type discount stores are increasingly popular around the country, but New York City has relatively few because of zoning restrictions that go back to 1974.
Now the Giuliani administration, like the Dinkins administration before it, is considering revising the zoning rules.
That would be a sound move if city officials take pains to protect small neighborhood stores that contribute to the vitality of life throughout the five boroughs.
There is ample evidence that the absence of superstores hurts the tax base and creates a drain on the general economy.
Many shoppers in search of bargains go to Nassau, New Jersey and Westchester.
Jobs that could be available in such stores migrate to the suburbs, too.


For Big Retailers, a Sluggish Month
Sales at the nation's retail chains sputtered in May as shoppers grappled with the implications of higher interest rates and taxes.
By one industry measure, sales showed their most modest gains since March 1993.
Most retailers reported that sales growth last month was slower than they had anticipated, although a handful, including Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, Neiman Marcus and the J. C. Penney Company, managed to pump up their volume in spite of growing evidence of reluctant consumers.


Computer to Aid Penn Station Trains
Like planes in an airport approach pattern, the 1,000 trains arriving at Pennsylvania Station every day must line up for scarce slots in the tunnels and wait their turn to enter.
If one train is a minute late, then the 15 or 20 trains behind it are also a minute late, at the very least.
Then, Amtrak and the Long Island Rail Road blame each other for delays.


Their Stunning Game 5 Even Stuns Pacers
This time of year, the Indiana Pacers are usually well into their vacations.
This time of year, the Pacers usually watch other teams march toward the league finals.
One day soon, building block by block, the Pacers hoped they could reach that exhilarating stage.
And to nearly everyone's surprise -- including their own -- that day has arrived.
On Friday night at Market Square Arena, the Pacers battle the Knicks in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals.
They lead the series by three games to two.
One more victory and they will meet the Houston Rockets in the finals.
At practice here today, the Pacers were pinching themselves and rubbing their eyes.


Haitian Migrants Settle In, Looking Back
In a turquoise cottage in Miami's Little Haiti, Meriente Auguste riffled through photographs of the family left behind when she fled home on a tumbledown boat.
She pulled out two snapshots, one of her father, one of her teen-age sister.
Hands crossed over their chests, they both lay in open coffins.
"They died because of me," said Ms.
Auguste, 23, who left Haiti in 1991, won political asylum last fall and now irons blouses for a living.
"My father was shot because I escaped, and my sister died of sorrow the day of his funeral."


Eric Nowlin, 48, Macy's Executive
Eric G. Nowlin, vice president of communication at R.H.
Macy &amp; Co.
Inc. and an expert in laser videodisk programming, died last Saturday at Cabrini Medical Center.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS-related pneumonia, according to Francis A. Roefaro, his companion.


The View From the Intrepid
FOR lovers of military history and memorabilia, New York City has never had as much to offer as many another great city.
Washington has the Smithsonian.
The great Paris military museum at the Invalides holds Frankish battle-axes, homemade French Resistance guns used against the Nazis, and Napoleon's white horse, stuffed after its death.
Moscow, Belgrade, Prague and even Hanoi have fine military museums.


Eatman Will Join the Falcons
The Atlanta Falcons reached a contract agreement Friday with tackle IRV EATMAN, who started every game for the Los Angeles Rams last year.
Eatman, a 6-7, 300-pounder, will be entering his ninth season, including five with the Kansas City Chiefs, two with the Jets and one with the Rams.


At the Bar; In a death penalty case, the defense lawyer is on trial himself, accused of incompetence, and worse.
On the dockets of criminal defense lawyers, few assignments are more thankless than death penalty trials.
The pay is poor, the clients often unsympathetic, the odds against winning steep.
And when the almost inevitable convictions are appealed, new defense lawyers desperately searching for errors pick apart their predecessor's performances.
Few lawyers, though, have had as nightmarish an experience as S. Donald Ames of San Bernadino, Calif.
Twelve years ago he represented Melvin Wade, who killed his girlfriend's 10-year-old daughter.
The killing was unusually brutal: Over a 22-hour period Mr.
Wade, 24, hit young Joyce Tolliver with a board from a broken couch, stuffed her in a duffel bag, tried to hang her from a wall with a leash, stomped on her chest and made her drink her own urine.
Mr.
Wade was convicted and sentenced to die in the gas chamber.


A Search For 3 Girls In a Slaying Is a Rarity
A man opened his door in East New York late Wednesday afternoon to see three upset teen-age girls in his backyard.
"We got to get out of here," the man overheard one of the girls say.
He told the girls that he had seen a police officer out front, and offered to call the officer to assist them.
But they ducked down to avoid being seen and ran from the yard.
Only then did he realize that the officer might have been looking for them.


Reviews/Film; No Kiss For Froglip
Jozsef Gemes's animated film "The Princess and the Goblin" is not to be confused with the kind of fairy tale in which a royal kiss turns a hideous creature into a shining prince.
An adaptation of a popular 1872 tale by the Scottish author George MacDonald, it tells the less romantic story of a sheltered princess who overcomes her childhood fears and saves her father's kingdom from a race of evil goblins.
The film is a whimsical allegory of self-reliance in which the wispy-voiced princess, Irene (Sally Ann Marsh), guided by the ghost of her great-great-grandmother (Claire Bloom), grows into a take-charge woman who survives all sorts of punishing physical ordeals.
If the subtext of the tale suggests that the goblins are really one's own unconscious childhood fears, visually the movie doesn't begin to plumb Freudian waters.


Pippig Withdraws From Central Park Race
The anticipated showdown between UTA PIPPIG of Germany and ANNE MARIE LETKO of the United States at tomorrow's Advil Mini Marathon dissolved yesterday when Pippig, winner of last year's New York City Marathon, withdrew from the 10-kilometer race through Central Park with the flu.
But that doesn't make Letko the automatic favorite.
Indeed, with a field that includes three top Kenyans -- the defending champion, TECLA LOROUPE, 21; the 1991 winner, DELILLAH ASIAGO, 22, and a 20-year-old comer, JANE OMORO -- the 25-year-old Letko, who is from Glen Gardner, N.J., should have all the competition she needs in making her first appearance in the world's oldest and richest women's road race.


Arafat Is Reported Ill With 'Mild Angina'
Suffering from what his aides called "mild angina," Yasir Arafat canceled appointments today and was reported to be resting in Tunis, P.L.O. officials said.
Palestinian officials both in Tunis and Cairo played down the P.L.O. chairman's medical problems, and denied reports that hewould be flown out of Tunis for medical care.
Mr.
Arafat, who is 64 years old, has had a history of health problems.


Legal Aid for Poor, Despite Flaws, Works Well in Most Cases
To the Editor:
Some of the facts in your May 23 article on New York City's legal aid for the poor, the assigned counsel plan, are accurate.
However, your overall slant is misleading.


P.G.&amp;. E. Chief to Give Way A Year Ahead of Schedule
The Pacific Gas and Electric Company has announced changes in its top management, adding a sense of urgency as it tries to increase efficiency in preparation for new competitors in its market.
The California-based utility said yesterday that Stanley T. Skinner, its president and chief operating officer, would take over as chief executive a year earlier than planned.


At AT&amp;T, No Joy on Clipper Flaw
Matthew Blaze did not set out to make trouble for his employer.
When Dr.
Blaze, a 32-year-old computer scientist at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories, discovered a basic flaw in the the Government's cloak-and-dagger Clipper system recently, he was merely doing what he does best: pushing computer code until it breaks.


Review/Pop; With Many Languages of Love, Julio Iglesias
Some people are drawn to powerful characters; others are touched by tender entreaties.
Julio Iglesias, one of the most popular singers on earth, seduces through vulnerability.
On Wednesday night at Radio City Music Hall, where he is appearing through Sunday, he sang about loneliness, about missing an absent lover, about feeling humbled and elevated by love.
In nearly every song, he was a supplicant.
Mr.
Iglesias is a multinational Romeo.
With lyrics in English, Spanish, Italian and Portuguese, he has pleas for most of the European Community, and a perfect line: "I never faked anything in my life," he said between songs, just before plugging his new album, "Crazy" (Columbia).
When he sang, he didn't move much beyond his hands, even in the few uptempo songs.
On risers behind him, three female backup singers sashayed and shimmied in slow motion, cooing wispy harmonies above a band that did its best to evaporate.


Hungary: Coalition Rule Is Wise Choice
Hungarians turned decisively to former Communists, now called Socialists, in the second and final round of parliamentary elections this week.
The Socialists, who took a big lead after the first round of elections, have now won an outright parliamentary majority.
The resurrection of Hungary's Communists need not cause alarm.
The Socialists have vowed to keep economic and political reforms alive -- a vow made plausible by their record of bringing market reforms to Hungary in the 1970's.


Commencements; Queens College Graduates Hear a Wistful Seinfeld
Observing the customary edict to be brief on an occasion where a full stand-up routine might have been welcomed, the comedian Jerry Seinfeld spoke at Queens College's commencement yesterday for only two minutes (and three jokes), telling the graduates that one of his most poignant memories as a student there was the time he found a parking spot near the campus.
Mr.
Seinfeld, Class of '76, said he had "a lot of other wonderful memories" of Queens College and its theater department, "which allowed me to pursue independent study here in stand-up comedy."


Dominic Kane, 85; Led Fuel Company
Dominic V. Kane, who in the 1940's was the president and part owner of what is now the Brooklyn Union Gas Company, died on Monday at the Shady Grove Adventist Hospital in Rockville, Md.
Mr.
Kane, who lived in Silver Spring, Md., was 85.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his son, Paul Kane.


Early Call Brings a New Dawn to Dooley's Career
The call came at 4:30 in the morning on Dec. 16, 1991.
"Are you sitting down?" the voice on the other end asked.


Buck High, Old Paint, or Goodbye
Under a blazing sun on the dusty High Plains, as fans hooted from the bleachers between swigs of beer and dips of snuff, a slender palomino was led to the bucking chute, ridden by a cowboy and given one last chance to save its life.
The gelding, no longer wanted by its rancher, would get eight seconds to show that it could buck high enough to interest one of the rodeo buyers here at the Bucking Horse Sale, or be shipped to slaughter.


Fleet Week Lands on the City's Shores


La-Z Boy Chair Co.(LZB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Reviews/Film; Giving the 'Spinal Tap' Treatment to Rap
Flattering the daylights out of Rob Reiner and his "Spinal Tap" crew, Rusty Cundieff turns "Fear of a Black Hat" into an unapologetic "Spinal Tap" imitation.
And there's no point in faulting Mr.
Cundieff for such derivativeness, because "Fear of a Black Hat" is too savvy and cheerful to warrant complaints.
Anyway, the more the merrier: what "Spinal Tap" did for heavy metal certainly deserves to be done for rap, which is the target this time.
If Mr.
Cundieff doesn't match the satirical genius of Mr.
Reiner's film, he does understand the rules of the game.
For instance, the band being studied in mock-documentary format must be publicly overconfident and privately pretty badly confused.
Accompanying the group should be at least one unctuous flunky.
"I really enjoy your work, fellas," one white manager says to some of this film's tough-guy black rappers.
"Rich emotional tapestry."


Fluor Corp.(FLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


It's Do or Done Tonight for Knicks Era
Downcast and still shaken by Wednesday night's stunning loss, the Knicks left for Indianapolis today, hoping to save their season.
Unless the Knicks defeat the Indiana Pacers in Friday night's Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals, New York's quest for a championship will end in abrupt and bitter fashion.


Sounds Around Town
Heath's Harmonies
Jimmy Heath, Metropolis, 31 Union Square West, at 16th Street, Manhattan, (212) 675-2300.
Jimmy Heath is one of the finest saxophonists to come up out of be-bop, a Philadelphian schooled in the style's intricacies.
But he has continued adding to the language, and now he's an enormously rich improviser; his harmony alone is worth listening to, following all the different courses he takes through a tune.
He's also a fine composer and arranger, and his improvisations have a composer's logic.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 8 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are $10 to $17.50, and there is an additional $10 minimum.
PETER WATROUS A Drummer Steps Forward
Joe Chambers, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, Manhattan, (212) 749-2228.
Though best known as a drummer, Joe Chambers also perdiodically leads fine groups that feature his tough composing.
His tunes, with their odd and angular harmonic movement, force soloists to pay attention, and his fierce swing makes them work for their money.
Mr.
Chambers has brought on the tenor saxophonist Javon Jackson as the lead horn player, and Mr.
Jackson, a classicist, should find the material ripe.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 9, 10:30 and midnight.
There is a $10 cover charge and a $10 minimum at the tables and a $5 cover charge and a $5 minimum at the bar.
P.
W.


Wharton's New York
Here is information on the Edith Wharton exhibition and other Wharton events at the National Academy of Design.
Exhibition "GLANCING BACKWARD: EDITH WHARTON'S NEW YORK," an exhibition of paintings, drawings, sculpture and rare books that evoke the author's real life and the world she created in her writing, is to remain on view through Sept. 18 at the academy, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, Manhattan.
Hours are Wednesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.; Fridays, noon to 8 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $3.50; $2 for students and the elderly; free for everyone on Fridays from 5 to 8 P.M.


Data Show Eased Pace Of Growth
Signs that the pace of economic growth may moderate in the months ahead spread today when the Government said its main forecasting index was unchanged in April.
The reading followed a March gain as large as any since Bill Clinton's inauguration as President.
A separate Commerce Department report showed the nation's factories obtaining slightly fewer new orders in April, an indication of diminished prospects for what has been a vigorous industrial sector.


Filling a Trans-Atlantic Air Niche
The planes were always jammed, the flights were usually late and prudent travelers brought along their own sandwiches.
But long before Freddie Laker or People Express, Icelandair (then called Icelandic) was breaking all the economic rules of airlines, making money by opening Europe to the backpack set -- among them a graduate student, Bill Clinton, on his way to Oxford.
Now, three decades later, the little airline that could is at it again, repositioning itself as the international carrier whose flights all stop in a country that is hardly anyone's final destination.
And improbable as it may seem, tiny, unsubsidized Icelandair may once again have found a formula for success in an industry where mere survival is considered a triumph.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in The Living Section on Wednesday about vacation cooking classes misstated the telephone number for the programs run by Le Cordon Bleu in Paris.
It is (800) 457-2433.


9 Florida Hotels Blacking Out A TV Station's Crime Reports
Some of South Florida's larger hotels have decided to screen out the newscasts of a local television station because of its zealous coverage of crime news.
The hotel owners, already dismayed by several highly publicized killings of tourists in Florida last year, say they are angry with what they call the sensational style of the television station, WSVN (Channel 7), a Fox affiliate.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.33
3.03
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.11
4.15
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.55
4.63
3.15
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.05
7.12
6.00
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.39
6.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.20
8.23
7.78
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.35
6.40
5.87
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ares-Serono Group reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Corrections
A report in the Off the Menu column of The Living Section on Wednesday about plans for the opening of the restaurant Spartina by late July misstated its address.
It is at 355 Greenwich Street (near Franklin Street), not 355 Greenwich Avenue.


Invasion and Remembrance


A City Game to Aid the City's Children


Sports of The Times; Watching the Knicks At Their Ebb Tide?
I've been sitting here staring out at the Gulf of Mexico, watching row after row of powerful waves tumble onto the beach.
At any moment I expect to see Knick bodies washing up on shore.
It appears the Knicks have been kicked aside and left for dead after a loss to Indiana on Wednesday.


No One Bribed Anyone in Clinton Trading
To the Editor:
For a man who usually chooses his words so carefully, William Safire is off the wall in describing Hillary Rodham Clinton's commodity trading as "bribery in its most modern form" (column, May 30).
He offers no evidence -- and there is none -- of what he calls "blatantly preferential treatment," "trades made in their behalf with little or perhaps no Clinton input" or "records strangely missing."


INSIDE
U.N. Panel Accuses Serbs Of Genocide in Bosnia
Ending a long inquiry, a United Nations commission accused Bosnian Serbs of "crimes against humanity" and "genocide" against Muslims and Croats.
Its findings go to a war-crimes tribunal.
Page A3.
Rostenkowski Seeks Lawyer
Dan Rostenkowski is replacing the lawyer who last week failed to persuade him to accept a plea agreement with Federal prosecutors.
Page A18.
Warning on Teacher Layoffs
District superintendents say Mayor Giuliani's budget will mean laying off hundreds of teachers.
Page B1.
Rangers Tie Series
Glenn Anderson's shorthanded goal sparked the Rangers to a 3-1 victory over the Canucks.
Page B11.
Graf Upset in French Open
Mary Pierce beat Steffi Graf in the semifinals, halting Graf's string of Grand Slam titles at four.
Page B11.


Not Guilty Pleas By 2 Officers
Two New York police officers charged in the 30th Precinct corruption scandal pleaded not guilty in Federal Court in Manhattan yesterday to charges that they were involved in drug trafficking and illegal searches.
Appearing separately before a magistrate judge, Christopher DiLorenzo and John Arena each entered pleas during arraignments in the United States Court for the Southern District and were released on bail.


Review/Photography; The Essence of an Invasion in Just a Few Frames
It is doubly fitting that the International Center of Photography's midtown branch is exhibiting Robert Capa's photographs of the Allied invasion of France in honor of the 50th anniversary of D-Day.
Capa, the legendary photojournalist, took what are by far the most famous photographs of the invasion; moreover, the center itself is a kind of monument to his memory, founded in 1974 by his younger brother, Cornell, as part of a long campaign to keep Robert Capa's work alive.
By D-Day, Capa had become the leading war photographer of his generation, recording London during the Blitz and the Allied campaigns in North Africa and Italy for Life and other magazines.
He was celebrated for risking his life to get the most telling shot; in an oft-quoted maxim, he once said, "If your pictures aren't good enough, you're not close enough."


Dolphins Reach Accord With Draft Pick
The Miami Dolphins yesterday signed their first-round draft pick, TIM BOWENS, to a four-year contract reportedly worth more than $3 million.
Bowens, a 6-foot-4-inch, 336-pound defensive tackle, was stabbed in the back three times by another teen-ager in high school and lost three toes on his left foot in a lawn mower accident prior to his senior prep season.
The Dolphins admittedly took a risk when they selected Bowens, a one-year starter at Mississippi. (AP)


Dozens Are Killed As Israelis Attack Camp in Lebanon
In one of their bloodiest raids into Lebanon in years, Israeli warplanes killed dozens of young Muslim guerrillas with rockets and machine-gun fire today as they pounded a training camp of the pro-Iranian Party of God.
Estimates of the dead ranged from about 30 to 45, with the lower figure coming from the Israeli Army and the higher from the Lebanese Foreign Minister, Faris Bouez.


Stock End Day Mixed; Dow Off 1.84
Continuing a listless trend, the stock market closed mixed and little changed in below-normal trading yesterday in advance of today's employment data, which could worry investors if it signals strong growth that would lead to an increase in inflation.
Yesterday, the Dow Jones industrial average fell 1.84 points, to 3,758.99, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 rose 0.02 point, to 457.65.


Prosecutors Rebuked in Molestation Case
Therapists and parents improperly prodded children to accuse a child-care worker of bizarre sexual abuse, a San Diego grand jury said in a report issued on Wednesday that sharply criticized the prosecution" of the case.
In November, after seven months of trial, a jury took seven hours to acquit Dale Akiki, 35, a mentally retarded and physically deformed church volunteer, who had been charged with sexually abusing, torturing and kidnapping nine children at a suburban San Diego church in 1988 and 1989.


Riley's Teflon Is Part Of Knicks' Scrapheap
The morning after another Game 5 got away from Pat Riley's Knicks, a defeated but unbowed nemesis from Chicago couldn't resist the chance to rub it in, a little bit.
"It just seems to me that they've put together a group of guys who are not terribly skilled," Phil Jackson said from the Bulls' office in downtown Chicago.
"The Knicks are predictable. Their offense is run on execution, not creativity. Any time you do that, you're going to get forceful in tight spots."


Heart of Rwanda's Darkness: Slaughter at a Rural Church
The banner across the entrance to the red brick church here announces the celebration of a festival.
A poster of Pope John Paul II is tacked on the main door and above it is a large white statue of Jesus, his arms beckoning.
Inside are the remains of victims of a mass slaughter carried out by Government-trained militiamen in mid-April.
In what they had hoped would be a refuge from the deadly irrationality of tribal and political violence, more than 500 members of the Tutsi tribe found their way to the church compound only to be shot or hacked to death by Hutu soldiers in classrooms, bathrooms and courtyards, and then left to rot.


Independent Films In Lincoln Center Series
"Set in Motion: The New York State Council on the Arts Celebrates 30 Years of Independents," a weeklong film series devoted to short and feature-length films produced by independent film makers, begins today at 2 P.M. at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street.
The 21 programs offer a mix of animation, interviews, biographical sketches, artists at work and fiction, and include early films by Claudia Weill and Spike Lee.


WHITE HOUSE ASKS GLOBAL SANCTIONS ON NORTH KOREANS
The Clinton Administration called today for global economic sanctions against North Korea after international inspectors said the North Koreans had destroyed evidence of whether they had diverted material for a nuclear bomb.
The Administration's move marked a new -- and potentially dangerous -- phase of Washington's confrontation with North Korea over its nuclear program.
North Korea has threatened to attack South Korea if sanctions are imposed.


Art in Review
Alberto Giacometti 'Early Works in Paris (1922-1930)'
Yoshii Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Through June 25
This small, outstanding exhibition should not be missed by anyone interested in modern sculpture.
Its subject is the period of Giacometti's apprenticeship in Paris, when he was restlessly searching for a direction and pursuing remarkably diverse paths at the same time.


Collegian Thrilled To Be Yankee Pick
With his father videotaping the event at their home in Clifton, Va., Brian Buchanan received the call yesterday from a scout, Paul Faulk, informing the University of Virginia first baseman-outfielder that he had been chosen in the first round of the amateur draft by the Yankees.
He was the 24th overall pick.
"I've just been high as a kite ever since then," said Buchanan, who will initially be represented in negotiations with the Yankees by his parents.


How Big an Army, for What?
With the end of the cold war, armies everywhere are slimming down to match shrunken threats and changing the way they prepare for battle, as this page noted on Monday.
But the U.S.
Army has yet to adjust sufficiently to the radically altered circumstances.
Although it is demobilizing eight divisions, the Army still wants more troops than it needs, largely because it is preparing to re-fight the last war, not the most likely next war.


Canucks Head for Drawing Board
Trevor Linden talked about the process.
The questions in the Vancouver dressing room had to do with a series for the Stanley Cup that is tied at one game each as the Rangers and Canucks head for British Columbia.
But when Linden, the right wing and captain, was asked about numbers and possibilities, he kept getting back to the process.
The captain of the Canucks was speaking of fundamental approaches and adjustments, both strategic and emotional, elements leading to the slips, skids and bounces that can determine a champion.


Long Jump Is a Close Call
Eric Walder of Arkansas won his third consecutive long jump title at the National Collegiate Athletic Association outdoor track and field championships tonight at Boise State University, but it wasn't easy.
Walder and Roland McGhee of Middle Tennessee State both jumped 27 feet 4 1/2 inches, but Walder took first place on the basis of a better second jump, 27-0 1/2 to McGhee's 26-10 1/2.


122 on Staff To Lose Jobs, Mayor Says
The Giuliani administration said yesterday that it had dismissed 22 workers from the Mayor's staff and would dismiss 100 more by the end of the month in an effort to cut costs.
At the end of the Dinkins administration on Dec. 31, the mayor's office had 1,274 positions.


Holy Bull Rests Case; He Is Out of Belmont
To run or not to run?
Jimmy Croll, who has been pondering the question since Holy Bull won the Metropolitan Mile on Memorial Day, finally made the decision yesterday.
He will not run Holy Bull in the Belmont Stakes one week from tomorrow.


Sounds Around Town
Jacquet on the Green
Illinois Jacquet Big Band, Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at West 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 873-3200.
The saxophonist Illinois Jacquet first became a jazz headliner when he was a sideman in big bands like Cab Calloway's, Lionel Hampton's and, in the 1940's, Count Basie's last band.
When he turned to leading his own group, he used a small combo, a format that lasted more than 30 years.
But in the 1980's he became the last of the Swing Era stars to form his own big band.
Lacking the locations that existed in the big bands' heyday, even such great survivors as the Duke Ellington and Count Basie Bands had been reduced by then to playing one-night stands.
But the Jacquet band has now embarked on an unusual engagement: a five-week run at Tavern on the Green.
The band plays tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11 P.M. and on Sunday at 8:30 and 10:30 P.M.
It will continue at the Tavern through July 3.
The music charge is $23.50 on Fridays and Saturdays, or $17.50 on Sundays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays.
JOHN S. WILSON One Plus One Plus Two
New York Swing Quartet, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street, (212) 533-7900.
The New York Swing Quartet is a pseudonym behind which lurk several well-known jazz musicians.
The two anchors are the guitarist Bucky Pizzarelli and the pianist John Bunch, each of whom tends to hire the other when one of them gets a gig.
So the John Bunch Trio features Bucky Pizzarelli on guitar, and the Bucky Pizzarelli Trio features John Bunch on piano.
But when they enlarge, they become the New York Swing Quartet, this weekend with Bob Haggart, the bassist who was one of the stars of the Bob Crosby Band in the 1930's and 40's, and the drummer Dennis Mackrel, a veteran of Count Basie's last band.
They play three shows tonight and tomorrow, at 8 and 10 P.M. and midnight, and two shows on Sunday, at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $20 cover charge and a $10 minimum all three nights.
J.
S.
W.


A Big Loss In Quarter At Borland
Battered by declining product sales and shrinking profit margins, Borland International Inc. reported a loss today for its fiscal fourth quarter that easily exceeded even the most pessimistic estimates by analysts.
For the quarter ended March 31, Borland said it lost $76 million, compared with earnings of $5.1 million, or 19 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenue plunged 56.4 percent, to $51 million from $117.1 million.


In Luxury, Purring Understatedly
THE more genteel the hotel, the more softly it speaks.
The Plaza Athenee barely manages a whisper.
It is discreet, subdued, understated.
In a field crowded with Basil Fawltys, it is Jeeves.
So recessive is the hotel, on 64th Street between Park and Madison Avenues, that cabdrivers were perplexed when, after turning onto 64th Street from Madison, I asked them to stop in front of the hotel.
On the first three occasions, the driver looked back with the weak, eager-to-please smile that spells total confusion.
Hotel?
Where?
After a while, I gave up.
"Pull up behind that garbage truck," I told driver No. 4.


Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce (CM) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Corrections
An obituary on May 21 about Paul Lenti, a theatrical reporter and critic, described the cause of his death incompletely, and a correction in this space on Wednesday misstated a description of it given by a spokesman for the Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, where Mr.
Lenti died.
The spokesman said Mr.
Lenti's death, from an infection of a heart valve, was not related to valve-replacement surgery that he underwent at the hospital two months earlier.


An Old City, an Old-Fashioned Role for 'EE-la-ree'
Looking like any other overscheduled, two-career couple who really needed to get away for awhile, Bill and Hillary Clinton held hands, laughed, mugged, ooh-ed, aah-ed and held hands some more as they roamed Rome today.
Eventually all Presidents find themselves in a tangle and need a change of subject, or scenery.
And the Clintons, openly thrilled to be away from the land of Paula Jones, Dan Rostenkowski, Republican electoral triumphs and Presidential helicopter debacles, hoped the Eternal City would provide some transitory relief.


Accounts
*
Gibson Greetings Inc., Cincinnati, to W. B. Doner &amp; Co., Cleveland, to handle its account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Cirrus Air Technologies, Locust Valley, L.I., to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct, New York, as the first agency to handle integrated marketing for Earplanes, a product developed to alleviate ear problems experienced by fliers.
Saatchi Direct's sibling agency, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Public Relations, New York, will handle the public relations.
Billings were estimated at $4 million. *
Kabi Peptide Hormones, Piscataway, N.J., to Robert A. Becker Inc., New York, as the first agency to handle marketing communications for Genotonorm, a human growth hormone.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Apple Computer Co., Sandton, South Africa, to Hunt Lascaris TBWA, Sandton, to handle its account in South Africa, which had been inactive for a decade.
Billings have not been determined.


A Warning on the Limits of Aggressive Advocacy; Disbarment of a Prominent Lawyer Stirs a Sharp Debate on Legal Ethics
After reading the character references provided by a lustrous array of judges and lawyers, a reasonable person could conclude that Theodore H. Friedman, a 63-year-old personal injury lawyer, all but walked on water.
Brilliant, said many of the 67 writers.
Meticulous.
A generous friend, whom many had met through his wife, Eve Preminger, a judge in Surrogate's Court.
A ferocious, rough-tongued adversary.
But above all, they wrote, Ted Friedman was scrupulously ethical.
The letter writers included the chief judge of New York's Court of Appeals, Judith S. Kaye, Federal District Judge Jack B. Weinstein, and the journalists Calvin Trillin, Murray Kempton and Sidney Zion.


CHRONICLE
The topic was "Women and Substance Abuse: A Family Problem, a National Crisis," and who better to personalize the pain than BETTY FORD, the former First Lady, and her daughter, SUSAN FORD BALES.
The two women offered a candid view of their experiences at a symposium and luncheon yesterday at the Parker Meridien Hotel in Manhattan given by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University.


Paper Maker's President
Madison Paper Industries of Madison, Me., has appointed Leroy J. Barry as its president and chief operating officer, effective on Aug. 1.
Mr.
Barry, 56, has been vice president and general manager of the S. D. Warren Company, a subsidiary of the Scott Paper Company.
He will succeed Jack E. Chinn as president of Madison, while Mr.
Chinn will remain chairman and chief executive.
Madison, which produces high-quality paper for magazines and advertising, is a partnership of Myllykoski O.Y. of Finland and The New York Times Company.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Joe Camel may have won a battle, but the war goes on.
THE president of the agency that produces Joe Camel campaigns hopes an apparent decision by the Federal Trade Commission not to prohibit the use of the Camel cigarettes cartoon character will curtail virulent attacks from anti-smoking activists.
But the activists, stung by a rare defeat, say they are likely to concentrate now on restricting or banning all cigarette advertising, not just Camel's.
Reaction to the decision involving Joe Camel -- the most recognized, and demonized, figure in tobacco marketing -- was somewhat muted yesterday because commission members refused to confirm widespread reports that they had voted, 3 to 2, not to pursue a complaint against the character.


Ames Department Stores Inc.(AMES,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Edison Brothers Stores Inc.(EBS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Restaurants
Five years from now, when I think of the food I ate in 1994, it is salt-baked crabs I will think of first.
Writing this, I can taste them again, feel my teeth crashing through the hot crust into the voluptuous heart of the crab.
I can remember the way the plump, juicy flesh, rich, sweet and soft as butter, snuggled into its crisp coat, remember the perfumed taste of the seafood against the faint saline tang of the spices, the fleeting burn of the sliced chili peppers scattered across the top.
I remember the way the entire table fell silent in homage to this feast of the senses.
And I remember thinking, "So this is what soft-shell crabs are supposed to taste like!"


Legal Aid for Poor, Despite Flaws, Works Well in Most Cases; A System in Collusion
To the Editor:
Your May 23 article on the inadequacy of the assigned counsel defense bar for indigent defendants in New York City is a story of enormous importance.
But it should not go unnoticed how well known the problem is to the prosecutors and judges in those courts every day.


Staying Impartial Isn't Easy
In the crowded broadcast booth during Game 1 of the Rangers-Canucks series Tuesday night, three television cameras -- from the MSG Network, ESPN and Canada's CBC -- followed the action in unison, tracking smoothly, then staccato, then smoothly again, in coordinated search of the puck on the Madison Square Garden ice.
The MSG team of John Davidson and Sam Rosen was perched in the left corner of the booth, the ESPN crew of Gary Thorne and Bill Clement in the right.


Study Warns of Growing Underclass of the Unskilled
Opening a wide door for changes in labor law but then hesitating to walk through it, the Labor and Commerce Departments issued a joint report today, detailing shifts in the American workplace but delaying any recommendations to deal with them for months.
The report details the development of an underclass of low-paid and unskilled workers unable to compete in a complex marketplace.
The changes come against the backdrop of an increasingly adversarial climate between management and labor while America is slipping behind other industrialized nations in wages and benefits, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said at a news conference.


Market Place; Japanese Stocks Show Life As Economy Gains Strength
Japan's stock market appears poised to break out of its long slump and surge to its highest level in more than two years, according to a growing number of analysts and investors.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues is now at its highest level since September and has risen 20.6 percent this year.
The index closed today at 21,009, down a mere 44.11 points, after four days of gains.


NCH Corp.(NCH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Critic's Choice; A Harvest Of Hilarity In a Festival
The most promising events in the second annual Toyota Comedy Festival, which began 11 days of festivities yesterday, are reminders that there is a lot more to humor than the commercial formulas in comedy clubs and on television.
This Sunday at 8 P.M., for instance, Chris Cerf, the author of the hilarious "Official Politically Correct Dictionary," will give a free talk at Barnes &amp; Noble (2289 Broadway, at 82d Street).
Readings of plays by Jay Tarses, Nicky Silver, Tom Mardirosian and Kelly Stuart will be at Playwrights Horizons (416 West 42d Street) at 7:30 P.M., Monday through Friday next week.
In addition, a high point of the series is likely to be Thursday's double bill: Albert Innaurato's "Urlicht," which imagines Gustav Mahler on a New York subway platform, and "When Dinah Ruled the Earth," a collaboration by Christopher Durang and Wendy Wasserstein from their Yale Drama School days.
The readings are free but seating is limited; reservations: (212) 279-4200.


Too Much of a Good Thing
The Sony Corporation earned plaudits, from us among others, for putting life into the barren space at the base of its U.S. headquarters building, the former home of AT&amp;T on Madison Avenue in New York City.
But the Sony-fication of this atrium has become overwhelming.
No one says Sony Plaza is violating city regulations, but it hardly fits the spirit of open spaces that builders create in exchange for a permit to build higher -- spaces where people can escape the hustle of city commerce.
A recent lunchtime stroller found a striking contrast of glitz and tranquillity in Sony's neighborhood.
I.B.M.'s large plaza, wrapped in glass, lies directly across the street.
In a setting of bamboo trees it offers chairs, tables, a food stand, a garden shop, an entrance to a department store -- and stillness.
In Park Avenue Plaza, two blocks south, Chuck Folds played light music on a grand piano.
And then there is Lever House, the model for modern open spaces on private property.
Its glass enclosure was filled with schoolchildren's art, and the outdoor plaza with New Yorkers soaking up sun.


Also-Rans May Ululate, but Only One Speller Wears the Crown
For the last two days, 237 competitors were eliminated by misspelling words like "ululate" and "arugula." And Arthur Dagdag, a banquet waiter at the Capitol Hilton was there to serve hot dogs and popcorn, as he has been for the last 11 years, to the young contestants of the National Spelling Bee.
"You see them crying all the way down there, and contestants from past years console them," he said, speaking of the contest's "Comfort Room."


Towers Chief Would Agree To Jail Term
Legal documents filed this week show that Steven Hoffenberg, the New York financier accused of defrauding investors of more than $450 million, is willing to plead guilty to criminal charges carrying a potential prison term of 25 years -- if the Government will give him a second chance at an earlier plea bargain that it revoked in February.
In return, Mr.
Hoffenberg expects a more lenient sentence and assurances that he will not be prosecuted for previously undisclosed criminal charges, including allegations that he participated in the bribery of unidentified pension fund officials to induce them to buy his securities.
Clearest Indication
The documents, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, reveal for the first time the details of the original plea bargain Mr.
Hoffenberg negotiated with the Government in his effort to avoid a criminal trial -- and they show, in the sharpest terms so far, the severity of the penalties he will face if he is convicted of the charges filed against him after the pact was revoked by the Government.


Diner's Journal
Mediterranean Mellow
Dappled sunlight filters through the branches of ancient trees and a fountain creates cool music.
Waiters move lazily across a stone floor, pouring wine for impossibly elegant people.
Can this be midtown Manhattan?
On an afternoon in late spring, there is no nicer place for lunch than the garden at Barbetta.
The inside is lovely, too, a cool shaded dining room that looks as if it belongs in an old Italian villa.
The walls shimmer with a golden patina and the chandelier casts a benign light on the guests.


Abroad at Home; A Question of Authority
Bill Clinton and his people came to Washington believing that foreign policy would matter little if at all to his political success.
Late, very late, they have begun to understand their mistake.
Americans may say that they do not much care about foreign affairs.
But making a mark in the world -- being seen by other nations as a figure of authority -- is crucial to a President's establishment of authority at home.
So it is ominous for President Clinton that recent polls show a sharp loss of confidence in his handling of foreign policy.


In a Small Town in Italy, the U.S. Legacy Is Baseball
President Clinton is arriving here Friday, but for today, 15-year-old Andrea Cancelli had little better to do than to take batting practice.
Nettuno, population 35,000, lies an hour's drive south of Rome and an hour north of the splendid ruined temple at Paestum, but when they talk of "tradition" around here they mean 13 national baseball championships in 47 seasons.
American soldiers brought the sport with them when they landed along Nettuno's beaches one dark night 50 years ago, and it has become an unlikely local passion.


Courts Struggle Over How Much Force It Takes to Be a Rape
As the nation's rape laws evolve to reflect changing relations between men and women, many state courts continue to struggle with the question of how much force is necessary in an encounter for there to be a rape conviction.
On Friday the Pennsylvania Supreme Court ruled that a man who did not use physical force, but had sexual intercourse with a woman who said "no" throughout the encounter, could not be found guilty of rape because there had been no "forcible compulsion" as required by the Pennsylvania rape law.


Review/Cabaret; Music and Moods Of the Early 40's
In "Sing! Sing! Sing! The Songs of World War II," her new cabaret act at Rainbow and Stars (30 Rockefeller Plaza), Maureen McGovern does more than perform nearly 20 songs that made the hit parade in the early 1940's.
Among the show's nonmusical tidbits, she offers "Joan Bennett's Hollywood Beauty Tip," an amusingly quaint vintage-radio ad praising the uplifting effects of coffee.
She also delivers a terse 1940's pitch for women to join the armed forces.
And a monologue near the end of the show is a family reminiscence of World War II, in which she points out how many ballads of the era were about dreaming.


Executive to Retire At Anheuser-Busch
Michael J. Roarty, the executive vice president of corporate marketing and communications for the Anheuser-Busch Companies, will retire effective Sept. 30, the company said, and then become a consultant.
Mr.
Roarty, 65, said in a telephone interview from St.
Louis that his retirement had been in the works for the last year.
As a consultant, Mr.
Roarty will advise Anheuser-Busch on advertising, marketing and social issues.


U.S. Proposes Penalizing El Al With Flight Cutback
The Transportation Department proposed reducing the number of El Al flights between New York and Israel today because the Israeli Government had refused to allow World Airways to fly the same route.
The agency said Israel's refusal violated the liberal agreement governing aviation relations with the United States.
El Al is state-owned.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about the Giuliani administration's efforts to settle pending lawsuits referred incorrectly to the status of discrimination suits filed by 28 employees of the Off-Track Betting Corporation.
The administration has settled a suit brought by one employee, not all 28.
The other cases are pending.


Apple Project In Ukraine
Apple Computer Inc. plans to announce on Friday a software development and education project for Ukraine that is designed to take advantage of a labor force with high computer skills and low wages.
In a joint agreement with the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Apple will train programmers, assign them basic programming and market Ukrainian software inventions abroad.


Buena Vista Video Divides an Account
Buena Vista Home Video, the video sales, marketing and distribution unit of the Walt Disney Company, said yesterday that it had selected Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco and Ground Zero in Venice, Calif., to handle selected creative projects, which had previously been handled in-house and farmed out to various small agencies on a project basis.
Though billings have not been determined, they have been estimated at $60 million.


U.N. Report Accuses Serbs of 'Crimes Against Humanity'
Bosnia's Serbs are accused of "crimes against humanity" and "genocide" and may also be responsible for "a systematic rape policy" in areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina, according to the final report of a United Nations commission set up to collect evidence of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.
The report consists of several detailed studies, including one on "ethnic cleansing" in the Prijedor region of northwestern Bosnia, where some 50,000 Muslims and Croats were expelled from their homes by Serbs, and another on rape which suggests that sexual abuse was sometimes used by the Serbs to spread terror.


Eagle Snacks Selects Glennon
Eagle Snacks Inc. in St.
Louis said yesterday that it had selected the Glennon Companies in St.
Louis to handle its Eagle and Cape Cod snack brands account, which was previously handled by TBWA Advertising in New York, though it had been inactive recently.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $15 million.


Newbridge
Shares of Newbridge Networks fell yesterday for the second consecutive day.
An analyst expressed concern about an exclusive contract between Newbridge and Nynex, the regional Bell, for a network service for Nynex customers.
He said regulators required Nynex to offer a choice of telecommunications equipment vendors, not just Newbridge, but the company denied his assertion.


Pall Corp.(PLL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Review/Film; DeVito Gets Lessons From Soldier Students
If you're looking for a learning experience, "Renaissance Man" is ready to teach you what the words simile, metaphor, oxymoron and formula mean.
The last, in this case, refers to the story of a down-on-his-luck individual who gets a shot at redemption by teaching nice, somehow-disadvantaged innocents who can benefit from his wisdom.
Maybe he's a coach ("The Air Up There," "Cool Runnings," "The Mighty Ducks") or maybe he's a failed ad copywriter (this film).
Probably he's a white male, unless he's Whoopi Goldberg teaching nuns about rock-and-roll.
Inherently condescending, and finally awash in warm-bath sentimentality, this setup never goes out of style.
It has certainly worked for Disney, whose "Dead Poets Society" is a landmark within this realm, and for Penny Marshall, whose "Awakenings" and "League of Their Own" flirted with the same motif.
This time, Ms.
Marshall directs the story of Bill Rago (Danny DeVito), whose advertising career is in ruins when he takes a temporary job educating Army recruits.
The recruits are supposed to need remedial teaching, but they're funny, sensitive and eager to learn.
When they stand up and read Bill their first creative writing exercises, their stories put the average screenwriter to shame.


Collins &amp; Aikman Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
MLB -- Named Kathleen Francis director of market development and major league baseball properties charities.
American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Called up Jason Grimsley, pitcher, from Charlotte of the International League.
Designated Kevin Logsdon, pitcher, for assignment.


Pierce Applies The Pressure To Upset Graf
With the wind-whipped clay stinging her eyes and the pulverizing strokes of Mary Pierce getting under her skin, Steffi Graf, the defending champion of the French Open and all three other Grand Slam tournaments, was ambushed this stormy afternoon in the semifinals by her opponent's simple combination of brute strength and iron will.
Thunder, plus a wildly partisan French crowd at Roland Garros, provided the background music today as the 12th-seeded Pierce pounded Graf into submission, 6-2, 6-2.
Pierce, who had already caused a commotion here in her adopted homeland after reaching the semifinal round in record-setting fashion by yielding only six games, said she was determined to forget Graf's ranking and 15 Slam crowns and treat her like just another anonymous first-round opponent.
In Graf's estimation, the Florida-trained Pierce more than succeeded.


An Embrace for Berlusconi But Friction With the Pope
President Clinton today became the first major world leader to openly endorse Italy's new coalition Government, which includes neo-Fascists, during a visit to Rome that also revived what he called "genuine disagreements" with Pope John Paul II over abortion and contraception.
The President arrived in Rome early today -- almost 50 years to the day after the Allied liberation of Rome on June 4, 1944 -- to begin an eight-day European tour feting allied victory in the Second World War and honoring the dead.


On My Mind; Prisons Save Lives
Police and bureaucrats tell the public that crime is going down.
But in every survey the public insists that crime is still the country's number one problem, ahead of the economy, health care, poverty, everything.
The American public is a hysterical paranoid dolt, that's one explanation.
The other is this:





No Mistakes Found in Test Of New Drug
In contrast to the findings of another Federal agency, an advisory committee to the National Institutes of Health said in a report today that it had found no evidence of wrongdoing in studies of an experimental drug for hepatitis B that led to the deaths of 5 of the 15 participants.
Two surviving participants required liver transplants.
The studies, probably the most catastrophic human experiment in many years, were conducted by the institutes, which canceled them last June.


Rostenkowski Announces A Split With His Lawyer
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, who is charged with 17 counts of corruption, said today that he would replace his legal defense team headed by Robert S. Bennett, the lawyer who tried but failed to persuade the Illinois Democrat to accept a plea agreement with Federal prosecutors.
"Today, Bob Bennett, my attorney in the House post office investigation, and I mutually decided to go our separate ways," Mr.
Rostenkowski said in a statement issued this evening.
"I will soon retain new counsel, and will present a vigorous defense to the charges recently brought against me."


New Kids on the Right
A suntan is a must for sincere followers of Italy's new Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi.
So wrote Roberto D'Agostino after the March election, in a satirical article in the Italian weekly L'Espresso.
No suspiciously Communist-looking pallor for the hearty conservative types who are going to turn the country into a paradise of high employment, low taxation and Roman Catholic family values.
"Those around you must be reassured by a complexion that radiates health and sport, self-confidence and youth."
In fact, being -- or looking -- young, though always desirable, has rarely been so much in style as it has been in Italy this spring.
Of the Prime Minister himself, who is 57, his wife, Veronica, observed in an interview this week, "My husband is concentrated on his future like a man of 30."


Even in Defeat, Wickman Gets Close to Closer
When General Manager Gene Michael was questioned about the Yankees' continuing quest for a closer last week, he conceded that his pursuit had slowed because the relief pitchers he desired were either unavailable or too expensive.
Without prompting, Michael then contended that a solution to the potential problem might be lurking in the Yankee bullpen.
Then he mentioned Bob Wickman.
"I'll bet you," Michael said, after naming Wickman, "one of those pitchers is the answer."


Drunken-Driving Case Leaves Town Stunned
For years, residents of the Orange County town of Goshen have regarded their police chief as an honorable man, one who volunteered at the local ambulance corps, served on the board of a Christian school and showered his granddaughter with affection.
Now the community is trying to reconcile that image of the chief, Edward Dykshoorn, with 20 minutes of reckless driving on Wednesday night during which, the authorities said, he injured two people and later tried to kill himself.


Perry Drug Stores Inc.(PDS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Books of The Times; Wild Journey Into an English Lad's Dark Psyche
My Idea of Fun
By Will Self
309 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $21.
The British writer Will Self has a liking for decidedly unorthodox heroes: his last book, "Cock &amp; Bull" (1993), featured a woman who sprouts a penis and a man who grows a vagina, and his new novel, "My Idea of Fun," stars a boy who apprentices himself to the Devil and learns (or says he learns) how to commit coldblooded murder.
The difference between these books is huge.
Whereas "Cock &amp; Bull" squandered Mr.
Self's evident gifts in sophomoric (and often highly sexist) jokes and high jinks, "My Idea of Fun" is a genuinely ambitious and accomplished novel, a novel that reads like an original and often willfully perverse Cuisinart mix of William Burroughs, William Gaddis, Thomas Pynchon and Lewis Carroll.
One reads the book with a combination of fascination and nausea, intellectual curiosity and emotional horror, impressed by Mr.
Self's virtuosic skills with language and satire even while being repelled by his images of necrophilia, mutilation and torture.


11-Year-Old Girl Is Raped in Queens
An 11-year-old Queens girl was abducted and raped on Wednesday on her way home from school, the police said yesterday.
The girl was walking on Hollis Avenue on her way home from the St.
Joachim and Anne School in Queens Village about 2:30 P.M. when a man brandishing a knife forced her to the corner of 214th Street and Hollis Avenue, the police said.
There, in a lot overgrown with shrubbery, the man raped her, then took her to a nearby parking lot and raped her again, the police said.


Ukraine Assembly Rejects Bid To Cancel Presidential Vote
The Ukrainian Parliament voted to proceed with presidential elections today, hoping that fresh leadership would help this young country find a way out of its deep political muddle and economic disintegration.
It was a major defeat for President Leonid M. Kravchuk, whose last-minute plea to cancel the June 26 vote was rejected by lawmakers.


Suns' Johnson to Play 3 More Seasons
Phoenix Suns point guard KEVIN JOHNSON says he will play three more seasons and then call it quits.
He said his retirement plans are firm, unlike the shifting announcements by his teammate CHARLES BARKLEY.
Johnson's one-year contract extension was announced yesterday, allowing him to end his career in Phoenix after the 1996-97 season.
He will be 31 when he retires. (AP)


CUOMO, BEGINNING BID FOR 4TH TERM, ASSAILS THE G.O.P.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo kicked off his campaign for a fourth four-year term today with a speech that included a list of accomplishments, an acknowledgement that he had not reached all his goals, and a broad attack on Republicans, both in New York and elsewhere, for practicing the politics of division.
On the closing day of the State Democratic Convention, Mr.
Cuomo and his running mate, Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine, left the direct assaults on their probable Republican opponents, State Senator George E. Pataki and Elizabeth P. McCaughey, to a parade of surrogates.
When it was Mr.
Cuomo's turn, he used his meandering 50-minute acceptance speech to draw numerous substantive and political distinctions between the Democratic and Republican tickets.


Fleet Week, More Nostalgic Than Ever
Fleet Week  Regattas, concerts, street fairs and exhibitions will all be part of Fleet Week in New York City this weekend.
Here are the events open to the public.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Information for most events: (212) 245-0072.
Today  COAST GUARD AND NAVAL SHIP TOURS, Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum, Pier 86, 12th Avenue at West 46th Street, Manhattan.
A tour of ship interiors; 1 to 4 P.M.


Review/Film; In Their Job Descriptions?
The voice-over that begins "Grief" is unmistakably male; light, but male.
Jo, the person to whom it belongs, turns out to resemble Divine if he had tried to dress like a managerial woman, in discreet suits and silk scarfs.
Jo (Jackie Beat, also known as Kent Fuher) is the producer of a television show called "Love Court," and the character's cross-dressed casting is just the start of the sexual shape-shifting that goes on in the office where Jo is the resident tyrant and earth mother.
Mark, one of the show's writers, is coming up on the one-year anniversary of his lover's death from AIDS.
Jeremy, another writer, is also gay and Mark's college friend.
Both Mark and Jeremy are sexually interested in Bill.
And just because Bill might get back with his girlfriend doesn't mean he would pass up a fling with Jeremy or Mark.


Josephine Moy Hong, 93, Dies; Volunteer and a G.O.P. Leader
Josephine Moy Hong, active in Chinese-American affairs and Republican Party politics, died on Sunday in Flushing Hospital.
She was 93 and lived in Jamaica Estates, Queens.
She suffered a brief illness, her family said.


No Headline
"It took them two days to kill everyone in the church. People from three communities had taken refuge in this place. Several hundred militias came. I recognized some from our own town. They were shooting and using machetes." -- CONSOLATA MUKATWAGIRIMANA, a Rwandan whose family was killed in a mass slaughter.  [ A1:1. ]


Milbury Quits Eagles Before Starting
The MIKE MILBURY era at Boston College ended before the first face-off.
Two months after resigning as Boston Bruins assistant general manager to take over as the Eagles' hockey coach, Milbury said yesterday that he was quitting because the college's officials didn't share his vision of the program's future.


Oliver Jackson, 61, Jazz Drummer Noted For an Elegant Style
Oliver Jackson, a jazz drummer known for his deft touch and smooth swing, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 61 and lived in Queens.
The cause was heart failure, according to a statement by the office of the jazz impresario George Wein.


Volt Information Sciences Inc.(VOLT,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Art in Review
Martha Diamond
Robert Miller Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Through June 25
Martha Diamond's latest paintings begin, as her works have in the past, with urban architecture, or more precisely with a loose grid of building facades.
The crucial word is loose.
The buildings are only suggested by sketchy, melting lines that make them look like tumbling houses of cards.
Above them, behind them, on top of them, Ms.
Diamond puts down broad, brushy strokes of paint.
The range of colors goes from all somber grays and black to pink, red and sky blue.
It's not only these chromatic twists, but also the blending of seeming structure and seeming spontaneity, that make the work distinctive.


Art in Review
Benefit Exhibition and Sale for Independent Curators  Sonnabend Gallery 420 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through June 25
This three-in-one end-of-season group show, heralding the arrival of the flock, is better than most.
It is held for the benefit and on the 20th anniversary of Independent Curators, which organizes traveling exhibitions of contemporary art, and it reflects the choices of three curators who seem to have given the project a good deal of thought.


Bruno Fonseca, 36, Painter and Sculptor
Bruno Fonseca, an artist who shifted easily between abstract and figurative styles and worked in both painting and sculpture, died on Tuesday at his family's home in East Hampton, L.I.
He was 36 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his wife, Anke Blaue.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  U.S.
SEEKS KOREA SANCTIONS  The Clinton Administration called for economic sanctions against North Korea after international inspectors said the country had destroyed evidence of whether it had developed a nuclear bomb.
A1  A RWANDAN TOWN, ERASED  In a village in eastern Rwanda, a large white statue of Jesus still looks down on a scene of mass slaughter carried out in mid-April.
Only corpses and the sound of wind remains in Nyarubuye, a town typical of those devastated by regular army troops or Hutu militiamen during two months of civil war.
A1  A DEADLY ISRAELI RAID IN LEBANON  Israeli planes pounded a training camp of a pro-Iranian group in eastern Lebanon, killing dozens of guerrillas.
It was one of Israel's bloodiest raids into Lebanon in years.
A1  CLINTON BACKS ITALY'S LEADERS  Beginning his European trip, President Clinton became the first major world leader to openly endorse the new Italian Government, which for the first time includes neo-Fascists.
His visit to Rome also revived a disagreement with Pope John Paul II over abortion.
A10  A SPRING GAMBOL THROUGH ROME  Reporter's notebook: Openly thrilled to be away from the land of Paula Jones and Dan Rostenkowski, Bill and Hillary Clinton held hands and laughed as they roamed Rome.
A10  Fifty years after the G.I.'s left, Italians still play baseball.
A10  REPORT CITES SERBIAN WAR CRIMES  A United Nations report accuses Bosnia's Serbs of "crimes against humanity" and says they may be responsible for "a systematic rape policy" in areas of Bosnia.
A3  A United Nations envoy delayed Bosnian cease-fire talks in Geneva.
A3  TO ADEN, THE TIME-HONORED WAY  Djibouti Journal: The Aden airport has been bombed, and the city is surrounded by northern troops.
But the trip to the southern Yemeni city can still be made in the traditional wooden ships known as dhows.
A4  Northern Yemeni forces pledged to honor a cease-fire call.
A5  GET RID OF ARMY, ARISTIDE URGES  In an interview in Washington, Haiti's exiled President said he doubted that an economic embargo could restore him to office and urged "action to get rid of the thugs" who overthrew him.
It is the strongest statement Father Aristide has made in favor of military intervention.
A3  Defying the President, Ukrainians decided to hold elections.
A2  National A12-20  RELIGIOUS RIGHT SPLITS G.O.P.
The rising influence of evangelical Christians is a major and often divisive force in Republican state party organizations.
A1  CLOUDED FUTURE OF FOX TV  Rupert Murdoch has landed in trouble with Federal regulators who suspect he misled them nine years ago on the foreign ownership of Fox Television, just as he was was on the brink of reaching the major leagues of American television.
A1  RODEO MATERIAL OR JUST MEAT  At the Bucking Horse Sale, unwanted animals must attract the interest of rodeo buyers or they will be shipped off to slaughter.
A12  GRAND JURY FAULTS PROSECUTION  Therapists and parents improperly prodded children to accuse a San Diego child-care worker of sexual abuse, a grand jury found.
A12  COUNTING DELEGATES IN VIRGINIA  Oliver North's backers say they have the votes, but they also know that when 14,000 people gather for the carnival atmosphere of Virginia's Republican convention, anything can and often does happen.
A14  ROSTENKOWSKI WITHOUT A LAWYER  Representative Dan Rostenkowski said he would replace the lawyer who last week failed to persuade him to accept a plea agreement with Federal prosecutors.
A18  CONFIDENT NEW CHAIRMAN  Sam Gibbons said he had no plans to share control of the Ways and Means Committee with Dan Rostenkowski and expressed confidence that he could produce a health care bill by the end of the month.
A18  AMERICAN LABOR SCRUTINIZED  The Labor and Commerce departments issued a joint report detailing the shift to low-paying jobs but delaying for months any recommendations to deal with the problem.
A18  HEPATITIS B STUDY ABSOLVED  An advisory committee to the National Institutes of Health found no evidence of wrongdoing in studies that led to the deaths of 5 of the 15 participants.
A20  Law Page B8  Victims of violence increasingly hold landlords liable for the crimes.
State courts struggle to define when unwanted intercourse is rape.
At the Bar: A death penality lawyer suffers near-death professionally.
Metro Digest B1  CUOMO KICKS OFF CAMPAIGN  Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo kicked off his re-election campaign with a speech that listed his accomplishments and attacked Republicans for practicing the politics of division.
A1  THE HAITIAN DIASPORA  The image of Haitians as boat people misrepresents the diversity of a small, entrenched immigrant group concentrated in the New York and Miami metropolitan areas.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-27, D17  D-Day on the Intrepid.
C1  Edith Wharton's New York.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Music: Glyndebourne reopens.
C3  Restaurants C20  Art: Robert Capa's D-Day photographs.
C26  Books: "My Idea of Fun." C24  Television: TV Weekend D17  Sports B10-16  Obituaries B9  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Attention, Gotham shoppers.
How big an army, for what?
Hungary's wise coalition rule.
Too much of a good thing.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Prisons save lives.
Anthony Lewis: A question of authority.
Andrea Lee: New kids on the right.
Chronicle B6  Crossword C24


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an entry in the News Summary on Sunday about the Governor of Arkansas summarized an article about his business dealings incorrectly.
The Governor, Jim Guy Tucker, has not admitted loan fraud, has not entered into a plea agreement and has not been charged with wrongdoing.


Provost of Juilliard To Step Down July 1
Dr.
James Sloan Allen, the provost and dean of the Juilliard School since 1992 and a faculty member since 1985, will leave his position on July 1, the school said yesterday.
Stephen Clapp, the associate dean and director of performance activities, will be the acting dean.
Dr.
Allen, whose background is in cultural history rather than music, was brought to Juilliard to recast what had been a weak academic and liberal arts curriculum.
In 1989 he established a program with Columbia University and Barnard College through which students could take courses at each school.
He also expanded Juilliard's adult education and evening division programs.


Power Play Worked Against Canucks Both Ways
Like hot goaltending, special teams are a vital ingredient for success in the Stanley Cup playoffs.
The Rangers have a slight edge over the Canucks after two games, and their penalty killers were vastly responsible for last night's 3-1 victory that evened the series finals at a victory each.
Not only did they produce the winning goal, they also kept the Canucks stymied six times.
In Game 1, the Canucks went scoreless five times with the man advantage.


Charles Ross Jr. Financial Executive, 57
Charles H. Ross Jr., a retired executive vice president of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, died last Friday in Rumson, N.J.
He was 57.
He died as a result of a fire at his home, the company said.


New Ways and Means Chief Rules Out Sharing Power
The new chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee said today that he had no plans to share power with Representative Dan Rostenkowski and expressed confidence that he could send health care legislation to the House floor by the end of the month.
The Representative, Sam M. Gibbons, a Florida Democrat, will take over as acting chairman in place of Mr.
Rostenkowski, who was indicted on Tuesday on multiple criminal charges of abusing his Congressional privileges.
Mr.
Gibbons said he would keep his committee in session over the Fourth of July recess if it did not complete its work on a health care bill by then.
But he scoffed at the idea that Mr.
Rostenkowski's indictment and consequent demotion would spell defeat for President Clinton's effort to overhaul the health care system.


Review/Film; Midday Cowboys in the City, With Horses
All you need to know about "The Cowboy Way" is obvious when Woody Harrelson spits tobacco juice on the shoes of a rodeo rider who's getting on his nerves.
As a champion rider called Pepper, Mr.
Harrelson lives in the land of the crass-is-cute macho hero.
And though the appeal of raucous tobacco-spitters is purely a matter of taste, it's hard to imagine who the audience might be for a film whose action is so predictable and humor so dispirited.
Pepper is the hot-tempered part of the film's buddy team.
Kiefer Sutherland plays his former partner, Sonny, the responsible one.
Though Pepper left Sonny in the lurch by not showing up at the national championships, the two are forced together when their friend Nacho disappears. (Why Sonny isn't named after a food, too, is one of the film's impenetrable mysteries.) Nacho (Joaguin Martinez) has vanished in New York, where he has traveled to find his grown daughter, who has been illegally brought in from Cuba for a price.


Tisch Says CBS Strategy Won't Shift
Answering rumors that have been swirling since Fox Broadcasting's shocking raid on CBS-affiliated stations, Laurence A. Tisch, the CBS chairman, said today that he had no intention of selling his controlling interest in the network and that he saw no reason to alter CBS's cautious strategy of sticking to the broadcasting business.
"I'm not selling," Mr.
Tisch said in an interview at the Century Plaza Hotel, where CBS is in the middle of its annual meeting with the managers of its affiliates.
"One of the main reasons I find this a very interesting business is because it's so dynamic."


CHRONICLE
JOHN M. ENGLER may be running for re-election as Governor of Michigan on the Republican ticket, but he will have a few other things on his mind between now and the end of the year.
Yesterday, he and his wife, MICHELLE ENGLER, announced that she was pregnant with triplets.
"The due date is Dec. 22," the Governor said in a statement released by his office.
"Michelle is now in her 12th week, and the health of the mother and all three babies is fine. So is Dad's."


Doubting Sanctions, Aristide Urges U.S. Action on Haiti
In the strongest statement he has made in favor of military intervention, the exiled Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, said today that he doubted that economic sanctions could restore him to office and urged "action to get rid of the thugs" who overthrew him.
In an interview in his Washington apartment, Father Aristide repeated his concern that the Haitian Constitution would not allow him to formally invite foreign military intervention.
But the Haitian leader said the United States should be "moving toward a surgical action" to remove Haiti's military leadership that he said would succeed in a few hours.


Hanoi, Not Nixon, Set Pace of Vietnam Peace
To the Editor:
No one will begrudge Tony Lewis ("Guilt for Vietnam," column, May 30) the fun of returning to the battles of his youth, in the process blaming the United States Government and not Hanoi for American casualties, and repeating the contemptible lie that the terms achieved in 1972 were available in 1969.
Like the Bourbons, Tony Lewis has forgotten nothing in the interval, but neither has he learned anything.


Inside Art
A Difficult 'Crossing'
Public art never ceases to push some people's buttons.
In Brookline Village, Mass., there has recently been something of an uproar over "Crossing," two altered crosswalk signals facing into the dividing triangle at Washington and Harvard Streets.
The work is by Denise Marika, a local artist, and the signals project images of a mother protecting her child at a crossing.
It sounds innocent enough, but both the woman and the child are naked.
The nudity is so tactfully executed that the woman's pose reveals no private parts and it is impossible to tell the sex of the child.
But some local residents were up in arms when the piece was unveiled two weeks ago.
Some tried to have "Crossing" removed.


Tenneco Reduces Size Of Case Stock Offering
Tenneco Inc. said today that it was reducing the size of a planned public offering of shares in its Case farm and construction equipment division to a 25 percent stake from 35 percent because of weak stock market prices for companies in machinery and other cyclical industries.
As a result, Tenneco now estimates proceeds from the sale will be $335 million to $385 million, down from an initial estimate of $500 million.


Royal Bank of Canada (RY) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "THE GIG," Manhattan Theater Club, Stage II, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
A concert version of a musical by Douglas J. Cohen, based on a film written and directed by Frank D. Gilroy, about a group of amateur jazz musicians who perform at a Catskills resort.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 7:30 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $27.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
"SHAKER HEIGHTS," Atlantic Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea.
A comedy about an eccentric who tries to incorporate celibacy into his life, by Quincy Long; directed by Neil Pepe.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 5 P.M.
Tickets: $28.
Information: (212) 645-1242.


Illegal Drivers in Nassau Are Caught on Camera, Then Arrested
Nassau County authorities said today that they had arrested 20 drivers with suspended or revoked licenses who had been caught on videotape driving under the most brazen of circumstances -- to and from their appointments with probation officers.
The motorists, all but four of whom had lost their licenses as a result of drunken-driving convictions, were secretly videotaped by investigators from the Nassau County District Attorney's office as they drove in and out of the parking lot of the Nassau County Probation Department over a four-day period in May.
Ignoring Court Orders
County officials said the surveillance underscored the degree to which motorists with revoked licenses ignored court orders to stay off the roads.
At a news conference, they described how they placed a camera in a van in the parking lot of the probation department here from May 16 to May 19, and observed the comings and goings of 180 people whose licenses had been suspended.
All had meetings with probation officers in connection with their driving offenses.


Theme Parks Give History a Landscape
To the Editor:
Railing against the Disney Company's proposed historic theme park in Virginia, as Frank Rich does in "Disney's Bull Run" (column, May 22), is a popular sport.
The proposed theme park may be the wrong project for the site because of environmental impacts, but we shouldn't dismiss historical amusement parks without considering why they are successful.


Art in Review
John Coplans
Andrea Rosen Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through July 2
A new note of distress can be seen in John Coplans's latest nude self-portraits.
In all the photographs, Mr.
Coplans appears upside down, as if he were suspended by his feet or falling.


A Little Snag on the Way to a Bigger and Better Beach


Collins &amp; Aikman Group Inc.(CKGPrA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Gooden, Seaver, Ryan, and Now Wilson?
Twelve years ago, the Mets struck the mother lode by selecting a blue-chip pitcher from Florida by the name of Dwight Gooden in the amateur draft.
Yesterday, the Mets turned to the Sunshine State for salvation again by picking another right-handed pitcher, Paul Wilson of Florida State, as the first choice in the 1994 draft.
Wilson, 21, is a 6-foot-5-inch right-hander from Orlando.
He was 12-5 with a 2.08 earned run average and 154 strikeouts in 134 innings in this, his junior year at Florida State.
For his college career, Wilson has a 26-11 record with a 2.37 e.r.a.


Peerless Carpet reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


With Nothing to Lose, an Oriole Rookie Wins
Orioles 11, Tigers 5
Before his major league debut yesterday afternoon, Orioles rookie right-hander Scott Klingenbeck said he had nothing to lose.
Then he went out and beat the Detroit Tigers, 11-5, in Baltimore.
Cal Ripken Jr. homered and drove in four runs, and Klingenbeck pitched seven strong innings, as the Orioles snapped their three-game losing streak and Detroit's four-game winning streak.


McMahon Signs On With Cardinals
Quarterback JIM McMAHON, changing teams for the fourth time in his career, signed yesterday with the Arizona Cardinals.
Terms of the contract weren't disclosed.


Canadian Bank Hires 5 Lehman Executives
Undaunted by the bad publicity surrounding the market for derivatives, the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce snatched five senior derivatives experts from Lehman Brothers yesterday.
Michael Rulle, the head of Lehman's equity derivative area, will run the Canadian bank's global derivative business from New York.


Allied Signal In Contract With Boeing
Allied Signal Inc. said yesterday that it had won an uncommon all-or-nothing contract to provide up to $2 billion worth of equipment for the Boeing Company's next-generation 737 airliner.
The Sundstrand Corporation, based in Rockford, Ill., came up the loser in the months-long competition to make auxiliary power units for Boeing's most popular narrow-body jetliner.
The first plane is scheduled for delivery to Southwest Airlines in October 1997.


Kudlow Takes Securities Job
Lawrence A. Kudlow, who resigned three months ago as chief economist and senior managing director at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company to deal with a drug and alcohol problem, rejoined the brokerage community yesterday as a consultant to Montgomery Securities.
Mr.
Kudlow, who is 46, resigned on March 3 after eight years with Bear, Stearns.
There were rumors at the time of his resignation that he was forced out because his substance abuse problem had caused him to miss an important meeting with clients.


Corrections
A chart yesterday describing details of the proposed sale of the New York Coliseum to Mortimer B. Zuckerman gave an incorrect deadline for the signing of a letter of intent, a document that indicates that all sides agree to the transaction.
The date is July 15, 1994, not July 15, 1995.
Because of an editing error, the article also misstated the location of the site.
It is at 59th Street and Columbus Circle, not Columbus Avenue.


Coliseum: Something for Everyone (Maybe)
On the surface, the deal reached this week to sell half of the New York Coliseum site to the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman has something for everyone.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority, for the first time since it put the Coliseum on the market nine years ago, has cash to show for its efforts: a nonrefundable down payment of $17 million from Mr.
Zuckerman.
The Giuliani administration, which had pressured the M.T.A. to complete a deal with Mr.
Zuckerman, now has the prospect of a new development to show that the economy is rebounding, 3,700 potential construction jobs and $12 million to $14 million in tax revenues, assuming the project is built.


Part of G.E. Account Is Put in Review
The General Electric Company said yesterday that it had placed in review the media planning and buying portion of its account, now handled by 33 agencies, in order to consolidate those duties at a single shop.
The review involves more than 30 company activities, including the corporate, appliances, lighting and financial services divisions, but not NBC.
Though G.E. would not discuss billings, Advertising Age estimated them at potentially as much as $50 million.


North Staff Not Taking A Victory As Assured
It's not that Oliver L. North's campaign staff is nervous.
Certainly not.
Aides responsible for tracking delegate votes at this weekend's Virginia Republican convention are saying the former Marine could win the Senate nomination over James C. Miller 3d with as much as 57 percent of the vote.
It's just that Mr.
North's strategists know what can happen when almost 14,000 people get together in a carnival atmosphere to pick a candidate for high office.
Many remember 13 years ago, when Herb Bateman came into the convention as the front-runner in a three-way race for attorney general.
He finished third.


Bosnia Talks Put Off as Serbs Break Promise
Yasushi Akashi, the top United Nations official in the Balkans, postponed Bosnian cease-fire talks today and conceded that he had been wrong to believe promises from the Bosnian Serbs.
A planned two-day meeting on arranging a Bosnian cease-fire was put off after the Muslim-led Bosnian Government boycotted the talks, protesting the failure of Serbian forces to comply with a six-week-old NATO ultimatum and leave the center of the eastern Bosnian town of Gorazde.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE BUGLIARELLO, who is stepping down as president of Polytechnic University in Brooklyn, was on his way to accept an honorary degree from Pace University on Saturday when he slipped -- and slipped a disk.
As a result, he could not accept the degree and will miss a dinner tonight at the Lotos Club in Manhattan for a former chairman of Polytechnic University, Dr.
Joseph Jacobs.
But Dr.
Bugliarello said yesterday that he would not consider skipping the dinner in his own honor tomorrow on the Polytechnic campus, which, largely under his leadership, now encompasses Metrotech, the $1 billion corporate complex.
He will go in a wheelchair.


METRO DIGEST
HAITIAN MIGRANTS SETTLE IN, LOOKING BACK
The image of Haitians as boat people misrepresents the diversity of a small, entrenched immigrant group concentrated in the New York and Miami metropolitan areas.
They include not only migrant workers in Homestead, Fla., but wealthy doctors on Long Island, not only taxi drivers in Manhattan but college professors in Washington.
A1.
CUOMO STARTS CAMPAIGN WITH AN ATTACK
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo kicked off his campaign for a fourth four-year term with a speech that included a list of accomplishments, an acknowledgement that he had not reached all his goals, and a broad attack on Republicans, both in New York and elsewhere, for practicing the politics of division.
A1.


Review/Film; A Coming-of-Age Tale From Sweden
"The Slingshot" takes a light-handed approach to the idea that surviving childhood may be the toughest part of life.
Though every coming-of-age story has a personal quirk, this one is built on a most particular identity crisis.
"Can you be a Jew and a socialist?" wonders 10-year-old Roland, who is doubly persecuted in the Sweden of the 1920's.
Once he has solved that problem, he goes on to ask, "How do I know I was meant to be Swedish?"
Roland's father is a socialist with heroic illusions and a serious limp; his mother is a Russian-born Jew, an idealist who sells condoms illegally; his older brother is an aspiring boxer who practices on Roland's nose instead of a punching bag.
Roland's other problems include ordinary sexual curiosity, a sadistic anti-Semitic teacher and being teased by bullying older boys.
It's a wonder he survived at all.


Patient Lidster Seizes Moment
Doug Lidster will be gracious.
He will not gloat.
He will not second-guess the Rangers' coaching staff.
He will not say, "I told you so."
Still, Lidster is human.
And so when someone told Lidster last night that Rangers Coach Mike Keenan had admitted it was a mistake to bench him for so much of this season, Lidster allowed himself a smile.
It is nice, after all, to feel wanted again.


New Computer Systems to Help Border Patrol


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANC ONE CORP., Columbus, Ohio, received approval from the Federal Reserve Board to acquire Liberty National Bancorp, Louisville, Ky., in a stock swap valued at $780 million.
NORTHERN TELECOM LTD., Mississauga, Ontario, won a contract worth more than $100 million to provide digital cellular telephone equipment to Mercury One-2-One, a cellular network in Britain.


Critic's Notebook; Of a Stately Opera Festival In a Demanding New Hall
The ha-ha is still here at Glyndebourne.
That sudden five-foot drop in the middle of the lawn of this Sussex country estate was designed to keep sheep from grazing up to the manor house.
Although the term is old, one local wit suggested that it derives from the number of tuxedoed gentlemen and silk-gowned ladies who have tripped on it during the 80-minute intermissions that are a feature of the Glyndebourne Festival.
No one tripped on Wednesday night, when the festival opened with a production of Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro," but the ha-ha seems to have reproduced.
After 60 years of presenting renowned opera performances in a quaint room originally built to hold only 300 people, Glyndebourne has an imposing new theater that seats 1,200 and cost $49.5 million.
And for anyone who has ever strolled around Glyndebourne, there is now one surprise after another.
Open a door in the organ room that used to lead to the old theater and you are faced with a cinderblock wall.
Take a turn that once led through a narrow passage between ramshackle buildings that have accrued over centuries, and you find yourself heading toward an expanded souvenir shop with Glyndebourne-labeled offerings.


On Stage, and Off
Long Time Between Roles
When Roger Horchow, the mail-order catalogue tycoon, wanted to fulfill a lifelong dream and produce a Broadway show, he put his money where his mouth was and anted up 70 percent of the $8.3 million stake for his chosen project, "Crazy for You." The show opened in February 1992, won the Tony for best musical and is still going strong.
And now Mr.
Horchow is going a bit further; he's putting his mouth where his money is.
Sometime in mid-September, when the actor Carleton Carpenter goes on vacation for a week or two, Mr.
Horchow will stand in for him in the role of Everett Baker, the father of the leading lady, Polly, now being played by Karen Ziemba.
It might very well be the first time a producer has entered a Broadway show in this fashion, and it will probably require a waiver of some kind from Actors Equity.


Religious Right Gains Influence And Spreads Discord in G.O.P.
After years of quietly building support, conservative Christians have burst into view this year as an important, often divisive, force in Republican politics.
They now have control of six state party organizations and are making inroads in several others.
The rise of evangelical Christians, whose presence has substantially grown since Pat Robertson ran for President in 1988, has led to bitter intraparty battles in several states.
Typically, traditional suburban moderates denounce the evangelicals as interlopers and fear that their stands on emotional issues like abortion will drive people from the party.


Appointment At the Limited
The Limited Inc. has turned to Cheryl Nido Turpin, one of its best trouble-shooters, to run its flagship Limited stores division.
Ms.
Turpin had been president of Lane Bryant, a Limited division that caters to large women.
Ms.
Turpin has been in charge of Lane Bryant's 817 stores since January 1990.
Before joining the Limited, she was president of Weinstock's, a department store chain based in Sacramento, Calif.


Issues of Foreign Ownership Cloud the Future of Fox TV
Just when it seemed that Rupert Murdoch was about to reach the major leagues of broadcast television, he has landed in trouble with Federal regulators who suspect that he intentionally misled them nine years ago concerning the extent of foreign ownership of Fox Television Stations Inc.
The questions are serious, because Federal law prohibits a foreign company from owning more than 25 percent of an American radio or television station.
Violation of the law, especially if the facts were misrepresented to the Federal Communications Commission, could mean that Mr.
Murdoch would have to sell his stations.


Art in Review
Hannah Collins
Leo Castelli Gallery  420 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through June 11
Billboard-size black-and-white photographs of Istanbul, Turkey; Warsaw, and the Sahara near Cairo make up the first New York show by Hannah Collins, an English artist who lives in Barcelona, Spain.
But Ms.
Collins rejects scenic views, instead offering images of back alleys and other nondescript locations in gigantic unframed prints hung directly on the wall, like tapestries.


Sports of The Times; Anderson Justifies The Trade
THE trade hadn't really panned out.
Glenn Anderson had been skating in the sands of time for the Rangers during the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Until last night.
At age 33, the old Oiler right wing with the withering stare in his eyes had contributed four late-season goals after Mike Gartner had been sent to the Toronto Maple Leafs in one of Neil Smith's trade-deadline deals that Mike Keenan had demanded.
But in the playoffs Anderson had scored only one goal while Gartner had produced five.


Home Video
Little Movie
Now and then the video maw is fed a little film that isn't here and gone in a gulp.
A present case in point is a riveting, down-and-dirty piece of film noir called "Red Rock West," directed and co-written by John Dahl and starring Nicolas Cage, Lara Flynn Boyle, Dennis Hopper and J. T. Walsh.
"Red Rock West," broadcast on HBO in October and available in video stores since February, has a profile not unlike other films that, denied theatrical release, begin life on television and move on to rental.


Reporter's Notebook; For Democrats, Too Smooth a Polish?
A week after a Republican state convention that was filled with accusations of backroom arm-twisting, skulduggery and last-minute deals, the Democratic convention that ended today was a tightly scripted, downright civil affair virtually devoid of drama.
Yet for all their messy maneuvering, the Republicans emerged from their convention energized by the sense that, amid strife, they had chosen the best ticket possible: one that would appeal to moderates and conservatives, women and people angry with incumbents.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Rupert Murdoch has landed in trouble with Federal regulators who suspect he misled them nine years ago on the foreign ownership of Fox Television.  [ Page A1. ]


For Williams, It's the Rangers or Nobody
MITCH WILLIAMS says he will either sign to pitch for the Texas Rangers in 1995 or continue his retirement from baseball.
Williams spoke from his Hico, Tex., ranch, where he went after the Houston Astros placed the 29-year-old left-handed reliever on waivers so they could him his unconditional release.


For Children
'Art Jam Improv'
Green Oasis Community Garden
East Eighth Street, between  Avenues C and D  Lower East Side  (212) 473-5850  Recommended for all ages  Sunday
The 60 community gardens, official and unofficial, in the East Village look so lovingly maintained and deeply cherished that you can almost detect the hum of lullabies when the leaves flutter.
And some of the community gardens have workshops for children that could make a non-East Villager parent envious.


Robert Hatch, 83, Critic and Editor
Robert Hatch, a critic for and editor of The Nation for almost 25 years, died on Tuesday at his home in Riverdale in the Bronx.
He was 83.
The cause was bone marrow disease, said his wife, Ruth Hatch.


School Chiefs Say Teachers Face Layoffs
Superintendents in New York City's 32 school districts say they will be forced to lay off hundreds of teachers under the Giuliani administration's proposed city budget.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has said the budget cuts he proposed for the Board of Education would cut bureaucratic fat without directly affecting classrooms.
But several superintendents, who have been meeting in recent weeks to discuss the cuts, said they could not balance their budgets without dismissing teachers, assistant principals, guidance counselors, teacher's aides and others.


Heat Stays With Loughery as Coach
Miami Heat Coach KEVIN LOUGHERY will keep his job, after all.
The team announced yesterday that Loughery agreed to a multiyear contract extension last Sunday, despite rumors that he would be replaced.
"Kevin did get a raise," was all the managing partner, LEWIS SCHAFFEL, would say on Loughery's contract extension.


Returning to the Scene of the Crime, to Sue the Owner
It never occurred to her that she was doing anything dangerous.
She was visiting a friend at 920 Broadway, an office building on 21st Street in Manhattan.
The regular elevators were slow, so when the freight elevator came she marched right in.
When a man entered after her, she did not flinch.
It was mid-afternoon, and a closed-circuit camera seemed to be monitoring the space.
But the man attacked her, fracturing her nose and cheekbone and stealing her pocketbook.
The camera, it turned out, was not working.


Now Who's Blowing Smoke in America's Eyes?; Medicare and Cigarettes
To the Editor:
Congratulations on "Medicare's Big Cigarette Burn" (editorial, May 18).
Underscoring the huge cost of medical care for cigarette-induced illnesses also shows the enormous lack of common-sense coverage by Medicare and private insurance.


Q &amp; A
Hunting the High Yield  Q. Would I do better financially with a five-year certificate of deposit, Treasury security or municipal bond?
TODD KUZNITZ, Forest Hills, Queens  A. The highest yield, of course, is a major consideration when choosing an investment.
But other factors to keep in mind are the investment's liquidity, your market risk tolerance, the creditworthiness of the security, possible penalties for early withdrawal and your tax bracket.
A five-year C.D. is now yielding about 6 percent, usually with a penalty for early withdrawal, and the income is subject to Federal, state and local taxes.
A comparable Treasury note yields about 6.5 percent.
Its value may fluctuate before maturity, but the proceeds are not subject to state and local taxes.
Though a comparable municipal bond with a triple-A rating yields just 5 percent and may fluctuate in value, the income is free not only of Federal tax, but also of state and local tax for residents of the state in which the bond is issued.
For an investor in the 31 percent Federal tax bracket who intends to hold the security for the full five-year period, the municipal bond clearly provides the highest yield on a tax-equivalent basis.
"The relationship of the rates on these investments is always changing," said William K. Joseph, senior vice president of Smith Barney.
"Get a taxable equivalent yield table to help you make a better comparison of taxable and tax-exempt securities."
Avoiding the Broker  Q. Where can I obtain a list of companies that sell their stock directly to investors without brokers or commissions?
Can you list a few of the more prominent ones?
MARK D. QUINLAN, Columbus, Ohio  A. You can buy stock directly from more than 900 companies, including McDonald's, Pepsico, Du Pont and AT&amp;T, by using a dividend reinvestment plan, or DRIP.
In most cases, you must first buy at least one share through a broker.
"A growing number of firms -- including Exxon, Texaco, U S West and Dial -- are taking their DRIP's one step further by allowing any investor, including nonshareholders, to make their initial purchase directly," said Charles Carlson, author of "Buying Stocks Without a Broker" and editor of the DRIP Investor, a newsletter.
For a free list of companies, write to the DRIP Investor at 7412 Calumet Avenue, Hammond, Ind. 46324.
I.R.A.
Beneficiary  Q. Should I designate my trust as beneficiary of my individual retirement account rollover, rather than my wife?
I have a will with a credit shelter trust, and the I.R.A. is two-thirds of my total assets.
SID ALBERT, Margate, Fla.
A.
If your wife is the beneficiary, she can roll over the I.R.A. at your death into another I.R.A.
In that way, the assets will continue to grow tax-deferred and income tax will be due only on money withdrawn by your wife.
"If instead the I.R.A. is payable to a trust -- unless both the I.R.A. and the trust are designed to comply with complex, recent I.R.S. rulings -- the entire value of your I.R.A. will be subject to income tax soon after you die," said Ralph M. Engel, partner in Rosen &amp; Reade, a New York law firm.
"And your wife may lose the benefits of future tax deferrals."


Classical Music in Review
Ascension Music
Church of the Ascension


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about President Clinton's trip to Italy described the scene incorrectly.
He was looking at the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel when the picture was taken; the "Last Judgment" portion of the Sistine murals was on the wall behind him.


Review/Ballet; In 'Giselle,' an Ageless Romanticism
Romantic ardor and anguish are dominating American Ballet Theater's final week at the Metropolitan Opera House.
"Giselle," a triumph of 19th-century balletic Romanticism, received its first performance of the season on Wednesday afternoon and is being repeated, with several cast changes, through today.
The excellent production is well worth seeing.
The moment Julie Kent stepped from Giselle's cottage, her effortless bounding revealed that this young peasant was happy and trusted Albrecht, her handsome but mysterious suitor.
But when she learned that Albrecht was really betrothed to a noblewoman, Ms.
Kent seemed to grow old and haggard in seconds.
Dancing, once a pleasure, now became a torture, and through her characterization Ms.
Kent suggested that Giselle's every step was accompanied by searing pain.


One for the Road: Revived Knicks Force a Game 7
Doing what many people believed they would not, the Knicks kept their season alive tonight.
Tying the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference finals at 3-3, the Knicks beat the Indiana Pacers, 98-91, in a remarkable victory at Market Square Arena, to force a deciding Game 7 on Sunday night at Madison Square Garden.
The Knicks had lost their previous five road games, and the Pacers had not lost a home game since April 8, a 10-game span.


Video Poker in Louisiana Is Mob Target, Inquiry Says
Since video poker was legalized in Louisiana in 1991, the blinking electronic machines have swept the state, showing up in barrooms, hotels, crayfish restaurants in the swamps and even at huge truck stops, where the main business is not refueling but playing video poker.
There are now 13,256 video poker machines in the state, and the number is growing.
In just one week in April, players put $23.8 million into the machines, about the usual weekly amount, says Gregory Albrecht, the chief economist in the legislative fiscal office.
A video poker machine at a truck stop collects about $1,000 a week; a machine at a restaurant, about $800.
The state expects to receive $100 million in revenue from the machines this fiscal year.


Auto Sales Lose Momentum For Second Straight Month
For the second straight month, auto sales slowed in May from the rapid pace of early spring, growing a modest 3 percent over a strong period a year ago.
Some auto industry analysts attributed the slowdown to factory production constraints, particularly for popular sport utility vehicles.
Indeed, sales of all light trucks continued strong, with the General Motors Corporation and the Chrysler Corporation posting their best May light-truck sales ever, while the Ford Motor Company sold more trucks than it had in any previous month.


Teamsters Local Aids Hit Man's Quest for Pension
In the Mafia, a pension is not a fringe benefit normally available to hit men.
But investigators said yesterday that they had uncovered the strange case of Anthony M. Senter, who arranged a deal with a local chapter of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters for a pension after he was convicted of being a member of a mob hit squad in New York City that committed 25 murders and dismembered most of the victims.
Mr.
Senter, 39, apparently hoped someday to collect $16,800 a year while serving a life sentence without the possibility of parole, the investigators said.


Ex-Trader Gets $138,181 From a Kidder Account
Under prodding from a New York State court judge, Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company sent checks totaling $138,181 yesterday to Joseph Jett, the government bond trader whom the firm dismissed in April after it accused him of creating $350 million in phony profits.
The money comes from one of two Kidder accounts held by Mr.
Jett that the securities firm froze after it accused him of fraud.
The account held the firm's deferred compensation for Mr.
Jett.


Monk Opts to Receive Here And Jets Land Prize Catch
After an extensive search, the Jets filled a void for an experienced wide receiver yesterday when they agreed to terms with Art Monk, the National Football League's career-best receiver.
Monk, a 36-year-old unrestricted free agent, had spent 14 seasons with the Washington Redskins and distinguished himself as a future Hall of Famer.
Monk is tops in the N.F.L. record book in catches (888) and touchdowns (65).


Not Just Oliver North Backers; They're Believers
Her T-shirt had a road sign that said, "North 94," and on each side were colorful stickers that identified her as an Oliver L. North supporter.
She also wore silver earrings with big gold elephants, signifying her loyalty to the Republican Party.
But that hardly made Charlotte Neal distinctive among other North supporters today at the opening of the State Republican Party Convention.
Like them, her backing of Mr.
North and her allegiance are unconditional despite predictions by political experts that his likely selection on Saturday as the party's candidate for the United States Senate could lead to ruin in the election this fall.


Italians Win But Hear Boos
They were outshot, outhustled and outmuscled.
And from the angry whistles of the nearly 40,000 fickle fans on hand at Olympic Stadium, one would have thought that the Azzurri -- the Blue Shirts -- had lost.
Instead, Italy beat Switzerland by 1-0 in their friendly match tonight on the strength of a 24th-minute goal by forward Giuseppe Signori.
"I wouldn't say that we played particularly well," said Italy's coach, Arrigo Sacchi.
"There is a lot of room for improvement on this team, tactically and physically. We have to learn to finish off our plays."


Reynolds Said to Be Ready to Settle
BUTCH REYNOLDS, the 400-meter world record-holder who has been battling track and field's world governing body over $27.3 million, is apparently ready to give up the fight.
A source, who asked not to be identified, said yesterday that the financially strapped Reynolds has asked for a private meeting with PRIMO NEBIOLO, president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, in an effort to settle the case.
Reynolds is willing to settle for $2 million, the source said.
JOHN GALL, an attorney for Reynolds, denied the report.


Unsettling Budget Prospects
The hole in Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's budget could be $1 billion or more, according to new estimates by official and unofficial watchdogs of New York City's finances.
The implication is ominous: more layoffs.
Indeed, the layoffs threaten to be so large that the Mayor must seriously reconsider his refusal to cut into the ranks of police, firefighters and teachers.
They account for more than half the city payroll.
If they are spared, the cuts for other agencies will be devastating.
Mr.
Giuliani balanced his $31 billion spending plan for the fiscal year starting July 1 with significant payroll reductions and without raising taxes.
But Comptroller Alan Hevesi said this week that at least a half-billion dollars' worth of the Mayor's calculations are highly unlikely to pan out, and a billion more is either doubtful or unsound.
The Citizens Budget Commission, an unofficial group, found a $1.1 billion hole.
And still another watchdog, the state's Financial Control Board, warned that city hiring had increased when it should be shrinking -- thus compounding the difficulty of cutting back -- and that overtime had gotten out of control.


Cuts Planned In Managers, Giuliani Says
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said yesterday that he was planning a new round of dismissals in the senior managerial ranks of city agencies over the next month, on top of the 6,800 jobs that have already been cut through voluntary severance offers.
The Mayor said he did not yet know how many jobs would be eliminated, but Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers said it could be in the hundreds.


Islands to Let U.S. Process Haiti Refugees
The Turks and Caicos Islands, a small British-ruled group of islands off the Bahamas, agreed today to let the Clinton Administration process Haitian refugees on a beach site on the islands.
Administration officials said the decision was important because it is the first time officials outside the United States have agreed to let Washington process Haitians' applications for asylum on land, where the situation will be far less cramped and stressful than at sea.


U.N. Sanctions for North Korea
President Clinton is beginning to rally international support for economic sanctions on North Korea.
Sanctions, especially those its neighbors are likely to impose, may have limited economic effect on the largely self-reliant North.
But their purpose is political anyway -- to show the world's resolve not to let North Korea trifle with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
It is thus imperative that any sanctions enjoy the broad backing that only a vote of the United Nations Security Council can muster.
Mr.
Clinton is right to direct his efforts to that end.


Johnson Re-signs, Reunited With Banks
The Giants' influence on the Browns' defense continued yesterday when PEPPER JOHNSON signed a two-year contract with Cleveland, one day after CARL BANKS joined the team, which is coached by BILL BELICHICK, the former defensive coordinator for the Giants.
"We picked up Pepper last year and he's still a good player," said Belichick.
"We felt like Carl's experience at linebacker was a big plus there. Based on the rookie mini-camp that Carl had here for us in May, I think he can still help."


Getting Shipshape for a City Greeting


U.S. Says Cuban Exiles Sought Missile
Two leaders of a paramilitary group of Cuban exiles have been arrested here on charges that they sought to buy a Stinger missile and other advanced weapons from an undercover Federal agent posing as a corrupt Army sergeant.
The men, Rodolfo Frometa and Fausto Marimon, are prominent members of a recently formed group, Comandos F-4, that Federal investigators said had wanted the weapons for an attack on Cuba.
The men were formally charged with dealing in explosive materials without a license when they appeared today before Magistrate Judge Linnea Johnson at the Federal Courthouse here.


Witch Witness Defends a Life of Woodland Ritual
A woman who calls herself a witch took the witness stand in a trial here this week and said that members of nature cults like hers regularly gather in Connecticut state parks to perform rituals and celebrate seasonal festivals in natural settings.
"Witchcraft is a religion that honors nature," said the witness, Bonnie Nadeau of New Haven.
"There's no structure built by man that could be as holy as that created by the sacred god and goddess."


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the business dealings of Gov.
Jim Guy Tucker of Arkansas referred incorrectly to a plea agreement made by a Little Rock businessman in a loan-fraud case.
The businessman, David Hale, admitted having committed loan fraud, but his plea agreement did not cite loans that he made to Mr.
Tucker.


INSIDE
Times Mirror agreed to sell its extensive cable television operations to Cox Enterprises for $2.3 billion in a move that renewed speculation about new mergers.
Page 35.
Showdown at the Garden
John Starks scored 26 points to lead the Knicks to a 98-91 victory over the Pacers and force a deciding Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals tomorrow in New York.
Page 27.


Rostenkowski Is Said to Plan Strong Defense
Lawyers for many important witnesses in the criminal case against Representative Dan Rostenkowski said today that their clients would challenge some of the most damaging charges the Government has made against the 66-year-old Chicago Democrat.
The lawyers said the witnesses who would support Mr.
Rostenkowski include the top aides in his Chicago and Washington Congressional offices and at least 8 of the 14 people listed in the indictment as "ghost employees" who were paid by Congress for either not working or for doing personal chores for Mr.
Rostenkowski.


Classical Music in Review
"La Perichole"
Opera Francais de New York
Tully Hall


Digital Equipment Freezes Employees' Wages
Struggling to cut costs and losses, the Digital Equipment Corporation has frozen the wages and salaries of nearly all of its 92,000 employees indefinitely.
"This is just part of our efforts to reduce costs and return the company to profitability," a Digital spokesman, Jeffry Gibson, said today.


Gooden Strong In Rehab Stint
Dwight Gooden made his second strong rehabilitation start in the minor leagues tonight and could be back in the rotation as early as next week.
Pitching for the Mets' Class AA franchise in Binghamton, N.Y., Gooden threw five innings and gave up two hits and no runs with one walk and four strikeouts.
He threw 62 pitches, 41 of them strikes.
"I felt good," Gooden said through a team spokesman.
"I worked on a lot of changeups."


Short-Term World Group a Disappointment
Short-term world income funds, billed as a low-risk, high-yield alternative to money market funds, have failed to live up to expectations.
The group initially engaged in a complicated "cross hedging" technique that counted on European currencies trading in a narrow band.
When the European exchange mechanism broke up in the third quarter of 1992, the funds took a severe beating.
Many funds then switched strategies, in some cases buying emerging markets debt.


A Clash of Contrasts Means Fire on the Ice
The Stanley Cup finals have moved from the skyscraping buildings of Manhattan to the skyscraping mountains of Vancouver, a welcome change of venue, to a place where hockey players are the biggest celebrities in town.
In this Pacific rim metropolis, the ice game commands the attention of a sports media and a sports citizenry more sophisticated in hockey, which is not to say that they take it all in stride.


Pickled, Stewed or Tradition, A Snake's a Snake, Police Say
Police Officer Joseph Makinen thought he was just responding to another burglary call in Jackson Heights, Queens, early yesterday when he approached the store with the metal grate rolled halfway down and the door ajar.
Inside the small, dark store, he saw shelves full of jars and bottles.
Floating inside the jars and bottles were snakes.
Officer Makinen could never stomach snakes.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  U.S.
Women's Team Advances Easily  Coach Manuel Coloma of Spain thinks that the United States is unbeatable in the women's world basketball championships.
The head coach of the United States, Tara VanDerveer, is far more cautious, even after the Americans defeated the European champion Spain, 92-71, last night in Hobart, Australia, scoring their second victory and clinching a quarterfinal berth.
Dawn Staley, a former Virginia guard who has played professionally in Spain for two years, hit 12 of her 15 points in the first half and center Daedra Charles scored a game-high 18 as the United States kept on track for a third straight title.
"Some of our younger players need to learn we need more from them," VanDerveer said. (AP)


It's Not Quite Indy, but Ford Wins an Electric Car Race
Roberta J. Nichols was skeptical.
Three states have mandated an imminent future for electric vehicles, but Dr.
Nichols, an official with Ford's electric vehicle program, was saying that compliance might be impossible and the strict timetable counterproductive.
Then an electric Chrysler mini-van zipped past her.


Pataki's Abortion Stance Draws Fire From Both Sides
As he seeks to unify the Conservative and Republican parties behind his candidacy for governor, State Senator George E. Pataki has come under attack from both ends of the political spectrum for his position on abortion.
It is a position that could end up costing him the undivided support of the Conservative Party, as it meets here on Saturday to endorse a statewide ticket to challenge Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, the three-term Democrat.


Observer; Gunning For Respect
One highly publicized activity of young American men these days is shooting strangers for being disrespectful.
Disrespectful behavior includes looking other people in the eye, bumping people on sidewalks or public conveyances, and driving a car in a manner some other motorist considers disrespectful.
The fact that news of this strange new social fad usually comes out of black neighborhoods should not unduly comfort persons of paler hue.
Black neighborhoods are where new trends are born these days.


Honoring G.I.'s in an Unsung Campaign
Surrounded by the graves of 7,862 Americans who fell during the drive to liberate southern Italy half a century ago, President Clinton urged his countrymen this morning "not only to praise their deeds but to pursue their dreams."
"We are the sons and daughters of the world they saved," the President said at the high point of a brief, dignified ceremony that marked not only the Allied entry into Rome on June 4, 1944, but also the fierce fighting in Sicily and up and down the boot of Italy.


Shareholders Stun Kmart, as Stock Plan Fails
A tidal wave of shareholder opposition yesterday swept away the Kmart Corporation's plan to raise $600 million to $900 million by issuing new stock tied to the performance of its specialty store units, despite the company's last-ditch efforts to win support.
The defeat was an embarrassing setback for Kmart's management, which has been under increasing pressure from shareholders unhappy with its inability to rejuvenate the company's flagship discount store business.


Starks Ties a Battle So That Knicks Can Win a War
John Starks chased all night.
On a mending knee, on guts and will and fury, he chased Reggie Miller all over Market Square Arena, as if it were the last lap of the Indy 500.
Starks stayed with Miller, and this time, Miller had to stay with Starks.
Starks lost the scoring battle, 27-26, but that was close enough and it was far more than the Knicks had a right to expect.


Corrections
A caption on May 27 about President Clinton's signing of a bill limiting abortion protests misidentified a member of Congress who attended the ceremony.
She was Representative Constance A. Morrella, not Anna G. Eshoo.


Yanks Fail To Dial The Right Number
Xavier Hernandez was waiting for the call in the bullpen after Paul Gibson allowed Dave Henderson's pinch-hit single in the eighth inning.
With two out, the potential tie-breaking run on first base for the Kansas City Royals and another right-handed batter strolling to the plate in Gary Gaetti, it seemed logical that the left-handed Gibson had thrown his final pitch.
When Gibson lobbed a pickoff throw to first, it appeared that he was stalling to give the right-handed Hernandez more time to warm up.
Manager Buck Showalter of the Yankees surely knew Gaetti had a .429 career average in seven at-bats against Gibson, so a change was probable.
But Showalter never lifted the telephone.


Review/Jazz; A Twice-Rare Maturity
Toward the end of his first set at Sweet Basil on Wednesday night, the guitarist Jim Hall played his version of "Body and Soul." Backed by his trio -- Larry Goldings on piano, Steve Laspina on bass and Bill Stewart on drums -- Mr.
Hall, one of jazz's more gifted improvisers, stretched out a set of notes, crystalline and tranquil, suggesting a conceptual maturity that many musicians never reach.
It was, unfortunately, a rare moment.
Perhaps he and his band were having a bad night, but for the most part Mr.
Hall, who is performing through tomorrow, was defeated by plodding, unswinging accompanists.
Mr.
Hall used a series of arranging ideas that were destroyed by his band.
One piece, "Why Not Dance," set his drummer, using brushes, against individual members of the band.
The tune ripped apart at the seams, leaving each segment alone and relying on the drummer's swing, which couldn't be found, or on the ability of the others to improvise, which was none to reliable.
And Mr.
Hall's natural sound has been distorted by his use of harmonizing electronic effects, making his playing seem clumsy.


Corrections
An article and an editorial on Thursday about President Clinton's diplomatic challenge in Italy referred incorrectly to his meeting with Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.
Mr.
Clinton was not the first foreign leader to meet Mr.
Berlusconi since the Italian leader took office; President Mario Soares of Portugal met him last month.


Review/Opera; In New Hall, Echoes of Glyndebourne Old
The new $50 million opera house designed by Michael and Patty Hopkins for the grounds of the Christie family's private estate near here may have permanently changed the character of the Glyndebourne Festival, but as a beautiful production of Tchaikovsky's "Eugene Onegin" on Thursday night proved, it is what happens onstage that counts.
This was bracing compensation for the middling performance of Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" that opened the hallon Wednesday evening.
In fact, "Onegin" received precisely the kind of staging and performance that made Glyndebourne's worldwide reputation.
Graham Vick, the festival's director of productions, revealed an almost Classical refinement under the surface of this Romantic opera.
Its tale of thwarted love unfolded through a series of spare, eloquently sung scenes.
Onegin's first-act rejection of Tatyana, for example, was mirrored by Tatyana's third-act rejection of Onegin: in each scene, both characters sat in chairs on opposite corners of a nearly bare stage.
Also, each act was clearly divided into a public scene of festive celebration and a private scene of confrontation and confession.
Andrew Davis's conducting of the London Philharmonic, along with an ensemble of striking singers, gave passion and flesh to the director's formalism.


CHRONICLE
MATTHEW T. CROSSON has worked as an assistant district attorney in New York County and as Chief Administrator for the New York State court system.
Tonight, he will receive the 30th annual Distinguished Citizen award from Dowling College for his efforts in his newest job, president of the Long Island Association, an umbrella group of 3,000 entities.


Harry Albaum, 84, Research Biologist
Dr.
Harry G. Albaum, a research biologist who was a retired professor and vice president of Brooklyn College, died on May 23 in Brattleboro, Vt., where he recently moved from Rockville Centre, L.I.
He was 84.
He suffered a brief illness, the college said.


Public &amp; Private; To The Altar
There are, they say, no accidents, and so perhaps it was some bit of divine inspiration that the New York Times story on Sister Virginia Welsh ran on the same day the leader of her church was minimizing the contributions of her kind, my kind.
Sister Welsh runs a Catholic parish in Ohio.
That job is called pastor when a priest does it, but Sister is called a pastoral administrator and her sermons called reflections.
She can soothe the sick but not administer the last rites; she can speak to parents about their spiritual obligations to their children but cannot baptize; she can carry the administrative load but not consecrate the host.


Uranium Shipment Ends Shoreham Reactor's Nuclear Life
A barge carried the last shipment of uranium fuel from the Shoreham nuclear power plant here today, in another milestone in the closing of a $5.5 billion reactor that brought the Long Island Lighting Company to the brink of bankruptcy and left Long Island with among the highest electricity rates in the nation.
The shipment, the 33d in a series that began in September, closed one of the last phases of a $180 million state-sponsored decommissioning project that began in June 1992, when Governor Mario M. Cuomo pushed a button activating an underwater torch that cut a connection to the reactor's pressure vessel.
The project is to conclude by early next year.


An All-Spanish Final As Courier Bows Out
The day had plenty of bluster, but it emanated from the wind, not from Jim Courier.
Instead, the mistake-free topspin from a pair of Spaniards in a pair of less than riveting semifinals guaranteed the French Open its first Spanish-only finale ever.
Courier, who hasn't been the same stalwart player since Sergi Bruguera rendered him a former French Open champion in last year's Roland Garros final, is going to remain a former French Open champion.
Again, the damage was done by Bruguera in a flawed semifinal that denied Courier, the event's 1991 and 1992 champion, a consecutive final-round berth for the first time in four years.


U.S. HALTS FLIGHTS IN ANDES DRUG WAR DESPITE PROTESTS
For three years, the centerpiece of the United States drug war in the Andes has been to use military radar and spy planes to attack traffickers at their weakest point: the air bridge of small planes linking the coca leaf fields of Peru with the cocaine laboratories of Colombia.
But barely a year after this air interception network started to disrupt trafficking routes, the Pentagon abruptly shut the operation down on May 1.
With the radar coverage suspended, Colombian and Peruvian defense officials say that drug trafficking flights have increased.


Classical Music in Review
'L'Allegro ed il Penseroso'  Merkin Concert Hall


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.25
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.12
4.11
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.53
4.55
3.27
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.98
7.05
6.09
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.27
7.35
6.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.08
8.20
7.83
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.35
5.89
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Same Old Bureacracy Serves a New South Africa
Joe Slovo's first newsworthy act as President Nelson Mandela's Minister of Housing was to dismiss the director of the housing department and put in a man he trusted.
"It is common practice internationally" to purge department heads when a new Government takes power, a spokesman for Mr.
Slovo said.


U.N. Told North Korea's Nuclear Record Can't Be Retrieved
As the Clinton Administration warned again that North Korea faces economic sanctions, the top United Nations nuclear official told the Security Council today that it is impossible to tell whether North Korea has extracted plutonium from a nuclear reactor to make bombs.
Hans Blix, head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said North Korea had removed all but 1,800 of the 8,000 fuel rods in the power plant at its nuclear complex in Yongbyon, including 300 critical rods comprising the core fuel element.
He said that the rods had been mixed up so that their precise location in the reactor could never be established.


Lebanese Flee North as Israel Moves Tanks Near Border
Thousands of residents were reported today to have fled villages in southern Lebanon as Israel sent tanks and artillery to its northern border, ready to enter Lebanon if Islamic guerrillas there resume rocket attacks against Israeli towns.
Although tensions ran high on both sides of the border, there were no signs that a widespread conflict was about to erupt as a result of a raid by Israeli warplanes on Thursday that killed several dozen young guerrillas at a training base of the pro-Iranian Party of God.


METRO DIGEST
FACING DEATH ON ONE'S OWN TERMS The deaths of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and Richard Nixon, after each had rejected medical treatment that could have prolonged their lives, appear to be accelerating a change in Americans' approach to death.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  2 KILLERS CAPTURED, QUIETLY, IN BROOKLYN The hunt for two insane killers who escaped from a psychiatric hospital ended quietly as one of them, thirsty, incoherent and covered with ticks, turned himself in to police officers who had pulled over their patrol car in Brooklyn to write a traffic ticket.
Three hours later, his partner was arrested nearby, a loaded pistol in his belt and $11.86 in his pocket.
Page 1.
COLISEUM DEVELOPER ASSAILS CONDITIONS Despite making a $17 million down payment for half the site of the New York Coliseum, the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman said the Metropolitan Transportation Authority had put so many restrictions on the purchase that building there would be nearly impossible.
Page 23.
KILLER SOUGHT TEAMSTERS PENSION In the Mafia, a pension is not a fringe benefit normally available to hit men.
But investigators said Anthony M. Senter had arranged a deal with a local of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters for a pension after he was convicted of being a member of a mob hit squad that committed 25 murders.
Page 23.
RATTLING?
WHAT RATTLING?
Police Officer Joseph Makinen thought he was responding to just another burglary call when he approached a darkened store.
Inside, he saw shelves full of jars and bottles; floating in them were snakes.
Officer Makinen could never stomach snakes.
Then he heard the rattling behind the wall.
Page 23.
REMAINS UNEARTHED ON GOVERNORS ISLAND Workers digging an electrical trench on Governors Island uncovered human remains, and archeologists were called in to determine whether there is an uncharted burial ground.
Page 23.
REGION  FUEL REMOVED FROM A-PLANT A barge carried the last shipment of uranium fuel from the Shoreham nuclear power plant, in another milestone in the closing of a $5.5 billion reactor that brought the Long Island Lighting Company to the brink of bankruptcy and left Long Island with some of the highest electricity rates in the nation.
Page 24.
WITCH DEFENDS A LIFE OF WOODLAND RITUAL A woman who calls herself a witch took the witness stand in Litchfield, Conn., and said members of nature cults like hers regularly gather in Connecticut state parks to perform rituals and celebrate seasonal festivals.
Page 24.
COURT EXPANDS RIGHTS OF COMPANIONS The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that an unmarried woman who was living with a man and was engaged to marry him has the same right to file an injury lawsuit as a wife.
Page 24.
MULTIPLE WINNERS IN PICK-6 LOTTERY Holders of two of the three winning tickets came forward to claim their part of the $38.9 million drawing in New Jersey's Pick-6 Lotto.
Page 24.
A Bronx man was killed when the walls of a seven-foot deep trench collapsed.
Page 24.
Unemployment rates in New York City and New York State dropped sharply last month.
Page 47.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman.......23


ARBY'S IS BUYING RESTAURANTS FROM FRANCHISEE
Arby's Inc. said yesterday that it planned to buy 43 of its Los Angeles-area restaurants from the current franchisee by the end of the summer.
The terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.
The move is part of the fast-food chain's previously announced plan to double its ownership of Arby's restaurants to 20 percent of the total by 1998.


Sports of The Times; Riley Does The Crowing This Time
ONCE again there was somebody sending a message to Fun City.
This time it was not an athlete in the employ of the Indiana Pacers.
This time it was the coach of the Knicks.
Pat Riley didn't jump up and down like Spike Lee on a good night in the Garden.
He didn't woof and warble like Reggie Miller the other night in the Garden.
But he did sit there after the Knicks had saved their season, 98-91, and he, too, had something to say to New York, or at least the increasingly rabid portion of the print and electronic news media and the front-running fans.


Zuckerman Assails Limits On Coliseum Construction
Despite making a $17 million down payment Thursday for half the site of the New York Coliseum, the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman said yesterday that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority had put so many restrictions on the agreement that building there would be nearly impossible.
But Mr.
Zuckerman insisted that he wanted to build a office and retail complex on the site and denied suggestions that the money was paid simply to get out an earlier contract that would have obligated him to pay twice that amount.


Temporary Sanity
A Federal judge in Seattle has righted, at least temporarily, an egregious wrong committed by the military against an outstanding nurse.
Federal District Judge Thomas S. Zilly this week ordered the military to reinstate Col.
Margarethe Cammermeyer, who was forced out as chief nurse of the Washington State National Guard after she acknowledged to military security officials that she was a lesbian.
The decision may well be appealed, but for now at least some sanity has been injected into this bizarre case.
Colonel Cammermeyer's plight has illuminated, more than any previous case, the irrationality of the military's ban on gay service members.


MAY JOBLESS RATE DECLINED SHARPLY, BUT HIRING LAGGED
The nation's unemployment rate dropped sharply to 6 percent in May, even though the growth of payroll jobs came in well below expectations, the Labor Department reported today.
With the labor force rising negligibly despite months of brighter prospects, the unemployment rate, which many had thought would be unchanged, fell four-tenths of a point, to the lowest level since November 1990.


Fox Rejects Questions About Its Ownership
Lawyers for Fox Television Stations Inc. lashed out today at reports that the Federal Communications Commission is questioning the extent to which the company is owned by foreign interests.
In a letter to the F.C.C., Fox reiterated its contention that it had done nothing wrong and that it had never tried to mislead the agency when it bought six television stations in the mid-1980's from Metromedia Inc.
It also disputed several statements that have been attributed by different newspapers to agency officials.


An Onassis Legacy: Facing Death on One's Own Terms
After years in which the process of dying has increasingly become the domain of doctors, more and more Americans are trying to take back control of the time, place and circumstances of their death.
Some are leaving hospitals to die at home.
Millions are thought to have signed living wills.
Many are giving friends and family the power to shut off medical treatment when they no longer can.


Brown Faces Test in Regatta
Brown, Princeton and Temple were the victors today among the men's varsity eights at the Intercollegiate Rowing Association's annual regatta on Onondaga Lake.
By finishing first in their heats, they advanced to Saturday's championship race.
The Bears, the defending champions, are again undefeated, having routed five foes in their opening heat.


Dr. Gladys W. Natchez, City College Professor, 78
Dr.
Gladys W. Natchez, a retired professor of education at City College of New York, died on Sunday at her home in Walnut Creek, Calif.
She was 78.
The cause was a heart attack, said her daughter, Meryl Rafferty.


CHRONICLE
The title of the "Conversation" scheduled to take place at Sotheby's Monday is "Cultural Thieves," which, to put it politely, means how artists reflect one another's work.
Less politely it might be described as how you learn by borrowing.
The artist LARRY RIVERS, who has been somewhat influenced by the old masters, and LUKAS FOSS, the composer and conductor, who has been somewhat influenced by the baroque composers, will take part in the evening with CHARLES MICHENER, an editor and writer, acting as host.
On the theory that turnabout is fair play, INGER McCABE ELLIOTT, who organizes the monthly discussion programs, noted that she wouldn't be surprised "if, during the question period, someone asks Mr. Rivers and Mr. Foss, 'What has been stolen from you?' "


This Time, Kennedy May Face a Race
Edward M. Kennedy, the veteran Senator and patriarch of the country's most famous political clan, has recently been telling voters in 121 cities and towns across his home state what he has been doing for the last 32 years in Washington.
"We have to tell the story," said Robert Shrum, a Democratic consultant who is advising Mr.
Kennedy.
"People have to know the record. We have to tell them what he's done. That's what campaigns are about."


Lebanese Mourn Victims of Israeli Raid


U.S. Cuts Back $7 Billion Plan For Air Traffic
After years of cost overruns and long delays, the Administration announced today that it would scale back its $7 billion program to modernize the nation's air traffic control system.
David R. Hinson, administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, said the changes would probably mean that only the air control towers at the largest airports would get new computer systems.
And he said a sophisticated new system intended to expedite air traffic would be re-examined.


Stanford U. Decides to Make Courses Harder to Drop But Easier to Fail
The F grade, under another name, is about to make a much-heralded and highly publicized comeback on the Stanford campus, from which it has been banished for the past 24 years.
But since most professors here have long forgotten how to hand them out, few students are very upset about its return.
But many students are angry about the end of Stanford's longstanding and highly tolerant course selection policy, one that let students pick and choose the courses that appear on their transcripts, depending on the grades they received.
As a result, Stanford transcripts have become less like historical records of the successes, failures and in-betweens most students encounter and more like airbrushed records of unalloyed achievements.


In Trashing Custodians' Pact, Mayor Sets Back Labor Relations
To the Editor:
"Rein In the Custodians" (editorial, May 12), which praises Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's arrogant decision to negate a collective bargaining agreement negotiated in good faith between the New York City Board of Education and the custodians union, is wrongheaded on every point and smacks of an old-fashioned, early 80's-style union bashing.


Serving Time, Saving Souls; Sing Sing Inmates Pursue Master's Degrees in Ministry
In the beginning was the word, or in Larry Pilgrim's particular spiritual quest, the sentence.
Twenty-five years to life.


Man Is Killed In Pit Collapse
A 52-year-old Bronx man working at a construction site in Yonkers was killed yesterday when the walls of a seven-foot deep trench collapsed, burying him up to his chest in dirt, the authorities said.
The man, identified as Zajm Muriqi, survived only a few minutes, his body pinned between the dirt and a wooden stabilizing wall, said Detective Robert Ryan of the Yonkers police.


Truth in Burgers
The new Federal labeling rules for meat and poultry will not take effect until Aug. 8.
But Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy already seems prepared to weaken them by carving out a special exemption for ground beef.
Consumers would thus continue to be misled about ground beef's high fat content.
And the important goal of enforcing uniform label terms would be undermined.
Under the new regulations, use of valuable marketing terms like "lean" and "extra lean" would be limited to ground beef that meets certain defined criteria for fat, saturated fat and cholesterol content.
Ground beef seldom meets these standards, and the Western States Meat Association has been lobbying hard for an exemption.


France Is Calling Pierce Finalist on Home Court
She's not really French, but she's the closest this nation has come to producing a women's champion at the French Open in more than a quarter of a century.
So even if the 12th-seeded Mary Pierce happens to have been born in Montreal, even if she was raised in nomad fashion in the United States in a succession of home bases that once included the family car, even if she now makes her home in un-Gallic Bradenton, Fla., just a stone's throw from her training grounds at Nick Bollettieri's tennis factory, Pierce is already being feted as France's first woman champion since Francoise Durr prevailed in 1967.


An Unconventional Mortgage for an Extended Family
Qualifying for a mortgage can be tricky for recent immigrants, especially if they have no credit cards and have kept their savings outside banks.
That was true for Caroline Hunte and her four adult children, who immigrated from Guyana and wanted to buy a four-family house in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. 'Many of our friends from Guyana had a difficult time getting mortgages, and we were afraid we'd run into the same problem,' said Cleveland Hunte, the eldest son.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DDI PHARMACEUTICALS INC., Mountain View, Calif., agreed to acquire two biotechnology companies, International Bioclinical Inc., based in Oregon, and Bioxytech S.A., a closely held French company., for a total of about $12.3 million in common shares. 3DO CO., Redwood City, Calif., a multimedia video systems maker, said it had completed a $36.8 million secondary stock offering and received $37 million in financial commitments from new and existing investors.
SHELL OIL CO., Houston, said it would return to Oregon to re-establish outlets that once numbered about 250 before the company pulled out of the state in 1992.
STARBUCKS COFFEE CO., Seattle, the coffee shop retailer, said it had completed its acquisition of Coffee Connection, Boston, also a coffee retailer, for about $26 million in stock.


Now Who's Blowing Smoke in America's Eyes?
To the Editor:
Jim Johnston, Reynolds Tobacco chairman, testifying last month before a Congressional subcommittee, told Representative Henry Waxman and his colleagues: "The anti-smoking industry is committed to achieving what essentially amounts to prohibition. When confronted, they will tell you they don't want prohibition. But their actions belie those claims. Regardless of what we, in the tobacco industry do, our opponents in the anti-smoking industry cry, 'Foul.' "


Treasury Yields Slide, Despite Jobless Report
Yields on Treasury securities fell to two-week lows yesterday, overcoming an early surge after the Government reported the unemployment rate fell to 6 percent, the lowest level since 1990.
The 30-year bond rose 28/32 , to a price of 8723/32 , for a yield 7.27 percent, down from 7.35 percent on Thursday and the lowest since May 19, when it was 7.23 percent.


Even Watchdogs Need Watching Sometimes
BY now, every investor has heard that it pays to be a bit skeptical of brokers, investment advisers and anyone else who is selling something.
But as a recent incident involving New York City regulators shows, it makes sense to be a bit wary of the watchdogs, too.
Last month, the city's lawyers took the unusual step of disavowing criticisms that the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs had leveled last year at ads run by the College Savings Bank in Princeton, N.J.
Paul A. Crotty, New York's corporation counsel, told the bank that "the issue should have been more thoroughly and accurately analyzed."


For Saberhagen, No Pain Is Mets' Gain
Bret Saberhagen called it "painless." That is exactly what the Mets wanted to hear.
Tonight at Riverfront Stadium, Saberhagen's previously sore back did not plague him on the mound and it definitely did not bother him at the plate.
In his first start since experiencing back spasms in Pittsburgh nine days ago, Saberhagen pitched eight impressive innings -- and scored the winning run -- as the Mets defeated the Cincinnati Reds, 4-3, to even their season record at 26-26.


New York Region Shows Big Gains in Job Market
Unemployment rates in New York City and New York State dropped sharply last month to their lowest levels of 1994, providing added signs that the region was slowly joining the nation's economic recovery.
The decline in the state's joblessness was most noticeable in New York City, where the unemployment rate in May was 8.4 percent, down from 9.5 percent in April, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday; the decrease was the largest monthly drop this year.
The unemployment rate in New York City was 10.8 percent in January.


Who's Playing Games?
When I was in third grade, growing up in Dallas and going to the neighborhood public school, I was something of a problem child.
Although I did well in my studies, I got low marks in "conduct," talked so much I was known as "motor-mouth Mosle" and "rough-housed" a little too often.
As a public school teacher in New York City, I now recognize my behavior as "acting out," but luckily for me I had an outlet for my rambunctiousness.
There was gym class every day.
After school, I played basketball on the school team, rode around on my bicycle, roller-skated over to a friend's house and caught tadpoles in the creek in the park.
I was seldom home before dinnertime, and after dinner often talked on the phone.
This was how I learned the rudiments of social interaction: how not to hog the ball, how to stop teasing a friend before it became unpleasant, how to settle a disagreement without resorting to a fight.


Religion Notes
There are a multitude of synagogues, mosques and Arab Christian churches in New York, but when Jews and Arabs wanted to get together on Thursday night for what they called a "Celebration of Coexistence," they chose the Episcopal Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
"Neutral territory," one of the organizers said.


A New Life of an Artist: Clearly, This Is Heaven
WHAT Lino Zerda believes happened to him when he was hit by a truck while riding a bicycle on 10th Avenue five years ago is that he died, saw God, and was given another chance at life.
What is more verifiable is that the 49-year-old former bicycle messenger broke many bones, lost his memory and became homeless.
But in the process, he found his calling as an artist and a talent he never knew he had.


A. Wilbur Duryee; Heart Specialist, 94, Was Dewey's Doctor
Dr.
A.
Wilbur Duryee, a cardiovascular specialist who was also Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey's personal physician, died on Wednesday at his home in Great Barrington, Me., where he had moved in 1986.
He was 94 and previously lived in Pawling, N.Y.
He had suffered a long illness, his family said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Acquired Keith Shepherd, pitcher, from the Colorado Rockies for Brian Conroy, pitcher.


Corrections
A caption on May 27 about President Clinton's signing of a bill limiting abortion protests misidentified a member of Congress who attended the ceremony.
She was Representative Constance A. Morrella, not Anna G. Eshoo.


In Trashing Custodians' Pact, Mayor Sets Back Labor Relations; They Earn Their Pay
To the Editor:
Custodians have gotten a bad rap from the Mayor, the press and others.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a burglary at a Manhattan store reversed the store name.
It is Everything Angels, not Angels Everything.


Honoring the Thousands Who Died in Italy


Review/Theater; The First of a Menagerie of Amandas
Starting next week, Carrie Nye will play her for the Phoenix Theater Company in Purchase, N.Y., and Julie Harris will take her on at the Roundabout come October.
But the celebration of "The Glass Menagerie's" Amanda Wingfield, the mother of all child-warping, playwright-making mothers in American theater, has already begun.
In the third and final series of this year's marathon of one-act plays at the Ensemble Studio Theater, Christopher Durang has provided a blissfully silly sendup of Tennessee Williams's epochal memory play and called it "For Whom the Southern Belle Tolls" or "The Further Adventures of Amanda and Her Children."


Corrections
Picture captions yesterday with an article about gains by conservative Christians in state Republican Party organizations reversed two identificatons.
Gov.
Arne H. Carlson of Minnesota was in the top photograph; Allen Quist, a farmer supported for governor by religious conservatives, was in the lower one.


Liberty Island Might Have Been Larger
To the Editor:
With New York and New Jersey dueling over Ellis Island, this might be the time to speak of Liberty Island, for which Norman T. Newton, my late husband (we were married in 1966), drew up the master plan in 1937.


Bridge
One of the most remarkable reversals of fortune in the 65-year history of the Reisinger Knockout Teams occurred Wednesday night at the Park Royal Hotel, 27 West 73d Street.
A foursome consisting of Mel Colchamiro of Merrick, L.I.; Keith Garber of New Rochelle, N.Y., and Ira Herman and R. Jay Becker, both of Manhattan, trailed by an overwhelming 49 imps at the midpoint of a match against a group led by Robin Kay of Manhattan.
In the remaining 24 deals they recovered exactly 49 and won a six-board playoff to advance.
In the quarterfinal stage, played at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, Colchamiro led by three imps at the midpoint of a match against a team headed by Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan.
Scores in other matches, by captain, were: Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, L.I., led John Roberts of Manhattan by 7; Bruce Rogoff of Ridgwood, N.J., led David Rosenberg of Jackson Heights, Queens, by 18; and Michael Kopera of Brooklyn led Al Rahmey of Brooklyn by 11.


Old Bones on Governors Island Warrant a Closer Look


Red Wings Dismiss General Manager
The Detroit Red Wings yesterday dismissed General Manager BRYAN MURRAY and Assistant General Manager DOUG MacLEAN after a season in which the team won its division but was stunned by the San Jose Sharks in the first round of the playoffs.
"Bryan made many contributions to the Red Wings and has a wealth of experience in the National Hockey League," the club owner, MIKE ILITCH, said in a statement.
"However, we both agreed it was time for him to move on. There was no animosity involved in this decision."


Perfect Chance Vanishes For Pacers
Dale Davis said the Pacers have become accustomed to playing catch-up ball against the Knicks.
He also noted, with a frazzled smile, that "sometimes that style catches up with you."
It did here tonight as the Pacers let Game 6 slip through their fingers, by 98-91, in Market Square Arena.
They let their chance to dump the Knicks at home and advance to their first National Basketball Association finals slip out the back door.





Kigali Journal; A Palace in the Midst of Devastation
In a country where the two-month-old civil war is depicted in dioramas of suffering and death, from refugee camps to massacre sites, a parcel of luxurious real estate, the presidential palace, is among the more incongruous exhibits.
Rebel soldiers, who now partly control this capital city, guard and give tours of the palace, where handsome grounds set off wide terraces, tennis courts, a pool and a satellite dish -- all predictably presidential.


Business Digest
The Economy
The U.S. unemployment rate fell four-tenths of a percentage point in May, to 6 percent, even though the growth in payroll jobs came in well below expectations, the Labor Department reported.
The report left many economists and analysts puzzled, wondering if the data were signaling stronger growth and rising inflation or a shift to moderate growth with less of a chance of price increases.  [ Page 1. ]  The unemployment rates in New York City and New York State dropped sharply last month to their lowest levels this year, providing added signs that the region is slowly joining the nation's economic recovery.  [ 47. ]
The Administration announced it will scale back its $7 billion plan to modernize the nation's air traffic control system.  [ 1. ]
The chemical industry described for the people of Charleston, W. Va. and the surrounding area just how potentially dangerous is the place they live, in an extraordinary doomsday discussion.  [ 35. ]
Companies
A tidal wave of shareholder opposition swept away Kmart's plan to issue new stock tied to the performance of its specialty store units, despite the company's last-ditch efforts to win support.  [ 35. ]
Times Mirror agreed to sell its extensive cable television operations to Cox Enterprises for $2.3 billion, a move that bolstered cable stocks and renewed speculation about mergers.  [ 35. ]
Roberta J. Nichols was skeptical, but she made history.
The official with Ford's electric vehicle program drove the first entry by a major car maker in a race of electric cars.  [ 35. ]
Auto sales slowed in May for the second straight month from the rapid pace of early spring, growing a modest 3 percent.  [ 35. ]
Digital Equipment froze the pay of nearly all of its 92,000 employees, in an effort to cut costs and losses.  [ 37. ]
Lawyers for Fox Television Stations lashed out at reports that the F.C.C. is questioning the company's ownership.  [ 37. ]
Mattel made a $79 million bid for the British toy maker J. W. Spear &amp; Sons in a move to outbid Hasbro.  [ 37. ]
The city of Cincinnati has decided to ban all outdoor advertising of tobacco products by June 1996.  [ 9. ]
Markets
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 13.23 points, to 3,772.22, despite confusion over the jobs report.  [ 36. ]
Yields on Treasury securities fell, overcoming an early surge after the drop in the unemployment rate.  [ 45. ]
The dollar rallied against most major currencies, rising to a two-month high against the yen.  [ 43. ]
Sharp falls in crude oil and grain prices drove commodity inflation indicators lower.  [ 43. ]
Your Money
The best investments seldom last once they get out, and the potential for gains from mutual savings banks are fading fast.
New rules are making it harder for investors to profit.  [ 33. ]
Every investor knows to be skeptical of anyone trying to sell something.
But now it makes sense to be wary of the watchdogs, too.
New York City regulators have disavowed criticisms by a city agency against ads run by a New Jersey savings bank.  [ 33. ]
This is the season for home improvements and home equity lending, but a low rate should not be the only consideration.  [ 34. ]


Stop the Exploitation Of Child Athletes
To the Editor:
The fate of Jennifer Capriati, the tennis prodigy who took on too much, had to leave the game and is now in substance-abuse therapy, is an example of the predictable, preventable abuse that pervades youth sports.


Stocks Stage Modest Rally, But Trading Falls Below Par
All week the stock market held back, as traders awaited the May unemployment data.
But when the report arrived yesterday, it was confusing, with part of the report implying more inflation and another part implying less.
So, the market continued to hold back in below-average trading.
Still, after first sending stock prices plunging, traders bid stock prices up in a modest rally that was the best performance in seven lackluster sessions.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  U.S. DEBATES ANDEAN RADAR
The United States has suspended use of military radar and spy planes to track drug traffickers between Peru and Colombia.
Officials in those countries say trafficking flights have increased as a result, and they are angry that they were not consulted.
So the State Department, officials say, is trying to find a way to reverse the Pentagon's decision.  1


No Headline
"People are gradually coming back to what we always knew until the middle of this century: that death is not a disease, that death is what occurs when the disease has won the battle." DR.
SHERWIN B. NULAND.  [ 1:3. ]


Jack Miller, 79, Maker of Equipment For Riders of Horses
Jack Miller, who as an executive of the Miller Harness Company in Manhattan sold boots and saddles to the world's equestrians, died on Wednesday at his ranch at Santa Barbara, Calif.
He was 79.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his daughter, Diane Himmelbaum.


CHRONICLE
DOROTHY STRELSIN'S Fifth Avenue apartment overlooks the Hans Christian Andersen statue in Central Park.
For years on summer Saturdays, she has enjoyed watching children pet the bronze ugly duckling at the base and gather around the statue to hear storytellers, including Victor Borge, read fairy tales.
"So when I heard from the Central Park Conservancy that the landscaping around the statue needed sprucing up, I thought the least I could do was volunteer the necessary funds," she said.
A good deal of the landscaping has been completedand this morning, Mrs.
Strelsin and two others will be honored by the Hans Christian Andersen Storytelling Center, which sponsors the Saturday morning gatherings.
There will be storytelling, of course, then a lunch at Loeb Boathouse.
Leif Donde, the consul general of Denmark, will be honored for his support of the center over the years, and Henry J. Stern will be welcomed back as New York City's Parks Commissioner, a position he also held during the Koch administration.


Wrong Coast, but Right There to Help
There was a sharp, chill wind off the harbor today, chasing plumes of white spray off the waves and tossing the boats tied along the quay.
Ralph Tegarten and the other Navy veterans who served aboard patrol boat PC1261 said it was on a day a lot like this, nearly 50 years ago, that they first met Richard McPhail.
It was just before dawn on D-Day, in the choppy sea barely a mile off the Normandy coast.
They were struggling in the icy water -- their boat had just been hit and sunk as they were leading the first wave of Allied landing craft toward Utah Beach -- when Lieutenant McPhail's Coast Guard cutter suddenly emerged from the smoke and the confusion of the battle, its deck already piled with other men who had not made it to the beaches either.


Tightening Up on Savings Bank Deals
The best investment deals seldom last once they become well known, and the potential for gains from mutual savings banks is fading fast.
A window of opportunity for investors appeared in recent years as mutual savings banks converted to stock ownership in large numbers.
Depositors, technically the institutions' owners, were generally offered a chance to buy the stock before it was available to the public.
Those who could afford to do so often reaped large profits, with new shares soaring an average of 26 percent on their first day of trading in the last few years.


A Sitting Sabo Wants Out of Baltimore
CHRIS SABO doesn't like riding the bench and has asked the Baltimore Orioles to trade him.
Sabo signed a one-year, $2 million contract as a free agent after leaving the Cincinnati Reds.
But back problems hit, and he went on the disabled list.
His replacement, LEO GOMEZ, took Sabo's third-base job. (AP)


Caught Between India and Pakistan
To the Editor:
Re "Rebels in Kashmir and Indian Army Ready for Long Fight" (news article, May 16):


Corrections
A caption on May 27 about President Clinton's signing of a bill limiting abortion protests misidentified a member of Congress who attended the ceremony.
She was Representative Constance A. Morrella, not Anna G. Eshoo.


Review/Pop; The Neville Brothers Scan the Hemisphere
The great New Orleans groove-makers, the Neville Brothers, opened this year's Summerstage series in Central Park with a showcase of music minus ego.
Through intertwined careers that date back to the mid-1950's, the Neville Brothers -- Aaron, Art, Charles and Cyril -- have a huge repertory of their own material.
But their concert on Thursday night featured other people's songs, from New Orleans standards like Earl King's "Iko Iko" and Professor Longhair's "Big Chief" to country, pop and reggae songs.
The other half of the set came from the Nevilles themselves, adding up to a good-natured ramble through American and Caribbean music.
What other band plays Hank Williams, Bob Marley, the Rolling Stones and "Amazing Grace" in the same set?


Paper Maker's President
Madison Paper Industries of Madison, Me., has appointed Leroy J. Barry as its president and chief operating officer, effective on Aug. 1.
Mr.
Barry, 56, has been vice president and general manager of the S. D. Warren Company, a subsidiary of the Scott Paper Company.
He will succeed Jack E. Chinn as president of Madison, while Mr.
Chinn will remain chairman and chief executive.
Madison, which produces high-quality paper for magazines and advertising, is a partnership of Myllykoski O.Y. of Finland and The New York Times Company.


2 Fugitives' Weeklong Flight Has Calm Finish in Brooklyn
The weeklong hunt for two criminally insane killers that began after they escaped at gunpoint from a psychiatric hospital ended quietly in the dark hours of yesterday morning as one of them emerged from a wooded area in Brooklyn, thirsty, incoherent and covered with ticks.
John Casablanca turned himself in to a pair of New York City police officers who had pulled over their patrol car to write a traffic ticket.
Three hours later, his partner, Herbert Arnold, was arrested wandering the area at daybreak, a loaded pistol in his belt and $11.86 in his pocket.


Mattel and Hasbro in a Scrap for Scrabble
Mattel Inc. made a $79 million bid for the British toy maker J. W. Spear &amp; Sons P.L.C. yesterday in a move to outbid a six-day-old offer from its rival, Hasbro Inc., in a battle for the international rights to Scrabble.
The bidding pits America's two toy giants against each other for a family-owned company that had $58 million in sales last year from products that include Escape the Blob, Atmosfear and Doh-nutters.
But the squabble is really over Scrabble; Spear owns the rights to it outside North America and the game accounts for a third of its revenue.


Veterans Collect Souvenirs From Omaha Beach


Dr. Herrlee G. Creel, 89, Dies; Influential Confucius Scholar
Dr.
Herrlee Glessner Creel, a University of Chicago professor of East Asian languages and a highly regarded authority on Confucius, died on Wednesday at his home in Palos Park, Ill.
He was 89.
He had suffered a long illness, according to the University of Chicago.


Review/Ballet; Various Dancers, Various Images of Doom
Amanda McKerrow, as Giselle, and Robert Hill, as Albrecht, led the cast of "Giselle" with American Ballet Theater at the Metropolitan Opera House on Thursday night; Cynthia Harvey and Guillaume Graffin were the principals on Wednesday night.
Ms.
McKerrow was more consistent in uniting the two acts.
Her peasant girl was innocent, taken aback by Mr.
Hill's passionate advances, and their rapport was intense.
Dancing strongly with amplitude and clarity, she nonetheless offered a persuasive collapse in a mad scene tinged with quietly impressive hysteria.


Bracing for the Worst in Chemicals
This metropolitan area of 252,000 people, nestled in the Kanawha River Valley and bracketed by the Appalachian Mountains, has few natural evacuation routes.
And today, in an extraordinary doomsday discussion, the chemical industry described for the people of Charleston and the surrounding area just how potentially dangerous a place they live in.
A dozen of the world's biggest chemical companies have factories here or nearby, producing some of the most caustic and volatile man-made substances on earth -- including methyl isocyanate, or MIC, the same gas that killed more than 3,000 people in Bhopal, India, in 1984.
Although the MIC plant, operated by Rhone-Poulenc, has never had a leak anywhere near the scale of Bhopal, its operators acknowledged that a major leak of the same chemical could put this city at risk of similar or worse casualties.


Clinton Faces Heroes: Judgment Day
The salute gave it away, of course.
Where there should have been snap, there was only chagrin.
In a photo opportunity arranged by the White House, President Clinton was welcomed at the American cemetery in Nettuno by June Marion Wandrey, a 73-year-old pint-sized former Army nurse who fought death in Sicily, Cassino, Anzio, Naples and Dachau.


Some Fans Complain About Their Seats
Fifteen months ago, America's extended soccer family -- players at all levels, coaches, referees, administrators, parents -- applied for tickets for a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to see the World Cup in the United States.
Those tickets are finally being sent by courier to 196,000 buyers this week, but numerous ticket holders are complaining that the location of their seats does not seem to correspond to the prices they paid.


Governors I. Is Excavated After Discovery
Workers digging an electrical trench on Governors Island uncovered human remains this week, and archeologists were carefully excavating a tiny section of the island yesterday to determine whether there is an uncharted burial ground.
Dr.
Leonore Santone, an archeologist called in by the Coast Guard, which uses the island in New York Harbor as a base, said, "We definitely have uncovered one skeleton and there appears to be evidence of perhaps two more."


Hurst Makes Winning Return to Fenway
Rangers 13, Red Sox 2
Jose Canseco hit a pair of two-run homers and Bruce Hurst made a victorious return to Fenway Park last night as the Texas Rangers defeated the Boston Red Sox, 13-2.


On West 57th, a Confederacy of Kitsch
NEW YORK CITY thrives on change, but sometimes the changes are hard to swallow.
The theme-parking of 57th Street is a case in point.
Just now, this quintessentially Manhattan thoroughfare looks to be on the verge of seceding from New York and linking up with Anaheim, Calif., and Orlando, Fla., in a confederacy of kitsch.
In the blocks west of Fifth Avenue, restaurants like Planet Hollywood and the Hard Rock Cafe have scattered stardust and tinsel, while Le Bar Bat smolders after dark in Gothic quarters of Transylvanian decrepitude.
One block south, the Harley-Davidson Cafe has roared into a pit stop in the base of a skyscraper at 56th and Avenue of the Americas.
To the north, skeletons are already rattling their bones atop the construction fence surrounding an addition to the genre, the Jekyll and Hyde Club, a restaurant scheduled to open this summer.


World Markets; In Britain, It's Stiff Upper Lip Time
IT all looked so rosy just a few months ago.
Market strategists were almost unanimous in predicting that British stocks would continue their long climb throughout 1994, driven by steadily improving corporate earnings, falling interest rates and a stream of investment from abroad, particularly the United States.
Reality has proven considerably less pleasant.
The Financial Times-Stock Exchange index of 100 leading shares has fallen nearly 15 percent since its peak in February of 3,520.3.
The London market, Europe's largest, closed out last week at 2,997.8.
The market gained 17 points on Friday and 48.9 points on Thursday.
But those performances were rare bright spots in what has been a grim three-month slide in both stock and bond prices here.


Andrea Lorenzo, Paul W. Thurman
Andrea Lorenzo, a daughter of Roberto Lorenzo of Rochester and Rima Lorenzo of Carolina, P.R., is to be married today to Paul W. Thurman, the son of Velma Thurman of Barling, Ark., and the late Clovis C. Thurman.
Rabbi Ira S. Youdovin is to perform the ceremony at the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue in New York.


JANET RENO'S CHOICE
Outside Washington, we are told, Janet Reno seems "compassionate, honest and real." Inside the Justice Department, she tells senior staff members to be good to their people.
She wants it to be a "caring" place.
How refreshing for a Government bureaucrat.
Too bad these instincts are not accompanied by judgment and courage.
If they were, she might have stared down the F.B.I. and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms when they were escalating the standoff at Waco.


Memories of a Different Kind
FIFTY years ago, Alice Jean Starr of River Vale was proud of holding down a "man's job," that of a military ferry pilot.
It required her to show just as much skill and fortitude as any of her male contemporaries.
But by the end of World War II, like other women whose talents and energies went toward the war effort, she was told there was no spot for her in the workplace because "the boys were coming home and our place was to get married, stay at home and raise a family," she said recently.


Learning to Escape A Prison of Silence
In a world gone wicked, silence equaled life.
Surrounded by the barbed wire and routinized evil of places like the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, Helga Newmark learned that the road to survival was best traveled silently and anonymously, so she endured three years of captivity by quietly blending into the background, like some obedient, respectful child.
Decades later as an adult, her breathy voice -- sometimes barely audible -- was a reminder that the skill that once saved her later hemmed her in emotionally.


From the Ancient Neem Tree, a New Insecticide
I CAN feel it in my bones.
Those little cabbage loopers are getting ready to defoliate my Green Comet broccoli.
The Colorado potato bugs can't wait to get into my potato patch.
If only I had a bottle of Neemix.
Neemix is a pesticide made by W. R. Grace &amp; Company from the seeds of the neem tree, which is native to India and Myanmar.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
ALL THE PLACES TO LOVE By Patricia MacLachlan.
Illustrated by Mike Wimmer.
Unpaged.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $15. (All ages)


Jackson Tours to Tell Blacks of New Threat
Noting that people are creatures of what they hear and see, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson decided that not enough people were hearing about or seeing reports on the legal threats to the new, oddly shaped Congressional districts in the South that had helped swell the number of blacks in Congress in the last two years.
So Mr. Jackson has taken to the road, Paul Revere-like, to sound the alarm.


Germany's Fragile North Sea Playground
SYLT, a roughly beautiful island off Germany's northwest coast, is topographically fragile, and by German standards, emphatically chic.
Now whittled down to a distinctive pick-ax shape, Sylt -- Germans pronounce it Zult, which sounds more or less like zoolt -- has spent the better part of the millennium losing its battle with the wind and waves of the North Sea, while in the last few decades becoming a point of pilgrimage for Germany's moneyed classes.
The island can prompt strong feelings among Germans, some of whom perceive it as a symbol of the country's celebrated post-war wealth, and some of whom see it as a symbol of the evasions they believe that wealth tried to buy.
Its reputation as an enclave of the rich, though, probably has more to do with attitude than with real expense.
Most of the accommodations are in a medium price range ($46 to $87 a night), and the restaurants, which maintain a standard unusually high for Germany, are often quite reasonable.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about World Cup ticket prices misstated the starting date of the soccer tournament.
It is June 17, not June 7.


Manhattan Community Boards
DISTRICT 1: Battery Park, TriBeCa.
Next meeting June 21, 5:30 P.M.; Trinity Church, 74 Trinity Place; (212) 442-5050.
DISTRICT 2: SoHo, Little Italy, West Village, Greenwich Village, parts of Chinatown.
Next meeting June 16, 7 P.M.; St.
Vincent's Hospital, 153 West 11th Street; (212) 979-2272.


Paula Patterson, Bullard Spence
Paula Teale Patterson, the daughter of Barbara W. Patterson of New York and Allen D. Patterson of Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to Bullard Andrew Holmstrom Spence, a son of Dr.
David L. Spence of Pittsburgh and the late Joan P. Spence.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles M. Carey performed the ceremony at the Westhampton Presbyterian Church in Westhampton, L.I.
The bride, 27, is studying for a master's degree in social work at New York University.
She graduated from the University of South Carolina.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of J. C. Penney Financial Services in New York.
Her grandfather, the late Dr.
Robert A. Patterson, was a nuclear physicist who was a founder of Brookhaven National Laboratories in Brookhaven, L.I.


Dean M. Scheinert and Jean Ann Ball
Jean Ann Ball, a daughter of John H. Ball of New York and the late Alice W. Ball, is to be married this afternoon to Dean Mitchell Scheinert, the son of Helene Scheinert of Forest Hills, Queens, and Arnold Scheinert of Weston, Conn.
The ceremony is to be performed by Rabbi Peter Rubinstein at Central Synagogue in New York.
The bride graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in social work at Hunter College.
Her father, a former president of Central Synagogue, is of counsel to the New York law firm of Tenzer, Greenblatt, Fallon &amp; Kaplan.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
TURTLE HUNT
It is not unusual to come upon one of Westchester's box turtles slowly crossing the road at its peril or trudging across a lawn at this time of year.
The females are known to seek places to dig their nests and lay eggs between mid- and late June, and the process will be covered in a program at the Greenburgh Nature Center on Saturday at 7:30 P.M.
Dean Fausel, the center's senior naturalist, will lead visitors on a tour of the grounds to look for nesting turtles, as well as observing the resident box turtles indoors and explaining the radio-tracking research that the center is engaged in to learn more about turtle behavior.


Corrections
An article on page 15 of the Travel section today carries an incorrect continuation-page number in some copies.
The article, headed "Leaving Their Mark in New Mexico," continues on page 28.


Peter Wang and Sarah Sullivan
Sarah Sullivan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Timothy M. Sullivan of Brooklyn, was married last Sunday to Peter Wang, the son of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
George T. Wang of Cherry Hill, N.J.
The bridegroom's father, a United Methodist minister, officiated at St.
Paul's Chapel of Columbia University in New York.
Ms.
Sullivan, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant editor of The New York Law Journal.
She graduated from Columbia, as did the bridegroom, and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is an interior decorator in New York.
Her mother, Carol Sullivan, is the director of financial aid at St.
Joseph's College in Brooklyn.


Streetscapes/Readers' Questions; A Non-Vanderbilt Mansion; Cattle on a Frieze
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes. 5 East 68th Street
Q.
I worked at the Indonesian Consulate General at 5 East 68th Street for 34 years.
Do you have the history of the building?
I was told it was one of the Vanderbilt mansions. . . .
Sumarsongko Sastrowardoyo, Centereach, L.I.


Beyond Supermarkets: A Shopper's Guide
SITTING in a building in Park Slope, labeling blood oranges with stickers declaring them organically grown, Marsha Lindesay is making a grocery-political statement.
So are Willie Jackson, a self-described "low-budget person" pushing a shopping cart through a warehouse hard by the Hudson in Harlem, and Anthony Liveridge, so passionate a devotee of the city's Greenmarkets that he actually tends to use the words "shopping" and "pleasant" in the same sentence.
New Yorkers love a tirade, especially about something as basic as food shopping: how crowded their supermarkets are, how messy they are, and above all, the prices they charge.
And still they shop there, largely because the stores are so close by, but also because they feel they have no choice.


Pena Is Missed
To the Sport Editor:
Why is the earned run average of the Red Sox pitching staff so high this year?
Because Tony Pena is sitting on a bench in Cleveland instead of being where he should be: behind the plate for the Red Sox.
HAVEN BRADFORD GOW  Arlington Heights, Ill.


At Work; Labor-Management Rorschach Test
WHAT does it mean that everyone with a stake in labor-management relations had the same reaction to the report on the state of workplace relations issued last week by the Dunlop Commission?
Once amity wandered lonely as a cloud among warring interests -- unions, business organizations, advocacy groups.
Now it seems to have settled more like a low bank of fog over the reaction to the completion of the fact-finding half of the Commission on the Future of Worker-Management Relations, as the panel headed by former Labor Secretary John T. Dunlop is more formally known.
During the next six months or so, the commission, which was appointed by Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich and Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown last year, will use its facts to draw up recommendations.


Council to Honor a Museum Founder
VIVIAN AYERS, founder and director of the Adept New American Museum in Mount Vernon, will be among five people honored Friday in Manhattan by the National Council of Negro Women.
The event, a dinner-dance beginning at 7 P.M. at the Sheraton New York Hotel, will mark the 20th anniversary of the Mary McLeod Bethune Recognition Program, named for the founder of the 59-year-old council.


Manager's Profile
Samuel S. Stewart Jr.
Fund: Wasatch Aggressive Equity; $40 million in assets.
Manager since 1986 inception. (Sponsor: Wasatch Advisors, Salt Lake City.)  Born: July 3, 1942; Salt Lake City.


Riley's Rules
To the Sports Editor:
Pat Riley's gift to New York basketball has been to create a U.N.L.V. permissive/forget-the-rules environment for the likes of Greg Anthony.
What a shame for New York.
And, watching Riley on the bench is to visit again the gaunt, haunted look of the failing Billy Martin.
What a shame for Riley.
PHILIP C. CHEEVERS  Harrington Park, N.J.


Ms. Lindenbaum And Mr. Feder
Victoria Paula Lindenbaum, a daughter of Belda and Marcel Lindenbaum of Elberon, N.J., is to be married today to Benjamin Feder, a son of Ruth Feder of Montreal and the late Rabbi Samuel Feder.
Rabbi Joshua Shmidman is to officiate at the home of the bride's parents.


THE HANDY-DANDY EVOLUTION PROVER
I am a Darwinist with many creationist friends, so the sight of Jonathan Weiner's article "The Handy-Dandy Evolution Prover" (May 8) filled me with wicked hopes of using it to taunt them.
But once again, an evolutionist thinks he can prove Darwin correct by enthusiastically reciting the details of yet another dreary example of microevolution.
This won't work, because creationists already concede that microorganisms evolve resistance to drugs and that mutant melanic moths are more likely to survive against tree trunks blackened with soot.
What they correctly note is that this does not prove that natural selection can turn a scaly dinosaur into a feathered bird, or a terrestrial mammal into a whale.


Christy Rupp, Mark Bunnell
Christy Rupp, a sculptor, was married yesterday in Denver, N.Y., to Mark Bunnell, a landscape architect.
Town Justice Gary Rosa of Middletown, N.Y., officiated at the couple's summer home.
Ms.
Rupp is keeping her name.
Her work has been shown at outdoor exhibitions and in galleries in the New York area.
She is also a visiting professor of art at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., and an adjunct professor at Brooklyn College.
A graduate of Colgate University, she received a master's degree in sculpture from the Maryland Institute College of Art and a master's degree in art education from the Rhode Island School of Design.
She is a daughter of Frances and Richard Rupp of Buffalo.


For Sale' Signs Up at a Connecticut Tourist Village
THE white Victorian chapel with the cornflower blue door where so many love-struck couples wed, the little wooden schoolhouse, the cumbrous steamboat on the pond and all the rest of this town's tourist village of Johnsonville are for sale.
Raymond Schmitt, the controversial self-made millionaire who developed Johnsonville, has closed the whole place down because of a feud with town officials.
A stark white sign with plain black lettering reading "Village Closed to Public" is nailed across the picket gate leading to the general store and the Red House restaurant.


The Art of Trash Talk Not Limited to a Court
Three of the greatest trash talkers in the history of sports -- Muhammad Ali, Henry Kissinger and Marge Schott -- made encore performances recently as if to remind the current designated mouths that there have been giants in the field.
Call it Homeric boasting, bench jockeying, psyching out, trash talk is the latest label for a line of hostile chatter that goes back at least to Cain putting down Abel before eliminating him from the race.
The verbal sparring between Reggie Miller of the Pacers and Spike Lee of the Knicks Fanatics, Mark Messier's promise to win the sixth game against the Devils, even the needling notes that Yankees left in teammate Jim Leyritz's locker, are contemporary, although hardly classic, variations of the attempt to divert or pump up or straighten out.


Equipment, Heavy and Specialized, at Rental Stores
RENTAL stores offer a myriad of home-repair tools and equipment.
Like lending libraries, they are a good source for specialized home-maintenance and remodeling implements that can be too expensive or used too infrequently to justify buying.
Rental stores are increasingly catering to homeowners instead of to contractors and other professionals.
Choose a store that is well established and can show proof of liability insurance.
Membership in an industry group like the American Rental Association is a good sign.
That trade organization provides training materials, guidelines, news and other services to owners of rental businesses.


American Sicko
PLUTO, ANIMAL LOVER By Laren Stover. 164 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.


New York
By definition, New York City in June is a celebration, its streets lively, its cultural calendar full.
Still, the confluence of three huge events -- World Cup soccer matches, the Olympic-style Gay Games and the 25th-anniversary commemoration of the Stonewall gay-rights uprising -- is stunning, even by New York standards.
More than 1.2 million spectators from throughout the nation and more than 60 countries are expected to pour into the city and its environs between June 18 and 26.
The big attractions include the first three World Cup soccer games at the Meadowlands Sports Complex in East Rutherford, N.J., the eight-day Gay Games IV and Cultural Festival in New York City and the Stonewall 25 rally and march in Manhattan celebrating the gay rebellion that followed a police raid in 1969 at the Stonewall Inn, a Greenwich Village bar.


Corrections
The "What Doing" column on May 15, about Salzburg, included an outdated reference to a performer for the Salzburg Festival from July 25 to Aug. 31.
One of those scheduled to perform, Lucia Popp, a lyric soprano, died last November.
The column also misidentified a hotel.
It is the Osterreichischer Hof, not the Osterreich Hof.


Germany's Fragile North Sea Playground
SYLT, a roughly beautiful island off Germany's northwest coast, is topographically fragile, and by German standards, emphatically chic.
Now whittled down to a distinctive pick-ax shape, Sylt -- Germans pronounce it Zult, which sounds more or less like zoolt -- has spent the better part of the millennium losing its battle with the wind and waves of the North Sea, while in the last few decades becoming a point of pilgrimage for Germany's moneyed classes.
The island can prompt strong feelings among Germans, some of whom perceive it as a symbol of the country's celebrated post-war wealth, and some of whom see it as a symbol of the evasions they believe that wealth tried to buy.
Its reputation as an enclave of the rich, though, probably has more to do with attitude than with real expense.
Most of the accommodations are in a medium price range ($46 to $87 a night), and the restaurants, which maintain a standard unusually high for Germany, are often quite reasonable.


Hindu Hamlet Is Battling Religious Hatred
In the soothing moments after the glow of dawn comes over the nearby Himalayan hills, bells begin to ring gently at Hindu temples.
The chant of prayers and the sweet smell of incense float across the Ganges River, as they have for hundreds of years.
Life in this tiny hamlet, whose name means Abode of the Hermits, and in the neighboring town of Rishikesh revolves around scores of ashrams, as the hermitages and monasteries cluttered along the river banks and low hills are known.


Pick a Number, Any Number . . .
THE economy is growing a lot faster than expected.
Or maybe it is growing much more slowly than thought.
Or maybe the numbers are just messed up.


YOUR FATHER'S SO DUMB . . .
Forty years ago, on the streets of white, Jewish Pelham Parkway in the Bronx, teen-age boys practiced the verbal gymnastics and one-upmanship described in John Tierney's "Your Father's So Dumb . . . " (The Big City, May 15).
We called it "sounding," but it had the same roots as "snapping."
It was hardly worthy then, nor is it now, of celebration.
But that point aside, if anything is to be celebrated, it is an acknowledgment of all that binds rather than separates us.
MARVIN WEINBAUM Sea Cliff, L.I.


Facing the Music, or Backing Away From It
IN MOST DANCE PRODUCTIONS, THE WHOLE body is expressive.
Yet inventive choreographers will occasionally either stress or ignore some specific part of the body to stunning artistic effect.
Meredith Monk and Trisha Brown recently presented vivid new solos using this approach.
Very different effects made each work memorable.
Whereas in "Volcano Songs," the emphasis was usually on Ms.
Monk's face, in "If You Couldn't See Me" Ms.
Brown never showed her face at all and attention was focused on her back.


Romario Is Short on Humility, Long on Talent
So far this year, the volatile Brazilian star Romario called Pele "mentally retarded," suffered through the chilling kidnap of his own father and refused to sit next to a particular teammate on last week's charter flight to the United States.
So it was no casual proclamation on Friday afternoon when Romario announced that he was, of all things, "tranquil."


Equipment, Heavy and Specialized, at Rental Stores
RENTAL stores offer a myriad of home-repair tools and equipment.
Like lending libraries, they are a good source for specialized home-maintenance and remodeling implements that can be too expensive or used too infrequently to justify buying.
Rental stores are increasingly catering to homeowners instead of to contractors and other professionals.
Choose a store that is well established and can show proof of liability insurance.
Membership in an industry group like the American Rental Association is a good sign.
That trade organization provides training materials, guidelines, news and other services to owners of rental businesses.


Public Service Is Rewarded
Rockefeller Institute honors Gerald R. Ford, Waldorf-Astoria, May 24.


How to Wear Rover Close to Your Heart
KNITTING WITH DOG HAIR A Woof-to-Warp Guide to Making Hats, Sweaters, Mittens and Much More.
By Kendall Crolius and Anne Black Montgomery.
Illustrated. 101 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press.
Paper, $9.95.


Making the Grades
An event of seismic proportions in the world of education occurred last week when Stanford University's faculty voted overwhelmingly to tighten a promiscuous grading system under which hardly anyone flunked out and nearly everyone received A's and B's almost as a matter of entitlement.
The failing grade will be restored and teachers will be encouraged to award C's and D's when deserved.
Those two letters had virtually disappeared from the dazzling but misleading transcripts that a generation of students at Stanford (and plenty of other places) had used to impress parents, employers and graduate school deans.
The hope is that Stanford's decision to jettison a system that failed equally to reward excellence and punish indifference will be emulated throughout the educational system -- not only in elite colleges where rampant grade inflation has destroyed the idea of merit but also in secondary and elementary schools.
The sad truth is that Stanford's permissive practices were merely the final expression of a sensibility that seeks foremost to eliminate the fear of failure, holds that feeling good is more important than doing well and assumes that somehow students can be injected with self-esteem rather than earning it by honest toil.


D-DAY: OTHER LOOKS
INTO THE DARK -- Nelson Bryant reflects on the days that followed his parachute drop into the hedgerows of Normandy.
Article and diagram, Week in Review, section 4.
AFTER THE WAR EFFORT -- At the time of D-Day, American factories were turning out about 250 warplanes a day.
What has happened to the manufacturers since?
Article and chart, Business, section 3.


Heat Wave in India


A Home for Anthony
IT WAS QUIET FOR A TUESDAY NIGHT AT THE group home.
The house manager was away, so the residents' weekly community meeting was short.
People played cards at the dining room table, watched TV, listened to music in their rooms, and one of the men, a schizophrenic, walked down Highland Road, past the large old houses and the big maples, to Glen Cove's main street for a slice of pizza and a soda at Avanti's.
In the small office off the living room, Donna Rubin was teaching a new counselor, Sandra Ford, how to distribute the antipsychotic medications.
Residents were to swallow their pills in front of the counselor and describe what they were taking and the dosage.
The idea was to make it harder to palm pills or hide them under the tongue.


No Headline
A NEW YORK couple with twins under 2 years old ask what they can do for a week's summer vacation within one day's drive of New York.
They do not want to pack themselves into an airplane, preferring to put kids, seats and luggage into the van and drive off.
The other requirements are rather simple.
The twins are happy for hours at a time if they can play in the water, the mother said, so a hotel or resort with an indoor pool is protection for rainy days.
The couple, both employed, are rather informal, but they do not want to rent a cabin and cook or clean.
And they do not want to spend a lot of money.
There should be a hundred solutions, given the rich variety of resorts within a day's drive of New York.
Calls to a few hotels with advertising directed toward families produced a peculiar result: Some resorts that cater to families advertise a calm adult dinner with children in a separate dining room.
But such resorts, in high season, do not want children so young they cannot eat separately from their parents.
We will love you in May or September, they told the parents, but not in summer.
The couple tried several travel agents, but found their recommendations high priced and offhand.
In a mountain of brochures, nothing appealed.


O'Rourke Balks at Bill To Maintain Metro-North
FORTY-FOUR Metro-North train stations in Westchester may be looking shinier these days but County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke is not altogether pleased.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority recently mailed the county a $13.4 million maintenance and cleaning bill -- a 19.5 percent increase over last year's cost.
Calling the increase a "great train robbery," Mr.
O'Rourke said he would refuse to pay the additional $2.2 million that the transportation authority was requesting, especially in light of a $15 million projected deficit this year in the county's budget.


Mary Kay Coyle, J. A. Faccibene Jr.
Mary Kathleen Coyle, a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company in New York, was married yesterday to Joseph Anthony Faccibene Jr., the president of JAF Associates Insurance Services, a brokerage in Rockville Centre, L.I.
The Rev.
Eugene H. Hazewski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in Hackensack, N.J.


On the Map This Season, Hard-to-Explain Peaks and Valleys
First came the dramatic increase in home runs and runs scored.
Then it developed that teams were stealing significantly less than last year.
Now comes the latest early-season development: streaks.
In the first two months of last season, only one winning or losing streak in the major leagues reached double figures.
This season teams have compiled four such extended streaks.
At overlapping times last month, the Yankees won 10 consecutive games while Milwaukee lost 14 in a row and San Diego 13.
Oakland began it by finishing April with a 12-game losing streak.


District Attorney Offers Tips to the Elderly
LIKE participants in some kind of support group, nearly all of the dozen elderly people gathered at the Jewish Community Center in Yonkers for a meeting on crime had a story to share.
Gertrude Kaufman, who lives in the southwestern section of the city, showed a visitor the safety pins she uses to keep her identification cards attached to her clothing in an effort to avoid loss should she be mugged.
Hannah Goldberg, whose wallet was stolen from her bag at a supermarket, described her fear of taking the bus from her neighborhood to the Cross County Shopping Center or to downtown White Plains.


Angela Fratianni and Robert Crawford
Dr.
Angela Fratianni, a dentist in Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Robert Crawford, the vice president of operations of the New Jersey Rockin Rollers, a professional roller hockey team that plays at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Rev.
James Muller performed the ceremony at St.
Anthony of Padua Roman Catholic Church in Ozone Park, Queens.
The bride graduated from Hofstra University and the University of Pennsylvania School of Dental Medicine.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo J. Fratianni of Ozone Park.


No Headline
With America less threatened than it has been in many decades, ordinary citizens can relax.
But Presidents are left with precious few opportunities to earn foreign policy glory.
That has proved an especially acute problem for Bill Clinton, who has shown an uncanny knack for making sensible, undramatic stewardship appear clumsy and inept.
But when glory cannot be earned, it can sometimes be borrowed.
And Mr.
Clinton is borrowing copiously on his current European swing through the legendary battle sites where American and Allied armies turned the tide against Fascism in Western Europe a half-century ago.


GARDENING
THERE are so many right-thinking garden books this spring, it almost makes me want to run out and plant an English garden just to be ornery.
Everybody's either writing about native plants or saving water or healing the mind and body with wild plants found in the rain forest or Central Park.
Some of these books are by people bent on defining the New American Garden (a catchy phrase that ought to be dropped right now), which has to be based on native plants.
Though I'd love to, I don't yet see native grasses rising up out of the lawns in Hempstead, the only part of Long Island that once had a prairie, but there's certainly a different wind blowing this year.
Instead of searching for the biggest white German bearded irises to stuff into a knockoff of Vita Sackville-West's white garden, gardeners are going back to their local historical societies to get a sense of how the land looked and what insects and animals lived on it before the suburbs, searching out the native viburnums and mulleins growing along the roadside and planting buffalo grass where the Kentucky blue used to go.
In THE NATURAL HABITAT GARDEN (Clarkson Potter, $40), by Ken Druse with Margaret Roach, the reader is led through American gardens that reflect terrain, climate and plants that were far more evident to Lewis and Clark than they are now to the average family driving across the continent.
According to the authors' figures, 700,000 acres have been converted into parking lots.
And the asphalt doesn't appear to be slowing, as the world's 5.4 billion population heads toward 8.2 billion by 2020.
By then, a quarter of the earth's species may have vanished.


China Tries to Blot Out Memories of 1989
China deployed security forces against its dissidents today and interrupted international news broadcasts to prevent commemoration of the fifth anniversary of the 1989 military attack on the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.
In anticipation of the anniversary, security agencies had put scores of dissidents under house arrest or close surveillance, a tactic most recently used during Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit in March.


Tell Them New York's Back in Business
To the Editor:
After nearly a decade of wrangling, the New York Coliseum site will finally be developed.
This is good news for the city, for the Metropolitan Transit Authority and for the construction and real estate industries.
Under the deal, the M.T.A. will receive $124 million for the property -- more than double the most recent appraised value of $57.5 million.
Boston Properties will put up $80 million in cash.
The company has agreed to pay immediately a $17 million nonrefundable down payment for the site, where it will build a million-square-foot office building, with retail stores.


Once Judged Just Old, These Objects Are Truly Ancient
MANY OF THE EXQUISITE jade objects unearthed in China in this century now prove to be much more ancient than anyone dreamed.
The stone figures and faces -- some so enigmatic they defy interpretation -- were produced not in 300 B.C., as previously thought, but as early as 3000 B.C.
That was a millennium before metal tools even existed.
Art historians realized the discrepancy in dating only after archeologists in the 1980's excavated hundreds of finely decorated stones along with sparely carved jade artifacts -- axes, blades and disks -- that could be documented as from the late Stone Age.
These finds meant that many meticulously crafted pieces found in tombs unscientifically unearthed years before -- some by turn-of-the-century railroad builders -- had been produced before 2000 B.C.
They look unmistakably like mythological beasts, birds, men and masks.


Mileage From Cunard
Though some airlines have made it harder to accumulate mileage awards, in the cruise industry mileage redemptions are a new perk.
Starting May 31, all passengers on Cunard Cruises received Cruise Miles, redeemable for upgrades and free cruises.
Miles are be awarded on a daily basis according to ship, accommodations and duration.


Allison J. Kaskel, Jonathan F. Spitalny
Allison Joy Kaskel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Kaskel of New York, was married last evening at her parents' house in Poughquag, N.Y., to Jonathan Frank Spitalny, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Spitalny of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Cantor Bernard Dienstag performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Spitalny, 24, teaches prekindergarten at the Temple Emanu-El Nursery School in New York.
She and her husband, 28, graduated from Rollins College.
Her father is chairman of the Carol Management Corporation and the Doral Hotels and Resorts Management Corporation, both in New York, and is chairman of the Colonial Indemnity Insurance Company in Kingston, N.Y.


A Trunkful Of Inspiration
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman's essay on Willem de Kooning, "America's Living Old Master"  [ May 15 ] , reminded me of an anecdote recounted by May Sarton in her 1993 memoir "Encore: A Journal of the 80th Year."


Mulholland Discovers Banjo Hitters Can Bite
The Yankees and everyone else in the American League have to re-evaluate their scouting report on Terry Shumpert.
Like some other pitchers before him, Terry Mulholland was obviously operating on an outdated report yesterday when he faced the Kansas City infielder at Yankee Stadium.
Although hitting home runs has become a routine practice when Mulholland pitches, Shumpert practiced it with particular vigor as the Royals edged the Yankees, 4-3, sending New York to its fifth loss in six games.


MURRAY GELL-MANN
Marcia Southwick is not a mere sandwich-maker to the high and mighty.
I realize that "Murray Gell-Mann, the Man Who Knows Everything" (by David Berreby, May 8) intended to bring him into focus, but it seems to me worse than condescending to ignore the established reputation of his wife, Marcia Southwick, as a talented poet.
Surely, her substantial body of published poetry would be a relevant detail in an article about a man so fascinated with language and complexity.
THOMAS F. DILLINGHAM Columbia, Mo.


The Longest Day Is Being Marked by Those With Shortened Memories
ONE of the main purposes of the great international spectacle of celebration and remembrance that is unfolding this weekend, here in southern England and across the English Channel in Normandy, is to teach younger generations a history lesson -- to dramatize for them the heroism and the sacrifices of their forebears 50 years ago.
But it is a highly selective view of history -- in some respects a distortion -- that has animated the ceremonies in Britain, France and Italy.
What has been missing, most of all, is context.


Sherlock Holmes
To the Editor: Your charming and informative article "Sherlock Holmes Inc." by Paul Hofmann (May 1) was marred ever so lightly by the statement that after Conan Doyle was knighted, he "bought an old castle in the town of Lucens . . ." Not so.
The Chateau of Lucens, a beautiful 12th-century castle, was obtained by Sir Arthur's son, Adrian Conan Doyle, assisted by the Swiss Government, some 30 years after Doyle's death.
It then became the Arthur Conan Doyle Museum, and some compared the baronial splendor of this castle to the Orson Welles set for "Citizen Kane."


Just One Darn Foot Before Another
MIND OVER MATTER The Epic Crossing of the Antarctic Continent.
By Ranulph Fiennes.
Illustrated. 322 pp.
New York:  Delacorte Press. $21.95.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING  Two Belmont Favorites in Fast Workouts  One week before the 126th Belmont Stakes, two of the main members of the cast held their final formal workouts at Belmont Park yesterday and were reported in top shape for the race, the third and final event in the Triple Crown series.
Go for Gin, winner of the Kentucky Derby, shot six furlongs in 1:104/5 , which was even faster than scheduled by his trainer, Nick Zito.
Brocco, winner of the Santa Anita Derby and fourth in the Kentucky Derby, worked one mile in 1:402/5 to the delight of his trainer, Randy Winick.
Apelia Wins the Genuine Risk: The Genuine Risk, a six-furlong sprint named for the champion filly who won the Kentucky Derby in 1980, was won for the second year in a row by Apelia, who is owned by Steven Stavro, the owner of the Toronto Maple Leafs hockey team.
The 5-year-old mare set speedy fractions as she outran Spinning Round, who is owned by George Steinbrenner, the managing partner of the Yankees.
The winner covered the distance in 1:09, paid $5.60 for $2 to win and brought home the first prize of $60,000.
She led almost all the way, and had three lengths on Spinning Round, who in turn had two lengths on Ann Dear.
BASKETBALL  U.S.
Women Pound New Zealand  The defending champion United States routed New Zealand, 97-46, yesterday to seal the top spot in Group A at the women's world basketball championships in Hobart, Australia.
Kara Wolters, a 6-foot-7-inch freshman center out of the University of Connecticut, scored a game-high 26 points as the Americans improved their first-round record to 3-0. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  An Arkansas Miler Wins Again  If it isn't one Arkansas miler, it's another.
In February and March, it was Niall Bruton, winning the Wanamaker Mile and the N.C.A.A. indoor mile.
Yesterday, it was Graham Hood at the National Collegiate Athletic Association outdoor championships at Boise State University in Moscow, Idaho.
Taking the lead from Andy Keith of Providence with half a lap to go, Hood held off Erik Nedeau of Northeastern to win the 1,500 meters in 3 minutes 42.10 seconds, and Keith, second to Bruton indoors, faded to last.
Off a slow pace (2:06 at 800 meters) Hood closed with a sizzling 54.4 final 400.
Bruton's fifth place gave the Razorbacks 14 points in their quest for their third straight men's team title.
Flirtisha Harris of Seton Hall, who doesn't like to run the 400 meters, added the N.C.A.A. outdoor 400 title to the indoor title she won in March.
Running a perfectly judged race, she passed Janeen Jones in the final 30 meters and pulled away to win by 4 meters in 51.66 seconds, a personal best by nearly a second.
Arkansas won its third consecutive men's team title, and Louisiana State won its eighth consecutive women's team title.
Record Set in 5,000-Meter Race: Haile Gebreselasie of Ethiopia broke the world record in the men's 5,000 meters yesterday at the Adriaan Paulen Memorial meet in Hengelo, the Netherlands.
Gebreselasie's time of 12 minutes 56.96 seconds was 1.45 seconds better than the previous mark by Said Aouita of Morocco.
Allen Johnson led an American sweep in the 110-meter hurdles with a stadium record of 13.50.
The world record-holder, Mike Powell, won the long jump with a leap of 25 feet 11 inches. (AP) Williams Paces Runners at M.A.C.: Louann Williams, running for the Caribbean Connection Track Club, successfully defended her sprint titles yesterday in the Coors/Metropolitan Athletics Congress outdoor men's and women's track and field championships at St.
John's University.
Williams, who has completed two years of junior college, won the 100 meters in 12.22 seconds and the 200 in 24.08 seconds.
Both times were well off the Brooklyn resident's national junior records of 11.22 seconds and 22.70 seconds, respectively.
Jawanna McMullen, the Christ the King High School standout sophomore, finished fourth (55.20 seconds) in the 400 meters won by Jessica Hudson in 54.40 seconds.
In men's events, Andrew Bloom took the shot-put at 60 feet 1 inch and the discus at 184-3; Robert Ayres of Seton Hall was first in the 800 meters in 1 minute 50.82 seconds and Troy McIntosh of Morgan State was the 400-meter winner in 47.46 seconds.
SOCCER  Belgian Player Stars in Debut  Josip Weber scored five goals in his international debut, leading Belgium to a 9-0 rout of Zambia last night in Brussels in the country's largest margin of victory since it began playing international soccer in 1904.
The 29-year-old Weber, who was born in Croatia, received Belgian citizenship on March 12. (AP) Scoreless Tie: Argentina became the first major soccer nation to visit Croatia yesterday and played the host nation to a 0-0 tie in Zagreb.
It was Argentina's last match before heading to the United States for the the World Cup. (AP)


Conservatives Back Pataki
New York's Conservative Party overwhelmingly endorsed State Senator George E. Pataki for governor in a major step toward cementing a Republican-Conservative alliance against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
But an upstate insurance salesman got enough convention votes to challenge Mr.
Pataki in a Conservative primary.
Article, page 42.


A Steak in Madrid
To the Editor: I enjoyed seeing the photo and mention of the Casa Paco tavern in Madrid ("A City's Timeless Taverns," April 3).
I visited there recently and had the pleasure of meeting with Paco himself.


True to Form: Life Styles Of the Infamous and Venal
HERE is the main difference between Democratic and Republican corruption: Democratic corruption tends to involve hands in the public till; in one word, graft.
Republican corruption is more likely to entail abuse of the power of government.
Not always, of course.
But as is the case with many stereotypes, there is more than a kernel of truth.
The latest example was the 17-felony indictment last week of Representative Dan Rostenkowski, who as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee was one of the most influential Democrats in Congress.


Gleaning a Master Director's Painted Clues
A MAN FLIES THROUGH THE AIR, guided by a white-robed angel who holds his hand.
The painting's strong lines, bright colors -- pink clouds against a turquoise-green sky -- and sense of mystery instantly bring to mind Chagall.
But the artist is the great director Akira Kurosawa, the flying man is him, and the scene depicts an episode planned for "Akira Kurosawa's Dreams," the 1990 film that is a collection of eight stunningly surreal vignettes following a fictional Kurosawa from boyhood to manhood.
"Dreams" is one of several masterpieces Mr.
Kurosawa has turned out late in his career.
And beginning with "Kagemusha" in 1980, he has prepared for each of his five latest films by painting elaborate watercolors.
As cagey as he is brilliant, Mr.
Kurosawa remains enigmatic about how his films take shape, but he continues to drop rich clues in the form of these paintings.


Elderly Patients Deserve First-Class Treatment; Look to Nurses
To the Editor:
At lunch the other day, a friend and nursing colleague of mine expressed exasperation with "Gaps in Geriatric Medicine Alarm Health Professionals" (front page, May 16) because of reporting on health care biased toward the physician.
Your article quotes a young physician speaking of delivering geriatric care: "There are very few areas of medicine where you get to see the patient as a whole, not as a disease, where understanding the psychological and social side of a person is as critical as the medical side."


Big Sneakers Take Large Steps
JUST DO IT The Nike Spirit in the Corporate World.
By Donald Katz. 336 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


Political Notes; New Sheriff Shuns High Noon Style
During his tenure as New York City's Sheriff, Philip A. Crimaldi came under heavy criticism for his aggressive campaign to crack down on parking-ticket scofflaws with such tactics as seizing their cars.
At one City Council hearing in 1992, some witnesses accused the sheriff's deputies of brandishing weapons to collect unpaid fines.
Council members complained about the tactics.


Gail Kaltenbacher, Herman J. Kurz 4th
Gail Ellen Kaltenbacher, a daughter of Nancy Blum of South Orange, N.J., and Philip Kaltenbacher of West Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Herman Jacob Kurz 4th, a son of Joan Kurz and Mr.
Kurz 3d, both of Whippany, N.J.
Former Gov.
Brendan T. Byrne of New Jersey officiated at the home of the bride's father.
Mrs.
Kurz, 26, graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from Rutgers University.
Her father, a former chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, is the chairman of the Seton Company, a manufacturing concern in Newark.


Some Casting Suggestions
To the Editor:
There is an entire subculture out there, bless them, of younger men who prefer older women.
The age gap works both ways in real life, and though it may not be this summer's hot topic, it is just a matter of time, one hopes, until the reverse phenomenon is explored on film.


Cuban Tourism
To the Editor: I am writing in response to Howard W. French's article about the resurgence of the tourist industry in Cuba ("New Hotels Attest to Cuba's Reawakening," April 17).
While it is certainly true that Cuba has beautiful beaches, tourists who choose to go there should be aware that by spending dollars, they are helping one of the most brutal regimes since Stalin to remain in power.
Recently, the Castro Government legalized the dollar.
Before this, Cubans could be imprisoned for merely possessing a few dollars.
The Government legalized the dollar because the economy is collapsing and the people starving.
This, on a tropical island capable of producing two, if not three, harvests per year.
However, the Castro Government does not allow the people to farm their land and sell their goods for profit.


THE HANDY-DANDY EVOLUTION PROVER
Most people would not even sit still for a theory like evolution except that they are told anything can happen over billions of years.
So Jonathan Weiner is now telling us that the process is quick.
I enjoy seeing the legs cut out from under a theory that flies in the face of knowledge and God.
ROSEMARY BOULTER Cambridge, Mass.


INSIDE
Still Confined
One year after the Golden Venture ran aground, most of its Chinese passengers remain in detention, fighting to stay in the United States.
Page 39.
Tiananmen Reports Silenced
China interrupted broadcast reports of the fifth anniversary of the Tiananmen Square uprising and put dissidents under house arrest.
Page 16.
A Turn in the South
Jesse Jackson goes on tour to rouse support for the serpentine majority-black Congressional districts that have attracted legal threats.
Page 24.
Down and Out in Philadelphia
In what is seen as a sign of organized crime's decline, 12 men accused of racketeering say they are indigent and need public defenders.
Page 24.
Rangers Beat Canucks, 5-1
New York leads Vancouver, 2 games to 1, in the Stanley Cup finals.
SportsSunday, section 8. (Some copies went to press before the game ended.)


Whither the Mob? 12 Defendants Plead Poverty and Ask Court for Lawyers
In what experts on organized crime are citing as evidence of the Mafia's decline here, 12 of 24 men recently arraigned on racketeering charges declared themselves indigent and accepted court-appointed lawyers.
"This says to me it isn't much of a mob anymore," said Fred Martens, executive director of the Pennsylvania Crime Commission, which monitors organized crime.
"The mob isn't taking care of its underlings the way it used to. In the old days, if a mobster got arrested, the mob took care of his legal fees and his family if he went to jail. The crime family really isn't a family in Philadelphia anymore."


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
QUEENS  Ancient Music and Dance From a Beijing Academy
Ancient Chinese music and dance will be presented Saturday at the Elmhurst branch of the Queens Public Library.


Holly Spofford And Kirk Bell
Helen Walker Spofford, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Nicholas Spofford of Bedford, N.Y., was married yesterday to Warren Kirk Bell, the son of Peggy Kirk Bell of Southern Pines, N.C., and the late Warren Bell.
The Rev.
Paul Twelves performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Matthew's Church in Bedford.
The bride, 30, known as Holly, is a sales manager at Pine Needles Resort, a golf resort in Southern Pines.
She graduated from Yale University.


Where It's All Happening
Explorers' Party, the Central Park zoo, May 23.


Where Elite Meet to Eat
Tibor Kalman, the editor of Colors, a magazine sponsored by Benetton, heard about it in Rome in a fax from the musician and movie maker David Byrne in New York.
Isaac Mizrahi, the designer, heard about it in New York in a fax from Rome from Mr.
Kalman's wife, Myra, an author of children's books.
Their faxes were twittering with reports that a favorite restaurant might be going out of business -- an establishment patronized by the likes of Matthew Broderick and Matthew Modine, the actors; John Waters, the film maker, and Suzanne Vega, the folk singer.


BEST SELLERS: June 5, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
14
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
2
3
4
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
3
2
6
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
4
5
95
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
5
1
WALKING SHADOW, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser looks into the murder of a member of a theatrical troupe in a Massachusetts town.
6
4
7
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a strange death.
7*
8
5
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and the Persian Gulf war.
8
7
8
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
9
15
2
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $22.95.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
10*
6
7
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
11
9
2
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $22.) A Victorian lady discovers the man of her dreams.
12
1
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $21.95.) The private eye V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
13
12
60
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) A woman on a Mexican ranch.
14
10
16
ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives of five families.
15*
1
ALL GOOD THINGS ..., by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $20.) "Star Trek"'s Enterprise crew tries to quash an effort to eliminate the human race.
16*
13
20
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
56
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
3
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
3
4
24
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
3
5
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
5
6
3
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
6
5
13
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
7*
7
8
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
8
8
14
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
9
9
7
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
10
1
THE HALDEMAN DIARIES, by H.R.
Haldeman. (Putnam, $27.50.) Notes made by the man who was Richard Nixon's chief of staff from 1969 to 1973.
11
10
21
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
12
11
7
DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $35.) Ways in which the art of diplomacy and the balance of power have shaped the world we live in.
13
14
35
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
14
13
27
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
15
16
12
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
6
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of duplicitous designs in color.
3
3
20
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
4
4
54
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 21, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BEAK OF THE FINCH: A Story of Evolution in Our Time, by Jonathan Weiner. (Knopf, $25.) A fascinating look over the shoulders of biologists who watched natural selection in motion over some 20 years in finch populations.
BONE BY BONE: Stories, by Gary Krist. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Fictions that draw, with engaging observation, the daily activities of ordinary people learning to swim in hot water.
THE CONFIRMATION MESS: Cleaning Up the Federal Appointments Process, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $21.) A law professor argues cogently that the Federal confirmation process has become a monster, grotesquely unfair to nominees of both right and left.
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944: The Climactic Battle of World War II, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) What was done by and to the Allied forces (40,000 men, 5,000 ships, 3,500 vehicles) in the awesome invasion of Normandy 50 years ago, with many accounts from the grunt's-eye level; by a distinguished biographer of Eisenhower.
EDITH WHARTON: An Extraordinary Life, by Eleanor Dwight. (Abrams, $39.95.) This life of the novelist in whose work architecture serves virtually as a language lays special emphasis on the houses and gardens Wharton inhabited and carefully made her own; copious illustrations.
LEAN AND MEAN: The Changing Landscape of Corporate Power in the Age of Flexibility, by Bennett Harrison. (Basic Books, $25.) An economist's polemic against analysts who see small, efficient businesses as the models for social organization in a world of rapid change.
MASTERS OF AMERICAN SCULPTURE: The Figurative Tradition From the American Renaissance to the Millennium, by Donald Martin Reynolds. (Abbeville, $67.50.) A clear, readable art historian's guide, handsomely illustrated, to modern American figurative sculpture.
SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND, by Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) A deft, affecting novel whose aging protagonist retires in the vain hope that he can plan the outcome of life and decline slowly, affably toward its end.
SHOT IN THE HEART, by Mikal Gilmore. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Fifteen years after Norman Mailer's "Executioner's Song," Gary Gilmore's youngest brother reclaims his own life in this highly personal account of his family.
SPECIAL TASKS: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness -- A Soviet Spymaster, by Pavel Sudoplatov and Anatoly Sudoplatov with Jerrold L. Schecter and Leona P. Schecter. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A valuable book, sometimes to be read with a little skepticism, about Stalin's terror apparatus by a man who served it, written with the help of his son and two journalists.
A WAY IN THE WORLD, by V.S.
Naipaul. (Knopf, $23.) A brilliant, probing autobiographical meditation on empire and inheritance, made of complementary narratives about characters from the author to Sir Walter Raleigh.


Starks Gets More Aggressive
It was John Starks, not Indiana's Reggie Miller, who hit the big 3-pointers in Game 6 Friday night, making 5 of 6 from long range in the Knick victory.
He scored 26 points, 10 more points than he did in the Game 5 loss.
"It's all about mind-set, and I came out with the attitude that I'm going to be productive on that end of the court," he said today at practice.
"Over the last couple of ball games, we've been hurting because we haven't been getting the scoring from me, from the '2' position. So I'm back to my old self, now being aggressive on the offensive end."


Italian Rentals
To the Editor: I have read with interest your articles about vacation properties in Italy.
Although the article about San Gimignano was droll, it is a terrible experience to find the accommodations you have already paid for are unacceptable.
We were a party of five adults and booked accommodations through Villas International in San Francisco, for one week in Florence and a week in Rome last October.
The apartment in Florence was adequate and nicely located.
We arrived in Rome on a Saturday afternoon to find the apartment unacceptable: small, cramped and most of all, just plain dirty.
Although we had arranged both apartments with the same person at Villas International, the disparity was monumental.


HAVING IT BOTH WAYS
Bravo! Finally, an article about women's lib, alimony and equality between the sexes.


A Wizard Shows Some (But Not All) Of His Secrets
HMM.
HOW TO GET INTO Carnegie Hall on Thursday morning for the first rehearsal of the Solti Orchestral Project?
At stake is a rare opportunity to observe a large-scale chemical reaction of a particularly volatile sort, as a canny old musical wizard blends 105 carefully chosen, mostly young and relatively untested instrumentalists to create an orchestra.
"The first few hours will be very exciting," Sir Georg Solti said recently by telephone from Salzburg, Austria, predicting that he will have a good sense of the orchestra's stature by the end of the first session.
But although most subsequent rehearsals of the two-week workshop will be open to journalists as well as to music students and professionals, that formative session is off-limits to the press.
So what exactly will take place?


L.A. Raw
BLACK BETTY By Walter Mosley. 255 pp. New York: W.W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Jessie Fan, Brian J. Gould
Jessie Fan, a daughter of Autumn Fan and Dr.
Schuber Fan of Holmdel, N.J., was married yesterday to Brian Joel Gould, a son of Donna Gould Suits of Bedminster, N.J., and Edmund P. Gould of Basking Ridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Jack Denys officiated at the Good Shepherd Lutheran Church in Somerville, N.J.
Mrs.
Gould, 21, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College last month.
Her father, a neurologist in Red Bank, N.J., is also an assistant professor of neurology at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother is a freelance writer.


Carol V. Kahn, Thomas Borden
Carol V. Kahn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert L. Kahn of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to Thomas E. Borden, a son of Elizabeth Borden of Chelmsford, Mass., and the late Thomas Borden.
Sabina Slavin, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


The Real Achievements Of a Community Board
To the Editor:
Unless I misread him, Steven Vincent is leaving Community Board 3 satisfied after a single term.
But if boards are to fulfill their mission, board members must recognize that impact accrues over time and requires follow-through and tenacity.
It takes at least two years on a board just to learn which committees are important and which agencies have power and reasonable managers.
If the Steven Vincents of our city retire from boards after serving one term, we're in a lot of trouble.
ED GOLD  Manhattan The writer is a vice chairman of Community Board 2.


Correction
An opinion article on the Soapbox page last Sunday about proposals for riverboat gambling in New York City carried an incorrect byline.
The writer was Councilman Herbert E. Berman of Brooklyn. (Kenneth M. Coughlin was the author of an opinion article on May 15 about automobiles in Central Park.)


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
PUPPETS ON PARADE
Surely most everyone loves a puppet show, and some of the best are available at the University of Connecticut, where the country's only undergraduate and graduate degrees are bestowed in its Puppet Arts Program.
This afternoon at 4:30 a series of marionette vignettes will be performed in von der Mehden Recital Hall on the Storrs campus by 72-year-old Albrecht Roser of Stuttgart, Germany, regarded as one of the finest living marionettists in the world.


Katrina Sorenson And Jess Peterson
Katrina Anne Sorenson, a daughter of Charlotte Sorenson and Ralph Sorenson 2d of Boulder, Colo., was married yesterday to Jess Linn Peterson, a son of Roger Peterson of Santa Fe, N.M., and Mary Lynn Sorensen of St.
David, N.M.
The Rev.
Margaret Gunness performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Stockbridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Peterson, 29, is the marketing manager for Sweetwater, a manufacturer of water-filtration systems in Boulder.
She graduated from Princeton University and received an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father, now retired, was the dean of the University of Colorado Business School in Boulder.


A Fishing Fleet Fights for Survival
THE fortunes of commercial fishermen are as fickle as the offshore winds.
They must deal with the changing whims of nature and the even-more-frustrating variations in state and Federal regulations.
Arthur Medeiros, who worked out of Stonington for 46 years before he recently retired, described the condition of the the local commercial fishing fleet, the state's last.
"We're just going week by week," he said.
"We can't tell the future."


Sylvia Hargrave And David Kelly
Dr.
Sylvia Lynn Hargrave, the daughter of Clara J. Hargrave of Somerville, N.J., and the late Dr.
Sylvester Hargrave, was married yesterday to Ralph David Kelly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Kelly of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
Frederick Black performed the ceremony at the Bethlehem Presbyterian Church in Pittstown, N.J.
Dr.
Hargrave, 30, is a resident in ophthalmology at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.
She graduated cum laude from Vassar College and received her M.D. from Boston University.
Her father was a dentist in Somerville.
Her mother is a psychologist in Newark.


On Sunday; Better Schools By Consensus, Not Conflict
WILLIAM C. THOMPSON JR., the latest appointee to that political sack of cats known as the Board of Education, has no one to blame for the honor but himself.
He asked to be considered for the post, and a search committee unanimously agreed with his old boss, Howard Golden, the Brooklyn Borough President, that Mr.
Thompson had all the right credentials.
Being black was not a qualification.
But it turns out that Mr.
Thompson, something of a civic thoroughbred with bloodlines three generations deep in the city politics of Bedford-Stuyvesant and beyond, seems likely to be the only black person on the seven-member board that assumes authority next month.


New Cable Network Will Be All Talk
AT first glance, the brown concrete and steel building on Fletcher Avenue here looks like any one of the dozens of other office buildings that border the western approach to the George Washington Bridge into Manhattan.
But some of what goes on inside the building is sent via satellite and coaxial wire into cable television boxes in more than 50 million homes and offices from Boston to Brussels and beyond, seven days a week, 24 hours a day.


Round-Table Meetings With No Agendas, No Tables
JAMES W. DEVLIN was baffled when he walked into the Rockport Company's distribution center for a companywide meeting in October.
The meeting had been billed as a powwow to discuss Rockport's mission, one considered important enough to shutter the footwear company, a subsidiary of Reebok International, for two days.
But here was this cavernous room some 20 miles from the company's Marlboro, Mass., headquarters, with nothing in it but hundreds of chairs arranged in a circle and an empty bulletin board.
No keynote speakers, no agenda, no reading materials, nothing.


For Cyclists, the Park Loop Is Riskier Without the Cars
To the Editor:
Far from banning cars, as Kenneth Coughlin quixotically advocates, I would like to suggest turning Central Park into Central Parking.
I don't have the New Yorker's hysterical reverence for the sanctity of the park; as a willing transplant to New York from Iowa, where open spaces are cultivated to produce revenue, it seems only reasonable that this financially struggling city should transform the park into a vast, easily accessible, revenue-producing parking lot.


Coffee Shop Faces Inquiry By the State
Coffee Shop, the coffee shop-turned-late night magnet for the fashion crowd, has been charged with serving alcohol to a minor.
The restaurant, received its third violation in four years from the State Liquor Authority in March, and could lose its liquor license if found guilty.
But Eric Petterson, a co-owner, says he thinks the restaurant should be exonerated.


Fresh Air Fund Offers Working-World Skills
Not long ago Germic Jones's speech was, he admits, incomprehensible to others.
"I used to mumble and slur my words," he said.
Moreover, he was a terrible fidget.
"I used to fiddle with a pencil and give indirect answers, like, 'yes' and 'no' or 'yeah, I did this.' "
After watching a videotape of himself in a mock job interview, Mr.
Jones realized that no one, not even he, could understand what he had said.


SUNDAY, June 5, 1994; Holy Smokes
Down in the corner of the clever new Philip Morris ads that seek acceptance for smokers is a clever new logo to signify balance and tolerance -- a yin-yang symbol with smoke curling up from a burning cigarette on one side.
It may seem offensive that a cigarette company is using an ancient symbol of complementarity to market tolerance toward smokers.
But it makes sense.
Yin and yang are symbols of opposites: female and male, light and dark, good and evil, no-smoking and smoking.


Derailment On Wall Street -- A special report.; Fallen Bond Trader Sees Himself As an Outsider and a Scapegoat
From the time he left a small town in Ohio to make his way through M.I.T., Harvard Business School and three Wall Street firms, Orlando Joseph Jett was the ultimate outsider, a fierce individualist who made few close friends and drove himself hard.
And since mid-April, when Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company accused him of orchestrating a $350 million fraud and dismissed him, placing him at the center of one of Wall Street's biggest scandals, Mr.
Jett has been more isolated than ever.
For the first time since that scandal unfolded, Mr.
Jett, 36, is speaking out about himself, his upbringing, his career on Wall Street and his ordeal at Kidder.
Only months ago, he was Kidder's employee of the year -- a star trader who earned a $9 million bonus in 1993.
Now he is unemployed, and under investigation by the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan and the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Lisa Abroms, Michael Herz
Lisa Abroms, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene M. Abroms of Ardmore, Pa., was married yesterday to Michael Llewellyn Herz, a son of Stefan P. Herz and Paula Herz, both of New York.
Rabbi Julie Greenberg performed the ceremony at Greystone Hall in West Chester, Pa.
The bride, 28, is a psychotherapist in private practice and a substance- abuse specialist at the Freedom Institute in New York, a private outpatient drug-treatment clinic.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.


Recalling a World in Flames
TOMORROW, when the nation and the world commemorate the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landing in Europe during World War II, William F. Falduti of Nutley will be thinking about Peter Black Cloud, a comrade with whom he fought and shared a cherished friendship.
"I'm a little guy and old Peter was this big strapping Indian from North Dakota, and all through training and going overseas, boy, did we raise hell together," said Mr.
Falduti, 69, a retired heavy-equipment engineer.
He is a veteran of the Army's 82d Airborne Division, an elite volunteer paratrooper unit that landed 40 miles behind enemy lines that day.


MANHATTAN MINUTE . . .
BIG BIRD STRIKES OUT: The Children's Television Workshop tries to rename part of West 63d Street "Sesame Street." Some block association residents get angry, claiming the workshop has never helped out in the past.
Discouraged by "the voices of a small bureaucratic few," the workshop drops the issue altogether. . . .
WILD, WILD EAST: It's not over yet for fiery William E. Ubinas but it's getting close.
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines rejects Ubinas supporters' appeal of School Board 1's decision to oust him as superintendent.
The appeal now goes to the central board.
Meanwhile, the Lower East Side school board is recruiting a successor and the defiant Mr.
Ubinas applies. . . .
VOICES RAISED, NOSES HELD: West Village residents gather at a public hearing to protest a proposal for a putrescible waste transfer station (for garbage that tends to decompose) on Washington Street near Leroy.
The company making the proposal, Atlas Paper Stock Company, says the project is being developed "with full respect for the community." . . .
NEW PARTNER?: Neighborhood opponents of a proposed home for the mentally ill at 101st Street and Broadway say the sponsor, Volunteers of America, has no experience running such a residence.
After months of complaints, the state considers asking the V.O.A. to share operation of the facility. . . .
DANCING THE DEBT AWAY: The old Studio 54 building is on the auction block.
With the property's owner, Philip Pilevsky, having Chapter 11 troubles, the Bank of Tokyo has started foreclosure proceedings.
The current tenant at 254 West 54th Street, Stringfellows, a topless club, has a longterm lease and won't be affected. . . .
MONDAY MOVIES: The Bryant Park summer film festival starts June 20 with "Funny Girl." Showtime each week: Sunset.
Blankets and picnics welcome. . . .
SWIMSTROKE: City pools open Saturday, July 2.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.


Pamela Lopez, W. H. Gibbons 3d
Pamela Corazon Lopez, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Rodolfo Lopez of Houston, was married there yesterday to William Henry Gibbons 3d, a son of Miriam Gibbons of Jaffrey, N.H., and the late Mr.
Gibbons Jr.
The Rev.
Victor Brown performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Holy Rosary.
The bride, 29, is an associate fashion editor at Esquire magazine in New York and is an associate editor of its Esquire Gentleman supplements.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is a radiologist at Pasadena Bayshore Hospital in Houston.
Her mother, Connie Lopez, owns Cie Designs, a jewelry distributor in Houston.


Carol Haggerty, James Reardon
Carol Mary Haggerty, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Haggerty of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to James Malcolm Reardon, a son of Martha Dodge Love of Mill Spring, N.C., and James Reardon of Winchester, Mass.
The Rev.
Douglas J. Milewski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Rose of Lima Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Reardon, 31, is an account manager and a sales representative at Sports Illustrated Picture Sales in New York.
She is also a freelance photographer.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.


A Practitioner of Freedom of the Press, on Land, Sea and Air
WHEN the ocean is one's work muse, setting up an office takes ingenuity, and tires with good traction.
Dan Rattiner's office-by-the-sea is a Toyota van parked on the sands of Sagaponack.
Practicing ergonomics, Mr.
Rattiner avoids the steering wheel and sits in the passenger seat.
The back seat is filled by his sheepdog, Wags.
As Wags sleeps, Mr.
Rattiner writes, the waves of the Atlantic lapping near his laptop.


Competition and Telecommunications
To the Editor:
Since the breakup of the old Bell System, the seven regional Bell operating companies have tripled in size to an aggregate market capitalization of $140 billion.
Overly generous regulators have allowed the Bells to increase their rates of return to levels that are twice as high as long-term interest rates.
Yet, the Consumer Federation of America says that in 1992 alone, the Bells managed to overcharge customers by $5 billion.


Leigh A. Elliott and James G. Irvine
Leigh Anne Elliott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederic S. Elliott of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to James Gerard Irvine, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Irvine Jr. of Gladwyne, Pa.
The Rev.
Joseph W. Hughes performed the ceremony at Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Irvine, 28, is an account executive at the Hearst Magazines Division in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is a managing director of Lehman Brothers, the New York investment bank.
Her mother, Carol Elliott, is a partner in Elliott Sheridan Ltd., an interior design firm in Rumson.


The Borough Struts Its Stuff
MUSIC, dance, games, celebrities: the 12th annual Welcome Back to Brooklyn festival will fill Eastern Parkway between Grand Army Plaza and the Brooklyn Museum next Sunday.
Devised to be the borough's big tourist attraction of the year, the festival was attended by 300,000 people last year, the organizers said.
It will begin at noon with a parade involving 1,000 Brooklyn children in school groups, bands and Scout troops; performers doing Chinese and African-style dances; clowns, and a 25-foot-long fire-breathing dragon.
There will be continuous entertainment on five stages.
The theme of this year's festival is Hispanic culture, and performers will include groups like the Ballet Folklorico Mexicano de Nueva York and Pucho and the Latin Soul Brothers.
Among the attractions will be a tent for story-telling and an arcade for old-fashioned games like skelly and double-Dutch.


Germany's Fragile North Sea Playground
SYLT, a roughly beautiful island off Germany's northwest coast, is topographically fragile, and by German standards, emphatically chic.
Now whittled down to a distinctive pick-ax shape, Sylt -- Germans pronounce it Zult, which sounds more or less like zoolt -- has spent the better part of the millennium losing its battle with the wind and waves of the North Sea, while in the last few decades becoming a point of pilgrimage for Germany's moneyed classes.
The island can prompt strong feelings among Germans, some of whom perceive it as a symbol of the country's celebrated post-war wealth, and some of whom see it as a symbol of the evasions they believe that wealth tried to buy.
Its reputation as an enclave of the rich, though, probably has more to do with attitude than with real expense.
Most of the accommodations are in a medium price range ($46 to $87 a night), and the restaurants, which maintain a standard unusually high for Germany, are often quite reasonable.


By Video Screens' Light, Sailors Learn to Steer
The sun had set on the Singapore Strait, and Patrick Lynch, the 21-year-old rookie third mate on the oil tanker Capella, peered nervously into the darkness.
It was his first time in charge of the bridge, and in the distance he could see the lights of fishing trawlers.
Suddenly the radar screen showed a small vessel speeding straight for the tanker.


Grass Struggles Back (Thanks to Soccer)
When soccer fans pile into Giants Stadium on June 18 to watch Italy face Ireland for the first World Cup match at the Meadowlands, they could take a minute to say a prayer for the grass.
Thank you, green blades, for allowing the World Cup to come to New Jersey.
And please hold up for 90 minutes -- while 22 players tear up and down the field after the ball.


Grandfather and Grandson Fish for Blues and Living Is Easy
For several years, at least one of my grandsons and I have been on hand for the annual spring run of bluefish at Wasque Point off the South Shore of Martha's Vineyard Island.
During the past decade, the blues had been arriving around mid-May, but this year they showed up a week late, probably delayed by the unusually cool spring.


Corrections
A picture with the Art column on May 22, about an exhibition at Lehman College, portrayed a tape-covered photograph of a pre-Columbian pot upside down.
The work, "Great Necromancer" by Joan Bankemper, actually shows the rounded part of the vessel at the bottom.


Shelley Church And Chip Rodgers
Jane Michelle Church, the daughter of Jane Millar of Oxford, Md., and Raymond E. Church of Parkersburg, W. Va., was married yesterday to Clifton Eugene Rodgers Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodgers Sr. of Enola, Pa.
The Rev.
Rod K. Brown officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Easton, Md.


From the Guys in the Typing Pool
To the Editor:
"But How Fast Can You Type, Sir?" (Viewpoints, May 22) led me to recall my early days in the Army during World War II, when I was abruptly ushered out of a line by a captain who let everybody know in a loud voice, "This guy's a fast typist who also takes shorthand, so we can't afford to lose him."
When I got to Paris headquarters, I was promptly made secretary to the director of claims.
After the war, I found it a lead-pipe cinch to find a secretarial job on Wall Street.
This rough resume is revealed just in case anyone's interested in hiring an 83-year-old, who's still a fast typist but whose shorthand is short of perfection.
WILLIAM S. PFRIENDER  Spring Lake, N.J., May 24


All the News That's Fit to Mulch
FOR just shy of 20 years now I have been gardening in the same spot abutting the forest out of which emerge such outlaws as raccoons and woodchucks, skunk, deer and black bear.
The earth dries out slowly there, backed by our pond.
But it stands open to full sun and yields 800 pounds of produce in a decent season.
Substantial credit for this prodigious yield goes to The New York Times, which arrives Monday through Saturday in the mailbox at the foot of the hill, courtesy of the R.F.D. mail carrier and her Jeep.
On Mondays or Tuesdays the Times Book Review comes via the same route.
I don't subscribe to The Times on Sunday, partly because it is too heavy to carry half a mile north, and partly because it would usurp every Monday to work my way through it.


What Price Peace? Sound Barriers Stir Debate in New Jersey
Kathleen Pigott can readily describe the hardships of living less than 100 feet from a six-lane highway, but it is hardly necessary.
She need only throw open the back door of her home for a sampling of vehicular rumbling so unceasing that the notion of relaxation seems an absurd fantasy.
Sometimes, the vibrations rattle her baby's crib, waking the infant in a fit of tears.
Mrs.
Pigott believes that her only salvation from Interstate 280 would be a sound barrier, one of those concrete walls that states have erected by roadways across the region to soothe nearby residents whose homes have been overrun by some of the very big-city ills they sought to escape.


How to Bridge the Gap Between Blooms
TRADITIONALLY, early June is the season that belongs to roses.
Their bouffant blooms are always a sight to see, for their bright colors as well as their shiny, showy foliage.
But spring has been cool thus far.
Rosebushes are behind schedule and have not had the chance to catch up.
Many are still putting out their full complement of foliage, while only a few of the earliest bushes have bloomed.
These early roses have not been top quality either.


Classic Storybook Characters Live Televisually Ever After
ALL RIGHT, CHILDREN.
GOT YOUR bunny slippers on?
Time for a story.
Curl up and go for that remote control.
Madeline, Babar, Winnie the Pooh and Peter Rabbit have become staples of the small screen as well as of baby bookshelves.
Richard Scarry's menagerie joined the collection this spring.
And now, arriving just in time for summer vacation, are Mrs.
Piggle-Wiggle and a new program on PBS starring storybooks themselves.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on May 22 about the Casals Festival in Puerto Rico misstated the telephone number for concert information.
It is (809) 721-7727.


My Dog's Smarter Than Your Dog
THE INTELLIGENCE OF DOGS Canine Consciousness and Capabilities.
By Stanley Coren.
Illustrated. 271 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


Corrections
A headline on May 22 with the Technology column, about software that produces foreign-language characters from a standard computer keyboard, described its applicability incompletely.
In addition to Macintosh models, the programs, published by Linguist's Software Inc., can be used with I.B.M. and compatible computers and machines that use the Unix software operating system.


Ukraine and Crimea Sign Joint Agreement
After two days of talks, Ukrainian and Crimean negotiators signed a joint communique Friday night recognizing Crimea as part of Ukraine, but calling for creation of a permanent joint committee to resolve legislative differences between them.
"There's a desire and a readiness to work together," said Sergei Nikulin, a member of the Crimean parliamentary delegation.
"Even we are surprised at Kiev's complete understanding of our position."


Iraq Played 'Catch Me if You Can.' North Korea Says, 'What if You Do?'
IT used to be that the world's great powers worried that some renegade country -- Saddam Hussein's Iraq, for instance -- might sneak a nuclear bomb past the prying eyes of international monitors and spy satellites.
Then came North Korea, which has presented a whole new threat to the guardians of nuclear nonproliferation.
North Korea is not simply trying to cheat.
It is ripping up the rule book and challenging the world to do something about it.


Recalling a World in Flames
TOMORROW, when the nation and the world commemorate the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landing in Europe during World War II, William F. Falduti of Nutley will be thinking about Peter Black Cloud, a comrade with whom he fought and shared a cherished friendship.
"I'm a little guy and old Peter was this big strapping Indian from North Dakota, and all through training and going overseas, boy, did we raise hell together," said Mr.
Falduti, 69, a retired heavy-equipment engineer.
He is a veteran of the Army's 82d Airborne Division, an elite volunteer paratrooper unit that landed 40 miles behind enemy lines that day.


House Tours Upstate and in Rhode Island
Watch Hill, R.I., and Catskill, N.Y., two towns within a day trip of New York City, will be offering tours of notable 19th-and 20th-century buildings in mid-June.
Six summer cottages in the seaside village of Watch Hill will be opened to the public for the first time on Friday, June 17, and Saturday, June 18.
The resort, which is often called Little Newport, is noted for its Shingle style houses and vistas to the water.


'The Glass Menagerie' Starts Phoenix Season
GET Bram Lewis started on the state of culture in Amer ica in a word, it is woebegone -- and you will get an earful about incoherent and ambivalent attitudes toward art, not to mention the prurient values of a misled society.
And Westchester, Mr.
Lewis feels, with its "vast resources, material wealth and impoverished soul" is but a reflection of a widespread cultural malaise.


Meghan Casey, Charles Hannigan
Meghan Clancy Casey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Casey of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Charles Gerard Hannigan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul T. Hannigan of North Easton, Mass.
The Rev.
William R. Mulligan officiated at St.
Cecilia's Roman Catholic Church in Stamford, Conn.
Mrs.
Hannigan, 25, is a sales and marketing associate at Rogers, Casey &amp; Associates, an investment consulting company in Darien, Conn.
She graduated from Villanova University.


Rent Strikes Still Hamper South Africa
With the victory won and apartheid defeated, the Government of President Nelson Mandela is now asking some of its most loyal followers to pay up.
Not everyone is listening.
As it embarks on a program to improve the country's poor townships, the new Government is finding its efforts hampered by the continued refusal of many blacks, people of mixed race and Asians to end boycotts of rents, mortgages and service and utility charges, boycotts originally aimed at bringing down apartheid.


But How Do You Measure Fear?
New York City and crime have been synonymous for so long that many Americans consider it a place best avoided.
But last week, Police Commissioner William J. Bratton suggested that the city might not actually be as dangerous as all that.
At a meeting with business leaders, he issued preliminary data showing the city is into its fourth year of declining crime statistics.


SPOCK, BRAZELTON AND NOW . . . PENELOPE LEACH
In furtherance of the crossfire involving Spock, Brazelton, Penelope Leach and a letter writer, Molly Welch Grygiel (Letters, May 1): My mother had six of us -- all boys.
It never crossed her mind that she was "incredibly trapped by home and hearth." She had a lifelong ball.
So did we.
ROBERT MISHKIN Williamston, Mass.


A Touch of Elegance


Sports of The Times; Let's Hear It For Wearied Gladiators
I'M tired.
You're tired.
We're all tired.
I was sitting at the word processor Saturday at noon, trying to make sense of these playoffs.
Imagine how exhausted the Knicks and the Pacers (and the Rangers and the Canucks) must be.
My friend Mike From Cairo, who runs the newsstand down at the train station, is a huge Knicks fan.
Lately, he has been laughing at me because his team keeps plodding along -- April, May, June -- making me plod along with them.
He laughed at me Saturday morning, when I showed up off the dawn flight from Indianapolis.


Equipment, Heavy and Specialized, at Rental Stores
RENTAL stores offer a myriad of home-repair tools and equipment.
Like lending libraries, they are a good source for specialized home-maintenance and remodeling implements that can be too expensive or used too infrequently to justify buying.
Rental stores are increasingly catering to homeowners instead of to contractors and other professionals.
Choose a store that is well established and can show proof of liability insurance.
Membership in an industry group like the American Rental Association is a good sign.
That trade organization provides training materials, guidelines, news and other services to owners of rental businesses.


Couples Plans Return One Swing at a Time
He and his doctor were standing on the third tee at Gleneagles Country Club in Dallas two weeks ago when Fred Couples made the decision.
The time had come to test it.
The hole before him was 571 yards of serious par-5 and Couples, who hadn't hit a driver since March 6 when his lower back exploded in pain on the practice tee at Doral, pulled the club from his bag.
Couples lifted the driver so his physician, Dr.
Scott Burke, could examine the club's sole plate.


Exotic and Refreshing Seafood Salads
ON a warm summer day, when you want to eat something light, a seafood salad is particularly refreshing.
One of my favorites is a classic spicy Thai salad made with shrimp, scallops and fish tossed in a dressing of green chilies and coriander and served with rice.
Sea scallops are good seared and served on thick slices of ripe tomato, topped with fried capers and onion rings, which add a crunchy texture.


The Girl in the Mouse Ears
A DREAM IS A WISH YOUR HEART MAKES My Story.
By Annette Funicello with Patricia Romanowski.
Illustrated. 235 pp.
New York:  Hyperion. $22.95.


Women in Love


A Guidebook to Finding Black American Sites
An alternative perspective on American travel is offered in a new book: "In Their Footsteps: The American Visions Guide to African-American Heritage Sites" (Owl Books/Henry Holt; $16.95 paper).
Written by Henry Chase, the travel editor of American Visions, a magazine of black culture based in Washington, the book provides comprehensive listings of significant African-American sites, from the Civil War and American Revolution battlefields where blacks took arms alongside whites to the plantations where they were once slaves and the courthouses where their futures as citizens were decided.
Divided by region, then subdivided by state (Canada is included at the end), the material features well-known landmarks -- Martin Luther King Jr.'s Atlanta birthplace, the Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala., Harlem's Apollo Theater -- and a wide array of lesser known ones.


On Rikers Island, Armed With Only a Camera
JON ALPERT, A MAN WHO HAS eagerly lugged his video camera through war-torn jungles, unspeakable slums and, most recently, America's largest jail complex, has turned bashfulness into an asset.
"You might laugh, but I'm too shy to do this without the camera," said Mr.
Alpert, expressing reservations common to reporters.
"It gives me a reason for being at Rikers, when under normal circumstances I have no business being there."


Viewpoints; Auto Rentals: Rough Ride for the Young
IF you are young and you want to rent a car, you're in for a rough ride.
But there may be a solution.
Like most people, I knew that car-rental companies discriminated against young drivers and that they do so because actuarial data show young drivers to be higher risks.
But, because I am 24, I personally ran into the problem while making travel arrangements for a recent business trip.
So I decided to check the industry out.


A $300 Insult
To the Sports Editor:
I attended a Knicks-Bulls playoff game at the Garden, the first Knicks game I have been to in many years.
My wife, my son and his friend accompanied me.
We are all avid Knicks fans (in my case since 1954).


Ms. Hopkins And Dr. Folpe
Anastasia Athene Hopkins, a daughter of Amy L. Hopkins of Southbury, Conn., and of the late Thomas C. Hopkins is to be married today to Dr.
Andrew Lawrence Folpe, the son of Herbert K. Folpe of Larchmont, N.Y., and of the late Susan N. Folpe.
Judge Joan Cooney of the Westchester County Family Court is to officiate at Little Albert's Beach in Amagansett, L.I.
The bride, 24, is a stepdaughter of William Furey.
She was until recently the development assistant at the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra in Rochester.
She graduated cum laude from Bryn Mawr College.


THE HANDY-DANDY EVOLUTION PROVER
Evolution by natural selection is an important force in our daily lives, affecting our health as well as that of the economy.
It does not occur only in obscure groups of birds on obscure islands.


Vivian Sone, Rodney Kumasaki
Vivian Mee Sone, a daughter of Dr.
Chae S. Sone and Dr.
Kyung O. Kim of Hicksville, L.I., was married last evening to Rodney Duane Kumasaki, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dori S. Kumasaki of Sacramento, Calif.
The Rev.
Fanny Erickson, a minister of the United Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Riverside Church in New York.
Dr.
Sone, 32, is keeping her name.
She expects to become a resident next month in obstetrics and gynecology at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
She graduated from Smith College and received her M.D. from New York Medical College.
Her father retired as a reference librarian at the Hicksville Public Library.
Her mother is an internist in Hicksville.


The Jefferson Market Courthouse
To the Editor:
Your splendid article about the old Jefferson Market Courthouse  [ "A Stopped Clock Sired the Preservation Movement," April 3 ] , in which is now housed the Greenwich Village public library, brought back a flood of memories.
Not the least of these was the way the big four-faced clock in the tall brick tower of the library helped us save that Victorian Gothic structure before the city had its present Landmarks Preservation law.
As it happened, at that time the clock was a useful timepiece for all members of the Village community -- schoolchildren en route to nearby P.S. 41, commuters emerging from the Ninth Street PATH station on the corner, Villagers hurrying to take buses on Sixth Avenue and subway riders headed to or from the big Fourth Street station on the IND line.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 7 of Styles of The Times today, about the Americas Society benefit on May 25 honoring former President George Bush, misstates Henry Kissinger's role.
He attended the dinner, but his presentation of a public service award to former President Gerald R. Ford occurred the previous night, at the Rockefeller Institute dinner also mentioned on that page.


Ranson Smith, Kenneth Hanau 3d
Mary Ranson Smith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Briscoe Ranson Smith of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kenneth John Hanau 3d, the son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Hanau Jr. of Madison, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
P.
C.
Enniss performed the ceremony at the Reformed Church of Bronxville.
The bride, 29, is known as Ranson.
She is a sales account executive at Liz Claiborne Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Pine Manor College.


As Big Farms Fade, Niche Farmers Bloom
FROM the roadside, Longneck Farms looks like many of the small horse or produce farms in and around Colts Neck, a small rural town in central New Jersey's Monmouth County.
Past the front gate, however, lie neither stalls of stallions nor neatly tended rows of tomatoes.
Instead, there are a half-dozen pens holding pairs of ostriches.


Sharing a Playground (With Rats)
Crystal Devlin and her 7 1/2-year-old son Jonathan spotted the first of the unwelcome guests at about 7 P.M.
"Rats," she said, narrowing her eyes.
Since the warmer weather began, she and others say, dozens of sizable rats have taken up residence in a rock formation at the eastern edge of a Riverside Park playground at 83d Street just off Riverside Drive, venturing out in packs to raid trash cans around dusk while children are still playing.


Lively Debate
To the Sport Editor:
History does repeat itself.
Back in 1961 there was a question on everyone's lips: "Is the Mickey Mantle baseball more lively than the Babe Ruth baseball?" To settle the question back then, The Times asked the consulting firm of Foster D. Snell to make a physical evaluation of the two balls.
Stephen Taub and I spent several days on the project.
The results of our tests performed in Central Park were published on the front page on Aug. 16, 1961, with the data from the tests covered in full on page 19.
The conclusion in the paper was "Baseball Hit by Ruth Not Unlike Those of '36 or Today." ROBERT W. BATEY  Rye Brook, N.Y.


City Proposes a New Look for the St. George Hotel: a School
For years, the St.
George Hotel has been a source of controversy in Brooklyn Heights.
Once one of the city's grand hotels, it has become a place for welfare recipients, the homeless and AIDS patients.
Now the hotel is involved in a new issue.
The Board of Education wants to move one of its specialized, experimental New Vision Schools -- and 600 students -- into two vacant buildings that belong to the hotel complex.


Festival Chamber Group Moves to Mamaroneck
IN 1988 the cellist Ruth Sommers started a between-seasons recital series called the Dobbs Ferry Chamber Music Festival at the Masters School.
Two years later, an offshoot cycle began in Manhattan, and to reflect the wider sphere of influence, the organization's name was changed to the Festival Chamber Music Society.
This year the name stays the same, as does the distinguished-artist roster, but the programs have been shifted from Sunday afternoons in Dobbs Ferry to Saturday evenings at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck.


Disney World Is Wary Site Of Gay Party
Thousands of homosexuals gathered here at Walt Disney World today, angering some conservative Christian groups and keeping Disney's public relations executives busy.
Disney World did not sponsor the event.
Instead, the Walt Disney Company posted signs outside the theme park explaining to visitors that "members of the gay community have chosen to visit the Magic Kingdom today in their recognition of Gay and Lesbian Pride Month" and that Disney "does not discriminate against anyone's right to visit the Magic Kingdom."


Whither the Mob? 12 Defendants Plead Poverty and Ask Court for Lawyers
In what experts on organized crime are citing as evidence of the Mafia's decline here, 12 of 24 men recently arraigned on racketeering charges declared themselves indigent and accepted court-appointed lawyers.
"This says to me it isn't much of a mob anymore," said Fred Martens, executive director of the Pennsylvania Crime Commission, which monitors organized crime.
"The mob isn't taking care of its underlings the way it used to. In the old days, if a mobster got arrested, the mob took care of his legal fees and his family if he went to jail. The crime family really isn't a family in Philadelphia anymore."


Corrections
Because of a computer coding error, the fiction best-seller list on page 56 of the Times Book Review today ranks seven books incorrectly.
"Walking Shadow," shown as No. 5, should be No. 11.
The books ranked 6 through 11 appear in the correct order, but each should move up by one number.


BROOKLYN MINUTE . . .
WINNING A HIGH COURT APPEAL: Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg's daylong spin through Brooklyn last week contained a sweet note for the Brooklyn Bar Association.
The Justice, a Brooklyn native, had declined two previous invitations to attend association events.
But in February, as the new president, Miriam Cyrulnik tells it, the Justice wrote to say that she would be in town June 1 to be honored by Long Island University.
Could the bar help coordinate her visits to the two Midwood schools she once attended?
In gratitude, Ms.
Cyrulnik said, she wrote, "if there were something going on at the Brooklyn Bar that day, she would love to participate." Which is how Ms.
Cyrulnik and fellow officers ended up being installed by a Supreme Court Justice.  . .
A BOUNTIFUL EXIT: The Fulton Ferry Landing Association is basking in the glow of a fertile outcome to their tussle with the State Department of Transportation.
The group had filed a lawsuit in 1993 seeking to postpone the start of long-delayed repair work on the Brooklyn Queens Expressway bridge over Atlantic Avenue.
Although that effort proved fruitless, the D.O.T. has agreed, in a court settlement, to a landscape scheme for the area adjacent to the Cadman Plaza West/ Brooklyn Bridge exit. . . .
THE FAMILY WAY: Two of the family businesses that will be honored next week with Brooklyn Mom and Pop Day awards are Monchito's Wedding Center in Sunset Park and Little Wedding World in Bay Ridge.
In other words, mom-and-pop businesses that are helpers to those who would be moms and pops.


Marjorie H. Ross, Jonathan M. Levin
Dr.
Marjorie Helen Ross and Dr.
Jonathan Minar Levin, neurologists at Harvard Medical School in Boston, are to be married today.
Rabbi Arnold Goodman is to officiate at Callanwolde in Atlanta.
The bride, 31, is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David C. Ross of Hillsdale, N.J.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University and received her medical degree from Georgetown University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is a dentist in Westwood, N.J.
Her mother, Lou Ross, is a learning disabilities consultant in Westwood.


Jay Ringelstein, Stephen Mufson
Jay Laura Ringelstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Ringelstein of Demarest, N.J., was married yesterday to Stephen David Mufson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Mufson of Closter, N.J.
Mayor Richard Schooler of Demarest officiated at the Ridgewood Country Club in Paramus, N.J.
Ms.
Ringelstein, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated from New York University and is an accountant for Home Box Office in New York.


Retooling Ideas To Conform With Clean Air Act
ALL through the recent recession, business kept booming at the Zierick Manufacturing Corporation in Mount Kisco, where 110 employees produce car parts and electronic connectors.
Indeed, since it opened shop 74 years ago, few outside forces have been able to stunt the growth of this family-owned company.
But now all that may be changing -- although not as a result of a shifting economy.
Rather, provisions of the Federal Clean Air Act, due to be implemented within the next several years, may prove too onerous for small businesses like Zierick Manufacturing.


Dogs at Play, People in Combat
It was supposed to be a quiet meeting.
Around dusk Wednesday, six members of the Friends of Madison Square Park met under the trees to discuss where to place a proposal for a fenced-in dog run.
Suddenly, eight neighborhood residents jumped in and started shouting about a long-simmering grievance: dogs running around off the leash.


Business Diary: May 29 - June 3
THE ECONOMY May Unemployment: Good?
Bad?
You Figure It Out.
You want logic?
Don't look at Friday's employment numbers.
You'd think that if the rise in payrolls was tepid, the jobless rate would hold its own or even rise.
But no: even as unemployment plunged to 6 percent in May (with the Northeast's rate falling to 6.3 percent from 7 percent), the lowest level since November 1990, payrolls rose just 191,000, far below expectations.
The stock market had held its breath all week -- up a point, down a point -- waiting for this job signal, but then didn't know what to make of it.
At first the Dow fell 16, as the market looked more at the jobless rate (a low rate could signal inflation).
But then Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the President's top economist, said the rate might be a statistical fluke, and the market remembered the payroll number and rallied, ending up 13 for the day.
But no one was sure what it all meant for the economy in general -- and Federal Reserve policy in particular.


Brooke R. Reid, Nathan B. Roberts
Brooke Russell Reid, the manager of special events for the Big Apple Circus, was married yesterday to Nathan Birge Roberts, an account executive at Goldman Sachs &amp; Company.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Mark Hollingsworth performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in York Harbor, Me.
Mrs.
Roberts, 26, is a daughter of Fergus Reid 3d of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Anne de Baillet LaTour Reid.
She is a stepdaughter of Sylvia G. Reid.
The bride graduated from Lake Forest College.


JANET RENO'S CHOICE
Your article refers to the disorganization in the Department of Justice.
Given the delays in obtaining F.B.I. clearances for a number of senior appointments and the full-scale changes in personnel required at all levels of the department, a certain amount of chaos is inevitable.
Given a choice, I'd take Janet Reno over her predecessors.
For the first time in my life, I feel that the Department of Justice works to protect me.
TRACEY A. JOHNSTONE Virginia Beach, Va.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Linda Mysliwy Conlin; Keeping the State Attractive to Tourists
NOW that Memorial Day has marked the unofficial start of the important summer travel season in a job-and-economy-conscious New Jersey, there is a broad and a confident smile on Linda Mysliwy Conlin's face.
"As always, the weather will be the deciding factor -- but I would say we are going to have a very good year, dominated by the World Cup soccer games at the Meadowlands," said Ms.
Conlin, the state's travel and tourism director.


U.S. and Britain Honor Knights on Wings, Raising Glasses, Voices and Some Specters
President Clinton led a tribute today to the World War II fliers -- "these knights borne on wings," he called them -- whose exploits gave the Allies the air superiority they needed above the Normandy beaches on D-Day.
Speaking at the American military cemetery a few miles from Cambridge, northeast of London, Mr.
Clinton recalled the days, a half-century ago, of "Lindy hops in London and kids from Milwaukee invited in for high tea." Prime Minister John Major reflected in another speech that, as the hour of attack approached, every 30th person in Britain was an American serviceman -- a total of more than 1.5 million.


Frederick A. Praeger Dies at 78; Published Books on Communism
Frederick A. Praeger, an Austrian immigrant who borrowed $4,000 from friends and founded a major Manhattan publishing house that brought to many Western readers their first incisive views of life under Communism, died on May 28 in Boulder, Colo.
Mr.
Praeger, who lived in Boulder and died at the Manor Care Nursing Home there, was 78.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter, Andrea Praeger.


Bookshelf
I DREAM OF PEACE: Images of War by Children of Former Yugoslavia.
UNICEF/Harper Collins. $12.95. (All ages) The powerfully moving pictures and writings in this collection were selected by UNICEF staff members from school and refugee programs on both sides of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia.
The children recall both traumatic and happy moments from the past and, miraculously, they also dream of better days ahead.


SURFACING
READING Coffee and Kafka: The proliferation of coffee bars has been accompanied by a growing number of literary journals with coffee-minded titles, including Java Journal and Literal Latte in New York, Caffeine in Los Angeles and The Bean in Seattle.
SPORTS No clashing: For women who have taken up boxing for aerobic exercise, Everlast is offering gloves with a difference: they come in pink and powder blue.
NOVELTIES Scratch, not strike: Why offer matchbooks where smoking is not permitted?
Restaurants like Off Vine in Hollywood are giving away small pads of scratch paper, instead.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Mute Sentinel
WAITING to be acknowledged, Bill Kain stood meekly before the security guard at the Omni Corporate Center in Mitchel Field.
When told that the guard would never acknowledge him because the guard wasn't human, Mr.
Kain was dumbfounded.
"But his skin is so real," he said.
"It's unbelievable."
What is unbelievable is that isn't skin or veins, that cover the body of Art the Guard.
Art is art, a sculpture so lifelike that almost everyone who enters the building approaches Art, and not the living-breathing Glynnis Gordon, who sits at a nearby table.


All the Sounds, and Silence Too
FOR parents, it's a magical moment.
You've fetched the last glass of water, arranged the last stuffed animal just so.
It's adult quality time.
What you crave now, though, is to let loose on the piano.
But with those thin walls?
Impossible.
Yamaha, it seems, heard the laments of these silenced poets -- and wants to ride to the rescue.
Last week it introduced a piano that, if you wish, is every inch the real thing -- shiny cabinet with keys, hammers, strings, the works.
But at the flick of a pedal the piano falls silent -- even as you pound out some ferocious Brahms.
Silent, that is, for others; the pianist slips on earphones and is engulfed by a full, rich sound.


Ms. Korth, Mr. Williams
Donna-Marie Korth, an associate at the law firm of Certilman Balin Adler &amp; Hyman in East Meadow, L.I., was married yesterday to Kenneth Dean Williams, a financial consultant in Garden City, L.I., for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The Rev.
Thomas M. Moriarty Jr. officiated at Our Lady of Lourdes Roman Catholic Church in Malverne, L.I.
Mrs.
Williams graduated magna cum laude from St.
John's University, where she also received a law degree.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay F. Korth of Lynbrook, L.I.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
In the Expansion League: A Batting-Practice Company
The owners of Baseball Plus, a Bronx batting-practice complex that opened at the beginning of the year, are planning to set up two additional sites in Queens this year.


SUNDAY, June 5, 1994; Ten Ways to Spot a Turkey Without Going to See It
As another endless movie summer draws near, this poster of a nonexistent movie (only the names have not been changed) is a guide to the telltale signs of a truly bad movie:
1.
Title -- one-word name of odd creature, e.g.: "Critters" or "Munchies," as in the (unfortunately) real original.


Suspect in Queens Carjackings Is Arrested in North Carolina
The two-month hunt for a man suspected of robbing at least eight elderly Queens residents with a silver pistol ended quietly in North Carolina early yesterday when the local police acted on a tip and arrested him in a bar.
The suspect, Gerald Jerome, 27, of Brooklyn, was arrested about 2 A.M. in Rocky Mount, 50 miles east of Raleigh, the authorities said.


G.O.P. IN VIRGINIA NOMINATES NORTH FOR SENATE SEAT
Forsaking appeals from Ronald Reagan in March and other party heroes, the Virginia Republican Party today nominated Oliver L. North for the United States Senate, setting the stage for one of the year's most unpredictable and acrimonious contests.
Mr.
North won 55 percent of the vote at the party's state convention, to 45 percent for James C. Miller, an economist and a budget director in President Reagan's Administration.


Henry Randall, 79, Medical Educator
Dr.
Henry T. Randall, a surgeon and medical educator who was an executive of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Institute in New York from 1951 to 1965, died on Tuesday at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.
Dr.
Randall, who lived in Bristol, R.I., was 79.
The cause was a stroke, said his wife, Louise Randall.


SUNDAY, June 5, 1994; Kitty Letter
Harvard and the University of California at Berkeley have thriving health newsletters that discuss diet, preventive care and the medical profession.
Now so does Tufts, with one small difference.
Its newsletter is called Catnip and it comes from the university's School of Veterinary Medicine.
Reasoning that cats might benefit from the self-care movement (well, in this case the owner-care movement) Franklin Loew, dean of the veterinary school, started Catnip.
It's edited by Gloria Parkinson, whose slightly overweight pets ("I know -- I feel terribly guilty about it.") -- Perdita, Nicholas the Ridiculous, Rosa and Kropotkin -- are four of the eight cat consultants listed on the masthead.
Catnip addresses health concerns like behavior ("As in, 'Why did my cat start pooping on the Persian rug?' " says Loew); feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV); nutrition, and gingivitis.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  REMOTE RAIN FOREST THREATENED  In Papua New Guinea, what is described by conservationists as the last rain forest is threatened by an influx of foreign loggers seeking new sources of tropical timber.  1  D-DAY EVENTS HAUNT GERMANY  Germany is anguished about its lack of a role in the 50th anniversary commemoration of D-Day and conflicted about how to view the way the war was concluded.  1


BENEFITS  Tour of Village Gardens TODAY -- Seven notable private gardens and homes in Greenwich Village will be open for a tour to benefit the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. The tour, from 1 to 6 P.M., will conclude with a champagne reception. Tickets, $50, from (212) 924-3895.   Author Honored at St. John's TODAY -- The Cathedral of St. John the Divine will honor the writer Madeleine L'Engle, who is also the cathedral's longtime librarian, on her 75th birthday. The benefit for St. John's liturgical music program starts at 7 P.M. at the cathedral, West 112th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, with a picnic supper, choral vespers by candelight, a performance by the cathedral's choirs and readings by Eli Wallach and Anne Jackson from some of Ms. L'Engle's 40 works. Tickets, $75, at the door.   For Immunological Research MONDAY -- Dr. Torsten Wiesel, the president of Rockefeller University, will accept an award for excellence in immunological research on behalf of the university to be presented by the Irvington Institute for Medical Research. Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner at the Gauguin restaurant at the Plaza Hotel. Tickets, $650, from (212) 685-0113.   In Honor of Women MONDAY -- Linda Fairstein, Sherry Lansing, Evelyn Lauder and Lily Tomlin will be honored by the Women's Project and Productions at a dinner at Tavern on the Green. The group, which seeks to increase the representation of women in the theater, has produced 60 plays and established programs for directors and playwrights in the 16 years since its founding. Cocktails start at 7 P.M. Tickets, $350, from (212) 838-2660.   Wine Party at the Whitney MONDAY -- The Lobby Gallery Associates of the Whitney Museum of American Art will hold their spring benefit with a wine tasting and buffet at the museum from 7 to 11 P.M. Tickets, $85, from (212) 570-3697, or $100 at the door.   Gambling for a Cause MONDAY -- At 6:30 P.M. there will be cocktails and games of chance, an auction, raffles, fortunetellers and dancing at the Pierre to benefit Cancer Care, an organization that provides psychological counseling to people with cancer. Dinner is at 8 P.M. Tickets, $300, from (212) 221-3300, extension 468.   Dancing With the Whales  MONDAY -- The American Museum of Natural History will hold a black-tie event to honor Maurice R. Greenberg, the chairman and chief executive of the American International Group, for his support of scientific education programs at the m


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
FESTIVAL WITH BIKES
The Fishawack Festival set for the borough of Chatham on Saturday is a event held every two years recalling the arrival of the Lenni Lenape Indians in the area after crossing the Passaic River, which they called Fishawack.
The Chatham Wheelmen, who claim to have the oldest active bicycling club in the state, will be the focus of many activities in celebration of the club's 100th anniversary.


Long-Ago Hero's Family Found
For almost a century, relatives of Wayland A. Estes have trekked to Greenwood Cemetery in Brooklyn to pay their respects.
"We were all told that we should be very proud of him because he was a hero," said Carole Machina, 51, the man's great-granddaughter, who lives in Alexandria, Va.


Lauren Neuborne, Seth Stander
Lauren Samantha Neuborne and Seth Mark Stander, rabbinical students at Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion in Cincinnati, are to be married today.
Rabbi Gerald Weider is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Beth Elohim in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Neuborne, 24, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Cornell University.
She is a daughter of Burt and Helen Neuborne of New York.
Her father is a professor of law at New York University.
Her mother is the executive director of the NOW Legal Defense and Education Fund in New York.


In the Region/Connecticut; A Whirlwind of Plans for a Hot Newtown Property
A PRIZED piece of property in the center of Newtown with almost 2 million square feet in 60 handsome brick buildings on an 800-acre campus has become a hotspot of contention among local and state officials and civic leaders.
Built in the 1930's as the Fairfield Hills state mental hospital, the now diverse operation is outmoded and its buildings are almost empty.
But the grounds and buildings have been well maintained and are suitable for recyling to other uses.


Claire O. Finkelstein, Peter A. Detre
Claire Oakes Finkelstein, a daughter of Michael Oakes Finkelstein of Manhattan and Elinor Fuchs of Brooklyn Heights, is to be married today to Peter Andrew Detre, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Detre of Montreal.
Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein, the bride's cousin, is to perform the ceremony at the Wheatleigh estate in Lenox, Mass.
Ms.
Finkelstein, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral candidate in philosophy at the University of Pittsburgh.
She graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from Yale University.


Despite Incentives to Stay, Mastercard Plans Move to Suburbs
Less than a year after Mastercard International said it would stay in Manhattan, it is considering moving most of its 450 New York employees to the suburbs.
No announcement is to be made until the annual board meeting on July 15.
But the huge credit-card association has looked at nine office buildings in White Plains, and in Stamford, Conn.
It has also shown nearly a dozen potential sublet tenants, including two big financial-services concerns, through the nine floors it has leased at Burlington House, 1345 Avenue of the Americas, at 55th Street.
Mastercard had planned to begin moving into Burlington House next May.


ABOUT BOOKS
Exploring Rivers
NOTHING will work if "Exploring the Little Rivers of New Jersey" does not drag the inquiring mind out-of-doors this summer for a visit to many of the state's best nature and historic sights.


50 Years After D-Day, an Aircraft Industry Remade
AS Allied commanders prepared to retake Europe, Asia and the Pacific from the Fascist powers five decades ago, the first place they knew they had to win was in the air.
The German blitzkrieg, Pearl Harbor, the Battle of Britain and Midway all demonstrated that air power, a side show in World War I, was crucial to victory in World War II.
Aviation captured the imagination of American generals, inventors, industrialists and the public alike in those dark war years, in a way few industries have, before or since.
Aircraft went from being expensive toys to weapons of liberty overnight.
Schoolchildren avidly studied recognition silhouettes and knew the names and strengths of dozens of planes.
Pioneers of flight like Glenn Curtiss, Jack Northrop and Glenn Martin found themselves at the helm of burgeoning empires.
And almost anyone who knew something about planes -- mechanic, stunt pilot, engineer, factory foreman -- could start a company and hope for a Government contract.


How Tudor City Residents Can Quiet the Protesters
To the Editor:
In your May 22 article "From Tudor City, Protests Against Noisy Protesters" you quote Harry Laughlin, the president of the residents' association, as saying that many residents are sympathetic to the noisy political and civil-rights demonstrations at the United Nations.
Then he adds, "But we can't help them."


New Delay at an Old Station
For years, the Main Street-Flushing subway station has endured the daily crush of more than 100,000 commuters heading to work in the mornings and back home in the evenings.
It is a major transfer point for 23 bus lines and the last stop on the No. 7 line, which takes thousands of people to Mets' games at Shea Stadium.
It is also deteriorating.


Judith J. Zwolak, John E. A. Dudley
Judith Jean Zwolak, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Zwolak of Brewerton, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Edward Alexander Dudley, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Dudley of Williamsville, N.Y.
Judge Jack Schultz, the town justice of DeWitt, N.Y., performed the ceremony at the West Hill Country Club in Camillus, N.Y.
The couple, both 28, graduated from Cornell University.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is an editor and a writer for The Monitor, a weekly newspaper at the Tulane University Medical School in New Orleans.


Kerry A. Dunn, Wayne King Jr.
Kerry Ann Dunn, a daughter of Ethel and Robert Dunn of Pomona, N.Y., was married Monday to Wayne King Jr., a son of Mr.
King of Glenwood Springs, Colo., and Virginia E. King of Borrego Springs, Calif.
The Rev.
Robert McCollar officiated at the Four Seasons Resort and Hotel in Maui, Hawaii.


The Real Achievements Of a Community Board
To the Editor:
Contrary to Steven Vincent's experience, recounted in his May 22 Soapbox essay, "Politics vs. Conscience," I found my five years on Community Board 3 an opportunity to reconcile politics and conscience.
Also contrary to his view, I found the collective, often complex, work very effective; we were not "powerless." Indeed, it was the board that convinced the city to adopt new approaches to affordable housing production.


'Last Rain Forest:' Timber vs. a Culture -- A special report.; In Isolation, Papua New Guinea Falls Prey to Foreign Bulldozers
Hidden in the lush vastness of the rain forests of Papua New Guinea, there is a land that time forgot.
It is a place so untouched by the outside world that many of the forest-dwellers here still wear bird feathers and grass skirts, use shells and pigs' teeth for money and remember not-so-distant relatives who celebrated victories over their tribal enemies by eating them.
Papua New Guinea has been described by conservationists as the last rain forest, and it is not much of an exaggeration.
This remote Pacific country is carpeted by some of the last extensive stretches of pristine tropical forest anywhere.


A Legend Lays Bare Her Hurt
IN MAY 1993, LENA HORNE MADE A RARE PUBLIC appearance at a party for the 25th anniversary of the Studio Museum in Harlem.
Then 75, she seemed eager to speak with anyone who approached her -- until somebody asked if she would be singing after dinner.
"I'm too old to be singing," she blurted out.
"You don't keep a voice all your life. When I had to start lowering keys, that was the cue telling me to get out."
Four months later, she recorded her most elaborate album in 17 years, "We'll Be Together Again," a valentine to departed friends from a woman who either shut them out of her life or lost them to death.
She calls herself "evil and angry and jealous and possessive," and for her, life has grown quite solitary.
She now lives in a huge apartment off Fifth Avenue, surrounded by books and ever resentful "that the men in my life have all left me."


Police Preparing for a Month of Emotional Events
It was only a drill, but the flying bottles were real, and when a squad of helmeted police officers charged through the door of a place in the South Bronx called the Club Mercury on Friday, they laid into a crowd of real people with real Plexiglas shields and real riot sticks.
Nobody was hurt as the dingy stage set of a club calmed down, and that is the way the police hope it will turn out if they are called in for an authentic fracas later this month, when city officials expect more than a million visitors to flood into New York City for the World Cup soccer matches, the Olympic-style Gay Games and a sprawling 25th anniversary celebration of a gay-rights uprising.
Bricks and Gasoline Bombs
The helmeted officers in the Club Mercury -- a slightly spruced up abandoned warehouse in the Hunts Point section of the Bronx -- and the disorderly patrons -- also officers, but in civilian clothes -- were among the last of several flying squads being trained to back up regular units in case of bar fights or riots.
The flying squads would also go into action should terrorists strike or some other kind of major disaster hit the city.


Time to Turn The Tables
To the Editor:
It's not women's viewpoints about their own aging that needs changing; it's men's viewpoints about aging women that should be changed.
GERALDINE VIGODA  Jackson Heights, N. Y.


MURRAY GELL-MANN
Several people have asked me about my recipe for low-fat tuna sandwiches.
In our household, making a tuna sandwich means starting from scratch, with quarks.
First, you put a gazillion quarks (and electrons) into a Waring blender-supercollider.
Then, you mix until life spontaneously generates.
After several billion years, a tuna will evolve, by way of natural selection and frozen accidents.
The rest is easy.
MARCIA SOUTHWICK Tesuque, N.M.


Ah, Isn't the Prom Music Divinely Bland?
IT'S prom night for Mount Vernon High School's graduating class of 1994, and 350 cummerbund-bedecked boys and corsage-toting girls have their feet planted firmly on the dance floor, their upper bodies stiff, and their lower bodies in a squat, as if hovering two inches above a toilet seat.
Only the students' hips move, grinding in slow circles to Patra's "Worker Man."
"This song is the public school version of 'Dirty Dancing,' " David Salsberg, co-founder of Promoceans, a party-planning service that is helping arrange 127 New York area proms this year, says about the down-and-dirty, dance-hall reggae song.
As the evening wears on, the dances change, the cummerbunds slip, the flowers wilt.
Afterward, if no one remembers the music, but everyone remembers having a good time, then the disk jockey has done his job properly.
"I won't remember the music in five years," says Carlton Ford, 19, minutes after the prom ends.
"I hardly even remember it now."


Is There a Medecin in the House?
ON our honeymoon in Barbados, I watched fascinated as the stranger I was about to spend the next 60 years with unpacked his Dopp kit.
"What's that?" I asked.


Symbol of Tiananmen Square Is Resurrected
Five years after a tank crushed the 40-foot-high statue of the Goddess of Democracy in Tiananmen Square in Beijing, supporters of the human rights movement in China gathered here today to unveil a bronze statue modeled after the original.
The original, made of plaster, was a symbol for the students who briefly stood up to the Chinese authorities in the late spring of 1989.
The one uncovered today, just nine and a half feet tall, was conceived within weeks of the destruction of the original.
But it took almost five years to win the necessary city approvals and to find a permanent home for it on public land, a small park on the edge of this city's Chinatown.


Landmarks and History; Boning Up on the Bronx With Tours and Talks
'Twas Ogden Nash who declared, "The Bronx? No Thonx!" That the eminent poet's clever rhyme was, however humorous, both fallacious and infelicitous has oft been proved -- how could one be negative about a borough that has given us Red Buttons and Ralph Lauren, the novelist Avery Corman, the director Penny Marshall, the comedian Robert Klein and the boxer Jake LaMotta, to name just a few?
But if any more proof is needed, it will be provided Saturday through a series of special events presented by the Bronx Landmarks Task Force.


Diary of a Wimp In 'Harold Trilogy'
THE portrait of Everyman as a nobody fills a special place in the gallery of theatrical antiheroes.
To general theatergoers the most lasting image is of Willy Loman and, to the more savant, Wozzeck, both stunted victims of cosmic foul play.
By contrast, Harold in "The Dear Harold Trilogy" by William Snowden, being produced by the Bay Street Theater Festival in Sag Harbor, is but another disposable item on a laundry list of the theater's hopeless losers.


Habitats/Eldorado Duplex; Aerie Over Central Park
"THIS is the African Art that got the boot," said Worth (short for Worthington) Linen, surveying the wooden tribal masks lying on the chaise longue in the small room off the foyer in the grand tower apartment at the Eldorado.
Mr.
Linen and Winifred Barnes, a partner in Bastoni Barnes, an advertising agency, got married last October, and a visitor senses they are still working things out.


Turning Indiana Into Little Pacers That Could
You are Larry Brown and it is time to face your deflated team.
It is the day after the great Hoosier celebration that died before it could end.
The pandemonium from the night before, the screams and the pleas and finally the groans that dissolved into silence, are still echoing in your head.
You already have canceled the morning practice and now your players have dragged their aching bodies to the airport.
They slouched coming in with their bags over their shoulders.
They concealed the bags under their eyes, not to mention the disappointment in their eyes, behind expensive shades.
They returned to work like assembly line workers to an auto plant that has been designated to close; it was a day they had planned to sleep through a hangover of joy.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 5, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
2
3
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
3
11
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Doomsday brings horrors to America.
4
7
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
5
6
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
6
5
THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) The sins of their mother haunt a boy and girl when a carnival comes to town.
7*
16
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
8
4
SURRENDER MY LOVE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) A ninth-century viking finds revenge and romance.
9
6
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
10
2
INTEREST OF JUSTICE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A judge's pursuit of the murderer of her sister and brother-in-law.
11
7
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
12
1
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Americans on holiday in Italy learn a lot about their marriage and themselves.
13
5
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Troubles befall a woman and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
14*
5
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Dell, $6.99.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
15
1
MISSING JOSEPH, by Elizabeth George. (Bantam, $5.99.) Two New Scotland Yard detectives help uncover the murder of a vicar.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
21
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
3
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
3
552
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4*
5
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
5
21
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
6
1
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in combat in Vietnam and recently committed suicide.
7
68
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8*
4
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
9
2
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
10*
138
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
11*
7
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
12*
10
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
13*
6
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on.
14
53
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
15
31
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
16*
152
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
168
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
175
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
1
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition.
4
5
THE POCKET POWTER, by Susan Powter. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $6.99.) Fitness advice.
5*
33
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 21, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Transactions
Baseball  American League CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Optioned Eduardo Perez, first baseman, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled J.T.
Snow, first baseman, from Vancouver.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Activated David Wells, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Phil Stidham, pitcher, from Toledo of the International League.
Placed Bill Krueger, pitcher, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Optioned John Flaherty, catcher, to Toledo.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Shawn Buhner, first baseman.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Agreed to terms with Reid Ryan and Janos Briscoe, pitchers and Joe Kail, infielder.
Signed Rob Nelson, first baseman, to a contract with Tulsa of the Texas League.
National League COLORADO ROCKIES -- Signed Doug Million, pitcher.
Football  National Football League CHICAGO BEARS -- Agreed to terms with Kevin Butler, kicker, on a three-year contract.
NEW YORK JETS -- Released Leonard Marshall, defensive lineman.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Released Andre Waters, safety; Ken O'Brien, quarterback; James Lofton, wide receiver; Keith Millard, defensive tackle; and Brian Baldinger, Ron Hallstrom and Mike Schad, offensive linemen.
Tendered qualifying offers to Rich Miano, safety; Mike Flores, defensive end; and Tom McHale and Eric Floyd, offensive linemen.
College  COLLEGE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION -- Elected William E. Tucker chairman and C. William Byrne secretary-treasurer.
Named Warner Alford, Lavell Edwards, Daniel E. Ferritor, Bob Goin, Carl James, Ed Pastilong, and Paul L. Roach to the board or directors.


Competition and Telecommunications
To the Editor:
In "AT&amp;T, MCI, Sprint: Cozy Competitors" (Viewpoints, May 22), Kenneth G. Robinson would have us believe that the long-distance business isn't competitive and that the best hope for long-distance customers is competition from local phone companies.
Mr.
Robinson wants us to believe that the regional Bell operating companies, currently limited to local service, would bring down long-distance prices if only they could get into that business.
He has trouble coming to grips with the fact that long-distance prices have been falling and local rates have been rising since the businesses were separated 10 years ago.


Exotic and Refreshing Seafood Salads
ON a warm summer day, when you want to eat something light, a seafood salad is particularly refreshing.
One of my favorites is a classic spicy Thai salad made with shrimp, scallops and fish tossed in a dressing of green chilies and coriander and served with rice.
Sea scallops are good seared and served on thick slices of ripe tomato, topped with fried capers and onion rings, which add a crunchy texture.


Taking Steps to Preserve Westchester's Urban Forests
ON a flawless day last month, two men set out from Village Hall here on a forest expedition.
One was wearing a suit and tie and the other, in sports clothes, carried only a clipboard; their destination was not a remote wilderness but the streets of Scarsdale.
The two men -- Scott Pickup, an administrative assistant to the Village Manager here, and Robert W. Messenger, a forester with the State Department of Environmental Conservation in Wappingers Falls -- were engaged in an effort that has grown increasingly common in a county dense with towering old trees.
They were beginning a survey of the trees growing along Scarsdale's roads and byways, cataloguing what naturalists call the village's urban forest.


Iona Graduates With Guaranteed Jobs
TWENTY-SIX members of the Iona class of '94 who received their M.B.A.'s at commencement exercises at the college on May 21 have already had several good job offers.
The jobs are in Noyabrsk, an oil-producing city in western Siberia, where the recent Russian graduates, now armed with the latest business-management skills and their master's degrees, intend to apply the principles and dynamics of a market-driven economy to various enterprises in Russia.
Dr.
Charles F. O'Donnell, dean of the Hagan School of Business at the college, said that the group, made up of 17 men and 5 women, was the first to graduate from the innovative M.B.A. program that has been offered jointly by the Hagan School at Iona, the Plekhanov Academy, which is Moscow's leading management institute, and Sinerghia, a private management organization in Moscow.


Golden Venture's Tarnished Hopes; Most of Ship's Human Cargo, a Year Later, Is Still Confined
A year after jumping into the frigid waters off Queens from a tramp steamer named the Golden Venture, all that 19-year-old Li Huaqing has seen of the outside world is a single street and a pale corner of sky beyond the windows of his cell in lower Manhattan.
For hours, he has gazed at the people walking by or sitting in the restaurant across the street, imagining himself among them.


Again at the Top of the Bill: Peter Brook
PETER BROOK, ONETIME prodigy of the English-speaking theater, continues to go his own way with the commitment of a novice in an order that he himself founded, for which the rules are still being written.
Now 69, he has lost none of the passion, mind and sense of adventure that so astonished London nearly 50 years ago.
He remains, as Kenneth Tynan wrote of one of his early productions, "totally, uncompromisingly theatrical."
After an absence of 16 years, the Paris-based Mr.
Brook recently slipped back into London to set up shop at the Cottesloe Theater, the smallest of the three spaces in the Royal National Theater complex, for 18 performances of "The Man Who," "inspired by," without attempting to be an adaptation of, Oliver Sacks's best-selling book "The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat." The 100-minute presentation is a free-flowing series of case histories of the neurologically impaired, played without an intermission by four actors and one musician.
It's as small and plain as "The Mahabharata" is large and elaborate, and as amazing as a magic show.
Unlike the book, the stage variation has no commentator, no Oliver Sacks, to chat up the audience and tell it what to think.


U.S. Beats Mexico, Overcoming Home-Field 'Advantage'
This is everything you need to know about the diffident state of soccer in the United States: The Americans were set to play today before the largest crowd ever to watch the national team in this country, yet most fans were expected to cheer for Mexico, the opposition.
A sellout crowd of 80,000 was expected at the Rose Bowl for the final United States exhibition before its World Cup opener on June 18 against Switzerland.
But today, curiously, the Americans found themselves visitors in their own country.


SUNDAY, June 5, 1994; Mandela on the Net
A recent Internet posting of Nelson Mandela's inauguration address came from ancdip@worknet.apc.org, the address of the African National Congress, which has been on line since 1987.
The group sent information into South Africa on computer networks when it was in exile.
Tim Jenkin of the A.N.C. writes, "We feel pretty advanced when it comes to computer communications when we compare ourselves to the Government (which we are taking over)." The A.N.C. is also on Compuserve.
Its ID is 100014,344.


Ashes for King
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte has high praise for Billie Jean King ("Softening Sports' Culture Shock," The Times, May 6).
King is to be much admired for her accomplishments as an athlete and for her fight to achieve legitimacy for women's tennis.
But a full accounting of King's contributions to society should include her role in forging a long-term relationship between women's tennis and Virginia Slims cigarettes -- a relationship which she does not merely acknowledge as a marriage of necessity, but which she positively revels in.


Writers Who Were Really Dogs
"Rough, rough, rough!" So barks every exasperated biographer in pursuit of the buried bones of the 19th century's canine literati.
Most settle for mere table scraps and produce a dog's breakfast of well-chewed erudition and insight.
Others persist, terrierlike, until a prize like Bowser's "Man Writes Dog" (Westminster Press) is carried in one day and dropped beside one's Morris chair.
You are invited to devour the leftovers here presented.
Perhaps they do reek a bit of age.
Perhaps home videos like "Rex Takes a Bath" have supplanted these solemnly formal 19th-century figures and their hygienically disadvantaged 19th-century lives.
These seem, indeed, a different breed; in fact, diverse breeds.
But mind that somebody once loved each and every one of them.
And that their rich lives, lived out among the alpha figures of world literature, render our own comings and goings as so much figurative frolicking with so many metaphorical squeaky toys.
IGOT SUCHANITCH
"Ankle-biting cur!" Pushkin shoved him out for ingratitude.
Even kindly Chekhov finally tired of his yapping and passed him on to Dostoyevsky, who was driven to such despair by the ensuing domestic disruptions that he threw himself into writing "Crime and Punishment" "just to escape into a happier realm," he later confessed.
In the light of modern science, Suchanitch's didoes become understandable; he was almost certainly being driven half-mad by fleas.
Not that the German-bred mischief-maker was without charm: that rakishly unkempt silvery-gray mane, those big, sparkling brown eyes, a restless bounding energy -- amid the pride of solemn literary lions of 19th-century St.
Petersburg, he was a gay dog indeed.
Alas, his literary output amounted to one brilliant, anguished fusillade against cats, "Nyatski!" ("Hiss!"), before he was drawn to science and became involved in psychological experiments -- to his everlasting regret -- with one Ivan Petrovich Pavlov, M.D.
FIONA PURINA
Irish by descent, but adopted at a mere 8 weeks by a noble Italian family and raised in Rome, Fiona Purina was a creature of fierce territorial instincts who quickly made Roman society her jealous domain.
But no pampered lap dog, she.
Fiona was an agitator by the age of 6 and soon an outspoken essayist and pamphleteer against any and all abridgments of freedom for her and her kind.
Yet the haughty household princess spurned the advances of what she called "mongrels and strays" and became the mistress of Garibaldi's pet, Pepe, who was sleek as a greyhound.
But he was unable or unwilling to be monogamous; soon the fur flew, and the relationship ended in a veritable dogfight.
Purina failed to mellow with age.
Having impetuously wet King Umberto's pants leg, she was banished in disgrace to the countryside near Reggio Calabria.
There she whiled away her remaining years, dozing in the sun in the dooryard, dreaming of the glory that had been Rome.
SIR WAGSTAFF BARKER
Late-19th-century English letters owe Sir Wagstaff Barker much; it was he who once rescued the infant Chesterton from drowning in the Solent during a family picnic.
Sir Wagstaff never spoke of his mother -- by all accounts a classic bitch, for all her impeccable breeding -- and never knew his father.
Perhaps this explains a life of ceaseless wandering and almost suicidal athleticism.
Certainly, a robust physicality ("Muscular Canininity," Kipling called it) informed Barker's days and works.
Up and out into the nearby woodlands before sunrise to splash through marsh and fen until exhausted, Barker lived and breathed and ate and celebrated nature with animal gusto to the end of his days.
Indeed, his longtime companion, John Buchan, in whose household he was to become a permanent guest, thought he detected something obsessive in the big fellow's tireless pursuits.
"Birds and squirrels, squirrels and birds," he fulminated in his diary.
"He can think, he can dream, of nothing else." AMELIA UPLAND
"Her long, wet nose quivers so," wrote Queen Victoria to a daughter after an audience with the shy and reclusive Amelia Upland, "and her hair feels like a rug; yet even Rosebery  [ that is, the Earl of Rosebery, Prime Minister 1894-95 ]  is compelled to pat her on her head!" The severe bombazine dress in this undated portrait symbolizes Miss Amelia Upland's austere spinsterhood, for an operation at an early age had made all hopes of a family impossible.
Her long life was one ceaseless quest for affection, expressed in poems -- "Bath Day," "Comes the Cook," "A Rumor of Mange" -- that returned, again and again and yet again, to her beloved themes of family life in the Lake Country of her youth.
Miss Upland seldom left her cozy corner under the stairs in the house where she was born, except to go swimming, and yet seldom has one so retiring been so widely loved.
"About life she had an acute sensitivity," eulogized England's poet laureate upon her passing, "and her sense of smell was nothing to sneeze at, either." HECTOR LE CHIEN
Runt of a brawling Billancourt litter and cast out early to seek his own fate, Hector Le Chien soon made Montmartre his neighborhood and its fin de siecle boites and cafes his home.
"Mascot of the Demimonde," Zola called the pint-sized hobbledehoy.
Le Chien was a beggar and a thief, notorious for his raffish demeanor (he was never known to bathe), his bad breath and a habit of furiously scratching himself until the furniture rattled.
Small wonder that he was always in somebody's doghouse.
Yet among Montmartre's innumerable poets and troubadours, his was a unique voice: keening his agonies and needs in impromptu recitals in one smoky cafe or another, he could still a room.
Then, as the sympathy and praise engulfed him, Hector would invariably roll over onto his back, legs in the air, his mouth twisted into an otherworldly rictus of a grin.
The stale croissant, the heel of a baguette that inevitably followed, were sustenance.
For body and soul.
BONAR KENNELWORTH KERR
"Man has no better friend," warbled Thoreau.
"He gobbles his food," hissed Emily Dickinson.
"He spoke a language even I don't understand," harrumphed Edmund Wilson, whose massive critical surveys of American letters fail to so much as throw a bone to Bonar Kennelworth Kerr.
True, his poems today may scan like doggerel, but in the New England of more than a hundred years ago, literary luminaries from Boston to Concord would instantly lay their papers down whenever Kennelworth Kerr came calling.
His visits were memorable.
"That damnable animal Kennelworth comes by," huffed Longfellow, "jumping up on the maid at the mere sight of some mutton scraps, bolting his meal, then licking her hands and face in a disgusting excess of what some call affection but I call servility." His biographer, Kibble, speculates that it was Mark Twain who taught him to smoke cigars as a parlor trick.
Alas, it banished him thereafter from the salons and parlors of fastidious literary Boston, and his twilight years were spent snuffling for butts in the alleyways of Roxbury.


MAY 29-JUNE 4: Homing In on Shiites; Israelis Attack Guerrillas Deep Inside Lebanon
They may be talking about peace in the Middle East, but old habits die hard.
Israeli warplanes flew deep into Lebanon's Bekaa Valley last week, striking at a training base of the pro-Iranian Party of God and killing several dozen teen-age recruits as they slept.
The Muslim Shiite group said 26 of its guerrillas were killed, but other estimates ranged as high as 50.
Whatever the real figure, the Party of God suffered a powerful blow in what was one of the bloodiest Israeli strikes in recent years, and it vowed revenge beyond the barrages of Katyusha rockets that it lobbed, predictably and ineffectually, at northern Israeli towns.


Sound Bytes; The Fine Lines of Humor
FROM his studio overlooking the rocky coastline of Cape Ann in Rockport, Mass., Rich Tennant spends each day looking for yuks in what is considered an especially unfunny venue: the world of computers.
Mr.
Tennant never intended to become the industry's pre-eminent cartoonist -- creator of the widely published "Fifth Wave" series and the editorial cartoonist for Computerworld, a leading industry newspaper.
In the early 1980's, Mr.
Tennant was neither a successful artist nor a technologist.
Having failed at a variety of pursuits, from acting to catering to selling vacuum cleaners, the puckish Mr.
Tennant found himself unmotivated in the production department of Computerworld.
But his doodles mocking the oddities of computers, scribbled in the throes of boredom, caught the eye of an art director at the publication.


The Value of Laughter, Especially in Older Age
THE aging process may be nothing to laugh at, but growing older can provide rich opportunities for laughter.
This was the premise of a humor workshop held here recently that resembled nothing so much as a group therapy session.
It was led by Izzy Gesell, a writer and humorist from Northampton, Mass., who takes his calling so seriously that he has formed a company called Wide Angle Humor to spread the word.


Long, Graceful And Cool
As spring fades into summer, long dresses for day have become a major look after several years of evolving with the trendsetters.
The style provides a romantic escape from basic office suits and dresses.
The ankle-length hems recapture a dominant silhouette of the first part of the century.
The dresses come in solid colors, prints and stripes, often incorporating transparent layers of chiffon or lace.
Some are accompanied by lightweight jackets and sweaters. (One wearer, left, achieved an unusual look by adding a bralike sweater.) As the summer heat approaches, we're already seeing long dresses in linen and cotton.
The dresses are worn with sneakers, sandals with intricate straps and platform shoes, some with cork soles.
The acceptance of the long summer dress is just as widespread on the Upper East Side as it is in SoHo.


Mr. Kurtz -- He Back!
HEADHUNTER By Timothy Findley. 440 pp. New York: Crown Publishers. $23.


Wall Street; Old Pros Agree: It's Time to Get Out
IF you're a believer in the notion that experience is the best teacher, you might consider a quick call to your broker with instructions to sell.
Alternatively, if you prefer to ignore the signs, you might just leaf through to the Sports section, where the losses under discussion are somebody else's.
Investment newsletter writers with the longest track records are increasingly sour on the market.
The trend has been in the making for over a year, said Mark Hulbert, who evaluates the performance of 155 investment newsletter writers in his monthly Hulbert Financial Digest.
At this point, "almost all those who have been around for 20 years are bearish," he said.


HAVING IT BOTH WAYS
Reading John Steinbreder's About Men column "Having It Both Ways" (May 8), I felt much less alone.
He correctly points out that women often are opportunistic when it comes to acting in accordance with feminist rhetoric; many seem to feel it is their privilege to pick and choose.
He is wrong, however, when he closes his essay with the observation that this makes men wonder what women are really after.
Rather, it makes men -- especially those of us who have sustained connection with women with effort, sincerity and self-scrutiny -- very, very angry, and resigned, reluctantly, not to listen.
THEODORE C. BILILIES Worcester, Mass.


The Real Achievements Of a Community Board
To the Editor:
I am a colleague of Steven Vincent's on Community Board 3.
While he accurately describes the turmoil on our board, we differ on its causes.
I suspect that a large part of the problem has been the emergence of the political polemicist on the board, whose goal is to advance a political agenda at almost any cost and who takes glee in rubbing opponents' faces in the mud.


Laura Miller, Michael Koch
Laura Lee Miller, a cosmetics executive in New York, was married yesterday to Charles Michael Koch, a commercial real estate broker in Baltimore.
The Rev.
Andrew F. Kline performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in East Haddam, Conn.
Ms.
Miller is the vice president of marketing in the European designer-fragrances division of Cosmair Inc.
She graduated from Hood College.
She is a daughter of Ernest C. Miller of New York and the late Edith Porterfield O'Keefe.


Cuban Tourism
To the Editor: Your article mentions that United States citizens are unable to take advantage of Cuba's tourist attractions because of the three-decade-old embargo.
However, a coalition of groups called the Freedom to Travel Campaign has been challenging those restrictions.
In October, the group took 175 United States citizens to Cuba to excercise our constitutional right to travel.
The next trip will be June 23 to 30.


Renovation At Lundy's. Yes, Really.
For more than a decade, developers designed plans of every stripe -- from condominiums to restaurants -- for the site of the old Lundy's restaurant in Sheepshead Bay.
No plan ever made it past the paper stage.
Two weeks ago, however, construction crews began tearing down windows and clearing out debris.
If all goes according to plan, the landmark building will house a new Lundy's, stores and offices by next spring, said Donald Lentnek, a partner of Lundy's Management Corporation, the developer of the $3 million project.


Q. &amp; A.
Neighbors Battle Over Hot Air Q A narrow three-foot alley separates my house from my neighbor's house.
My neighbor, who owns the alley, adamantly objects to my ground-floor tenant's installing an air-conditioner in the living-room window facing the alley because the hot air emitted from this air-conditioner interferes with the neighbor's air space -- the alley.
The hot air, according to my neighbor, annoys her as she walks in the alley.
The air-conditioner does not protrude into the alley.
Can my neighbor legally prevent my tenant from installing this air-conditioner? . . .
Bernard Weill, Brooklyn A Most likely not, said Eric M. Davis, a Manhattan lawyer.


Alaska Air Cancels Russia and China Tours
Alaska Airlines has canceled its vacation tours to Russia and China because of recent warnings by the International Airline Passengers Association about unsafe conditions for travelers and because the airline had growing difficulties guaranteeing departures within Russia.
Love Holidays-Uniworld, (800) 733-7820, said that it continued to offer tours to and within the Russian Far East and that it was rebooking Alaska Airlines passengers.
Other companies that offer tours to eastern Russia include REI Adventures, (800) 622-2236.


Ann Betteridge and John M. Wheeler
Ann Betteridge, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Betteridge of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to John Michael Wheeler, the son of Mrs.
John H. Patton of Las Vegas, Nev., and Fred K. Wheeler of Lawrence, Kan.
The Rev.
Richard Anderson, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Water's Edge Inn in Westbrook, Conn.
Mrs.
Wheeler, 33, is a manager in the Chicago office of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm.
She graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Chicago.
Her father retired as a vice president of AT&amp;T in New York.


Sports of the Times; Omaha Beach Has a Golf Course Now
ON a short pier in Port-en-Bessin, France, on a soft summer afternoon, rock music was thumping in a cabaret.
Voices sang and laughed.
The beach itself was empty and silent.
Above the craggy cliffs of Normandy, beyond the sixth green of the sea nine at the Omaha Beach Golf Club, gray steps dropped into what seemed to be a narrow ditch in the grass and wild flowers.
Suddenly that ditch expanded into an abandoned Nazi bunker, its concrete cool and clammy, with the same spooky view of the English Channel that it had 50 years ago tomorrow when D-Day dawned.


Cowpoke Absurdism
GOD'S COUNTRY By Percival Everett. 219 pp. Boston:  Faber &amp; Faber. $21.95.


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1993 Christmas issue.
AFTER TET: The Bloodiest Year in Vietnam By Ronald H. Spector.
Vintage, $13.
Government policy following the 1968 Tet offensive.
THE AMERICAN WAY OF BIRTH By Jessica Mitford.
William Abrahams/Plume, $12.
Alternatives to high-tech hospital deliveries.
ANATOMY OF LOVE: The Mysteries of Mating, Marriage, and Why We Stray By Helen Fisher.
Fawcett Columbine, $12.50.
Biological answers to intriguing questions.
ANGELS &amp; INSECTS: Two Novellas By A. S. Byatt.
Vintage International, $12.
Re-creations of a bizarre Victorian universe.
ARCHITECTURE: The Natural and the Manmade By Vincent Scully.
St.
Martin's, $24.95.
The history of what we live in.
ARE YOU MINE?
By Abby Frucht.
Grove, $12.
A novel about a marriage and an unplanned pregnancy.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History By Robert D. Kaplan.
Vintage Departures, $12.
Tracing the roots of the ethnic hatreds in Bosnia.
BLACK DOGS By Ian McEwan.
Bantam, $7.95.
Fiction about mysticism and marital dissolution.
BOILING POINT: Democrats, Republicans, and the Decline of Middle-Class Prosperity By Kevin Phillips.
Harper Perennial, $13.
The economic consequences of the 1980's.
BONE By Fae Myenne Ng.
Harper Perennial, $11.
A novel about a death in a Chinese-American family.
THE CALL OF THE TOAD By Gunter Grass.
Translated by Ralph Manheim.
Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $10.95.
A satirical story about foreign relations, love and death.
THE CERTIFICATE By Isaac Bashevis Singer.
Translated by Leonard Wolf.
Plume, $10.
Fiction about a young Polish Jew and Palestine in 1922.
CHANCELLORSVILLE 1863: The Souls of the Brave By Ernest B. Furgurson.
Vintage Civil War Library, $14.
The most dramatic Confederate victory of the war.
CHICAGO LOOP By Paul Theroux.
Ivy, $5.99.
A novel about a businessman who finally lives out his murderous sexual fantasies.
THE COLLECTED STORIES By John McGahern.
Vintage International, $12.
Irish characters' harsh lives and their means of escape.
THE COLLECTED STORIES By William Trevor.
Penguin, $16.
Eighty-five works, most about the author's Ireland.
COME TO ME: Stories By Amy Bloom.
Harper Perennial, $10.
A collection about families in crisis.
COMPLEXITY: The Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and Chaos By M. Mitchell Waldrop.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $12.
The attempt to find the pattern behind all patterns.
COMPLEXITY: Life at the Edge of Chaos By Roger Lewin.
Collier/Macmillan, $10.
More on why order often triumphs over disorder.
CROSSED OVER: The True Story of the Houston Pickax Murders By Beverly Lowry.
Warner, $5.99.
The troubled lives of two young people, one a killer.
THE CRYSTAL DESERT: Summers in Antarctica By David G. Campbell.
Houghton Mifflin, $10.95.
Celebrating the species that thrive in extreme cold.
DAYS OF OBLIGATION: An Argument With My Mexican Father By Richard Rodriguez.
Penguin, $11.
Essays about embracing a Hispanic heritage.
DEAD MAN WALKING: An Eyewitness Account of the Death Penalty in the United States By Helen Prejean.
Vintage, $12.
A nun's reflections on why society shouldn't kill.
DRIVEN PATRIOT: The Life and Times of James Forrestal By Townsend Hoopes and Douglas Brinkley.
Vintage, $17.
A biography of the first Secretary of Defense.
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS By Alan Lightman.
Warner, $7.99.
Fables by a physicist about the passage of time.
THE ENGLISH PATIENT By Michael Ondaatje.
Vintage International, $11.
Fiction about lives that converge in an Italian hospital toward the end of World War II.
THE FATE OF THE ELEPHANT By Douglas H. Chadwick.
Sierra Club, $14.
The natural history and habitats of a species in peril.
FRAUD By Anita Brookner.
Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
A novel about a woman's emotional disintegration.
GENIE: A SCIENTIFIC TRAGEDY By Russ Rymer.
Harper Perennial, $10.
The true story of a horribly abused child.
GENIUS: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman By James Gleick.
Vintage, $14.
A biography of a Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
GIRL, INTERRUPTED By Susanna Kaysen.
Vintage, $10.
A memoir of adolescent years in a mental hospital.
GUNFIGHTER NATION: The Myth of the Frontier in Twentieth-Century America By Richard Slotkin.
Harper Perennial, $20.
How the Wild West has influenced our society.
HANNAH ARENDT -- KARL JASPERS: CORRESPONDENCE, 1926-1969 Edited by Lotte Kohler and Hans Saner.
Translated by Robert and Rita Kimber.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $19.95.
Letters from two scholars, commenting on their times.
A HARD ROAD TO GLORY: The African-American Athlete in Baseball The African-American Athlete in Boxing The African-American Athlete in Basketball The African-American Athlete in Football The African-American Athlete in Track &amp; Field By Arthur R. Ashe Jr. with Kip Branch, Ocania Chalk and Francis Harris.
Amistad Press, five volumes, $9.95 each.
A comprehensive history of black Americans in sports.
THE HEALER By Aharon Appelfeld.
Translated by Jeffrey M. Green.
Grove, $11.
A novel about assimilated Jews in prewar Vienna.
HENRY JAMES.
The Imagination of Genius: A Biography By Fred Kaplan.
Quill/Morrow, $15.
The expatriate author's hidden life.
HITLER AND STALIN: Parallel Lives By Alan Bullock.
Vintage, $20.
The kinship between two brutal dictators.
I, TITUBA, BLACK WITCH OF SALEM By Maryse Conde.
Translated by Richard Philcox.
One World/Ballantine, $10.
A novel about the colonial slave accused of sorcery.
THE INFINITE PLAN By Isabel Allende.
Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden.
Harper Perennial, $12.
Fiction about a barrio boyhood and a war-torn adult life.
INNER CIRCLES How America Changed the World: A Memoir By Alexander M. Haig Jr. with Charles McCarry.
Warner, $14.99.
Foreign policy from the cold war through the gulf war.
THE ISLAND: Three Tales By Gustaw Herling.
Translated by Ronald Strom.
Penguin, $9.95.
A Polish author's stories about his adopted land, Italy.
JESUS' SON: Stories By Denis Johnson.
Harper Perennial, $10.
Tales of addiction, narrated by a young drifter.
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES Volume One: Hopes Betrayed, 1883-1920 By Robert Skidelsky.
Penguin, $15.95.
The first book in a biography of the great economist.
THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS By Sherri Szeman.
Harper Perennial, $12.
A novel about the relationship between a Nazi commander and a Jewish prisoner.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire By David Remnick.
Vintage, $14.
A Pulitzer Prize-winning account of Communism's fall.
THE MALE CROSS-DRESSER SUPPORT GROUP By Tama Janowitz.
Washington Square/Pocket Books, $12.
Fiction about a childless New York woman and a waif.
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon By Patrick Marnham.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $14.95.
The psychology of the prolific Belgian-born novelist.
MARLENE DIETRICH By Maria Riva.
Ballantine, $14.
A biography of the actress, written by her daughter.
THE MARRIAGE OF CADMUS AND HARMONY By Roberto Calasso.
Translated by Tim Parks.
Vintage International, $13.
Greek mythology, recast and retold.
MURDOCH By William Shawcross.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $15.
The strategies and cunning of a media mogul.
MYSTERY RIDE By Robert Boswell.
Harper Perennial, $12.
A novel about a love that transcends divorce.
NEW AND SELECTED POEMS By Mary Oliver.
Beacon, $14.
A collection that won a 1992 National Book Award.
NOBODY NOWHERE: The Extraordinary Autobiography of an Autistic By Donna Williams.
Avon, $10.
A sufferer's fitful progress toward an independent life.
NOW YOU KNOW By Michael Frayn.
Penguin, $9.95.
Satire about the workings of a British lobbying group.
OPERATION SHYLOCK: A Confession By Philip Roth.
Vintage International, $12.
A novel about a writer, his impersonator and Israel.
ORIGINS RECONSIDERED: In Search of What Makes Us Human By Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin.
Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
Thoughts on evolution and the development of morality.
OUTERCOURSE: The Be-Dazzling Voyage By Mary Daly.
HarperSanFrancisco, $13.
A trip from Roman Catholicism to New Age feminism.
THE PASSION OF MICHEL FOUCAULT By James Miller.
Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
The parallels between the philosopher's life and work.
PAST IMPERFECT: French Intellectuals, 1944-1956 By Tony Judt.
University of California, $14.
How Sartre, Beauvoir et al. supported Stalin.
PIGS IN HEAVEN By Barbara Kingsolver.
Harper Perennial, $13.
A novel about a white woman threatened with the loss of her adopted Cherokee daughter.
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY By Paul Kennedy.
Vintage, $14.
Future challenges, economic and environmental.
THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories By Thom Jones.
Back Bay/Little, Brown, $9.95.
Characters fighting for their lives, in and out of the ring.
THE QUEEN'S THROAT: Opera, Homosexuality and the Mystery of Desire By Wayne Koestenbaum.
Vintage, $12.
Why and how gay men worship the opera.
RACE MATTERS By Cornel West.
Vintage, $9.
Essays on the relations between blacks and whites.
REMEMBERING DENNY By Calvin Trillin.
Warner, $9.99.
A memoir about a gay man's hidden life and suicide.
RIGHTEOUS DISCONTENT: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church, 1880-1920 By Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham.
Harvard University, $14.95.
How religious women helped foster racial progress.
THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE By T. Coraghessan Boyle.
Penguin, $10.95.
Characters at the Kellogg sanitarium in 1907.
SACRED HUNGER By Barry Unsworth.
Norton, $11.95.
A novel about an 18th-century utopia gone awry.
SCREENING HISTORY By Gore Vidal.
Harvard University, $9.95.
Reflections on politics and culture.
SECOND FRONT: Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War By John R. MacArthur.
University of California, $10.
The control of information during the war with Iraq.
THE SEVEN MOUNTAINS OF THOMAS MERTON By Michael Mott.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $17.95.
An account of the life of this Trappist monk and scholar.
SHYLOCK: A Legend and Its Legacy By John Gross.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $13.
The mythic stature of a literary character.
STELLA By Peter Wyden.
Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.
The story of a Jewish woman turned Nazi collaborator.
TALES OUT OF SCHOOL: Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education By Joseph A. Fernandez with John Underwood.
Back Bay/Little, Brown, $11.95.
A memoir by the former Chancellor of the New York City schools.
THINKING OUT LOUD: On the Personal, the Political, the Public and the Private By Anna Quindlen.
Fawcett Columbine, $12.
Essays from the author's Public &amp; Private column in The New York Times.
THIS LITTLE LIGHT OF MINE: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer By Kay Mills.
Plume, $12.95.
The biography of a civil rights heroine.
TURNING POINT: A Candidate, a State, and a Nation Come of Age By Jimmy Carter.
Times Books/Random House, $12.
The former President looks back on his first election.
UPON THIS ROCK: The Miracles of a Black Church By Samuel G. Freedman.
Harper Perennial, $12.
Finding hope in a poverty-ridden parish in Brooklyn.
VAN GOGH'S ROOM AT ARLES By Stanley Elkin.
Penguin, $10.95.
Novellas about ordinary folk, extraordinary situations.
VINDICATION By Frances Sherwood.
Penguin, $10.95.
A novelization of the life of Mary Wollstonecraft.
THE WORST OF TIMES By Patricia G. Miller.
Harper Perennial, $12.
An oral history of abortion before Roe v.
Wade.
LAUREL GRAEBER


European Reactors
To the Editor:
Regardless of the liability issue for United States companies proposing to rework or complete Eastern European reactors, the work must be done.
Safety must be addressed, but the failure to make these reactors operable will have devastating economic and environmental effects.
The countries are desperate for power, suffering periodic blackouts.
Oil-and coal-burning plants, which have blackened much of the landscape, are the alternative to nuclear electricity.


Extending the Olive Branch
On the shady side of the mountains where the Romans advanced in their conquest of Provence, the vivid colors of van Gogh are replaced by Cezanne greens and russet hues.
The ambient smell of brine and garlic fades, supplanted by a subtler, more herbaceous aroma.
As Waverley Root wrote in "The Food of France," inland Provence is not a place you fall in love with at first sight.
Rather, once you've been there a while, your affection becomes "unshakable."
Perhaps that is why we headed there last spring, driving north from the coast.
Ours had not been love at first sight (more like second or third), and we were still scaling the ladder between romance and domesticity.


GIULIANI IS MOVING TO LIMIT AWARDS WHEN CITY IS SUED
With juries finding New York City's pockets nearly bottomless, the Giuliani administration is moving to make it harder for people to sue the city.
This year, the city estimates it will pay out $262 million to settle lawsuits and other claims, a figure that has doubled in seven years.
That amount could be cut by a third, officials reckon, if Albany enacts a package of proposals that would put such cases in the hands of judges rather than juries and would limit awards for pain and suffering.


D-Day + 50 Years: Confusion Still Haunts the German Side
The 50th anniversary of the Allied landings in Normandy finds the Germans anguishing about the fact that their most important NATO partners are commemorating it without them.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl insists that he never asked to be invited and often says that he considers it appropriate for the Americans, British and Canadians to gather alone to pay tribute to their soldiers who died on the French beaches to liberate all Europeans, including Germans, from Nazi tyranny.


Rivkah Gutnick, Shmaya Krinsky
Rivkah Gutnick, a daughter of Rabbi and Mrs.
Joseph Gutnick of Melbourne, Australia, was married on Tuesday to Rabbi Shmaya Krinsky, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Yehuda Krinsky of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Chaim Gutnick, the bride's paternal grandfather, performed the ceremony in Stuyvesant Park in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Krinsky, 18, was until recently a teacher's aide at the Associated Beth Rivkah Schools in Brooklyn, of which she is a graduate.
Her father is the chairman of Great Central Mines in Melbourne and a philanthropist.


Room for Improvement
"The changes I made were subtle, but they brought about a radical change in feeling. The most significant step was to replaster and paint the walls from a soft gray-white to a pure white in a flat, matte finish. I installed clear glass in the skylights instead of opaque, and suddenly everything popped. I particularly love the crispness of the dark woods against the pristine walls.
"I also added splashes of texture and color, like the rug in the foyer, which is made up of many pieces of brightly colored sisal. The pillows on the sofa are now a creamy yellow on one side, a green stripe on the other. The whole place feels larger, and the art stands out without any special lighting. It really feels like an artist's studio."


Editors' Note
Articles in recent months in the New Jersey Weekly have reported on the workings of the Delaware River Port Authority (May 15), the Port Authority Transit Corporation (Feb. 27) and the South Jersey Port Corporation (last Nov. 21).


Joy Herfel, Thomas Cronin
Joy Ellen Herfel, the vice president of merchandising for Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York, was married yesterday to Thomas Garry Cronin, a marketing manager for the Perrier Group of America in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Walter A. Daly officiated at St.
Patrick's Roman Catholic Church in Bedford, N.Y.
The Rev.
Timothy P. Cronin, a cousin of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cronin received an associate degree from the Fashion Institute of Technology and a bachelor's degree from the State University College at Oneonta, N.Y.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Christian R. Herfel of New Fairfield, Conn.


Kaleen Kitay, Andrew Axelrad
Dr.
Kaleen Kitay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mel Kitay of Merrick, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Andrew Axelrad, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herb Axelrad of Riverdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Brooks Sussman is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Dr.
Kitay, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an intern in internal medicine at Thomas Jefferson Memorial Hospital in Philadelphia.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., as did her husband, and received her medical degree from the Health Science Center at Brooklyn.


Technology; Giving Human Eyesight to Machines
OUT of the corner of his eye, a young child notices a fluttering motion across a crowded room.
He turns his head to focus on the movement and recognizes his mother waving at him.
He toddles toward her, sidestepping other adults he passes along the way.
Easy enough for a toddler with normal eyesight.
But each of those seemingly simple tasks -- focusing, recognizing and using sight to maneuver -- is so complex that duplicating them with machines has remained one of the most challenging tasks in computer science.


Setting the Standards For War Pictures
AT FIRST GLANCE, "REPORTING the War: The Journalistic Coverage of World War II" at the National Portrait Gallery in Washington looks like the kind of show that only a World War II buff could love.
Lots for them to love here: documents, reading matter, fine photographs like W. Eugene Smith's from Saipan -- though most of the photographs are not shown to great advantage.
A few, like Margaret Bourke-White's spectacular view of an air raid on Moscow, are impressively enlarged, then cropped to fit into archways.
As for the visual material about reporters, it is by and large less interesting than their words, appropriately enough.
And memorabilia like the helmet of the writer Richard Tregaskis or Edward R. Murrow's microphone, though they may quicken many a pulse, will induce narcolepsy in some viewers.


On the Internet, Dissidents' Shots Heard 'Round the World
POLITICAL dissidents of all nationalities are discovering a homeland in the worldwide web of computer networks known as cyberspace.
Five years ago today, Chinese dissidents used facsimile machines to call world attention to the Government's violent crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square.
Today, many human rights activists are exploring an even more powerful medium, the computer web called the Internet, as a way of defying censorship.


Conservatives Choose Pataki for Governor
New York State's Conservative Party today overwhelmingly endorsed State Senator George E. Pataki for governor, moving a major step toward cementing a Republican-Conservative alliance against Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that has been four years in the making.
But in a sign of deep-seated discontent with Mr.
Pataki's positions on abortion and other social issues, the Conservatives failed to give him unanimous support.
Instead, Robert Relph, an insurance salesman from Watertown, mustered 28 percent of the delegates' votes, ensuring that he will be on the ballot to challenge Mr.
Pataki in the Sept. 13 Conservative primary.


Fish Story
WHITE SHARK By Peter Benchley. 324 pp. New York: Random House. $23.


Supporting Art, Music, Business
Honoring corporate and individual efforts.


How to Bridge the Gap Between Blooms
TRADITIONALLY, early June is the season that belongs to roses.
Their bouffant blooms are always a sight to see, for their bright colors as well as their shiny, showy foliage.
But spring has been cool thus far.
Rosebushes are behind schedule and have not had the chance to catch up.
Many are still putting out their full complement of foliage, while only a few of the earliest bushes have bloomed.
These early roses have not been top quality either.


They Announced the Invasion at the Polo Grounds on June 3
To the Editor:
On June 3, 50 years ago, I was a 21-year-old infantry second lieutenant, sitting at the Polo Grounds with my uncle, watching the New York Giants play the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Suddenly, the announcer blurted out on the public address system: "We interrupt this game to bring you a special announcement. The Allies have invaded France."
Pandemonium!
There were only 9,000 people at the Polo Grounds that day (according to your June 4, 1944, report of the game), but the roar that went up could have been from 90,000.
We all leaped to our feet, yelled, pounded the backs of total strangers and had mental images of the war's ending soon.
When the yelling subsided, the announcer said:


Exotic and Refreshing Seafood Salads
ON a warm summer day, when you want to eat something light, a seafood salad is particularly refreshing.
One of my favorites is a classic spicy Thai salad made with shrimp, scallops and fish tossed in a dressing of green chilies and coriander and served with rice.
Sea scallops are good seared and served on thick slices of ripe tomato, topped with fried capers and onion rings, which add a crunchy texture.


Greeley Statue Has People Heading in All Directions
HORACE GREELEY is remembered best for his advice, "Go west, young man." But a statue of the 19th-century newspaperman may be traveling about half a mile east, moved to make room for improvements on the Saw Mill River Parkway.
The proposal has set up a battle between conservators of the old and proponents of the new.
Chappaqua has long been proud of its famous resident.
Mr.
Greeley bought a farm here in 1853, and he lived on it from 1854 until he died in 1872.
The local high school, the main thoroughfare through town and several stores are named in his honor.


Susan E. Loeb, Andrew M. Zeitlin
Dr.
Susan Elizabeth Loeb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Loeb of Teaneck, N.J., is to be married today to Andrew Michael Zeitlin, the son of A. Jane Pitkoff of Allentown, Pa., and Dr.
Mark H. Zeitlin of Erie, Pa.
Rabbi Eric Gurvis is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emeth in Teaneck, N.J.
The bride, 25, graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received an M.D. from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
She is to begin a residency in obstetrics and gynecology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center later this month.


Royal Romp
DI AND I By Peter Lefcourt. 300 pp. New York: Random House. $20.


Bristol, R.I.
To the Editor: The best fish and chips in Bristol ("That Pleasant Blur Is Bristol," May 8) are at Aidan's Pub &amp; Grub. (Rhode Islanders are connoisseurs; fish and chips came to the state with the English mill workers and never left.) Aidan's is a cozy, convivial place just off Thames Street on John.
It offers good Irish music, a gratifying choice of ales and the best apple pie in town.
CAROL MCCABE  Bristol, R.I.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Leslie Stern and Andrew Abramowitz
Leslie Lynn Stern, a daughter of Ann and Alvin Stern of Ardsley, N.Y., is to be married today to Andrew Herbert Abramowitz, the son of Susan Isaacs and Elkan Abramowitz of Sands Point, L.I.
Rabbi Michael Klayman is to officiate at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Ms.
Stern, 23, is keeping her name.
She is an editorial assistant at G. P. Putnam's Sons, the publisher, in Manhattan.
She graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a lawyer in Ardsley.
Her mother is the circulation manager at The Enterprise, a weekly newspaper in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


Data Bank/May 29, 1994
Data Bank/May 29, 1994
New Orders for Durable Goods
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
0.1
0.7
-1.8
Gross Domestic Product
I Q'94
IV '93
III Q'94
1987 dollars, in percent
3.0
7.0
2.9
Weekly Jobless Claims
May 20
May 13
May 6
In thousands
366
367
382
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,903
1,918
1,921
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
May 27
May 20
May 13
Friday spot price, per barrel
$18.03
$18.92
$18.21
3-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.16
4.13
4.10
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.61
4.53
4.66
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.39
7.30
7.49


Elaine Svensson, Charles Wendel
Elaine Suzanne Svensson, the daughter of Eileen and Holger Svensson of Mount Kisco, N.Y., was married yesterday to Charles Bruce Wendel, the son of the late Roberta and Charles G. Wendel.
The Rev.
M.
Jennings Matheson performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in Great Barrington, Mass.


Unwelcome Small Business
When Edison Arms, a home for 100 low-income elderly people, opened in January on Decatur Avenue in Fordham-Bedford Park, there was no proper celebration.
It was too dangerous, said Nayda Alejandro, the manager.
The carloads of officials and other visitors, the toasts to success, would have to wait, she said, until the bodega across the street closes.
The bodega, at 2839 Decatur Avenue, has been the target of at least two police raids in the past year.
A boycott has been organized to stop drug sales reported in and around the store and the city has tried to close the place.


Shane Mitchell, Bronson Hager
Shane Anderson Mitchell, a daughter of James E. Mitchell of Newport, R.I., and the late Katherine S. Mitchell, was married yesterday to Bronson Quackenbush Hager, a son of Mrs.
Andrew D. Hart Jr. of New York and the late Peter A. Hager.
The Rev.
Alan J. Neale, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Ida Lewis Yacht Club in Newport.
Miss Mitchell, 36, is keeping her name.
She is a contributing editor at Interiors Magazine and a freelance writer in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College.
Her father is a marine painter.


Quite a Party. Of Course, It Rained.
Fifty years to the day, it rained again here, great drenching sheets that swept in from the Channel on gale winds, spoiling parades, scaring hairdos and grounding helicopters.
But unlike those running the show a half-century ago, when weather of almost exactly the same sort forced Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower to put off the invasion for another day, the generals stuck to the schedule this time around -- muddling on, as always in Britain when it comes to the weather, wrestling with their umbrellas in the wind and using squeegees to soak the water from the red carpet beside the royal yacht Britannia.


Hospital Owns It, but Pigeons Rule
More birds than people live in the largely abandoned, five-story apartment building at 423 East 75th Street.
Doors are broken, windows shattered, and pigeons coo and flutter about inside.
Only two apartments of the 18 are occupied.
An inches-thick gray crust of droppings blankets empty rooms and the cast-off possessions of former tenants: a tipped-over refrigerator, a pile of trash, a jumble of kitchen chairs, a sodden mattress next to a stove, layers of fallen plaster chips.
The stench is so bad that neighbors say they can't bear to open their windows.
On damp days, Helen Simon, a holdout at 423, says, she fights the odor with Pine-Sol and ammonia.


In America; Ticket Trust Busters
Pearl Jam is the intense Seattle-based band that has become the top rock act in the country.
Ticketmaster is the colossus of American ticket brokers, a tough, aggressive computerized service that sells more than $1 billion in sports and entertainment tickets annually.


It's Tough to Get Ghosts to Be Human on Stage
HOW DO YOU TEACH GHOSTS TO walk a stage?
How do you make concrete what can be understood only by the indirection of myth?
Since the publication of Maxine Hong Kingston's prize-winning memoir "The Woman Warrior" in 1976, writers and theaters have tried to tame its surrealism.
It has taken 18 years and a half-dozen false starts to put the book's ghosts into human form.


Commercial Property/The Photography District; Economics and Technology Alter a Neighborhood
ANYONE walking down West 20th Street between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas would swear the photography district is alive, well and booming.
There's Nancy Brown's studio and a couple of others at 6 West 20th Street.
And there are all the Duggal family operations -- the 24-hour photo processing lab, serving professional and retail clients, the finishing-touches operation, where photos are mounted, and soon there will be a Duggal digital imaging center, which will convert images on computer disks into posters, film or the like.


F.Y.I.
Hold the Pepper
Q.
In Yankee Stadium there is a sign, visible during televised games, that reads, "No Pepper Games Allowed." What is a pepper game, and why isn't it permitted?


Where It's All Happening
Explorers' Party, the Central Park zoo, May 23.


Smoke Signals
Aboard THE HIGHLANDER, on the Hudson River off Manhattan -- On May 25, Pat Buckley, New York's tallest reigning socialite, detached herself from her husband, the conservative columnist William F. Buckley Jr., sat by a window and started smoking.
She knew she didn't have to ask permission.
Mrs.
Buckley, after all, was on the Forbes company yacht to celebrate the publication of "Thank You for Smoking" (Random House), a satirical novel by her son, Christopher, about a man who defends the rights of smokers.
With Robert Forbes handing out cigars to smoking die-hards like Fran Lebowitz and P. J. O'Rourke, and a cigarette girl handing out promotional matches, it was a very pleasant moment for Mrs.
Buckley, who is as devoted to cigarettes as she is to fashion and charity.


Amy C. Eldridge, Steven Riccardelli
Amy Chappell Eldridge, the daughter of E. Bliss Eldridge of New York and the late Ruth Whitney Eldridge, was married yesterday to Steven Riccardelli, the son of Michael Riccardelli of Upper Montclair, N.J., and Valerie Griffin of Roseland, N.J.
The Rev.
Tony Ahlstrom performed the Congregational ceremony in East Hampton, L.I., at a private home rented for the occasion.


Remembering Normandy for D-Day
TOMORROW, the 50th anniversary of D-Day, the flag of Normandy will be flying in Locust Valley.
It will be in front of the nine area restaurants participating in Normandy Remembered, a series of events commemmorating the half-century anniversary of the invasion of Europe.
The restaurants, seven in Locust Valley, one in Oyster Bay and another in Glen Cove, have exchanged spring and summer menus with 10 Norman restaurants in the Ste.
Mere Eglise area.
The little French crossroads town was adopted by Locust Valley in 1947 as part of a rebuilding program called Operation Democracy.


Ms. von Arentschildt, Mr. Dawson
Anne Mary Louise von Arentschildt, the daughter of the late Baron and Baroness von Arentschildt, was married yesterday in New Canaan, Conn., to Michael Andrew Dawson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Dawson of Oberlin, Ohio.
The Rev.
Lidabell Pollard performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church of New Canaan.
Mrs.
Dawson, the granddaughter of Mrs.
Clinton DeBaun of Hilton Head Island, S.C., was until recently an external affairs associate at the Guggenheim Museum in New York.
She graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in art history from the Courtauld Institute.
Her father was a banker in Vienna.


Sheila K. Heen, John M. Richardson
Sheila Kaye Heen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Heen of Lincoln, Neb., was married last evening to John Morgan Richardson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Richardson of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Mark Brunott, an Evangelical Free Church minister, performed the ceremony in the garden of the bride's parents' house.
Ms.
Heen, 26, is keeping her name.
The couple are associates at the Harvard Negotiation Project, which promotes dispute resolution, in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride is also a consultant to the Conflict Management Group in Cambridge.
She graduated from Occidental College, and she and her husband received law degrees from Harvard University.


Little Power Play but a Lot of Glory for Rangers
Once more in this Stanley Cup final, the Rangers did not hurt themselves with a surprisingly unproductive power play.
Playing this evening without Sergei Zubov, the important point man who was forced to miss Game 3 because of a chest bruise suffered during Game 2, the Rangers were still able to take advantage of several decisive breaks to gain a 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game series despite their continuing inefficiency with a man advantage.


Teacher Found Slain Carrying Thousands
An elementary school teacher in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, was found dead Friday night in Queens, the police said yesterday, slumped inside his car with several thousand dollars in his pockets and gunshots to his head and chest.
The police identified the victim as Morris Binder, 52, of Mill Basin, Brooklyn.
Mr.
Binder, who had worked in the New York City public school system for more than 20 years, taught fourth grade at Public School 94, the police said.


HAVING IT BOTH WAYS
As I write my monthly support check, equal to 25 percent of my gross income, plus amounts for child care and medical expenses (knowing that I could and would care for my children as well as their mother does), I am sure I will hear many women say that "I just don't get it."


MAY 29-JUNE 4: As You Were; Judge Reinstates Gay Army Officer Who Was Asked and Told
Col.
Margarethe Cammermeyer is the stuff of recruiting posters.
A 26-year Army nurse who earned the Bronze Star in Vietnam, she was the Veterans Administration's Nurse of the Year in 1985.
But her career ended abruptly in 1992 after an investigator asked about her sexual orientation during a top-secret security clearance review, and she said she was a lesbian.
The Army dismissed Colonel Cammermeyer with an honorable discharge.


Off the Map
THE LOST AND FOUND And Other Stories.
By Anne Marsella. 198 pp.
New York: New York University Press.
Cloth, $25.
Paper, $10.95.


Susan E. Covitz, Henry Grossman
Susan Esther Covitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel D. Covitz of Brookline, Mass., is to be married today to Henry Levey Grossman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David E. Grossman of Newtown, Mass.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel is to officiate at the Back Bay Harvard Club in Boston.
The bride, 26, is the citywide coordinator for the Boston Initiative for Teen Pregnancy Prevention.
She graduated from Haverford College and has a master's degree in social work, administration and planning from Boston College.


Choreographing a Festival
The New York City Ballet spring gala featured three premieres and celebrated the Diamond Projectc.
The New York Theater, May 19


Diane Aldrich And Mark Haase
Diane Carter Aldrich, the daughter of Lorraine Aldrich of Manhattan and the late David Aldrich, is to be married today to Mark Samuel Haase, a son of Carol Haase of Longmeadow, Mass., and the late Lewis E. Haase.
Cantor William Walton is to officiate at the Inn at Mystic, Conn.


Down by the Riverside
Whatever the plans for the Hudson River waterfront -- which over 20 years have ranged from the grand to the glitzy -- they have always involved billions of dollars and countless arguments.
The park of New Yorkers' dreams may one day emerge on the site.
Meanwhile, don't hold your breath.
Now, however, you can stretch your legs along at least part of the waterfront without dodging trucks, taxis and the occasional concrete barrier.
June 8 marks the official opening of a 27-foot-wide bike/Rollerblade/pedestrian path that runs from Little West 12th Street to Morton Street now, and will reach Harrison Street in a few weeks and West 31st Street sometime next year.
The path, which so far has cost a mere $1.4 million in Federal highway and state funds, couldn't be plainer.
But who needs fancy when a great waterway is dancing practically at one's feet?


Hotels and Airlines Join in Award Programs
Two hotel chains have recently announced their participation in traveler award programs.
Wyndham Hotels and Resorts, American Airlines and Hertz have joined forces in "Wyndham Triple Upgrade." When members of American's AAdvantage frequent flier program stay at a Wyndham hotel or resort within 24 hours of a flight on American, American Eagle or other airline partner in American's frequent flier plan, they will receive an immediate upgrade to the best available room or suite.
They will also get certificates for future upgrades on American Airline flights and Hertz rental cars, and the hotel stay will earn double mileage (1,000 miles) from AAdvantage.
To qualify, guests must pay the regular, corporate or WynClub rate and stay between June 15 and Dec. 31.
Upgrade certificates are valid through Dec. 31, 1995.
AAdvantage members staying at a Wyndham hotel without traveling on a participating airline can still earn the 1,000 miles for their hotel stay, but are ineligible for the upgrades.
Wyndham operates hotels and resorts in the U.S., Bermuda and the Caribbean.
Information: (800) 996-3426.


The Big Top Returns To Connecticut Towns
SOME people may still remember how in the 1930's and 40's the long, gleaming silver train of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus would roll into railroad yards in June, usually in the middle of the night.
Later in the morning a circus parade, featuring animals in gilded-cage wagons and clowns, would wend its way through a town's business district bound for the circus grounds, generally a sprawling and vacant grassy expanse on its outskirts.
Traditionally Ringling Brothers would start its Connecticut run in Stamford and then make stops in Bridgeport, Waterbury, New Haven, New London, Hartford and some smaller towns, mostly for one-day, two-show stands.
Smaller circuses, such as King Brothers, Cole Brothers and the Clyde Beatty Circus, featuring the animal trainer, also visited the state often.
But on July 6, 1944, a fire swept through a tent crowded with more than 6,000 people during a Ringling Brothers matineee performance on a vacant city-owned lot on Barbour Stret in Hartford.
In all, 168 people were killed and more than 500 injured in the fire; its cause has never been determined.


Paying Just 3% Down
ONCE upon a time it seemed to take a king's ransom to make a down payment on a home.
No more.
This former barrier to home ownership is crumbling fast, with down payments of 5 or even 3 percent no longer confined to special situations or government programs.
Even affluent buyers -- many of whom were equally deterred by the proportionately higher down payment it took to buy a luxury home -- are being included in the relaxation.


Who Needs Designers?
Ross Bleckner's art opening at the Mary Boone gallery in SoHo in early May was just the sort of event where, only a few years ago, the first stirrings of fashion change might have been found.
Slipping drinks on the dewy back patio of Barolo afterward were James Truman, David Salle, Eric Fischl, Diane Von Furstenberg, Bianca Jagger, Julian Schnabel and Francesca Clemente, the heart of the invisible cultural world in which art meets fashion.
But as gllerygoers filed out through the drizzling rain, some passed an event a few blocks down that was more telling of fashion's new order, and of who's calling the shots.


Anti-Congress Candidate for Senate
He cast himself as a pugnacious outsider, intent on fighting the political establishment in Washington, with no interest at all in forging friendships or coalitions.
But now that Oliver L. North has won the Virginia Republican nomination for the United States Senate, defeating James C. Miller 3d today at the state party convention, political experts wonder how his obstreperous and conservative campaign themes will play while the party keeps searching for unifying themes after the divisive national convention of 1992.


MAY 29-JUNE 4: Harassed, Female and Navy; Lawyer Receives A Belated Apology
Ever since the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal, the Navy has been trying to patch up its tattered reputation as a military service hostile toward women.
It issued tough new rules.
It opened new jobs to women.
Last week Navy Secretary John H. Dalton personally tried to make amends, apologizing to Lieut.
Darlene Simmons, a promising Navy lawyer who Mr.
Dalton concluded was punished for accusing her boss of sexual harassment.


Paper Tigers -- and Real Ones
The conventional wisdom is that the Clinton Administration has horribly bungled its dealings with East Asia.
It has surrendered to China on human rights, it has zigged and zagged in its trade strategy with Japan, it has temporized with North Korea and in general it has illustrated what "policy disarray" means.
The reality is both better and worse.
It is better in that the Administration has avoided several pitfalls in Asia and has attained several significant goals.
It is worse in that the challenges soon to come from East Asia will involve issues more fundamental than one U.S.
President's operating style.


U.S. Virgin Islands Tighten Tourist Security
RESPONDING to a spate of recent attacks on tourists, including a pair of robberies that ended in shooting deaths, authorities in this American territory in the heart of the Caribbean are beefing up the police force, cracking down on juvenile crime, preparing a safety advisory and taking other measures intended to better protect the visitors on whom the islands' economy depends.
The new steps follow the killing in April of a 69-year-old tourist from San Diego in a botched nighttime robbery just a few blocks from the port on St.
Thomas where cruise ships dock daily with thousands of passengers on board.
In another incident late last year, an Italian visitor was shot to death in an apparent robbery attempt in downtown Christiansted, on the neighboring island of St.
Croix.
Overall, crimes against tourists in the Virgin Islands are infrequent, with only one hundredth of 1 percent of the two million people who visited the Virgin Islands last year reporting they were victims.


Munoz Paces Twins' Romp With 2 Homers, 7 R.B.I.
Twins 21, Tigers 7
Pedro Munoz homered twice and drove in a career-high seven runs yesterday as the Minnesota Twins tied team records for runs and hits with a 21-7 rout of the Detroit Tigers.


Pierce Thrives Under Right Kind of Attention
She has survived a childhood that would have broken the heart and spirit of a less ferocious young woman, survived an adolescence of threats and abuse and misogynistic treatment by the same man who promised the world he had fathered the next great tennis legend.
If Mary Pierce's journey to her first Grand Slam final has been fraught with trauma, her arrival here has at least been joyous.
Strolling through Montmartre, indulging in gourmet ice cream along the Champs Elysee, flashing a triumphant grin toward her mother and brother each time she pounds yet another forehand past a flummoxed opponent, Pierce is having the run of her life at this French Open.


POSTINGS: $40 Million Renovation on Madison Avenue; Upgrading From Trainees to Grandees
In a stroke of zoning legerdemain, a Manhattan developer plans to remove some ceilings to make double-height reception rooms in the Hampton House, a prewar hotel on Madison Avenue and 70th Street, and use the lost space to create a penthouse that might not otherwise be built.
By removing the ceilings and moving the rooftop mechanical equipment to the basement, Millennium Partners, the developer, hopes to qualify for approval from the city's Department of Buildings to build a 6,000-square-foot penthouse duplex.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
105.35
104.28
107.73
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6705
1.6435
1.6265
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3773
1.3866
1.2793
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5048
1.5105
1.5090
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$380.60
$384.20
$376.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Bette Kirschstein, Jonathan Gellman
Bette Helen Kirschstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Kirschstein of Chappaqua, N.Y., is to be married today to Jonathan Saul Gellman, a son of Naomi C. Gellman of New York and Maurice M. Gellman of Wantagh, L.I.
Rabbi Laurence Sebert is to perform the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
The bride, 37, will keep her name.
She is an assistant professor of English at Pace University in Pleasantville, N.Y.
She graduated from Cornell University, received a master's degree in English from Columbia University and a Ph.D. in English from the University of Delaware.


Amy J. Povich and David B. Agus
Amy Joyce Povich, a daughter of Mrs.
Philip Baskin of Pittsburgh and Maurice Povich of New York, was married at her father's house on Monday to Dr.
David Bernard Agus, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Zalman S. Agus of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Rabbi Isaac Furman performed the ceremony.
The bride is an actress in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Connecticut College and received a master's degree in acting from Yale University.
Her father is the host of "The Maury Povich Show," a syndicated television talk show.
Her paternal grandfather, Shirley Povich, is a sports columnist for The Washington Post.
Her stepfather, Mr.
Baskin, is a lawyer in Pittsburgh and her stepmother, Connie Chung, is the CBS News anchor.


'A Killer in the Eye'
It was the same look evident on the faces of those who did not commit such acts but nonetheless stood by and cheered the genocide on.
Most of the 200,000 who have come here to this refugee camp at Benaco fled out of terror, fearing revenge at the hands of the Tutsi guerrillas of the Rwandan Patriotic Front (R.P.F.), who have been fighting the Hutu Government of Rwanda since 1990.
But even now, in the din, smoke and squalor of the camp, a hardened glare will show itself from out of a tent or a crowd, sufficient to remind one of all that is murdering Rwanda.
And there are the facts: the mountain of machetes brought in by the mostly Hutu refugees and surrendered at the border; the admission by Hutus in the Kibungo district that they were forced to kill Tutsis or be killed themselves; the Red Cross medical worker in Benaco who was made to stand aside as Hutu killers invaded his Rwandan hospital and hacked his patients to death in their beds.
He has recognized one of those Hutus in the camp.


Many Car Owners Are Facing Tougher Tests for Autos' Emissions
FOR years now, tens of millions of car owners in smoggy cities have had to do their part for cleaner air by having an annual tailpipe emissions test.
But now many states are saying that is not enough, and the inspections are about to get a lot more thorough.
Under rules taking effect over the next few years in about seven metropolitan areas, particularly in the Northeast, owners of cars and light trucks will be taking their vehicles to centralized, high-technology inspection stations.
Designs will vary slightly from state to state, but all of the stations will have treadmills to measure how a car performs under a load, as opposed to the current emissions tests, which are done when the car is at idle.


Salary Cap Forces Jets to Cut Marshall
One year after splurging on unrestricted free agents, the Jets cited the constraints of the league-imposed salary cap as one of the reasons why they released the veteran defensive tackle Leonard Marshall, who was one of their most expensive acquisitions last season.
The other reason was that they didn't know when Marshall's fractured left forearm would heal.
Marshall, an 11-year veteran, signed a three-year, $4.5 million contract last season as he moved to the Jets from the Giants as an unrestricted free agent.
He joined Ronnie Lott as one of six unrestricted free agents the team signed for about $16 million.
With Marshall being released on Saturday, only Lott and tight end James Thornton remain from that group of unrestricted free agents, and Lott has agreed to trim about $400,000 from his 1994 contract.


Carefully Casual World of the 'Mother of the English Garden'
WHEN Gertrude Jekyll was born, in 1843, the sun was nearing its zenith over the British Empire and, when she died in 1932, it still had not set.
In other words, the "mother of the English garden," as Jekyll (pronounced JEE-kul) is called, lived during a golden age ruled by Victoria and statesmen like Gladstone and Disraeli and peopled with writers from Dickens to Kipling and Beatrix Potter.
The composer Elgar, and his counterpart in architecture, Edwin Lutyens, were also of the company.


Have the Serbs Left Gorazde? Muslims and U.N. Disagree
Six weeks after a NATO ultimatum expired, the top United Nations official in the Balkans said today that Serbian forces had finally left the center of the Muslim enclave of Gorazde, opening the way for stalled talks on a Bosnia-wide cease-fire to begin.
But the Muslim-led Bosnian Government contested the view of the official, Yasushi Akashi, saying its information indicated that armed Serbs were still within two miles of the center of Gorazde, in eastern Bosnia, which came under ferocious Serbian assault in April.


Groups and Individuals Share in Arts Grants
IN the all-important game of getting grants, support from the National Endowment for the Arts provides winning applicants with prestige as well as essential income.
An endowment grant, many arts groups and individual artists say, makes it easier to win subsequent fellowships and awards from the endowment itself and from other organizations.
The Washington-based endowment receives nearly 18,000 applications each year and with its $170 million budget supports the projects of about 4,000 artists working in fields ranging from theater and music to folk art and media arts.
Most of the larger arts institutions in Westchester County rely heavily on endowment grants; what is less known is that many individuals also receive substantial amounts for their work.


HAVING IT BOTH WAYS
The examples in your article record the guerrilla warfare tactics of today's so-called feminist movement.
Current divorce laws hold on to antiquated "sacred" escapes.
Such escapes destroy women's motivation for the true equality they say they want.
The practice of this double standard not only confuses and frustrates men; it does the same to women who play the game straight-up.
JANICE BOROWICZ New York, N.Y.


THE HANDY-DANDY EVOLUTION PROVER
Jonathan Weiner references the work of Peter and Rosemary Grant on the Galapagos island finches.
Their studies clearly show changes in physical characteristics (like beak size), in response to environmental forces (like floods and droughts).
However, this is simple natural selection.
True evolution must have novel genetic types.


To Pushkin, Add Borges, Soap Opera And Smut
THE Russian soul, that object of so much mystery and patriotic smugness, has undergone its own revolution.
These days, it finds solace more easily in Victoria Holt and Stephen King than in Dostoyevsky and Solzhenitsyn.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's glasnost eventually brought much banned or emigre literature out of the vaults, after fervid debates reaching to the Politburo.
But the collapse of the entire totalitarian system has produced an astounding variety of books in the stores and kiosks -- from Pushkin and Borges to a self-help guide on how to mix a sophisticated cocktail.


Susanne Hartenstine, Daniel Savage
Susanne Alicia Hartenstine, a daughter of Mrs.
Charles J. Hartenstine Jr. of Red Bank, N.J., and the late Mr.
Hartenstine, is to be married today to Daniel Alden Savage, a son of Mrs.
David Savage of New York and the late Mr.
Savage.
Donald McGrath, the town clerk of Cold Spring, N.Y., is to perform the ceremony at the Hudson House in Cold Spring.
Mrs.
Savage, 30, is the associate director of artists and repertory administration at Arista Records in New York.
She graduated from New York University.


Margo McGlade and Dave Epprecht
Last summer, at a barbecue in Darien, Conn., Margo McGlade and Dave Epprecht were among the last guests left on the lawn as the beer ran out and the sun began to set.
A week later, they went water-skiing together, and after a few months of dating, they began to feel a sense of urgency about getting married.
Their thinking was, "We're madly in love, let's just do it!"
In April, Mr.
Epprecht, 35, who sails Hobie Cats, drives a 1977 Toyota Land Cruiser and owns EPCO Direct Marketing Resources, mailing-list consultants in Norwalk, Conn., proposed to Ms.
McGlade, 36.
Not willing to wait long, they set the date for seven weeks later: May 14.


24th Precinct: A Conversation With the Commander


In New Canaan, Show of Winning Works at Silvermine Guild
IT is the 45th year for "Art of the Northeast U.S.A.," a contest at the Silvermine Guild Arts Center in New Canaan that routinely attracts 1,000 or more entries and that this year offered 20 prizes.
Diane Waldman, deputy director and senior curator of the Guggenheim Museum in Manhattan, was judge, finding for 103 artists.
As a prize giver, Ms.
Waldman did her best work bestowing the Silvermine Tavern Award on Jay Eisenberg's pastel of a blue Western-style shirt framed by two pairs of real cowboy boots.


Corrections
A picture on May 22 with a report about the wedding of Nancy Aline Kopans and Thomas Michael Johnson was published in error.
It showed Ellen Wade Curtis, whose wedding was reported on another page.


Or You Could Just Get the Car and Go West
SOMEWHERE south of Houston Street, someone snapped off my car's antenna.
I hope he falls on it.
Shopping for anything that costs less than $5,000 in this city is a hassle.
The clerks don't want to be bothered, especially if it is food, clothing or hardware.
So I headed west.
I'd been Out There before.
For almost 20 years, my prime, I lived in Closter, N.J., a town celebrated in these pages last week for a Grand Union filled with smiling check-out clerks, aisles as wide as the Grand Concourse, fruit and vegetables in colors seen only in Haitian art and every single dry cereal ever boxed.


All In the Hemisphere
The Americas Society honors George Bush, Waldorf-Astoria, May 25.


The Crabgrass Frontier Meets Old New York
When Bradlees decided to move into the old J. W. Mays building on 14th Street, Union Square business owners were jubilant.
But they worried that a typically suburban chain store would not blend in with the historic neighborhood's architecture.
So last winter the 14th Street/Union Square Business Improvement District approached Bradlees with a list of suggestions for the building, which has sat vacant since 1988 between Broadway and University Place.


Books for Vacation Reading
Art, Music &amp; Popular Culture
A CHEF'S TALE: A Memoir of Food, France and America.
By Pierre Franey with Richard Flaste and Bryan Miller. (Knopf, $25.) Assisted by two former colleagues at The New York Times, Mr.
Franey covers some 70 years of gustation in two countries in this mouthwatering memoir (nearly 40 percent recipes).


The Discreet Lap of the Bourgeoisie
THE BEAST IN THE BOUDOIR Petkeeping in Nineteenth-Century Paris.
By Kathleen Kete.
Illustrated. 200 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press. $30.


What If the Citadel Lost Its R.O.T.C. Funds?
To the Editor:
The Department of Justice has joined Shannon Faulkner's suit against the Citadel.
Might Justice consider enlisting the Department of the Army and requesting the Army to end its Reserve Officer Training Corps program at the Citadel and Virginia Military Institute as well?
A shrinking Army scarcely needs more second lieutenants, especially not from two all-male, not to say macho, institutions.
Second lieutenants have to work with and perhaps command units containing women and men, and all-male institutions are unlikely to provide appropriate training or experience.
Why sow the seeds for continuing trouble or allow behavior that must be unlearned?


TRAVEL
FOR centuries, travel writing possessed a stunningly simple rationale: the world was big, and almost no one ever got to see it.
Explorer, anthropologist, geography teacher and raconteur all in one, the travel writer was a paid importer of experience who delivered the exotic right to the home table, like so much tropical fruit in winter.
Norman Lewis's new book, AN EMPIRE OF THE EAST: Travels in Indonesia (John Macrae/Holt, $25), sets itself squarely in this generalist tradition.
Mr.
Lewis, an Englishman and seasoned travel writer, provides a classic narrative of manners, history and scenery from the land of more than 13,000 islands.
Here are "splendid" views of palm-fringed lagoons; of Sumatran rice paddies where storks and egrets delicately step; of sinister mangrove swamps and a mosque abandoned to the jungle.
Fruit bats, wings tied with twine, hang from roadside trees, sold to make a stew used as a cure for asthma. (Mr. Lewis gives this a miss, but makes up for it by breakfasting on chopped octopus and strawberries.) Of Indonesians, we learn that they will twist themselves into knots to avoid being the bearers of bad news; that their sense of humor tends to the slapstick; that traditional hunting rituals feature a shaman conjuring up the spirit of a monkey and apologizing for its imminent death.


SPOCK, BRAZELTON AND NOW . . . PENELOPE LEACH
Ah, Molly -- how old are you?
At 60, could I have been your mother?
One of those placid innocents yoked into reproduction before her discriminatory faculties developed?
Alas, women of "my" generation had children (or not), for complex reasons, even as they now do.
Bioclocks hammered earlier, perhaps -- no amniocentesis then.


For Cyclists, the Park Loop Is Riskier Without the Cars
To the Editor:
As a longtime cyclist who has looped the park several thousand times in the last decade, I agree with Kenneth Coughlin's sentiment in the May 15 Soapbox essay about Central Park, "Ban the Cars! A Historical Plea." But the fact is that the park loop now is more dangerous for cyclists during non-automotive hours than during hours when cars are permitted.


Gail Roboz, Dimitri Steinberg
Dr.
Gail Judith Roboz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John Roboz of Riverdale, the Bronx, is to be married today to Dimitri Benjamin Steinberg, the son of Judy DeLuca and Dr.
Arthur Steinberg, both of New York.
Rabbi Joseph Gelberman is to perform the ceremony at the Sleepy Hollow Country Club in Scarborough, N.Y.
The bride, 25, graduated summa cum laude from Yale University.
She received a medical degree last month from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in the Bronx, where her father is a professor of neoplastic diseases and her mother, Julia Roboz, is a laboratory administrative manager.


SUNDAY, June 5, 1994; Waterfalls -- Cool, Clear Waterfalls
There are newsletters about everything from colostomies to cats (see the item at right).
But amid the health advice, ideological tirades and stock analyses, one small newsletter offers a breath of fresh, misty, air -- the kind produced by a waterfall.
All the short articles in Falling Water are on waterfalls -- where to find them, how to protect them, what books to read about them.
Waterfalls are even touched by international strife.
A recent issue noted that as a minor consequence of war, Plitvice National Park in the former Yugoslavia, an area of spectacular falls, has been effectively closed to tourists.
Pending peace, the photo at right will have to do as a glimpse of what used to attract people to Yugoslavia.


Mexico Now Says Assassin Acted Alone
After insisting for weeks that the governing party's presidential candidate had been assassinated in a plot involving as many as seven men, Government investigators say they now believe that his killer probably acted alone.
In court documents submitted on Thursday and in a broadcast to the nation on Friday, the special prosecutor in the case acknowledged that investigators had found new evidence only against the young factory worker who confessed to shooting the candidate, Luis Donaldo Colosio, as he left a campaign rally in Tijuana on March 23.


Send In the Clowns
To the Editor:
"Ariadne auf Naxos" has been mentioned on your pages as the way of the future at the Met.
If so, perhaps it's time for me to relocate to some place where productions take their drama from the music and the text rather than try to create it where it does not exist.


New Issues: Prices Down, Buyers Scarce
FOR underwriters, the bad old days are back.
It was only a few months ago, before Alan Greenspan started doing his act, that underwriters were basking in the riches of underwriting fees.
Now, the monthly volume of new equity and debt issues has fallen to under $40 billion, less than a third of its peak level of $122 billion set last June, and is at the lowest level since January 1991, just before the success of the Gulf War helped set off the bull market.


Big Roller Coaster
The new Raptor ride at Cedar Point amusement park in Sandusky, Ohio, is billed as the tallest, fastest and steepest inverted roller coaster in the world.
The steel coaster, which uses ski-lift like chairs suspended from an overhead track, is 137 feet high, has a 45-degree, 119-foot drop and hits speeds of 57 miles an hour as it takes riders through a 100-foot-tall vertical loop, two inverted corkscrews and a zero-gravity roll, all in 2 minutes and 16 seconds.
Riders must be at least 54 inches tall to ride the Raptor.


Mabel R. Diaz And Carl Joslyn
Mabel Rachel Diaz, a daughter of Gladys and Jesus Diaz of the Bronx, was married yesterday to Carl Sheafe Joslyn, the son of Gunilla and Allen Joslyn of Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Manuel Cruz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Sacred Heart Cathedral in Newark.


The Big City; The Coffee Shop, Cornered
For those who worry about the fate of Greek coffee shops, the corner of 86th Street and Second Avenue is an ominous spot.
There stands the Viand Coffee Shop, fully equipped for the future with mauve plastic booths, blue Socrates-adorned takeout cups and a menu ranging from oatmeal to broiled lobster -- 14 pages with 439 selections, at last count.
But outside the plate glass windows, threats lie in all directions.
To the south is Seattle Bean, an espresso bar that seemed a harmless novelty when it opened early last year at 82d Street.
What hope did a few placid Oregonians in black T-shirts have against hyperactive Greeks in black vests at the Viand and at least a thousand other coffee shops in Manhattan?
But dozens of espresso bars have opened in the past year, and the Viand has been hit especially hard.
By spring it was surrounded.
Decaf cappuccini foam two blocks north, six doors east and directly west across Second Avenue.
These new espresso bars can't yet match the Viand's menu -- they don't offer a single lemon-meringue pie -- but they've already expanded into soup, sandwiches and pastries.
Suddenly there are hard choices for the locals.
Do they spend 60 cents for American coffee or $3.25 for a caffe latte grande?
Do they drink ordinary joe at the Viand's counter while admiring a display case of pies, or sip espresso a few feet down the block at Kaspar Art Space/ Coffee while studying landscape paintings representing an "acute awareness of life in a fin-de-siecle world full of complications."


Cuban Tourism
To the Editor: Your article mentions that United States citizens are unable to take advantage of Cuba's tourist attractions because of the three-decade-old embargo.
However, a coalition of groups called the Freedom to Travel Campaign has been challenging those restrictions.
In October, the group took 175 United States citizens to Cuba to excercise our constitutional right to travel.
The next trip will be June 23 to 30.


York College Dispute Pits Faculty Against President
One Friday afternoon this spring, as students streamed in and out of the York College cafeteria, a black Baptist minister moved among them and, with bullhorn in hand, shouted out the names of eight white male professors who he said were conducting a racially motivated campaign of "academic sedition" against Dr.
Josephine Davis, the college's first black president.
The incident was just one sign of how the debate over Dr.
Davis's leadership has become bitter and personal and public, to a point rarely seen on a college campus.
It has raised issues of race and sex, spilled into the surrounding community of Jamaica, Queens, and pitted some local black leaders against the largely white faculty.
So heightened have tensions become that the office of W. Ann Reynolds, Chancellor of the City University of New York, is trying to bring the two sides together, at the request of the faculty and staff.
A School's Stability
In recent months, faculty and staff members have complained that many senior staff members have quit, raising concern about the institution's stability, and that Dr.
Davis has made personnel decisions without the usual consultation with department faculty members.
The faculty caucus had considered a vote of censure against her after three years of escalating tension.
Instead, it decided to conduct an evaluation, a lesser step, but postponed it when the caucus president, Dr.
James Donald Wynne, was killed by a car on May 17.


SUNDAY, June 5, 1994; Picking Stocks by the Stars
For those who missed the recent conference on "Astrology and the Stock Market" in Manhattan (about 40 people attended), here are some tips from several of the hot sessions:
The Art of Timing: Combining Astrological Indicators -- Graham Bates, London financial astrologer.
"I'm worried and confused about the eclipses in November. I don't know what they're going to do, but I know they'll be important."


Honoring America's Fighters in Britain


Competition and Telecommunications
To the Editor:
When Vice President Gore summoned long-distance executives to the White House in May to discuss telecommunications policy, he did not end the invitations at AT&amp;T, MCI and Sprint.
I was at that meeting, along with representatives from other smaller long-distance companies and their trade associations.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Wholesale trade, April, percent change
1.3
0.6
Consumer credit, April, change, billions
$7.4
$6.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
362
365
Friday
Producer prices, May, percent change
-0.1
0.2
*4*This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Johnson Redbook report released
Thursday
Bundesbank Council meeting
*4*Elections for European Parliament


In Jazz, Drummers Take Up the Melody
WHAT can thump like a heartbeat, rumble like a thunderstorm and shake the seats in a concert hall with a mighty roar?
If the context is classical music, the answer is the timpani, the kettle drums that march briskly through Haydn symphonies, rage to the heavens in epics like Beethoven's Ninth Symphony and lend other works an exuberant joie de vivre.


Frank Gehry's American (Center) In Paris
FRANK GEHRY'S NEW BUILDING for the American Center in Paris is a love poem on the relationship between freedom and tradition.
And what could be more apt for an institution whose purpose is to strengthen the cultural bonds between France and the United States?
The venerable civilization that framed the Enlightenment and the modern nation founded on that framework: Gehry's design is at once a warm tribute to their common heritage and a confident demonstration of the creativity required to sustain it.
Americans embarrassed by the desperate martial mirth of Euro Disney can take pride in this building.
Witty, urbane, as affable as Gene Kelly, it shows that American architects can do more than exploit the Old World.
They can enrich it.


Rockets Relax, Watch and Prepare
The Houston Rockets ended their three-day beach-front retreat this afternoon with a rigorous workout and a spirited scrimmage that several players said resharpened an edge they may have lost during a lengthy layoff.
The Rockets have not played since last Tuesday, when they advanced to the National Basketball Association championship with a victory over Utah at the Summit.


Supporting Art, Music, Business
Honoring corporate and individual efforts.


How to Bridge the Gap Between Blooms
TRADITIONALLY, early June is the season that belongs to roses.
Their bouffant blooms are always a sight to see, for their bright colors as well as their shiny, showy foliage.
But spring has been cool thus far.
Rosebushes are behind schedule and have not had the chance to catch up.
Many are still putting out their full complement of foliage, while only a few of the earliest bushes have bloomed.
These early roses have not been top quality either.


Paul M. Wiener and Elizabeth Dobell
Elizabeth Dobell, the daughter of Byron Dobell of New York, is to be married today to Paul Michael Wiener, the son of Joel and Suzanne Wiener of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi David Lincoln is to perform the ceremony at the Century Association in New York.
Ms.
Dobell, 32, is keeping her name.
She is also the daughter of the late Ande R. Dobell and the stepdaughter of the late Elizabeth Rodgers Dobell.
The bride is an editorial researcher at The New Yorker magazine in Manhattan.
She graduated from Radcliffe College and Harvard Law School.


Whither the Mob? 12 Defendants Plead Poverty and Ask Court for Lawyers
In what experts on organized crime are citing as evidence of the Mafia's decline here, 12 of 24 men recently arraigned on racketeering charges declared themselves indigent and accepted court-appointed lawyers.
"This says to me it isn't much of a mob anymore," said Fred Martens, executive director of the Pennsylvania Crime Commission, which monitors organized crime.
"The mob isn't taking care of its underlings the way it used to. In the old days, if a mobster got arrested, the mob took care of his legal fees and his family if he went to jail. The crime family really isn't a family in Philadelphia anymore."


On Screen She Keeps Her Head (and the Guy)
IN "SPEED," THE ACTRESS SANDRA Bullock takes the driver's seat and commandeers a Los Angeles city bus.
In "Love Potion No. 9," she plays a research scientist.
In "Demolition Man," she shoots a bad guy.
While the lithe 27-year-old always gets the guy romantically, she has not yet had to play an empty-headed object of desire.


Clinton Says That North Korea Can Still Avoid U.N. Sanctions
Trying to ease the confrontation with North Korea over nuclear inspections, President Clinton said today that North Korea could still take action to avoid economic sanctions.
The President's remarks, at a joint news conference with Prime Minister John Major prior to the D-Day commemorations, came a day after North Korea said it would regard sanctions as a declaration of war.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  How did Peter Falk, Woody Allen and Madonna get those courtside Garden seats?
They called Monie Begley Feurey.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Fear and loathing on 57th Street: Is New York's premier shopping thoroughfare slouching toward L. A.?


COOKING
WHEN the team that created the popular Silver Palate cookbooks dissolved in acrimony not so long ago, it must have left many home cooks with an especially bitter taste.
Weren't Julee Rosso and Sheila Lukins the bubbliest couple of cooking cheerleaders ever to toss a salad?
All that effervescence, it seemed, turned as sour as a bad champagne cork, and Ms.
Rosso and Ms.
Lukins went their separate ways personally and professionally.
On her own, Ms.
Rosso produced a book last year, "Great Good Food," that had its defenders and also its vigorous critics, who said it didn't stand up in the test kitchen.
Ms.
Lukins, for her part, went solo about as emphatically as anyone could, by traveling the world in search of inspiration for a new book, her first without Ms.
Rosso. (In it, Ms. Lukins does allude to a previous partner, but not by name.)


Ellen Maker, Kenneth Malsky
Dr.
Ellen Judith Maker, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Maker of Closter, N.J., is to be married today to Kenneth Edward Malsky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Malsky of Belmont, Mass.
Rabbi Eileen Bogosian is to perform the ceremony at the Habitat Institute for the Environment in Belmont.
Dr.
Maker, 28, is a resident in internal medicine at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester, Mass.
She and the bridegroom graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and she received her M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


Worries at Waterside
When it opened in 1973, Waterside Plaza, four modernistic towers on a concrete platform jutting into the East River, was hailed as an architectural and engineering feat, an innovative creation of urban living space.
But time and the elements have taken their toll on the self-contained community of 1,470 apartments, shops and a health club.
Now, the development just below 30th Street needs major repairs to mend deterioration in that platform, its beams and pilings, as well as to the facade's distinctive square brown bricks.


A New Royal Museum In Amalienborg Palace
The Amalienborg Palace in Copenhagen, the official residence of Queen Margrethe II of Denmark, has turned 12 of its rooms into a royal museum.
Formerly private and official quarters occupied by the royal Glucksborg family, the rooms opened to the public this spring.
Among the most dazzling is the study of King Christian IX and Queen Louise, who ascended to the throne in 1863.
Their six children -- including King George I of Greece; Alexandra, who married Edward VII of England, and Dagmar, wife of Czar Alexander III of Russia -- sent elaborate gifts to their parents from their distant abodes.


HAVING IT BOTH WAYS
Steinbreder tries to prove that women, especially feminists, are trying to stack the deck when negotiating a divorce.
He carefully selects scenarios that support his point.
Unfortunately, he leaves out moves that are used by men to play all a woman's accomplishments against her.
He also fails to mention that for every woman who quits a job to enhance her financial dependency, there are several men who reduce their incomes to avoid child-support awards.
LINDA LAMEL South Orange, N.J.


No Relief in Sight: Mets Throw One Away in the Eighth
The way Dallas Green talks, it almost sounds as if he is making a choice among the lesser of his evils.
He picks up the bullpen phone, makes the call and hopes that the pitcher he picks will have decent stuff.
Green hopes, as he put it, that "the tide's changed, the moon is right or the coin came down on the other side."
There were no tide changes or perfect moons over Riverfront Stadium tonight.
In one horrific inning, three members of the Mets' bullpen combined to blow a three-run lead and then some, allowing the Cincinnati Reds to seize an 8-5 comeback victory, their first over New York in five meetings this season.


Mary C. Bennett, John A. Rieger
Mary Catherine Bennett, a daughter of Dr.
Matthew and Dr.
Genevieve Bennett of Garden City, L.I., was married there yesterday to John Andrew Rieger, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard Rieger of Garden City.
The Rev.
Richard F. Delaney performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church.
Mrs.
Rieger, 31, is an associate at Sheft &amp; Sheft, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Hofstra University, from which she also received a law degree.
Her father is the chairman of the department of pathology and laboratories at St.
John's Episcopal Hospital in Smithtown, L.I.
Her mother is a psychiatrist in Central Islip, L.I.


Exit Soprano, Enter Ballerina
To the Editor:
When discussing the Metropolitan Opera under Gatti-Casazza  [ "Easy Does It: The Met Edges Into the Future," May 15 ] , Alex Ross writes that "native operas were commissioned from Howard Hanson, Deems Taylor, John Alden Carpenter, Walter Damrosch and composers of less renown. Unfortunately, they all immediately sank from sight."


Equipment, Heavy and Specialized, at Rental Stores
RENTAL stores offer a myriad of home-repair tools and equipment.
Like lending libraries, they are a good source for specialized home-maintenance and remodeling implements that can be too expensive or used too infrequently to justify buying.
Rental stores are increasingly catering to homeowners instead of to contractors and other professionals.
Choose a store that is well established and can show proof of liability insurance.
Membership in an industry group like the American Rental Association is a good sign.
That trade organization provides training materials, guidelines, news and other services to owners of rental businesses.


Eric Cortell and Julia Wong
Dr.
Julia Shomei Wong and Dr.
Eric Daniel Cortell, physicians in Boston, were married last evening.
Rabbi Emily Korzenik officiated at Estherwood in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
The couple graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received their M.D. degrees from Tufts University.
Dr.
Wong is a resident in radiation oncology at the Harvard Joint Center for Radiation Therapy.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ting-Chao Wong of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Her father, who is retired, was an obstetrician and gynecologist at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx.
Her mother, Agnes Wong, teaches piano in Scarsdale.


Amy L. Miller, Guy P. Tully
Amy Leigh Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter N. Miller of Wyckoff, N.J., was married yesterday to to Guy Paul Tully, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Tully of Merrillville, Ind.
The Rev.
Dwight Juliani performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Madison, Conn.
Mrs.
Tully, 28, is the promotion manager for the Boston Ballet.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is a senior vice president, in Basking Ridge, N.J., for Prudential Insurance.


Joy H. Silberman, Michael Solomon
Joy Harriet Silberman and Michael Dean Solomon, assistant district attorneys in Manhattan, were married last evening in Baltimore.
Rabbi Mark Loeb officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Sandra and Eugene Silberman.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/Honda Accord Station Wagon; Good for People, But Not for Bureaus
TWO of my lesser charms, or so says my wife, are that I am a pack rat and that I am occasionally lazy.
As usual, she is half right.
It is true that the last thing I threw away was a water bill from 1959.
But I am lazy on more than just an occasional basis, a fact reflected by the bottles and cans that fill one of the rooms in our basement.


James Merlis and Jennifer Richardson
Jennifer Joan Richardson, a daughter of Drs.
Robert and Betty Richardson of Ithaca, N.Y., was married there yesterday to James Duncan Merlis, a son of George and Susan Merlis of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Andrew Buechele performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in Sage Chapel at Cornell University.
The bride, 29, is an assistant to the president of Crescentera, a nonprofit human-rights and environmental organization in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in creative writing from Columbia University.
Her father is the Floyd R. Newman Professor of Physics at Cornell and the director of the university's Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics.
Her mother is a physics lecturer at Cornell.


Stone Temple Pilots, Rock Weather Vanes
DESPAIR, PARANOIA, cynicism, resentment, mourning.
Fuzz-toned guitars, pounding tom-toms, an anguished baritone voice intoning lines like "Breathing is the hardest thing to do." With sentiments like that, the muscular self-pity of grunge can be only a deflating snicker away from self-parody, and Stone Temple Pilots are just about begging for that snicker.
Looking to Seattle from their southern California base, Stone Temple Pilots jumped on the grunge bandwagon with their 1992 album "Core," a Pearl Jam imitation that sold more than 3.5 million copies.
On their second album, "Purple" (Atlantic 82607; CD, cassette and limited edition LP), Stone Temple Pilots are still tagging along behind their northern mentors.
Scott Weiland, the band's songwriter and lead singer, is a vocal chameleon and a cagey borrower, but he doesn't exactly cover his tracks.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday showing the corporate holdings of Rupert Murdoch's company, News Corporation Ltd., referred incorrectly to five units.
Barnes &amp; Noble Inc. was never owned by Mr.
Murdoch or any of his companies.
The San Antonio Express-News was sold by News Corporation in 1992.
Fox Television Stations has 184 affiliates, not 140.
The Herald &amp; Weekly Times Ltd. is in Victoria, Australia, not London.
Ansett Transport Industries Ltd. is an airline, not an air cargo carrier.


Man in the News; Gyula Horn, Recycled Communist, to Lead Hungary
After a stunning comeback in elections last weekend, Hungary's victorious Socialist Party today designated its leader, Gyula Horn, a tough politician with deep roots in the Communist era, as its choice for Prime Minister.
The vote by the former Communist party assures that Mr.
Horn, 61, will become Hungary's next Prime Minister after a new Parliament convenes in early July.
The Socialists captured 209 of 386 parliamentary seats in the final voting last Sunday, with most attributing the result to discontent with free-market policies.


Women's Final Off Till Today
As unrelenting as Mary Pierce's forehand missiles, as steady as Arantxa Sanchez Vicario's topspin, the weather delivered a knockout blow to the women's French Open final this afternoon.
After a four-hour wait at Roland Garros, the faithful fans wound up watching just 17 minutes of tennis tonight before another blast of cold showers halted play for good.
Pierce, the 19-year-old Grand Slam final debutante, was leading by 2-1, and held a break point in the fourth game, when play was postponed until noon Sunday.


Liberals Endorse Cuomo but Reject Koppell for Attorney General
The small but politically influential Liberal Party acclaimed Mario M. Cuomo as its nominee for governor yesterday, and Mr.
Cuomo used the occasion for another attack on his probable Republican challengers, saying they have neither the experience nor the independence to run the state.
At the Liberal convention in Manhattan, Mr.
Cuomo, without mentioning names, repeated charges he made at the Democratic state convention last week that the Republican designee, State Senator George E. Pataki, was a creation of the party's leaders, especially of United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.


Chinatown? Little Italy? No, Portuguese
MANHATTAN has Little Italy and Chinatown, but Long Island also has ethnic neighborhoods.
One of the best known is the Portuguese community in Mineola.
There, in bustling storefront bakeries, restaurants and wine shops, crowds from around the Island arrive for a taste of Portugal.
Little Portugal Restaurant is far from a storefront, but it, too, draws visitors as well as diners from the community.
The large stucco building on Mineola Boulevard is divided into a smoky working-man's bar, with bare wood tables and a television set perpetually tuned to sports events, and a separate dining room with white tablecloths, tuxedoed waiters and fresh flowers.


In Other Words . . .
The new Random House Historical Dictionary of American Slang has to be the only guide to the English language ever published to quote Public Enemy and "The Valley Girl Handbook" more often than Henry James or the Bible.
It is not a book for literary bluenoses or the politically correct.
An epochal compendium of colloquial, profane, underground and just plain informal expressions, the book is demonstrating how, in the last 300 years, Americans have concocted their own shadow language, with thousands of synonyms for standard words and phrases that can be collected under the umbrella of slang.


Scuba Deaths Prompt Calls For Oversight
It was the recent death of a German scuba diver, his oxygen tank filled with carbon monoxide, that finally raised a red flag here in the Florida Keys.
The diver, Peter Klauf, was the fourth scuba diver to die within three months while swimming the nearby reefs, but with no laws regulating the underwater sport, the sheriff had no basis to investigate possible negligence, and the medical examiner could do nothing more than file an autopsy report.
Nationwide, about 90 people die each year while scuba diving.
But unlike other risky pastimes like flying planes and bungee jumping, it is policed only by private industry associations.


MAY 29-JUNE 4: Endless Trials; Jurors Decide Against Assessing More Damages
As divided as the city it represented, a jury last week settled on an uneasy compromise in the civil suit of Rodney G. King.
A month after ordering the city to pay $3.8 million in compensatory damages, it refused to assess punitive damages against the officers who beat him.
Reporters trumpeted an end to a legal drama that has dragged an exhausted city through two criminal trials, a riot and a painful self-assessment.
"I would like it to end," Mr.
King said.
"No one wins here in this type of situation."


In Hartford, 'Present Laughter'
IT isn't overloading Noel Coward's "Present Laughter" to perceive its magnetic central force, Garry Essendine, as a classic variation of a paranoiac: a man who knows the real truth.
All about him the sharks insinuate themselves upon his truly good nature, waste his valuable time and exploit his celebrity.
Since Essendine happens to be a romantic matinee idol of devastating allure and charm, he is, as well, the object of one ruthless seduction plot after another.
When Essendine sighs: "The whole world's against me," you are supposed to believe it.
You are also supposed to accept that he is "fundamentally honest under the glittering veneer." "Present Laughter" is a frivolous comedy of substance.


JANET RENO'S CHOICE
The most disturbing aspect of Janet Reno's performance as Attorney General is her tireless speechmaking on behalf of "family values" ("Janet Reno's Choice" by Lincoln Caplan, May 15).
It may or may not be desirable for mothers to remain at home to supervise their children.
But more than half of American women work outside the home, and that's not going to change.
To urge returning to the kitchen as a panacea for adolescent violence and criminality is wishful thinking.
EPHRAIM A. LEWIS New York, N.Y.


Rostenkowski Picks Ex-Prosecutor as His Lawyer
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, who dropped Robert S. Bennett on Thursday as his lawyer, today chose a former United States Attorney in Chicago, Dan K. Webb, to defend him against corruption charges.
The appointment of Mr.
Webb was announced by Mr.
Rostenkowski's office late this afternoon in a message sent to reporters by fax.


Correction
An entry in the Residential Resales listing last Sunday, for a co-op at 3671 Hudson Manor Terrace in the Bronx, misidentified the broker in the sale.
It was Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates.


Sarah S. Brown, Mark S. Adams
Sarah Stebbins Brown, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Duncan Walker Brown of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Mark Squire Adams, a son of Mrs.
Virginia Adams of Alexandria, Va., and the late Horace B. Adams.
The Rev.
Clinton C. Glenn officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Brown-Adams, 24, is a receptionist for the Boston Consulting Group in Manhattan, a management consulting firm.
She graduated from New York University.


Public Service Is Rewarded
Rockefeller Institute honors Gerald R. Ford, Waldorf-Astoria, May 24.


Elizabeth Garrell, Michael Bacon
Elizabeth Sara Garrell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley B. Garrell of Fairfield, Conn., is to be married today to Michael Francis Bacon, the son of Dr.
Janet A. Novotny of Washington and Michael H. Bacon of St.
Louis.
Judge Frederick A. Freedman of the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of Connecticut is to officiate at Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn.
The bride, 23, is a special-events associate at the New York Public Library.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College.


From the Guys in the Typing Pool
To the Editor:
The real reason women now predominate in the secretarial field is that women accepted salaries that were half what secretaries are worth.
It simply became more cost effective to exploit women, and that undercut salaries for both men and women.


Hospital Reflects Ideas on Criminally Insane
Nestled in a valley 55 miles north of New York City, the Mid-Hudson Psychiatric Institute stands as the emblem of a quarter-century of court decisions that place the dangerous mentally ill outside the prison system.
Mid-Hudson is the hospital for the dangerously criminally insane from which Herbert Arnold and John Casablanca -- who together have been linked to eight killings, two rapes and two kidnappings over the last three decades -- escaped on May 27.


Corrections
A highlight entry in the Television section today about a musical tribute to D-Day aboard the Queen Elizabeth 2, on Channel 13, is duplicated erroneously in some copies.
The program is scheduled for tomorrow at 1:30 and 8 P.M., not for today.


Policing the 24th: Conversation With the New Commander
On the blustery winter day when he took over as the commander of the 24th Precinct, Capt.
John T. McDermott received a phone call that he took as a sign.
"I think it was the first call I took that day," he recalled.
"It was a very frustrated public school principal who said, 'I really have a serious problem.' " The problem was an entrenched crack market around Public School 165 on 109th Street, with young students being intimidated and threatened.


Q and A
Pullout From Berlin
Q.
As a former serviceman I am very interested in attending the ceremonies in Berlin this year for the departure of the Allied and Russian troops.
Can you give me any information about them? -- Peter R. Aikman, Pacific Grove, Calif.


Update
Note to readers: The Choice Tables column on April 17 described five restaurants in Miami, including An American Place Waterside.
That restaurant, in the Jockey Club, opened in late January and closed a day after the column appeared.


Like Being There, Almost
Madison Square Garden is seeing a lot of action in June involving the Rangers and Knicks.
There was no game in town last night, but more than 5,000 fans gathered in the Garden and caused enough of a stir to sway the 1939-40 Stanley Cup banner in the rafters.
The Garden provided die-hard fans a view of Game 3 between the Rangers and Canucks in Vancouver on a large television screen.
Admission was free for anyone bearing a ticket from Games 1 or 2 of the finals; 4,600 fans paid $5 apiece to soak up the atmosphere, while watching their favorite team.
Part of the proceeds from ticket and concession sales will be donated to the National Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse and the C. J. Foundation for S.I.D.S. (sudden infant death syndrome).


Brown Crew Breezes And Sweep 3 Events
Brown accomplished another sweep today at the Intercollegiate Rowing Association regatta as the freshman, second varsity and varsity eights all won.
And rather easily.
"Our best race of the year by far," said Raj Shah, a coxswain for the men's varsity eight.


Profile; Dues Paid, a Hollywood Upstart Joins the Mogul Set
Robert Shaye is an improbable movie mogul.
His long hair seems a relic of the 1960's, when he hung out in Greenwich Village.
His casual clothes are not the de rigueur Armani worn by Hollywood hot-shots.
Instead of driving the standard Mercedes or Jeep, Mr.
Shaye pulls into restaurant lots in his 1972 Oldsmobile convertible.
And if all that doesn't set him apart from the pack, look at his background.
He started his film career organizing the film-stills archives at the Museum of Modern Art in New York and then began distributing arcane Czech films and hip underground movies to college campuses.


The Real Achievements Of a Community Board
To the Editor:
Steven Vincent blames Lower East Side social service and housing organizations for keeping the neighborhood poor.
It is indeed true that these organizations, by developing affordable housing, defending tenants and providing supportive services to our community, have helped to preserve the traditional low- and moderate-income nature of the area, despite market forces that, in the last decade, have driven asking rents from less than $250 a month for a studio to $900.
This used to be called community preservation.


Courtesy Code Prompts Suit In Pasadena
Two years ago, a new Councilman began making his colleagues uncomfortable with what they saw as an inappropriately blunt style of politicking.
Their solution: a courtesy code requiring City Council members to be fair and cooperative or face censure.
But things became only more raucous.


Masterful Meltdown
"She does a masterful job of analyzing the evolution of the international monetary system," Library Journal writes of Judy Shelton's "Money Meltdown: Restoring Order to the Global Currency System."
The word the reviewing librarian intended is masterly, "expert, with the skill of a master"; masterful, according to Webster's New World Dictionary, Third College Edition, means "fond of acting the part of a master; domineering; imperious." The Simon &amp; Schuster lexicographer includes, as a second sense, "having or showing the ability of a master; expert; skillful; masterly." It adds ominously to this second, sloppy sense: "usage objected to by some."


Little Power Play but a Lot of Glory for Rangers
Once more in this Stanley Cup final, the Rangers did not hurt themselves with a surprisingly unproductive power play.
Playing this evening without Sergei Zubov, the important point man who was forced to miss Game 3 because of a chest bruise suffered during Game 2, the Rangers were still able to take advantage of several decisive breaks to gain a 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game series despite their continuing inefficiency with a man advantage.


Wall Street; Microsoft Seems to Be Making Everybody Happy
INSIDERS have been doing scattered selling of Microsoft stock and outsiders couldn't be happier about buying.
Standard &amp; Poor's said on May 12 that it would add Microsoft to its S.&amp; P. 500 index of large stocks.
Shares of the software company have since moved 13 percent higher, to close at $52.875 on Friday.
Institutional investors frequently use investment programs in which they simply allocate their money among shares of a well-known index, and the S.&amp; P. 500 is by far the most popular index in that game.
Thus, the movement of big money to Microsoft.
Officers, directors, and affiliated persons who are deemed "insiders" by the Securities and Exchange Commission, meanwhile, have been filing with the S.E.C. to disclose that they have been sellers of Microsoft.


A Vintage Practice
To the Editor:
In Janet Roach's article on May-December screen romances, "What's Unusual About These Pictures?"  [ May 22 ] , not only are a few swallows asked to make a summer but history is either ignored or distorted to the same end.


First Atys, Now Jason, In a Periwig
AT THE BROOKLYN ACADEMY OF MUSIC recently, Jason, the mythic winner of the Golden Fleece and leader of the Argonauts, seemed uncannily similar to Atys, a lesser-known associate of river nymphs and the lover of a fertility goddess, who had appeared in the hall two years earlier.
Both were characters in stunning productions of French Baroque opera directed by Jean-Marie Villegier and conducted by William Christie.
And both, for all their differences, wore costumes and wigs of 17th-century French nobility, and looked as if they had stepped out of the court of Louis XIV.
This plumage was not precisely what the composers, Jean-Baptiste Lully (in "Atys") and Marc-Antoine Charpentier (in "Medee"), had in mind.
Nor did Mr.
Villegier heed the librettists' calls for scenic mountains, waterfalls and gardens.
"Atys" took place in a windowless marble-paneled room at Versailles; "Medee," in a brick church on a French nobleman's estate.
But these radical restagings were not typical examples of directorial creativity.
They created brilliant counterpoint to the supple performances, perhaps permanently changing the way these operas are thought about by those lucky enough to have been present.
The genius lay in recognizing that both works are inseparable from the court of the Sun King, where they had their origins.
"Atys" was first performed in 1676, "Medee" in 1693.


Letko Wins Central Park Road Race
With a field of 6,500 led by premier runners from four continents, including the Kenyan defending champion and the fastest women from Portugal and Brazil, the Advil Mini Marathon turned into an epic international duel through Central Park yesterday.
Tecla Loroupe improved her 1993 winning time in the 10-kilometer race, and Conceicao Ferreira and Carmen de Oliveira did better than that.
But when the world's oldest and most prestigious women's road race was over, Portugal, Brazil, Kenya and a dozen other countries gave ground to New Jersey as that state's Anne Marie Letko led her international rivals across the line.


Mutual Funds; The Fad That Is One-Stop Shopping
FOR the one-stop shopper, the Schwab One Source Account is far from the only stop in town.
Almost two years ago, Charles Schwab &amp; Company started the account to cater to mutual fund investors who wanted a diversified portfolio of funds without the transaction costs and mountains of paperwork.
At about the same time, Jack White &amp; Company began a similar account, and last spring Muriel Siebert &amp; Company followed.
Fidelity Investments joined a few months later.
The latest entry, Waterhouse Securities, weighed in three months ago.


A Spreading Pain, and Cries for Justice
DR.
MARIO FELIBERTY, medical director of the Kemper Corporation's life insurance operations, began complaining to superiors in late 1992.
He was feeling pain in his arms and hands from long hours of typing evaluations of claims by policyholders and other reports.
By last summer, his doctor had ordered him to quit work.
He had surgery on both hands and endless hours of therapy.
But his hands, now dry, red and swollen, are still weak, intermittently spastic, and always painful.
The specialists Dr.
Feliberty has seen say he has symptoms of a rare, incurable condition known as reflex sympathetic dystrophy.
It might have been caused by the typing or by the operations intended to help him.


Keep On Farming
PRESERVATION By Peter Svenson. 190 pp. Boston: Faber &amp; Faber. $21.95.


Summer Dining, Up(town) and Out
LE REFUGE ** (212) 861-4505; 166 East 82d Street, at Lexington Avenue; $$$; AE
This enchanting little French auberge ranks high on the romantic scale.
The dining room has a creaky old charm, with lots of aged wood, a beamed ceiling and dignified French antiques.
The back dining room has brick walls and soft candlelight.
At this time of year, a backyard patio, enclosed by a white picket fence, holds five tables.


Turn On, Tune In, Interface
THE INTERNET COMPLETE REFERENCE By Harley Hahn and Rick Stout. 817 pp.
Berkeley, Calif.: Osborne McGraw-Hill.
Paper, $29.95.


Rangers Make Canucks Pay for Their Misconduct
The Vancouver Canucks self-destructed tonight in Game 3 of the Stanley Cup finals, and the Rangers took advantage, thank you very much, to claim a 2-1 lead in the championship round.
This 5-1 victory at Pacific Coliseum was a little like finding a wad of bills in an old pair of pants in the back of the clothes closet.
The Canucks put two pucks in their own net.
Kirk McLean, their goalie, played a bad game for a change.
Pavel Bure, their superstar, got himself ejected in the first period after opening the scoring.


Endangered Jewel on Park Row
Although it is only eight stories tall, the Clark Building, at 1 Park Row, near City Hall, was among the city's first skyscrapers when it was built, 101 years ago.
Now landmark preservationists are trying to save it from being demolished to make way for a boxy modern office equipment store in J. &amp; R. Music World's expanding retail electronics empire.
The classically styled yellow brick and terra cotta building, on a triangular plot at the corner of Ann Street, is on a sensitive site.
It anchors one end of Park Row's line of historic buildings, which include the old newspaper row.
Across the street are St.
Paul's Chapel and the Woolworth Building on Broadway and the tip of City Hall Park; the Municipal Building and the rest of the Civic Center is a backdrop.


All In the Hemisphere
The Americas Society honors George Bush, Waldorf-Astoria, May 25.


Sleek Decor, French Style, Sound View
IF the Riviera Cafe near Long Island Sound in Branford were graded on decor alone, it would merit an easy A. The all-white setting of the small cafe evokes memories of the French Riviera: sleek white walls, rush-seated white chairs and tablecloths, sparkling glass and tableware and splashes of vibrant color in a few judiciously placed modern paintings.
As along the Mediterranean coast, one looks forward to the happy prospect of dining.
The menu is auspiciously small and eclectic, with an Italian accent, rather than pure French.
A basket of bread (unfortunately nothing like a good, chewy baguette) was served with butter, but a small bottle of olive oil infused with garlic cloves on the table provided a more satisfactory option.
It was followed, before the appetizers, by a crisp green salad of romaine leaves, radicchio, huge croutons and a peppery, creamy dressing.


A Festival's Premiere in Revival
SIXTY-FOUR years ago, at the first Music Mountain concert (or the Dedicatory Chamber Music Festival, as it was then called), the Gordon String Quartet played Beethoven, Ravel and Schumann.
This Saturday, at 8 P.M., those same pieces will be performed by the Colorado String Quartet, as another summer comes to the mountain, situated in the Litchfield Hills near Falls Village.


Two L.I. Film Festivals Enjoying New Stature
FILM makers are looking over their shoulders, panning and focusing on Long Island.
The Long Island Film Festival, opening tomorrow at the Cinema Arts Center in Huntington, may be an appetizer for the feast beginning on Oct. 19 at the Hamptons International Film Festival, said Christopher Cooke, director of the Suffolk County Motion Picture-TV Bureau and Office of Cultural Affairs.


Lori Wentworth And Scott Odierno
Lori Gay Wentworth, a daughter of Ollie J. Wentworth of Bellevue, Wash., and the late Donald K. Wentworth, was married yesterday to Scott Frederic Odierno, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph J. Odierno of Melville, L.I.
The Rev.
Vernon Nichols performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Church Center for the United Nations in New York.


SUNDAY, June 5, 1994; Bachelor Cooking in the Big House
From "Jailhouse Rock" to baggy, ill-fitting trousers (prison clothes are often too big), prison life affects the outside world.
Now Prison Life, magazine publishing's latest example of niche marketing, may help spread a new jailhouse style -- Cuisine Prisonniere.


G.O.P. Delegates Leave 19th C.D. to a Primary
WESTCHESTER Republicans, meeting in convention, failed to agree on a candidate for the 19th Congressional District last week, leaving the choice to a Republican primary in September.
The seat is being vacated by its 13-term Republican incumbent, Hamilton Fish, for health reasons.
A week earlier, Mr.
Fish's son, Hamilton Fish Jr., won a surprise victory at a Democratic convention, but the ultimate winner is also likely to be determined in a fall Democratic primary.


Susan A. Scherl And Adam Licht
Dr.
Susan Amy Scherl, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton A. Scherl of Engelwood Cliffs, N.J., is to be married today to Adam Ethan Licht, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Licht of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Stephen Listfield is to perform the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
The bride, 30, is the chief orthopedic resident at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
She received bachelor's and medical degrees from Boston University.


High-Concept Classics: A Quiz
OUR editor was nervous.
He was clearly about to say something unliterary.
"I need a handle," he finally admitted.
"You have to give me the handle if I'm going to sell this book."
The handle, also known as the "high concept," he eventually explained, is a one-sentence description of a book.
After 175 interviews and three years of work on a 160,000-word manuscript, we were asked to describe it in 12 to 14 words, preferably fewer.
It was actually a reasonable request, given the market conditions.
Each year, some 45,000 new books are published.
The sales people will have, at best, one sentence on average to describe each author's monumental work to the retail booksellers.
Whether a store, or even a whole chain of stores, will deign to stock a book could come down to that one sentence.
It had better be a good one.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about a visitors' center at the Walt Whitman Birthplace in Huntington Station misstated the title of State Senator Ralph J. Marino, Republican of Oyster Bay.
He is the Senate majority leader, not minority leader.


SPOCK, BRAZELTON AND NOW . . . PENELOPE LEACH
What is the point of having children that are "ardently" wanted and then parking them with the hired help?
That's like inviting people over for dinner and leaving them to eat with the butler and the cook.
ANNEMARIE COLBIN New York, N.Y.


Dispensing Justice, Small-Town Style
ON a recent steamy Monday afternoon, the village courtroom here filled rapidly with 40 people who looked as if they would rather be elsewhere.
The 2 o'clock Criminal Court session was about to start in this village of 4,600 people.
The sober-faced defendants, dressed mostly in jeans and sneakers, fidgeted as they waited their turn to appear before Justice Walter Schwartz.
On the docket at this particular session were cases of drug possession, uninsured, unregistered and intoxicated drivers, larceny, credit card fraud and harassment.
For spectators accustomed to television shows like "L.A. Law" and "Law and Order," this was hardly the stuff of high drama.
But for Judge Schwartz, who patiently and courteously listened to each person's argument, the cases were hardly banal or insignificant.


Her Brilliant Career
LIFE OF THE PARTY The Biography of Pamela Digby Churchill Hayward Harriman.
By Christopher Ogden.
Illustrated. 504 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Recalling a World in Flames
TOMORROW, when the nation and the world commemorate the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landing in Europe during World War II, William F. Falduti of Nutley will be thinking about Peter Black Cloud, a comrade with whom he fought and shared a cherished friendship.
"I'm a little guy and old Peter was this big strapping Indian from North Dakota, and all through training and going overseas, boy, did we raise hell together," said Mr.
Falduti, 69, a retired heavy-equipment engineer.
He is a veteran of the Army's 82d Airborne Division, an elite volunteer paratrooper unit that landed 40 miles behind enemy lines that day.


A Whole Nation More Agitated Than Spike Lee
ON the hammered bronze door of the ornate palace that houses the archdiocese of Rio de Janeiro, a hand-written sign announced that no business would be conducted whenever the national team took the field.
It was the eve of the World Cup, and in the most populous Catholic nation on earth, even urgent matters of the spirit would have to find their resolution on the soccer pitch.


Elderly Patients Deserve First-Class Treatment; Training Is Vital
To the Editor:
You demonstrate how the serious shortage of physicians trained to meet the special needs of older Americans is compromising the health and quality of life of the nation's elderly in "Gaps in Geriatric Care and Medicine Alarm Health Professionals" (front page, May 16).
Shortages among nurses, dentists, social workers and other allied health professionals with specialized training in geriatrics further limit the ability of the health care system to care for the elderly.
Not only is there a need for professional schools to introduce and expand their curriculums on aging, but also a key challenge is how to provide basic training in geriatrics for the thousands of practitioners involved in delivering health care to the nation's elderly.


Scenes From a Divorce


The Executive Computer; A Data Base Program That Aims to Think Like the User
WITH all the noise the cable and telephone industries are making, you'd think the hard part of the data superhighway was laying the wires.
But the real challenge may lie in creating the software that lets users find their destinations.
For years, for example, researchers and programmers have been working on various problems of retrieving text from electronic data bases or filtering the information.
Even with today's comparatively puny data bases, locating exactly the right information can require learning a virtually foreign language -- or at least some clever stunts in the if-this-then-that logic of Boolean algebra.


Helen V. Vera, Kent A. Clark
Helen Virginia Vera, a daughter of Jonas Vera of Briarwood, Queens, and the late Hortensia Vera, was married yesterday to Kent Arthur Clark, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Glen M. Clark of Calgary, Alberta.
Msgr.
Harry J. Byrne officiated at the Epiphany Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Ms.
Vera, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer at G.C.G.
Risk Management, workmen's compensation consultants in New York.
She graduated from Pace University and received her law degree from the State University at Buffalo.


Family Cruising
To the Editor: Did Betsy Wade and I really go on the same American Family Cruise trip, and the same week, no less? ("Boys and Girls Together," April 10).
The cruise itself had many problems; children of all ages ran everywhere unsupervised.
The table next to ours had only children under about the age of 12 who were so loud that we could often not hear ourselves speak.
The roller-skating meant passengers walked about at their peril.
On an island excursion, my daughter and another passenger signed up for wind-surfing; my daughter ended up alone far from shore without her instructor and made it back only because she is such a strong swimmer.


Knicks Have Another Mountain to Climb
A compelling, emotional and unpredictable series has reached its climax.
Either the Knicks will reach the National Basketball Association finals for the first time since 1973 or the Indiana Pacers will get there for the first time ever.
For one team, there will be jubilation and the anticipation of a championship series.
For the other, there will be an end to any hopes for a title.
Those are the lofty stakes for tonight's Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals between the Knicks and Pacers at Madison Square Garden.
The winner will open the four-of-seven-game N.B.A. finals Wednesday night in Houston against the Rockets.


Haiti's New Government Fights Potholes
Lacking support from nearly all but the military that installed it last month, Haiti's provisional government has undertaken road-repair work in an effort to win credibility and support among the people.
The repair work varies from stuffing potholes with rocks and sand to resurfacing some roads with asphalt-laying machines.
But whatever the method, the condition of the roads has unquestionably improved since the army named Emile Jonassaint, 81, former head of the Supreme Court, as provisional president on May 11.


'The Scream' Is Back, but Where Has It Been?
IT DIDN'T TAKE SOPHISTICATED gadgetry to beat the security system at Norway's National Gallery in Oslo.
Two men pulled up outside in a van just before 6:30 on the morning of Feb. 12, propped a ladder against a wall, smashed a window, climbed in and emerged 50 seconds later with the nation's best-known painting, "The Scream," by Edvard Munch.
Done in 1893, Munch's image of an almost fetuslike figure, its head clasped in its hands and its mouth open in a cry of horror, has become increasingly familiar in popular culture around the world, a symbol of the overwhelming pressures of modern life.
But it has near icon status in Munch's native Norway, and its theft, captured on blurry videotape by a surveillance camera, jolted the country even as it basked in the glow from the opening of the Winter Olympics that same day in Lillehammer, 110 miles to the north.


Papandreou Barks Less This Time
When Andreas Papandreou was Prime Minister through most of the 1980's, he made Greece the odd man out in the Atlantic and European alliances.
With his anti-Western Socialist oratory and friendships with people like Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi of Libya and Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, who imposed martial law on Poland, Mr.
Papandreou seemed to go out of his way to offend fellow NATO members and the European Community.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about Mark Jorgensen, the former executive at the Prudential Insurance Company who reported overvaluations of properties in some of Prudential's real estate funds, misspelled the given name of the judge assigned to Mr.
Jorgensen's lawsuit.
He is Dickinson R. Debevoise.


Journal; Clinton's War Story
"What did you do in the war, Daddy?" is the question American children of my generation asked their fathers, and the answers were the stuff of a thousand unforgettable bedtime stories.
As my own father, who served in the China-Burma-India Theater during the war, said to me as I turned 45 last week: "I can't remember what I was doing when I was 45, but I still remember everything about what happened on D-Day, when I was 23."
Many of today's children must ask their fathers a radically different question: "How did you get out of the war, Daddy?" And the answer can be simple or complex.
Of the many American men who eluded service in the Vietnam War, only a fraction can boast that they resisted the draft, paying a price in exile or jail or both for that principled stand.
The rest of us, as strongly opposed to the war on moral grounds as we might have been, found other, easier, often devious ways out -- from a high number in the draft lottery (my lucky case) to the intricate manipulation of educational and medical deferments (which would have been my case had I been less lucky).


Artists Who Brought Taos Home
TAOS, N.M., sprawls on a desert shelf 7,000 feet above sea level, embraced by three jagged mountain ranges -- the Sangre de Cristo, the Picuris Range and the Jemez and Nacimiento Mountains -- all overlooking the Rio Grande, which has carved a gaping gorge across the Taos valley.
Although home to Spaniards since the late 16th century, and to Pueblo Indians for hundreds of years before that, the dramatic country around Taos retains a distinctly raw and untenanted look.
At sunset, the Sangre de Cristo peaks redden, revealing the source of their name; below, the valley falls into lavender shadow.


Arthur Caliandro And Lea Bell
Lea Weeks Bell, the president of the Tower Management Company, a real estate concern in River Edge, N.J., is to be married today to the Rev.
Arthur Caliandro, the senior minister at Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan.
The Rev.
Florence Pert, a minister of the Reformed Church in America, and the Rev.
Bruno Caliandro, the groom's brother and a Methodist minister, are to perform the Reformed Church in America ceremony at Marble Collegiate.
The bride, 53, graduated from Young Harris College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Weeks of McCaysville, Ga.


Budget Cuts To Be Fought By Democrats
New York City's budget battle resumed in earnest yesterday as the Democrats on the City Council met privately to decide where they would challenge Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget amid a growing consensus that the Police and Fire Departments have to share in the cuts.
The Democrats did not disclose their priorities yesterday, but it has become clear that they will try to restore as many of the Mayor's cuts in services as possible, especially in youth programs, parks, schools and the Department of Social Services, where Mr.
Giuliani has proposed cutting 4,600 jobs, or 20 percent of the work force.


Turkey, Hurt By Iraq Curbs, Requests Help
Turkey is pressing the United States and other Western and Arab allies for relief from the hardships that the United Nations embargo on Iraq imposes on its crisis-ridden economy.
At the same time, sentiment is growing against the continued use of Turkish territory for an international operation on behalf of Kurds in northern Iraq.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
EAST MIDTOWN  $2.1 million
641 Fifth Avenue (51st St.)  (Olympic Towers)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. postwar condo; concierge, manned elevator, dining room, eat-in kitchen, health club, 2 exposures; common charge $1,736, taxes $22,848, listed at $2.3 million, 69 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)


Catholics Question Article of Faith
For years large majorities of American Roman Catholics have disagreed with their church's official teachings on subjects like contraception, remarriage after divorce and ordaining women to the priesthood.
But a New York Times/CBS poll taken in April turned up a more startling result.
Since ancient times the church has taught that the bread and wine offered at mass during the sacrament of holy communion are mysteriously changed into the actual body and blood of Christ, in keeping with Jesus's words at the Last Supper.
In contrast, some Protestant views treat the bread and wine as symbols or reminders.


Tanya K. Hernandez, James Q. Walker
Tanya Kateri Hernandez, a lawyer for Brooklyn Legal Services, was married yesterday to James Quentin Walker, an associate at the law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton in New York.
The Rev.
Erik Kolbell performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Christ Chapel of Riverside Church in New York.
Ms.
Hernandez, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University and received a J.D. from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Norma C. Rolon of New York and the late Victor Hernandez.


Paula Kreitzer, Harry Karpen
Dr.
Paula Michele Kreitzer, the daughter of Lillian and Saul Kreitzer of Flushing, Queens, is to be married today to Harry Stewart Karpen, a son of Hilda and Murray Karpen of West Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Mordecai Efron is to officiate at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 36, is a pediatric endocrinologist at Schneider Children's Hospital of the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.
She is also an assistant professor of pediatrics at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
She graduated summa cum laude from Queens College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.


HAVING IT BOTH WAYS
Steinbreder takes the position that women who "seek cover in divorce laws" are not being true to their feminist ideals.
In a bitter divorce, customary ethics and personal political philosophies tend to go out the window.
Couples often engage in unprecedented cruelty toward one another.
The legal system and the courts become the arena in which all of the frustrations of the marriage get played out.
I really feel that what needs to be examined are the practices of matrimonial attorneys and the entire legal process of divorce.
JOYCE MOONEY Montclair, N.J.


City to Close Armory Shelter For Homeless
The Flushing Armory, long the source of complaints from downtown residents and businesses, will close at the end of the month as a shelter for homeless women, a Department of Homeless Services official said last week.
The move is part of the city's continuing effort to move homeless people from large buildings like armories to smaller residences where they can receive social services, said Sam Szurek, a Homeless Services spokesman.
The city's largest women's shelter, with 135 residents, the Flushing Armory is the first armory scheduled to close entirely since the downsizing began in 1992, he said.
The city now uses nine armories to house 1,298 homeless men and women in Queens, Brooklyn and Manhattan.


Helene Price, Charles Gropper
Dr.
Helene Eve Price, a neurologist, is to be married today in Roslyn, L.I., to Dr.
Charles Arthur Gropper, a dermatologist.
Rabbi Ephraim Rubinger is to perform the ceremony at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center.
Dr.
Price, 34, is keeping her name.
She and her husband practice in New York, where she is also a clinical instructor at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She graduated from Barnard College and New York Medical College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Price of Brooklyn.


Rhonda Levy And Glenn Wolk
Rhonda Levy, a daughter of Norma Kelleher of Bayside, Queens, and Joel Levy of New York, was married last evening to Glenn Wolk, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allan Wolk of New City, N.Y.
Cantor Bernard Fitch officiated at Xaviar's restaurant in Garrison, N.Y.


No Headline
"I liken it to the Manhattan Project, when they were building the atomic bomb. Remember Fat Man and Little Boy? When they had a big crunch, they brought in scientists from all over the world." TREY ROGERS, a Michigan State professor trying to grow grass for the Silverdome.  [ 30:1. ]


Man on a Leash
Emile Marc de Saint Hilaire, a friend of Balzac and the author of "The Art of Tying the Cravat" (recently reissued by Thullverlag, in Germany), called the necktie a man's "letter of introduction." He traces its origins in France to the arrival, in 1660, of a regiment of Croats, whose manner of swathing the throat in lace, muslin or silk was widely imitated; he recounts instances of soldiers being saved from bullets and saber cuts by their cravats.
Among the 21 different styles for which he gives instructions are the Cravate en Cascade (like a waterfall), the Cravate a l'Americaine (requiring a whalebone stiffener) and the Cravate a la Gastronome ("possesses the great advantage of loosening itself in cases of indigestion, apoplexy or fainting").
But even Saint Hilaire, in his enthusiasm, recognized the necktie's nooselike potential: "It is universally allowed that the least constraint of the body has a corresponding effect on the mind, and it must, therefore, be admitted, that to a certain extent, a tight Cravat will cramp the imagination, and, as it were, suffocate the thoughts."
Since Saint Hilaire's time, men's love-hate relationship with the necktie has taken various turns for the better and for the worse, but never, it seems, worse than at the moment.
At a recent "Black Tie" dinner attended by inhabitants of the art world, the standard male attire was a tuxedo with either a turtleneck or a band-collared shirt -- No Tie.
At a benefit for a charity supported by people in the music industry, most of the men had evidently interpreted the invitation's "Festive Dress" to mean "Novelty Tie."


Praise for a Bribe Refused
Sitting at a table piled with cash and bags of cocaine, five Washington Heights police officers described yesterday how they lured two suspected drug dealers from their apartment and arrested the men when they offered them a $13,000 bribe.
The bribery attempt was foiled on Friday afternoon when one officer, Edward Wilson, responding to a report of an assault at 670 West 193d Street, entered the apartment and saw money and bags of what appeared to be cocaine on a kitchen table, the police said.


Choreographing a Festival
The New York City Ballet spring gala featured three premieres and celebrated the Diamond Projectc.
The New York Theater, May 19


Jeremy M. Davis and Lois E. Lerner
Lois Ellen Lerner, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Lerner of Merrick, L.I., is to be married today to Jeremy Mark Davis, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
David Davis of Columbia, Mo.
Rabbi Arthur Schwartz is to officiate at the Americas Society in New York.
The bride, 36, is a director of marketing for Sony Wonder, a children's video and music label of Sony Music Entertainment, in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.
Her father is the owner J.A.Z.
Printing Company in Merrick.
Her mother, Frances Lerner, is the secretary to the rabbi at the Oceanside (L.I.) Jewish Center.


Nina Rowe, Charles Ward
Katherine Neuhaus Rowe, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Whitney Rowe of San Francisco, was married yesterday to Charles Forrester Littlefield Ward, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elmer Lawrence Ward Jr. of Far Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
Gary Fertig performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Thomas Church in New York.
Mrs.
Ward, 26, is known as Nina.
She graduated from Duke University and is an account executive with Hal Riney &amp; Partners, an advertising agency in San Francisco.
Her father is a managing director, in San Francisco, with J. P. Morgan &amp; Company.


Megan Spurdle, Giles D. A. Peel
Margaret Warren Spurdle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Spurdle Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Giles David Antony Peel, a son of the late Rev. and Mrs.
E.
B.
Peel.
The Rev.
Ophelia L. Keller performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Church in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
Peel, a soprano, is an opera singer known professionally as Megan Spurdle.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and studied at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama in London.


How to Bridge the Gap Between Blooms
TRADITIONALLY, early June is the season that belongs to roses.
Their bouffant blooms are always a sight to see, for their bright colors as well as their shiny, showy foliage.
But spring has been cool thus far.
Rosebushes are behind schedule and have not had the chance to catch up.
Many are still putting out their full complement of foliage, while only a few of the earliest bushes have bloomed.
These early roses have not been top quality either.


Exotic and Refreshing Seafood Salads
ON a warm summer day, when you want to eat something light, a seafood salad is particularly refreshing.
One of my favorites is a classic spicy Thai salad made with shrimp, scallops and fish tossed in a dressing of green chilies and coriander and served with rice.
Sea scallops are good seared and served on thick slices of ripe tomato, topped with fried capers and onion rings, which add a crunchy texture.


Elderly Patients Deserve First-Class Treatment
To the Editor:
Memory dementia, confusion, falls and urinary incontinence, while common in the elderly, are never normal.
As you note in "Gaps in Geriatric Medicine Alarm Health Professionals" (front page, May 16), practitioners often dismiss these complaints, either because they think -- incorrectly -- that the problems aren't treatable, or because they don't want to be bothered by conditions that seem to them burdensome to evaluate and manage.
Even more alarming, these ailments are often caused by interventions that physicians make in treating other conditions.
A diuretic for high blood pressure can precipitate a fall by causing low blood pressure, or it can lead to incontinence in a slow-moving, arthritic patient who cannot get to the toilet in time.


On the Bias
OBSESSION The Lives and Times of Calvin Klein.
By Steven Gaines and Sharon Churcher.
Illustrated. 414 pp.
New York: Birch Lane Press/Carol Publishing Group. $22.50.


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on Wednesday about the competition for the Grand Prix du Sommelier misstated the history of American participation.
Michael McNeil of the Ritz-Carlton Buckhead, in Atlanta, is not the first American finalist.
In 1986, Larry Stone, then working at Charlie Trotter's in Chicago, was a finalist and went on to win the international prize.


A Slick Take on Talk Shows Feeds a New Little Channel
Maybe it's the magenta lights, which give the foyer an eerie, extraterrestrial glow.
Or perhaps it's the color scheme of the executive offices: purple and electric turquoise.
Or maybe it's the exaggerated ebullience of the logo that makes it clear this company has attitude:
E!
A relative newcomer to the cable lineup, E! is the first cable channel to celebrate openly the triumph of hype over content.
What other channel, after all, would be able to announce with unalloyed pride, as E! did last week, that it is giving Howard Stern a nightly television show?
And what other channel would boast as its signature show a program like "Talk Soup," a compendium of the day's weirdest talk-show clips, a program, in other words, that never ventures beyond television itself?


Amid Royal Support, Bruguera Retains Title
As Spain made a clean sweep of the French Open, with that nation's clay-court specialists turning this Grand Slam into the Spanish Open at least for the day, Sergi Bruguera outplayed his unseeded friend and countryman Alberto Berasategui and extended his reign at Roland Garros for another year.
With a 6-3, 7-5, 2-6, 6-1 victory, the sixth-seeded Bruguera became the ninth man in French Open history to repeat as champion.
The last was Jim Courier, the man Bruguera dethroned last year and detoured this year in the semifinals.


Music Notes
Change of Label
William Christie and his Paris-based period-instrument ensemble Les Arts Florissants, who performed at the Brooklyn Academy of Music last month, have left Harmonia Mundi France, their longtime record label, and signed an exclusive five-year agreement with Erato.
The move was something of a surprise: Mr.
Christie has been making harpsichord recordings for Harmonia Mundi since 1976 and the label has been recording his ensemble ever since it was founded in 1979.
Les Arts Florissants has made more than 20 recordings for Harmonia Mundi, including its highly regarded versions of Lully's "Atys," Rameau's "Indes Galantes," Marc-Antoine Charpentier's "Medee" and Purcell's "Dido and Aeneas." To a great degree, this discography helped establish Les Arts Florissants as one of the world's great early-instrument groups.


Roberto Burle Marx Dies at 84; Brazilian Landscape Designer
Roberto Burle Marx, whose mark on Brazil's landscape ranged from the undulating mosaic sidewalks of Copacabana Beach to the hanging gardens in the new capital of Brasilia, died on Saturday.
He was 84 and lived in his lush, botanical retreat, a former coffee farm, 35 miles from here.
He died of congestive heart failure, friends said.


Foster Care, Still Shortchanged
It is no secret that New York City's foster care system is plagued with problems.
Now, State Comptroller Carl McCall weighs in with a report that, once again, calls attention to the unmanageable caseloads, inadequate screening and monitoring of families, and the system's inability to place children in permanent homes.
The Child Welfare Administration, an agency within the city's Human Resources Administration, is generally responsible for the 47,300 abused and neglected children who have been removed from their homes and placed with foster families or are in families that require supervision.


PRO BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; The Anti-Knicks Just Trudged to Houston
UNGRACEFUL.
Unlovely.
Unrevered.
These are the New York Knicks, who have now grittily trudged all the way to the finals, out of sheer, dogged gall.
They did it their own way last night, in frantic rugby scrums under their own basket, refusing to be beaten by their opponents or their own shortcomings.
They like it that way.
They'd better.
They have no choice.
"If we ever swept anybody, or won it, 4-1, it wouldn't be our style," said Anthony Mason, one of their scrappers from the bush leagues.
"We don't want it easy. We thrive on danger."


New York City Striving to Lure Corporations And New Jobs
In recent years, New York City has been so desperate to hold on to companies already in the city that it handed out hundreds of millions of dollars in tax incentives to stem the corporate diaspora.
But now, with clear signs emerging that the local economy is finally on the mend, City Hall is looking outward, trying to lure companies prowling for a new home.


Retracing History: Clinton's 20-Something Aides
President Clinton and his top White House aides have only read the history that many here have lived through.
And as the Administration flotilla started across the Channel to re-create the invasion of Normandy, there were signs everywhere that this is not exactly the Lindy Hop, Spam fritter and "Pennsylvania 6-5000" crowd.
In a fashion statement that it is hard to imagine Brent Scowcroft making, Calvin Mitchell 3d, a National Security Council official on the D-Day memorial tour, wore a gold hoop in his left ear.


Shake-Up Under Way At Prudential
The management of Prudential Securities has been quietly shaken up by a series of dismissals, reassignments, resignations and hirings, with several moves resulting from a decision to back away from branch managers facing potential regulatory charges, Prudential executives said yesterday.
The series of management shifts came in recent weeks, with many occurring in the last few days.
The result is that almost every major division of the firm has been touched by significant management changes since Prudential's settlement in October of securities fraud charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission and other regulators.


A Gun Dealer's Story: Good Intentions Go Astray
Last year, Terrence Williams, a hair stylist seeking to earn a little extra money, did what 250,000 other Americans have done: he obtained a Federal license to buy and sell firearms.
Now Mr.
Williams, who is 27, is serving a four-year sentence in Federal prison for illegal gun trafficking.
So far, his guns have been linked to two homicides -- a young woman in Camden, N.J., shot in a dispute with her boyfriend in January, and a 21-year-old man found dead here last year -- two armed robberies, five assaults and at least two dozen other crimes in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
Eleven of his guns were taken from juveniles.


INSIDE
Fed's Benign Inflation View
Top Federal Reserve officials have concluded that inflation is under control, making more near-term interest rate increases less likely.
Page D1.
Bosnians Delay Talks
The Bosnian Government raised objections that delayed peace talks in Geneva, and it appeared not to be eager for a cease-fire.
Page A3.
A River Revival
A cleanup of the St.
Lawrence River is yielding some promising results, but the Mohawk Indians' life style may never be the same.
Page B8.


In the City's Cycle of Seasons, Spring Is for Street Games


Review/Music; The Choral Splendor Of the Bach 'St. Matthew'
Whatever discordant notes may have sounded during the 17th annual conference of Chorus America last week in New York were submerged in a wash of choral splendor on Friday evening at Carnegie Hall, after a series of open rehearsals.
In its basics, the performance of Bach's "St. Matthew" Passion, with Richard Westenburg leading the chorus and orchestra of Musica Sacra, held no particular surprises for anyone familiar with the conductor's work over the years.
Mr.
Westenburg showed his usual thorough command of the score, and his beautifully prepared and responsive chorus sang with sure intonation and good strength.
Typically, the orchestral strings were less refined, although solos by Daniel Stepner on violin and Mary Springfels on viola da gamba were engaging, and the woodwinds were mostly excellent.


It's Silly For Yanks To Worry, Right?
Of course it's too early to panic, and with the possible exception of the man upstairs or in Tampa or wherever he is in his new low public-profile approach, none of the Yankees plans to.
But the Yankees did suffer their fourth successive loss and sixth in their last seven games yesterday, and the 11-game road trip that begins in Texas tonight should provide a telling glimpse of how good these Yankees really are.
With Kevin Appier dazzling them for nearly eight innings, the Kansas City Royals stopped the Yankees, 3-1, completing their first sweep of a Yankee Stadium series since July 1978.
It was the Royals who, in Kansas City a week earlier, started the Yankees on their worst week since they took over first place in the American League East May 9.


Rostenkowski, Made by Machine
In the old days, in the old neighborhood, before he became a Congressman, Danny Rostenkowski was a prince.
He grew up on a rich diet of clout and first learned politics and the deal-making skills that made him one of the most powerful men in the country when he was a kid on Chicago's Northwest Side, a rough and tumble kingdom, protected and preserved for decades by the Democratic Machine.


Anderson in Vancouver: A Beginning, an End?
The child became a man.
The game he once rejected because of its frustrating difficulty is bringing him joy again.
The circle of Glenn Anderson's career is nearly complete.
He is home again in Pacific Coliseum, six blocks from the home of his early childhood.
Anderson is emerging, after two difficult months, as the factor that Ranger management sought when he was acquired from the Toronto Maple Leafs on March 21, the day the Rangers underwent their Stanley Cup makeover.
Anderson's deflection of a shot by Sergei Nemchinov, while parked in front of Vancouver goaltender Kirk McLean, became his second consecutive game-winning goal in New York's second straight victory over the Canucks.
The goal was Anderson's 91st career playoff score, fourth best in National Hockey League history.


Flocking to Salsa, No Longer Hispanic Fogy Music
In the early 1980's, Hispanic teen-agers in New York City were listening to the singers India and Marc Anthony and dancing to Latin hip-hop, a dance-club music that glorified an electric, metallic sound.
These two sang in English, perfect for a generation of youth yearning to define themselves in opposition to whatever their parents and their immigrant culture represented.
Ten years later teen-agers are listening to India, now known as La India, and Marc Anthony.
But La India (Linda Caballero) and Marc Anthony (Marco Antonio Muniz) are singing salsa, the music of (gasp) their parents.
And Hispanic youth are flocking to it.
"I used to be so embarrassed by salsa, I wasn't into it," said La India, who performs tonight at S.O.B.'s, with her orchestra.


Jericho Is Being Turned Into a Booming City of the Future
In the warm desert evening, as dusk settles over the Jordan Valley, there are traffic jams on the dusty road to Jericho.
Long lines of cars packed with families from other West Bank towns stretch back from an Israeli checkpoint at the city limits, near a joint command center where Israeli and Palestinian flags fly side by side.


Yanks' Taste of Failure Doesn't Prompt Panic
While Europe is busy commemorating D-Day, the Yankees are trying to avoid a re-enactment of their own.
Yes, they lost their fourth straight game at the Stadium yesterday, but they don't believe they will be losing their self-confidence, something that seemed to happen to last year's team.
The Yanks lost to Kansas City, 3-1, a defeat that sealed the Royals' first three-game sweep at Yankee Stadium since 1978.
The loss sent the Yankees out of town with their first taste of prolonged failure this season, what with four straight defeats and six losses in the last seven games.


Inflation Is Viewed As Stable
Top officials at the nation's central bank have concluded that growth in the American economy has slackened slightly and that inflation is under control, making further interest rate increases much less likely in the coming weeks.
Three of the Federal Reserve Board's five governors said they did not believe that unemployment had dropped to an alarming extent, given contradictory information on hiring that the Labor Department released on Friday along with an announcement that unemployment had fallen to 6 percent in May from 6.4 percent in April.


Where 'D-Day' and 'H-Hour' Came From
The Allied invasion of France was an extraordinary endeavor, but the expression D-Day has a rather ordinary history.
The term had been used long before June 6, 1944.
D-Day originally meant nothing more than the day on which an envisioned military operation would be started.


D-Day Veterans Float Down And Capture French Hearts
The first time around, they parachuted into the dark behind enemy lines, carrying rifles and heavy loads, certain of a hostile welcome.
Today, they dropped gently into Normandy beneath multicolored parasails and heard cheers instead of gunfire.
Of course, there was one other difference.
The 38 World War II veterans who re-enacted the parachute drop that launched the liberation of Europe 50 years ago tonight are older now, some in their 80's.
But it took a brave person to suggest that any one of them was past his best.


Review/Television; Diversity Of Tragedy In an Island Prison
Jon Alpert and Nina Rosenblum, exponents of video verite, took their cameras to Rikers Island, that New York City landmark where 17,000 men and women await disposition of criminal charges.
It's like a stroll through bedlam.


Heroin
Heroin use and its dire effects appear to be on the rise as the drug has become cheaper, stronger and more widely available.
The percentage of drug arrests in New York City involving heroin has risen for almost a decade.
Visits to city hospitals for heroin-related emergencies rose 31 percent in the first half of 1993, from the first six months of 1992.
The more potent heroin is more easily smoked or snorted than injected.
New York City has some of the purest and cheapest heroin in the nation, according to the latest D.E.A. samples.
The average purity of heroin obtained in the city was 64 percent; the average price was 45 cents a milligram.
The national averages were 35 percent purity and $1.64 a milligram.


Getting an Early Start on Citizenship


Public Advocate Seeks to Alter Program for City's Lifeguards
New York City's Public Advocate yesterday called for a complete overhaul of the city's lifeguard program, saying that mismanagement, lack of training and negligence may have contributed to several drownings during the last few years.
Bearing the results of a three-month preliminary investigation by his department, the Public Advocate, Mark Green, charged that inadequate training and supervision of the city's 800 lifeguards might have contributed to five of nine drownings reported to the city's health department since 1988.


Woodstock Meets the 90's; Two Days of Peace, Music and Interactive Video
After 25 years, it has come to this: the festival commemorating Woodstock this summer in Saugerties, N.Y., will be broadcast live on pay-per-view television, just like Wrestlemania II, championship boxing and Howard Stern's New Year's Eve Party.
And that is only one telling difference between the definitive countercultural event of the late 1960's and the attempt by the original organizers, now paired with a $4 billion entertainment company, to rekindle its spirit for another generation.


Essay; School For Scandal
"Invidious" was the deliciously defamatory word chosen by Lloyd Cutler, White House counsel, to denounce my use of "bribery" to characterize the undeclared gift of $100,000 in so-called profit to the Clintons.
I'm used to that.
Here are three recent examples of investigations stemming from enlightened invidiousness, in this space and elsewhere, and where they went.
Three years ago, a cloud no bigger than a man's hand appeared on the political horizon: the bank operated by the House of Representatives was exposed as a check-kiting center, providing interest-free loans to perkomaniacal members.


Review/Dance; A Robbins Premiere With a Cast To Match Its Youthful Outlook
If any choreographer can make sunlight virtually stream into a theater, it is Jerome Robbins.
And that is exactly what he has done again so naturally in "Two- and Three-Part Inventions," an infinitely fresh and wonderful new ballet set to Bach's piano studies.
After what seemed like a dry spell of six years, America's premier classical choreographer has come up with a masterpiece of a special kind.
The temptation will be to see it as an informal sequel to "Goldberg Variations," his epic Bach ballet of 1971, in the same way that several shorter Robbins pieces to Chopin's piano music are creative spinoffs from "Dances at a Gathering," his great Chopin ballet of 1969.


Health Care Reform or Social Revolution?
To the Editor:
William Safire's "Let's Make a Deal on Health" (column, May 23) is remarkable in that it concisely identifies 99 percent of what is wrong with the Clintons' health care reform package, as well as what should be done to correct it.


Review/Dance; Betraying Giselle Shyly, Despite Love
American Ballet Theater ended its season at the Metropolitan Opera House on Saturday with exciting performances of "Giselle" from some of the company's finest dancers.
But one dancer, Parrish Maynard, stood out.
Mr.
Maynard has already distinguished himself as a promising young classicist.
His radiant debut in the testing role of Albrecht at the matinee suggested that he is now well on his way to stardom.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Trade between Mexico and the United States rose to record levels in the three months after a new trade agreement took effect on Jan. 1.
Imports from Mexico grew much more rapidly than U.S. exports, cutting the American trade surplus with Mexico for the first quarter nearly in half.  [ Page A1. ] The Economy
Top officials at the nation's central bank have concluded that growth in the American economy has slackened slightly and that inflation is under control, making further interest rate increases much less likely in the coming weeks.  [ D1. ]


U.S.-MEXICO TRADE ADVANCES SHARPLY UNDER NEW ACCORD
In the first three months after a new trade agreement took effect, trade between Mexico and the United States rose sharply to record levels.
Imports from Mexico grew much more rapidly than United States exports, cutting the American trade surplus with Mexico for the first quarter nearly in half.
The numbers are the first to measure the impact of the North American Free Trade Agreement since it took effect Jan. 1.


Cool Welcome For Nominee
As Oliver L. North celebrated winning the Republican nomination for the Senate from Virginia, two national party Senators questioned today whether he could win the general election.
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, passed up an opportunity to endorse Mr.
North and said he would meet this week with J. Marshall Coleman, a former Virginia Attorney General who may run as an independent.
Mr.
Dole spoke on the CBS News program "Face the Nation."


Riley Rumors Clipped Away
A report that painted a picture of Pat Riley leaving the Knicks turned into nothing more than a fizzling rumor last night amid the hoopla of Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals.
A CBS Sports report yesterday said that the Los Angeles Clippers were ready to offer the Knicks' coach a $3 million package to become their coach and a part owner.
The network did not offer any sources for the report, which was broadcast on its "Eye on Sports" program.


Legislators' Agreement on Tax Cuts May End State Budget Impasse
The long battle over the state's $33 billion budget appeared near its end tonight as legislators reviewed two chunks of a new budget plan that calls for almost half a billion dollars in tax cuts, mostly for business, and programs to fix schools and improve stadiums around the state.
The budget was 66 days late tonight and legislative aides said the deal was not yet complete.
But in a sign that negotiations were nearly over, the leaders of the Senate and Assembly unveiled for legislators their agreements on tax cuts and capital projects, including a $24 million aquatic center on Long Island and $103 million for other sports facilities.


Efforts Revive River But Not Mohawk Life
The St.
Lawrence River is clearer than it has been in years.
Unsightly sores caused by chemicals have all but disappeared from the bellies and backs of catfish and bass taken from the river.
As Francis Jock, a Mohawk fisherman and environmental researcher, sped away from the bank in a small boat to check his nets, he listed other indicators of the river's improving condition.
"The eagles and the hawks have come back," said Mr.
Jock, who has spent all of his 52 years along the river's edge.
"I see mink and otter again. And the fish -- they are plentiful, like when I was a child."


North Korea's Motives Baffle U.S. and the South
For America's allies in Asia, the imagery is a bit eerie.
As President Clinton observes the 50th anniversary of D-Day, leaders across the Pacific are struggling once again to understand the motives of an 82-year-old dictator who seems to have stepped out of the grainy newsreels of another conflict and may be lurching toward a last, desperate confrontation with his old enemies.
Few believe that North Korea's President, Kim Il Sung, will deliberately reopen the Korean War 41 years after it ended.
Far too much has changed since his invasion of South Korea took Seoul and the Truman Administration by complete surprise, and this time, Mr.
Kim knows, China and Russia would not come to his aid.


Help the Living Help the Dying
Every year, countless New Yorkers enter their last illnesses without having arranged for others to make health care decisions for them.
Perhaps signing a living will or health care proxy is too discomforting a reminder of mortality.
Or perhaps they assume that the relationships that sustain them through life can sustain them through dying.
They are shortsighted on the first count, wrong on the second.
Under current New York law, no one, not even parents or children or siblings, can refuse life-sustaining treatment for incapacitated adult patients unless those patients have either signed a proxy or left "clear and convincing evidence" of how they want to be treated and when -- if ever -- they want treatment discontinued.
New York is one of only two states (the other is Missouri) in which the courts have specifically held that family members cannot make these decisions.


Review/Jazz; Steve Coleman Expands The Limits of a Musical Idea
The alto saxophonist and composer Steve Coleman's first set at Zanzibar on Wednesday night featured his group Five Elements, a band that merges jazz improvisation with a highly sophisticated use of a funk rhythm section.
Mr.
Coleman has been doing this for a while now, and it was fascinating to see how far he has taken the idea.
His formula has stayed the same, but he has made it all more complex and pliable, with pieces weaving in and out of one another and inspiring fervent improvisations.
But its limitations have stayed the same.
At the opening of its five-night stand, the band -- featuring Ravi Coltrane on tenor saxophone, Andy Milne on piano, Reggie Washington on bass and Gene Lake on drums -- never lost some of the chill that Mr.
Coleman's music often has.
As able as the musicians are at playing the music, with its difficult meters and distinct rhythmic conception, the group rarely raised it above the level of a musician's exercise, technically interesting but mostly mute emotionally.


Virulent Strep In Throat Puts 2 in Hospital
A virulent form of strep throat, similar to the kind that killed 11 people in Britain this year, has hospitalized two residents of Norwalk, Conn.
The cases are the first reported in the United States this year, but health officials said yesterday that there was no reason to fear a widespread outbreak.
The two cases were reported late last week by Norwalk Hospital after a man and a woman, both in their 30's, were admitted to the emergency room suffering from a Type A subgroup of streptococcus, said Diana Karish, acting vice president of the hospital's nursing division.


Tokyo Journal; Japan Falls for Soccer, Leaving Baseball in Lurch
Make no mistake: these are tough times in Japan.
The economy is deep in recession, politics are in upheaval and the corporations that invented lifetime employment are cutting jobs.
Relaxing at a major league baseball game, Michio Shoji, a Government official from western Japan, said he found these problems worrisome but manageable.
But he seemed less able to deal with signs of a crisis in a beloved sport.


Houston, Effel Given ITT Hartford Work
ITT Hartford Insurance has selected Houston, Effler, Hampel &amp; Stefanides in New York to handle its corporate and product advertising account, which had been handled by McCaffrey &amp; McCall since 1967, until February, when that agency was absorbed by Bates Worldwide in New York.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million.


Knicks Go Out of the Frying Pan and Into the N.B.A. Finals
They became Eastern Conference champions the hard way, the Knick way, the only way that was fitting for a team that has never stopped battling, no matter how tough the circumstances.
Reaching the National Basketball Association finals for the first time since 1973, the Knicks stormed back in the second half last night to outplay the Indiana Pacers, 94-90, in a remarkable Game 7 of the Eastern Conference finals at Madison Square Garden.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the new Claytor-Scannell Control Center for Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan referred incorrectly to Daniel T. Scannell, one of the men for whom it is named.
He is the first vice chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority; he is not retired.


Review/Dance; A Modernist Vision of the Baroque
There could have been no better way to end the Diamond Project, the New York City Ballet's showcase of new works, than with the premiere of Robert La Fosse's "Danses de Cour" on Friday night.
It is, in every sense, a festive ballet, a choreographic bouquet that evokes an 18th-century fete champetre.
From the moment the curtain rose at the New York State Theater, the formal ensemble that framed two couples -- Darci Kistler and Nikolaj Hubbe; Ethan Stiefel and Yvonne Borree -- conveyed the spirit of the ballet and its music.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Borrowing . . .
April  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims Friday  Producer Prices . . .
May


Law on Window Gates Would Save Lives
To the Editor:
In two recent tragic and deadly fires, one in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx and one in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn (and, Fire Department officials say, in dozens of others), the victims prevented their own escape by blocking or padlocking their apartment fire escapes.
Sadly, to deter robberies and break-ins, many New Yorkers have become prisoners in their own homes.
This understandable response is dangerous -- and also illegal.


Patents
CHOLESTEROL-LADEN yolks have given eggs a low spot on the Food and Drug Administration's nutrition pyramid, along with red meat and most nuts.
To avoid an egg's cholesterol and saturated fats -- which can contribute to heart disease -- some cooks use just the whites, or mostly the whites, in baking or making omelets or scrambled eggs.
A patent awarded to Kraft General Foods Inc. may restore the yolk's acceptability.
The company has developed a method for extracting as much as 70 percent of the cholesterol from eggs without, it says, affecting the taste or texture of the product.


The Terrible and Sacred Shore
It was a battle on a titanic scale, its name as resonant as Yorktown and Trafalgar, Waterloo and Gettysburg.
It proved decisive on the Western front in a war unequaled for its mortal toll and global reach.
It was a masterpiece of organization, its inevitable blunders in execution redeemed by ordinary Americans, Britons and Canadians on code-named beaches that have become legend: Utah, Omaha, Gold, Sword and Juno.
Even so, the 50th anniversary of the Normandy invasion is rightly being remembered in print and on prime time as more than a feat of arms.
It reminds us anew that given the right challenge and leadership, democracies can prevail together against daunting odds, if their will and resources are great enough.


Come, Cavort in the Park That Has Not Been Built
Look at a map of Manhattan.
See that inviting, leafy strip of green along the Hudson?
No, not Riverside Park.
Lower.
Say, from Battery Park City to 59th Street.
Don't see it?
That is because it is not there.
Except in an ad now cruising the city aboard the subway.


The Big Guy Delivers With Finest Moment
On the biggest Knicks possession of Patrick Ewing's career, he didn't get the ball.
He went and scored the franchise's most significant basket in more than two decades just the same.
"I thought the shot went in," John Starks said of his driving layup with the Knicks down a point to the Indiana Pacers, inside 30 seconds to play.
It did, but only because Ewing was there to rescue Starks, to save the Knicks, to guide the ball into the basket and erase the doubts, once and for all, about how high he could reach at the height of the drama.


CHRONICLE
The first Weizmann Women and Science Award will be presented tomorrow to DR.
JOAN ARGETSINGER STEITZ of Yale.
Although the $25,000 award could be used by Dr.
Steitz to finance her own projects, she will, she said, give it to the Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund for Medical Research to be passed on to the highest-ranking female post-doctoral student in biomedical research.
"I'm in the very fortunate position of not needing funding," said Dr.
Steitz, a professor of molecular biophysics and biochemistry.
"I'm an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, which funds about 5 percent of biomedical research in this country, and they support us handsomely."


Fox Chief Savors His Role as Roiler
Having stirred the television industry and left it thoroughly shaken, Rupert Murdoch, his demeanor as dry as a James Bond martini, sat in his office on the lot of his Twentieth Century Fox studio this week and declared himself "totally amazed" at what he had wrought.
The Fox chairman, who engineered the most brazen act of station piracy in the history of American broadcasting -- the switch of 12 stations from the Big Three networks to his upstart fourth network, the Fox Broadcasting Company -- said he never expected the reverberations that continued to roll through the networks and local stations last week.


17 Firefighters Injured In Lower Manhattan Fire
Firefighters responding to a suspicious blaze in lower Manhattan yesterday found oil on the stairs inside the building and on the fire escape ladder, and Fire Department officials said the aim was to deliberately injure firefighters, 17 of whom were hurt in the fire, including one seriously.
"Whoever the arsonist, we have to assume he's attempting to kill or seriously injure firefighters," said Chief of Operations Donald Burns.
Commercial-Loft Building
The blaze roared through a five-story commercial-loft building at 79 Worth Street, which also had residential tenants, said John Baldassarre, a Fire Department spokesman.


Half-Century Later, Allies Return to Normandy
In company with ships of many nations, the American aircraft carrier George Washington, with President Clinton and his entourage aboard, steamed tonight toward Normandy and a rendezvous with memories of a mighty victory.
For Mr.
Clinton and other leaders of the World War II Allies, a Sunday as mild and sunny as Saturday was dank and rainy passed in a swirl of color and high British military pageantry.
Kings, princes, presidents and prime ministers from three continents, the leaders had come together to mark the launching, precisely half a century ago, of the greatest seaborne invasion in history, Operation Overlord.


Buoyed by Croats' Support, Bosnians Reject a Cease-Fire
The Bosnian Government today appeared to be pressing for war rather than peace after once again rejecting United Nations-sponsored cease-fire talks here.
After a fourth day of fruitless attempts to end the boycott by the Muslim-led Government, Yasushi Akashi, the top United Nations official in the Balkans, first declared the talks canceled, then said he would make one last effort to convene them Monday.


Normandy Yesterday


Protecting Son, Owner of Store Is Shot in Robbery in Brooklyn
A grocery store owner in Boerum Hill in Brooklyn was shot and critically wounded Saturday night when he tried to shield his 18-month-old son from an armed robber, the police said.
Shortly before 9 P.M., a man entered Saleh Nasef's store, the Third Avenue Corner, at 93 Third Avenue between Bergen and Dean Streets, the police said, brandished a gun and said, "Give it up," to Mr.
Nasef, who was standing behind the counter with his son, David.


West Should Assist Russian Education
To the Editor:
Re "In Russian Education, Growing Class Distinction" (news article, May 22): The lament of Yevgeny V. Tkachenko, Russian Education Minister, "education is no longer a priority in our society," is a great understatement.
While per capita gross domestic product has fallen roughly 40 percent in the last three years, the percent of G.D.P. spent on education has dropped from 4 percent to 3.5 percent (against 7 percent in 1970).


Mets Blow a Game and Green Blows Up
Dwight Gooden has heard plenty of screaming since Dallas Green took over as the Mets' manager in May 1993.
There have been many loud speeches, several tirades and some general bellows, here and there.
Today's tirade ranked up with the best.
In an explosion that Bret Saberhagen, a 10-year major league veteran, called "the best I've ever seen," Green eviscerated his players in the visitors' clubhouse at Riverfront Stadium after the Mets blew what had been a two-run lead with two outs in the ninth, then played horrific baseball in the 10th inning to lose, 9-6, to the Reds.


A Savvy Sanchez Puts a Stop To Pierce
Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, the Spanish scamperer who chases down and captures the same balls other women let pass them by, successfully diluted the power game of Mary Pierce today and repossessed the French Open trophy she last held at age 17 in 1989, when she became this Grand Slam's youngest champion.
This time around it wasn't Steffi Graf, the No. 1-ranked defending champion, across the net but the newcomer and crowd favorite Pierce, who had been virtually invincible here in the breakthrough performance that has taken her to a career-high No. 7 in the world.


Knicks Win in Final Seconds and It's On to Houston


Market Place; For banks, the bloated balance sheet is becoming undesirable.
AT lunch in Beverly Hills, Calif., they say you can never be too rich or too thin.
In the corporate dining rooms of the nation's banks, the refrain has been you can never have too much capital.
Now, while fat waistlines may not be in fashion, fat balance sheets are becoming passe.


War on Two Fronts
This editorial appeared in The New York Times on June 7, 1944.
It was never, of course, going to be like this.
If Hitler, the man of a thousand certainties, was more certain of one thing than of all the others, it was that he was not going to repeat the monstrous mistake of his predecessors in 1914 and get himself involved simultaneously in a war on two fronts.
It was to be one nation at a time -- even, where necessary, one bite of one nation at a time.
In fact, the German people were led to suppose at first that it was to be wholly a bloodless conquest.
First the Rhineland, then Austria, then the Sudetenland, then the rest of Czechoslovakia -- all without bloodshed, if you do not count a few incidental assassinations.


Dividend Meetings


Evolution Benefits Species as a Whole
To the Editor:
"The Male of the Species: Why Is He Needed?" (Science Times, May 17) asks this relevant question from the standpoint of the female of the species.
The underlying assumption is that the male and the female of each species compete for power, much as they do in modern-day human society.


R.J. Reynolds Woos Polish Smokers
R.
J.
Reynolds recently opened the first American cigarette manufacturing factory in Eastern Europe, a plant of gleaming glass and green trim set among verdant suburban fields, and said it was doing Poles a favor.
Polish smokers rank among the heaviest smokers in the world.
Some surveys show they are the heaviest, preferring unfiltered cigarettes laden with coarse tobacco that gives a pungent aroma and is considered a major cause of death among middle-aged Polish men.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Popular with viewers but not with advertisers, 'N.Y.P.D. Blue' is hardly a candidate for cloning.
LAST year at this time, network television standards were supposedly under siege.
The television world had just caught its first glimpse of Steven Bochco's new program, "N.Y.P.D. Blue," which featured, in the first episode alone, a nude love scene, a crotch-grabbing interlude and several expletives undeleted.
With Mr.
Bochco leading the charge, the reasoning went, other producers were sure to follow.


Can E-Mail Cachet = jpmorgan@park.ave?
In late 1990, Alain Pinel Realtors Inc. of Saratoga, Calif., plunged into the electronic age with a vengeance.
Employees were given personal computers, and when the company joined the Internet, the global web of computer networks, each worker was assigned an electronic-mail address.
Even in the real estate company's Silicon Valley home, however, the initial reaction to those addresses -- listed on business cards, and thus the outward sign of its high-tech move -- was lukewarm at best.
Some agents complained that the arcane computer language -- like jones@apr.com, for example -- looked like messy typographical errors.
Potential customers were puzzled.


METRO DIGEST
CLEANING UP THE ST. LAWRENCE RIVER
At the northernmost tip of New York, where the St.
Lawrence River forms the boundaries of three nations -- the United States, Canada and the 28,000-acre Akwesasne Mohawk nation -- the costliest and most extensive toxic waste cleanup undertaken in the United States by private companies is beginning.
The scientific and administrative lessons learned there are likely to be applied to similarly complex contamination problems in the Hudson River, the Great Lakes, San Francisco Bay, the Chesapeake Bay and the San Pedro Channel off Los Angeles, the Environmental Protection Agency said.
B8.


Sports of The Times; One of the '40 Rangers Remembers the Cup
NEAR big wide windows the Stanley Cup was gleaming in the lobby of the Waterfront Center hotel, but Clint Smith's name and those of all his 1940 Stanley Cup teammates on the Rangers were no longer on it.
"Our names are in Toronto, in the Hall of Fame," the 80-year-old former center was saying now.
"They took off the silver bands with the names of the teams from 1927 to 1940 to make room for new names."


For Many Canadians, the Normandy Landing Marked a Nation's Coming of Age
Lance Cpl.
Kelvin Mactier, 23, of the Royal Winnipeg Rifles got 20 to 30 yards up the beach near Courseulles-sur-Mer when the German sniper's bullet smashed into the left side of his face.
It was "just like getting hit on the head with a sledgehammer," he says.
Earlier that morning, June 6, 1944, Acting Petty Officer Ivan Doherty, 18, was in the engine room of the Canadian minesweeper Guysborough as it came to within a mile and a half of the French coast to clear a lane for the assault ships.


Americans Don't Let Home Support Hinder Progress
This is how Joe DiMaggio must have felt when he went to dinner with Marilyn Monroe.
An audience of 91,123 showed up at the Rose Bowl on Saturday.
It was the largest crowd to watch the United States soccer team in this country, even if almost everyone came to see Mexico.


Ahead for Health Proposal: Subtle Art of Compromise
The technocratic era of the health care struggle is long over, with the White House policy purists consigned to the sidelines.
It is June, time is running short for passing a bill, and some major Congressional committees have been stymied for months over one central issue: whether to require employers to contribute to the cost of their workers' insurance.
For the lawmakers in the middle, it is time for some serious dealing, time to look for some political fixes and some political cover and time to find a way to finesse the chasm between those who have proudly and angrily opposed those "employer mandates" and those who have just as proudly and angrily supported them.
It is the moment, in short, when politicians like Senator John B. Breaux of Louisiana, a conservative Democrat who is a member of the Senate Finance Committee, a quintessential swing vote who loves to deal, become very, very important.


Keep Politics Out of the Military
To the Editor:
Having just returned from a Defense Department-sponsored tour of military bases, I read with interest "Keeping Politics Out of Base Closings" (editorial, May 24).
What you say must be put into greater context if we are to base military policies primarily on the needs of the military, rather than power politics.


73,511 See Colombia Romp at Meadowlands
The crowd at Giants Stadium totaled 73,511 this afternoon.
The fans were vividly dressed in the colors of Colombia and Greece, and for the first time in the stadium's history, the field was naturally green.
It was just an exhibition, but the atmosphere was electric and lacked none of the pageantry of the World Cup.
Colombia dominated play everywhere in a 2-0 triumph over Greece, and its fans staged such a huge party it prevented the Greeks from doing any dancing, not even in the isles.
The huge gathering was the largest for a soccer game here since the glory days of the Cosmos, but the excitement created in the stands by the predominantly Colombian crowd surpassed anything ever seen for soccer at Giants Stadium, whose grass surface for the World Cup got its first real test.


6 A.M. EXTRA!
"The invasion of Europe from the west has begun." So began the dispatch reporting D-Day in The New York Times.
The front page of that edition is reprinted on page A11.


Ward, a 2-Sport Star, Yank Pick in 3d Sport
Charlie Ward, the Heisman Trophy winner and an expected high choice in the coming National Basketball Association draft, has played only one season of baseball since his youth-league days, but the Yankees selected him in last week's draft of amateur players.
The Yankees haven't announced Ward's selection, but two executives from other clubs yesterday confirmed the selection and Eugene Parker, Ward's agent, said he had spoken with Ward about it Saturday.


Review/Rock; Lyrics as Poetry First, Song Parts Second
King Missile is a band with multiple personalities.
It's an art-rock outfit, a heavy-metal group, a comedy ensemble and a lounge act.
But no matter what stylistic elements it's appropriating, this New York City band's appeal ultimately rests on the front man, John S. Hall.
Mr.
Hall is not a songwriter; he's a poetry spieler.
A King Missile number succeeds or fails depending on what humorous ideas and non sequiturs he brings to it.
On Friday night at Wetlands in TriBeCa, King Missile's music threatened to overtake Mr.
Hall's words.
The group played songs with poetry breaks in the middle instead of spoken texts set to loose-limbed music.
Even "Sensitive Artist," Mr.
Hall's 1987 parody of the creative ego, was rewritten to sound more like a song than a poem.
This is in keeping with the band's sixth album, simply titled "King Missile" (Atlantic).
Most of the songs on "King Missile" are attempts to integrate Mr.
Hall's words and the bassist and keyboardist Chris Xefos's music into fully developed songs.


No Headline
"I liken it to the Manhattan Project, when they were building the atomic bomb. Remember Fat Man and Little Boy? When they had a big crunch, they brought in scientists from all over the world." -- TREY ROGERS, a Michigan State professor trying to grow grass for the Silverdome.  [ 30:1. ]


From Retiree, a Legacy of Volunteerism
Winifred Brown had a talent: She found volunteers willing to work without pay for New York City.
Now, after serving in five administrations as director of the Mayor's Voluntary Action Center, Miss Brown, 71, is retiring.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
American Electronic Components Inc., Elkhart, Ind., an initial public offering of a million shares.
Chicago Corp.


Rangers Savor Canucks' Slip While Avoiding the Same
Early in Game 3 of the Stanley Cup finals Saturday night, the Canucks' fans at Pacific Coliseum began to taunt the visiting team from New York.
"Rangers Stink!" is the PG translation of the chant.


Vallone, a Deal Maker, Is Caught in the Middle
Holding the middle ground is no mean feat in the Balkanized and bare-fisted world of New York City politics, but over the years the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, has proved himself a master.
His skill was evident two months ago when Manhattan liberals pressed him to act on a bill discouraging protesters from blocking access to abortion clinics.
Mr.
Vallone accommodated them, but not until he had simultaneously introduced a bill extending the same protections to churches and synagogues.


The Gloves Are Coming Off In Senate and Local Races
Republican primaries in two Congressional districts at opposite ends of the state are drawing most of the attention as voters prepare to pick their candidates Tuesday for scores of county and local races as well as for the United States Senate and New Jersey's 13 Congressional seats.
Polls will open at 7 A.M. and close at 8 P.M.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption in Business Day on Friday about changes in the top management at the Pacific Gas and Electric Company misstated the new titles of the two top executives.
Richard A. Clarke, current chairman and chief executive, will remain chairman.
Stanley T. Skinner will become chief executive, not chairman.


A Tearful Last Day Of School For Pacers
In the exuberance of victory a week ago, the Indiana Pacers happily talked about how vacations had been obliterated by their unexpected success against the Knicks.
Yesterday, in the tearful gloom of their locker room after a 94-90 loss at Madison Square Garden in the series finale, they choked up, and many of them cried, at the prospect of finally catching up with their vacations.
Vern Fleming can go to Aruba now.
Rik Smits can leave for the Netherlands, LaSalle Thompson can jet off to Los Angeles and Reggie Miller -- who caused so many heartaches for New York in this series and who came within a hair of causing the biggest one of all last night -- will stay home in Indiana.


Mortal Kombat, Over the Telephone
A new company, backed by the Blockbuster Entertainment Corporation and other investors, will introduce on Tuesday a service that lets video-game devotees play the most popular Sega and Nintendo games over local telephone lines.
Under the system, a user in one home would be able to square off with another player in the same city for games like Mortal Kombat and N.B.A.
Jam.
The company, Catapult Entertainment Inc., was founded earlier this year by former executives of Sony Pictures, General Magic and Apple Computer.
It plans to begin offering the service in some cities before Christmas.
Renewing Interest
Adam Grosser, the president of Catapult, noted that the most popular games run on the current generation of 16-bit machines and have millions of users each.
The phone service is seen as a way of raising interest in a maturing technology until the arrival of 32-bit games in 1995.


Changes by Saatchi At New York Office
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York has, as expected, made a series of changes involving top management.
Michael Jeary, 46, chairman and chief executive at Saatchi's San Francisco office, was named chief executive of Saatchi New York, assuming responsibilities temporarily handled by Bill Muirhead, who recently became chairman and chief executive of Saatchi North America.


Smile Gives Away Thompson
One of the happiest people in Madison Square Garden last night was John Thompson, Patrick Ewing's coach at Georgetown.
Thompson and his academic adviser, Mary Fenlon, were seated just to the right of the Knicks' bench in the second half.
"He refused to lose," Thompson said, smiling broadly, which he rarely does in the Garden when coaching against St.
John's.
"I thought Patrick's passing was excellent tonight. They have not died. That is a credit to the team and the staff."


How Support Collection Units Harass Fathers
To the Editor:
"Private Firms Help Single Parents Get What's Due" (front page, May 21), on the failure of state governments to collect child support for single mothers, tells only the mother's side of the story.
As a divorced father until recently under court order to pay support through the New York State Support Collection Unit, I would like to tell the father's side.


Irregular Heartbeat for Smith
Mets pitcher Pete Smith was released from a local hospital after spending one night under observation for an irregular heartbeat.
Smith, who has suffered from this condition in the past, left the Mets' dugout during their game Friday night against the Cincinnati Reds and was taken to Cincinnati Jewish Hospital.
Smith did not appear seriously concerned by his condition, and he has been cleared to pitch in the Mets' coming series in Colorado.


Trisha Brown to Receive Scripps Dance Award
Trisha Brown is to be given the 1994 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award, which honors American choreographers for lifetime contributions to modern dance.
The award, which carries a $25,000 cash prize, is to be presented by Ms.
Brown's longtime collaborator, the artist Robert Rauschenberg, on June 19 at the festival in Durham, N.C.
The Scripps Award was established in 1981.
Previous winners include Martha Graham, Alvin Ailey, Merce Cunningham, Erick Hawkins and Paul Taylor.


In Middle-Class Queens, Blacks Pass Whites in Household Income
Driven by striking gains in the 1980's among working wives and immigrants, the median income of black households in Queens has surpassed that of whites.
A fresh analysis of 1990 census results found that the economic progress by blacks in Queens, New York City's quintessential middle-class borough, was built largely on a traditional foundation of family solidarity.
Married couples, whether born here or abroad, typically made the greatest strides, while households headed by individuals generally lagged.


Resolving a Crisis: Can Haiti Emulate South Africa?
They have both been governed for generations by rigid caste systems, South Africa's based solely on race, Haiti's driven by both money and skin color.
Both countries have long been riven by political violence.
And both have been the objects of strong international pressure for change.
But since Nelson Mandela rose to the presidency of South Africa, successfully negotiating a democratic end to the system of apartheid that choked his nation, Haitians have been watching, some envious and many fearful, wondering if this is where the similarities between their two countries end.


P.&amp; G. Sues Former Officials Over Rights
In the most recent example of a corporation seeking protection of intellectual property rights, the Procter &amp; Gamble Company has filed suit against two former executives and their new employer, Johnson &amp; Johnson Inc., contending breach of contract.
In the lawsuit, filed on May 27 in Hamilton County Common Pleas Court in Ohio, Cincinnati-based P.&amp; G. asked the court to bar the executives from working for three years on what it said were competitive products at Johnson &amp; Johnson.
The suit also demands that Johnson &amp; Johnson stop recruiting its employees and seeks unspecified monetary damages.


World Economies


U.S. to Offer Only Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.12 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 4.53 percent, traders said.


Time Inc. Shelves a Gay Magazine
Time Inc.
Ventures, the division of Time Inc. that develops new magazines, has decided not to proceed with Tribe, a publication aimed at gay men and lesbians.
Saying the decision was made for business rather than editorial reasons, company officials said they were too busy with the division's other ventures to devote the necessary energy to the magazine.


BridgeTwo teams match wits in the final of the Reisinger knockout team championship.
Teams headed by Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, Queens, and Michael Kopera of Brooklyn clashed yesterday afternoon in the final of the prestigious Reisinger knockout team championship.
At the midpoint of the 56-deal match at the Manhattan Club at 27 West 72d Street, Kopera led Schwartz by one imp.
In semifinal play on Saturday, the Schwartz team, a foursome including Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif., Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Michael Polowan of Manhattan, won by 50 imps against a group led by Bruce Rogoff of Ridgewood, N.J.
Kopera, whose team consists of Michael Radin, Kitty Munson, John Rengstorff, Jared Lilienstein and Glenn Milgrim, all of Manhattan, defeated Edgar Kaplan of Manhattan and his team by 22 imps.


Evolution Benefits Species as a Whole; To Combat Boredom
To the Editor:
"The Male of the Species: Why Is He Needed?" (Science Times, May 17) is a zanily humorous article, which only in its conclusion hits upon the probable real reason there is a male of the species.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; As baby boomers near 50, Keds goes after a new niche: casual footwear for today's 'mature' woman.
O.K., advertising strategists of America, here are two demographic certainties: (1) The leading edge of the baby boom is turning 50. (2) Women of the baby-boom generation will not tolerate the conventions that many of their older Eisenhower-era sisters were accustomed to.
The big picture?
There will be seismic changes in family relationships, employment patterns and the equality of opportunity for women.
But advertisers, to be sure, are more interested in the small picture.
The one that gives them a niche opportunity.


Seagram Cuts Ties With DDB Needham
The Seagram Company has ended an agency relationship of 32 years by dismissing DDB Needham Worldwide in New York as one of its global agencies, handling accounts with billings estimated at $41 million.
The dismissal came as Seagram placed all its brands at the agency, like Chivas Regal Scotch whisky, in review and excluded DDB Needham from that review.
"DDB Needham helped Seagram to grow those brands over the years," Chris Tofalli, a Seagram spokesman in New York, said Friday, "but we feel it's an appropriate time to begin a review on a global basis." Besides the Chivas brand, the review involves two other global accounts, Crown Royal whisky and Cordon Rouge de Mumm Champagne, and two Seagram accounts in this country, Captain Morgan Original Spiced Rum and Myers's rum.


Abroad at Home; The Lying Machine
Henry Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, has taken exception to a recent column of mine.
It noted that 20,492 Americans died in Vietnam while he and Richard Nixon made policy on the war, in the years 1969-72.
It quoted H. R. Haldeman's diaries as saying that on Dec. 15, 1970, Mr.
Kissinger objected to an early peace initiative because there might be bad results before the 1972 election.
In a letter to the editor of The New York Times, Mr.
Kissinger said the column had pounced "on a single entry in 600 pages" of the diaries to show that "President Nixon's Vietnam policy was driven by electoral politics."


Corrections
An article on May 31 about health care insurance for recent college graduates misstated the percentage of insurance companies offering individual coverage.
It is 5 percent, not 95.


Books of The Times; Putting a Human Face On One Shattering Day
D-Day, June 6, 1944  The Climactic Battle of World War II  By Stephen E. Ambrose  Illustrated. 655 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.
To many Americans old enough to remember 50 years ago today, the Allied invasion of Nazi-occupied France was a series of crackling radio announcements with a sense of inevitable victory about them.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions yesterday about a Navy diving exhibition at the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum misstated the purpose of the event.
The divers were performing as part of Fleet Week celebrations, but not specifically to honor Russian soldiers who fought in World War II.


Review/Jazz; Keith Jarrett and Trio In Gentle Discoveries
Keith Jarrett changes with his setting.
In solo piano concerts, he becomes orchestral, rolling out expansive ostinatos and grand gospel chords.
But with a trio, his playing turns transparent and sparse, full of fragile implications and weightless melodies.
Mr.
Jarrett's only performances anywhere this year took place over the weekend at the Blue Note.
He led the trio he has worked with since 1983, with Gary Peacock on bass and Jack DeJohnette on drums, and Friday's first set included, as usual, standards both well known (the Gershwins' "How Long Has This Been Going On?," Charlie Parker's "Now's the Time") and obscure.
The three-night engagement was Mr.
Jarrett's first New York club date in 11 years, and for it he turned the club into a miniature concert hall; smoking was prohibited, and no food or drinks were served during the set.
The music was recorded for a possible album.


Commencements; College of S.I. Hears Mayor Praise Area
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, addressing the graduating class of the College of Staten Island yesterday, used the occasion to extol some of the borough's favorite sons and to praise the section of the city that many considered crucial to his mayoral victory last year.
"The College of Staten Island is an extraordinary place of which you can be very proud," Mr.
Giuliani told the 1,800 graduates seated with 3,000 other people under a huge white tent on the lawn of the sprawling 204-acre campus.
"It has a unique identity that sets it apart, just as Staten Island has a unique identity."


CHRONICLE
How can six hands play one piano?
"You all have to be slim," said JOHN CONTIGUGLIA, who, with his twin brother, RICHARD, and RUTH LAREDO, will be doing just that next Monday.
The trio, with some other composers and musicians, will be among the participants celebrating the 50th anniversary of WNYC-FM, a classical music station, with a live concert to be broadcast from Alice Tully Hall.
Tickets are from $50 to $125, the highest price including a reception after the concert.


Uncharted Law for a Man Between Life and Death
Joey Fiori was 21 years old in 1971, a Vietnam veteran looking forward to a Navy career as an officer specializing in nuclear physics and planning to marry his childhood sweetheart.
It was not to be.


Murray Cutler, 78, Lawyer Who Took on Criminal-Defense Cases
Murray Cutler, a Brooklyn criminal-defense lawyer for 46 years whose clients included accused killers, rapists and drug dealers and the reputed kingpin of gambling in New York in the 1940's, died at his Brooklyn home yesterday after a long illness.
He was 78 years old.
Colon cancer was the cause of death, said his son, Richard.


Reviews/Rock; A New-Wave Diva of Many Voices
Alison Moyet has a cult following that she developed in the early 1980's with the duo Yaz, which also featured the former Depeche Mode synthesizer stroker Vince Clarke.
The short-lived band brought new wave to dance floors everywhere with "Only You" and "Situation," songs that struck a chord with romantic-minded misfits.
Today, Ms.
Moyet is a new-wave diva, backing her rich, robust voice with gliding melodies and synthesizer effluvia.
Unfortunately, a cult follows its leader blindly, or, in Ms.
Moyet's case, deafly.
At a crowded concert on Friday night at Irving Plaza, Ms.
Moyet's fans stomped and hollered wildly as she belted out songs that were severely hampered by a tinny sound mix and a shoddy backing band.
Whenever her voice began to soar, the music dragged it back down.
The guitar strumming sounded flat, while the synthesizer lines lacked punch.


Times Mirror and Cox Sign Deal for Cable-TV Merger
Cox Enterprises and the Times Mirror Corporation, two of the biggest United States cable television companies, signed a $2.3 billion merger agreement yesterday, creating the No. 3 cable company in the country after Tele-Communications Inc. and Time Warner, and hastening a trend toward regional consolidation.
Cox, the Atlanta-based newspaper and television company, agreed to buy the cable systems owned by Times Mirror, publisher of The Los Angeles Times, New York Newsday and The Baltimore Sun.
Cox operates 21 cable systems, publishes 18 daily newspapers and owns or operates 20 radio and television stations.


Canseco Continues Streak As Rangers Sweep Red Sox
Rangers 10, Red Sox 7
Jose Canseco capped an outstanding weekend yesterday with his fourth home run in three days, a three-run shot in the 10th inning, giving the Texas Rangers a 10-7 victory and a sweep of the Red Sox in Boston.


Political Memo; Hoping Voters Ignore Personal Stains
Forgive or forget.
That would be an apt slogan for many candidates running for office this year.
While some American legends were elected from a jail cell, the truth is that not so long ago politicians caught doing something wrong would often hurriedly look for the nearest exit out of public life.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  RISING TIDE OF TRADE
Trade between Mexico and the United States reached record levels in the three months after a new trade agreement took effect on Jan. 1.
A1


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  Czech Republic Wins  Ireland, a surprise winner over the Netherlands and Germany on the road last week, was a 3-1 victim yesterday of the Czech Republic in a pre-World Cup game in Dublin.
Pavel Kuka scored twice and midfielder Jan Suchoparek scored a third goal as the Czechs found holes in the Irish defense.
Andy Townsend scored a first-half goal for Ireland.
The defeat follows three impressive performances, a 1-0 victory in the Netherlands, a 1-0 home triumph over Bolivia and a 2-0 victory in Germany against the defending World Cup champion.
The Czechs did not qualify for the World Cup.
Ireland opens its World Cup schedule on June 18 against Italy at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J. (AP) Sweden Wins Nordic Cup: In Stockholm, striker Tomas Brolin struck twice within six minutes early in the second half as Sweden beat Norway, 2-0, to win the three-nation Nordic Cup tournament.
It was the last exhibition before the World Cup finals for Norway, which plays Mexico in its opening game in Washington June 19.  (AP) Brazil 1, Canada 1: At Edmonton, Alberta, Canada produced one of its finest soccer results, tying the powerhouse Brazil, 1-1, on a goal by the substitute Eddy Berdusco in the 70th minute of a World Cup tuneup game.
Berdusco, who entered in the 62d minute, sent the crowd of 51,930 into a frenzy when he hammered a shot high into the left corner over Brazilian goalie Claudio Taffarel.
The goal came after Romario scored in the 45th minute. (AP) AUTO RACING  Wallace Outduels Irvan  Rusty Wallace, biding his time as Ernie Irvan toyed with the field over the first 400 miles, yesterday won the crash-filled Budweiser 500 Nascar race in Dover, Del.
The two engaged in a stirring duel before Wallace held off Irvan at the finish.
The margin of victory was about three car lengths (.34 seconds). (AP) GOLF  Daniel in a Breeze  There was little doubt Beth Daniel would win the L.P.G.A.
Oldsmobile in East Lansing, Mich., yesterday.
The main question was: How many records would she break on the way?
Daniel closed with a four-under 68 yesterday, and her 20-under total tied the L.P.G.A. record for 72 holes set by Nancy Lopez in the 1985 Henredon Classic at the Willow Creek Golf Club in High Point, N.C., also a par-72 course. (AP) Brooks Takes Kemper: Mark Brooks won the Kemper Open with an 18-foot birdie putt on the 18th green yesterday, capping a two-under-par 69 that gave him a three-stroke victory over Bobby Wadkins and D. A. Weibring.
But the tournament at Potomac, Md., was essentially decided 12 holes earlier.
That was when Wadkins lost his ball -- and a shot at his first victory in his 20 years on the PGA Tour. (AP) (AP) HORSE RACING  Market Booster Prevails  Market Booster, a 22-1 long shot, got up in the final strides to beat Irish Linnet by a half length in the $100,000-added Sheepshead Bay Handicap at Belmont Park yesterday.
Fairy Garden rallied late to finish a length back in third in the field of nine fillies and mares.
Market Booster, ridden by Jose Santos, stalked the brisk pace set by Irish Linnet, taking command in late stretch to cover one and three-eighths miles in 2:113/5 over a firm inner turf course.
The Wayne Lukas-trained mare, a 5-year-old daughter of Green Dancer, earned her first victory in six starts this year, and $66,690 for owner Moyglare Stud.
Market Booster returned $44 for a $2 wager to win. (AP) Strodes Creek Stumbles: Strodes Creek, the Kentucky Derby runner-up trained by Charlie Whittingham, was taken off the track in a horse ambulance during training for the Belmont Stakes early yesterday morning but was uninjured. (AP) CYCLING  Yates Surges to Title  Sean Yates of England took the lead in the ninth of 10 laps and won the United States Pro Cycling Championship in Philadelphia yesterday.
Yates, 34, finished with a time of 6 hours 4 minutes 25 seconds in the 156-mile race, the richest single-day cycling event in America.
Yates's first-place prize was $25,000.
Steve Hegg, of Dana Point, Calif., finished fifth and, as the first American finisher, is the United States professional road cycling champion. (AP)


Supreme Court Roundup; Prison Officials Can Be Found Liable for Inmate-Against-Inmate Violence, Court Rules
The Supreme Court ruled today that prison officials can be found liable for failing to protect an inmate from violence at the hands of other prisoners if the officials did not act when they knew of a "substantial risk of serious harm."
The 9-to-0 ruling gave a transsexual Federal prisoner whose suit against prison officials was dismissed by two lower courts a chance to show at trial that the beatings and rapes he suffered at the Federal penitentiary at Terre Haute, Ind., were the result of officials' "deliberate indifference" to his need for special protection.


CompUSA Shares Off Sharply as Expansion Is Trimmed
Shares of CompUSA Inc. fell sharply today to an all-time low after the computer superstore retailer said that it might lose money in the fiscal fourth quarter and scaled back its aggressive expansion plans.
Analysts said that the share price might have plunged further except for speculation that CompUSA may become a takeover target.
CompUSA's warning, issued late Friday, caused a selloff of its stock today after a delayed opening on the New York Stock Exchange.
Com pUSA shares fell $2.375 to close at $9.50 on the Big Board, less than half the share price earlier this year.
Volume was heavy, with more than 1.3 million shares traded.


On My Mind; Facing Nuclear Fallout
The Clinton Administration has to stare hard at one question every time it considers what to do about the fact that North Korea either has nuclear weapons or all the makings at hand.
If it comes to war to roll North Korea back to zero weapons, what would it cost in lives?


Computers in Libraries
To the Editor:
Re "Data Highway Ignoring Poor, Study Charges," (front page, May 24): Pat industry responses to the study do little to assure the public that the information highway won't bypass certain areas.
Access to computers is the goal in Brooklyn's public libraries.
Computer literacy is the data superhighway learner's permit.


By Design; The Bags of Summer
It's time to put away winter's heavy leather handbag and move your wallet and makeup into something soft and light to complement summer's linens and cottons.
The summer bags that look best right now are squishy pouches made of crocheted cord, sisal or raffia, macrame or woven linen in neutral, go-with-anything tones ranging from ivory to earth brown.


Grand Jury To Consider Chief's Case
A grand jury will look into a party attended by the Police Chief of Goshen, N.Y., shortly before he was involved in a car crash and shot himself in the jaw, the Ulster County District Attorney said today.
Liquor was served at the party, which was sponsored by F.B.I agents and a police chiefs' association.


Owners Pull So Hard on Cap, They Can't See Strike in Their Path
A high-ranking executive of an American League team asked a reporter the other day what the chances were that the players would strike later this season.
Told that the chances were very strong that the players would strike, very likely in August, the executive was clearly bothered that management people had not been appraised of the serious nature of the threat.
"It's been kept very quiet in baseball circles," he said.
"No one knows enough about it. When someone mentions something about a strike, everyone is hushed about it."


Confession Is Admissible in Katie Beers Case
A judge today refused to throw out Salvatore Inghilleri's confession to sexually abusing Katie Beers, the 11-year-old Long Island girl who was kidnapped and held in an underground bunker for 16 days.
But Mr.
Inghilleri, 41, of Bay Shore, who has said that the police coerced the confession, said he would still refuse a plea bargain from the Suffolk County District Attorney, James M. Catterson Jr., that would have spared Katie from testifying.


A Mysterious Disease Strikes Serengeti Lions
A MYSTERIOUS ailment has been devastating the much studied lions of the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania, and scientists said yesterday that it had been identified as canine distemper, a viral disease that causes severe neurological symptoms and death.
Prides of lions in the Serengeti, whose behavior has been the subject of intensive study for almost 30 years, have been decimated by the disease outbreak since it was first noticed at the beginning of the year, said researchers monitoring the animals.


High Court Overturns Taxes Often Imposed in Drug Cases
Expanding the constitutional protection against double jeopardy, the Supreme Court ruled today that states may not follow up a narcotics conviction by imposing a tax on the illegal drugs.
The 5-to-4 decision was the first time the Court applied to taxation the Fifth Amendment's prohibition against multiple prosecutions or punishments for the same offense.
The majority opinion by Justice John Paul Stevens provoked a sharp retort from Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, who said the decision "drastically alters existing law."


Fed Officials' Comments Help Push Rates Down
Long-term interest rates moved lower again yesterday, brushing against the bottom of a trading range that has been in place since the beginning of April.
By late in the day, the Treasury's benchmark 6 1/4 percent bonds due in 2023 were offered at a price to yield 7.21 percent, down from 7.27 percent late Friday.
It is the lowest yield on the closely watched issue since April 27.


SOCCER
With the World Cup finals starting next Friday, most of the 24 participants are in the United States, but some are still scattered around the globe, training or playing warm-up games.
What follows is an update on the 24 teams in the finals.
The tournament begins on June 17 when Germany, the defending champion, plays Bolivia in Chicago.
The World Cup concludes with the championship game in Pasadena, Calif., on July 17.
Argentina
The Argentines concluded their preparatory matches with a disappointing scoreless tie against Croatia in Zagreb on Saturday.
They are training at Babson College near Boston.
Belgium
Belgium registered a 9-0 triumph over Zambia on Saturday and has a game against Hungary in Brussels tomorrow before arriving at its training site in Orlando, Fla., on Friday.
Bolivia
The Bolivians have a game against Peru tomorrow and will arrive at UMass-Dartmouth on Thursday before traveling to Montreal to play Switzerland on Saturday.
Brazil
The Brazilians suffered a morale-shattering blow on Sunday in a 1-1 tie with Canada in Edmonton, Alberta.
They have a game against Honduras tomorrow in San Diego and a game against El Salvador on Sunday at Fresno, Calif.
Their training base is at Santa Clara, Calif.
Bulgaria
This is a team in turmoil after the president of the national federation -- who had promised the players large bonuses if they do well in the World Cup -- resigned last week.
The team arrived in Dallas last night and will train at Southern Methodist University.
Cameroon
For financial reasons, the Indomitable Lions have been training in Haiti instead of Los Angeles.
The good news is that the 42-year-old Roger Milla, the hero of the team's run to the quarterfinals in Italy four years ago, is on the roster.
Colombia
The new favorite among the South American entries, the Colombians proved in victories over Northern Ireland and Greece last weekend that they are in impressive form.
They will be training at Cal-State Fullerton in California.
Germany
The defending champion will conclude its warm-up matches with a game against Canada tomorrow in Toronto before moving to Chicago in advance of the tournament's opening match against Bolivia.
Greece
Not only were the Greeks outplayed by Colombia in a 2-0 loss on Sunday, their locker room at Giants Stadium was broken into and ransacked, according to their coach, Alkis Panagoulis.
Later in the day, the Nassau County, L.I., police reported that three hotel rooms occupied by the players were also burglarized.
The team is leaving for Middlesex School near Boston tomorrow, and not a day too soon.
Ireland
Despite a 3-1 loss at home to the Czech Republic on Sunday in its last preparatory match, more than 7,000 fans were at the Dublin airport yesterday to give the team a rousing send-off for Orlando, Fla., where it will train.
Italy
The Italians will arrive today in New Jersey and settle at their training site, at the Pingry School near Princeton.
They edged Switzerland on a questionable goal in Rome on Saturday and will conclude their preparation with a game against Costa Rica on Saturday at the Yale Bowl in New Haven.
Mexico
After a 1-0 loss to the United States on Saturday, the Mexicans have one more exhibition left: Saturday in Miami against Northern Ireland, a nonqualifier.
The Mexicans will train at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., next week.
Morocco
The Moroccans will arrive in Orlando on Saturday to prepare for their opener there, against Belgium.
They will train for four days at Rutgers before their game against Saudi Arabia June 25 at Giants Stadium.
The Netherlands
Ruud Gullit's departure will have a negative effect on a team that was once one of the favorites to win the World Cup.
The Dutch have a game against Canada on Sunday in Toronto before they settle at their training site at the University of Central Florida.
Nigeria
They received an official letter of apology from Dallas Mayor Richard Beckert after a report in a local newspaper quoted the city's police chief, James McLaughlin, making racist remarks about Nigerian fans.
Norway
The Norwegians lost, 2-0, to Sweden on Sunday in Stockholm and will conclude their preparatory matches against Denmark tomorrow in Oslo.
They will arrive at their training base in Princeton, N.J., on Thursday.
Romania
A scoreless tie with Slovenia was disappointing.
Romania will conclude its preparations in a game against Sweden on Sunday in San Diego.
The Romanians arrived at their training site in Los Angeles last Friday.
Russia
The Russians are scheduled to arrive at their training site near San Francisco tomorrow to prepare for their opener against Brazil on June 20.
Saudi Arabia
The Saudis have been training at Richard Stockton State College in Pomona, N.J., for two weeks.
After their scoreless tie against the United States, the Saudis beat Trinidad and Tobago by six goals on Saturday.
They will play Northern Ireland tomorrow.
South Korea
The South Koreans arrived yesterday in Dallas and will play there against Honduras on Saturday in their last preparatory game.
Spain
After a 2-1 victory over Finland last Friday, the Spaniards have a game against Canada in Montreal on Friday, then travel to their training headquarters near Chicago.
Sweden
Tomas Brolin scored both goals in the 2-0 victory over Norway on Sunday and could be a star in the tournament.
The Swedes will play Romania on Sunday in San Diego before moving to Los Angeles to train.
Switzerland
The close 1-0 loss to Italy in Rome on Saturday gives the Swiss some hope.
They play Bolivia on Saturday in Montreal before going to their training site in Detroit.
They open the tournament against the United States on June 18 in the Pontiac Silverdome.
United States
The 1-0 victory over Mexico on Saturday in Los Angeles is the best thing that has happened to the Americans since the 2-0 victory over England last June.
The victory lifted their spirits, but it will mean nothing unless they come away with a victory in their opening game of the tournament against Switzerland.
ALEX YANNIS


Market Place; At Times Mirror, 2 Roads Diverge
The directors at the Times Mirror Company have decided that their shareholders will benefit from having stock in two companies: Times Mirror and Cox Cable, which will be a major operator of cable television systems.
But the people who control Times Mirror -- the Chandler family -- have opted for a different deal.
They will forgo any investment in Cox, and instead take extra dividends.


At Bosnia Mission, News Makes Parties Irrelevant
The smudged windows have no East River view, and the walls are papered with crinkled maps.
Impermanence and disarray pervade the Bosnian mission to the United Nations, where the mood wavers between melancholy and panic.
On a typical morning, volunteers and visitors start arriving before the coffee is brewed.
The college students who file documents come first, followed by two stern-looking Citibank representatives who want a word with Muhamed Sacirbey, chief Bosnian delegate to the United Nations.
By 10:30 A.M., an adviser is conferring with Sarajevo on a satellite telephone, barking instructions and scribbling notes.


Brown Group Inc.(BG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


The Knicks Break Through -- at Last
When the New York Knicks chose Patrick Ewing in the N.B.A. draft nine years ago, euphoria broke out all over Gotham.
Skywriters heralded the news in the city's heavens.
Predictions of an imminent Knick championship fell like rain.
The eagerness was understandable.
New York City, basketball Mecca though it be, had been without a basketball championship for more than a decade.
As the dominant player on the college scene, Ewing was expected to do as he had done at Georgetown: Hoist the team onto his shoulders and carry it to a championship.


Genovese Drug Stores Inc.(GDX.A,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 20


Pierce's Paris Party Hint of Game's Future
It was a Grand Slam event that humbled both of the world's No. 1 players, turned a cold shoulder to Martina Navratilova on her final visit, and made it clear that, in the matter of a grueling two-week war on red clay, top 10 rankings mean far less than tenacity.
It also made a star of Mary Pierce, the French-Canadian-American teen-ager who rescued the tennis dress from obsolescence, and whose life story is the stuff of which Grade B movies are made.
The springtime showers that seem intent on pelting Paris daily parted just long enough on Sunday to make space for a pair of French Open finals confirmed Sergi Bruguera, who made a triumphant defense of his 1993 crown, and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, who reclaimed the title she'd won at 17, as the best clay-court artists in the world.
The finals also confirmed what most of the tennis community already knew, that Spain, which produced three of the four finalists, is the undisputed global powerhouse of clay-court tennis.


Plexus Corp.(PLXS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


American Team Drops Out
DAVID SCULLY, a sailor from Chicago who is a favorite to win the upcoming BOC solo yacht race around the world, dropped out of a trans-Atlantic competition yesterday from Plymouth, England, to Newport, R.I.
Officials of the event, the Plymouth Development Corporation Two-handed Trans-Atlantic Race, reported that Scully and his co-skipper, STEVE FOSSET, of Beaver Creek, Colo., turned back to England from a position about 300 miles at sea.
Scully plans to race around the world beginning in September aboard Coyote, the 60-foot monohull that the late MIKE PLANT was sailing when he was lost at sea two years ago.


Subpoenas Against House Members Rejected
A Federal district judge today forcefully rejected subpoenas secured against two House members last month by the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, accusing the company of "seeking to intimidate, and in a sense to punish" its critics in a bitter dispute over the hazards of smoking.
The company responded just as forcefully, saying through a spokesman that the judge had put members of Congress "above the law" and that it would appeal the ruling.


Judge Drops Logging Ban In Northwest
A Federal judge ruled today that limited logging may resume in the public forests of the Pacific Northwest, but he withheld final approval of the Clinton Administration's plan to protect the habitat of the northern spotted owl.
The ruling by Judge William L. Dwyer of Federal District Court in Seattle left both sides in the long-running dispute free to continue lawsuits contesting the plan.
It delayed, if only for a few more months, the climax in a legal struggle that has turned the spotted owl into the symbol of the environmental movement and the northwestern forest into the foremost test of the Administration's quest for consensus on environmental policies.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
American Scenes of the 50's From the Chamber Opera  Marymount Manhattan Theater
For the final program of its 10th season, the American Chamber Opera Company is presenting Jack Beeson's "Hello Out There" and Leonard Bernstein's "Trouble in Tahiti," both from the early 1950's.
The Bernstein work, a scathing satire of the American suburban idyll, is certainly the stronger of the two.
The composer's libretto works too hard at its social agenda, but the music achieves a fairly seamless synthesis of classical and popular styles, with a generous application of melodic grace.


On Edge of Gaza, a Haven for Israel's Informers
Unlike other Arab towns in Gaza, Dhaniya is not celebrating Palestinian self-rule.
There are no pictures of Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader.
Nor are there Palestinian flags or graffiti welcoming Palestinian independence.
Instead, the wind-swept streets of this town of about 500 people on the southeastern edge of the Gaza Strip are largely empty, except for a few children playing and the occasional stray dog.
Most residents stay at home, sometimes peering from behind steel shutters, checking out Israeli Army patrol cars or rare visitors venturing from Gaza's border.


Kidd Gets a Misdemeanor
A misdemeanor hit-and-run charge was filed yesterday against JASON KIDD, a likely National Basketball Association lottery pick, in connection with a traffic accident last month.
The All-America point guard from the University of California, also charged with speeding, was scheduled to be arraigned Friday in Oakland Municipal Court.


Corrections
A chart with the Advertising column on on May 26, about the agencies recently dismissed by the International Business Machines Corporation, included two agencies erroneously.
Those agencies, which specialize in direct marketing, are Bronner Slosberg Humphrey and Barry Blau &amp; Partners; they have not been dismissed, and continue to work for I.B.M.


Police Search the Records of Slain Teacher
Investigators yesterday removed four boxes of records and personal effects from the office of a Brooklyn schoolteacher who was found shot to death Friday night.
Detective Robert DeLeon said the records from Public School 94 were being reviewed in an attempt to uncover a motive for the slaying of Morris Binder, a 52-year-old teacher who was discovered dead in Queens behind the wheel of his wife's car with several thousand dollars in his pockets and four gunshot wounds in his face and chest.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.S.
SHIFT ON TRADE POLICY  The Clinton Administration signaled that it is ready to jettison its all-or-nothing approach to a trade agreement with Japan and strike whatever arrangements it can get.
A1


Boy, 3, Is Killed in Fall
Despite the presence of window guards, a 3-year-old boy fell to his death yesterday from a 13th-floor window in a New York City housing project in the Bronx, the police said.
"It appears to be an accident," said Lieut.
Thomas J. Sbordone, a spokesman for the housing police.
"There's no indication of foul play."


Older, Maybe Wiser, But No Less Intrepid
"The Belmont Stakes?" asked Julie Krone, treating the memory tenderly.
"One year later, it doesn't fade."
She reached into the memory for more, and said: "It feeds my soul. And it probably will for the rest of my life."


Sports of The Times; Swapping Stitches For the Stanley Cup
IF the Rangers win the Stanley Cup, Jay Wells's name will be engraved on it.
Just as the scars from his surgical stitches are engraved on his face.
No other athletes sacrifice their face for fame as hockey players do.
Baseball and basketball players seldom bleed.
Football players are protected by masks.
Boxers get sliced around the eyes, but not as often as hockey players do.
And nobody is slashing a boxer's face with a hard wooden hockey stick.


New Washington Arena Near
While the Washington Redskins owner, JACK KENT COOKE, proceeds with plans to move his football team from the nation's capital, the area's basketball and hockey teams may be moving in.
The Washington Post reported today that ABE POLLIN, owner of the Washington Bullets and Capitals, and the District of Columbia are close to an agreement for a new downtown arena.
The arena would be built on a mostly vacant tract in the Chinatown area of downtown Washington.
The two sides met for several hours yesterday and city representatives expressed optimism that a deal would be struck. (AP)


Sonat Offshore Drilling (RIG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Old Canseco Rises From the Ashes
One of the most embarrassing and damaging moments in Jose Canseco's intriguing career probably rescued his career.
If Canseco had not completely torn the ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow while foolishly thinking he could be a pitcher last May, he conceded that he might not have discovered he could still be an imposing power hitter.
Even after having ligament reconstruction surgery last July, Canseco's career was still in doubt.
One miserable inning of 33 pitches against the Red Sox helped transform one of the game's great home run hitters and former most valuable player and rookie of the year into a great question mark.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.16
3.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.12
3.14
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.53
4.53
3.30
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.90
6.98
6.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.21
7.27
6.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.06
8.08
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.21
6.28
5.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Hybrid Recital Style For 'The Art of the Song'  Alice Tully Hall
For its Art of the Song series this season, Lincoln Center encouraged performers to explore musical styles or extramusical themes systematically.
The inventive Dvorak and Janacek installment that was presented on Sunday evening was proposed by the pianist Rudolf Firkusny, and although he had to bow out because of poor health, his plan was generally well served.


O.E.C.D. Being Pressed To Change Its Mission
Long respected as a low-profile "think tank" that monitors and forecasts the economic performance of the industrialized world, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development is under pressure to broaden its horizons by opening its doors to more members and involving itself in shaping global economic policy.
As a result, the organization's annual ministerial meeting, which usually only interests economists, has assumed special importance.
At stake when it opens here Tuesday is whether the 25-nation organization can adjust to the changing global economy.


Sprint and E.D.S. End Deal Amid Contentious Letters
Sprint and Electronic Data Systems said yesterday that they had broken off merger talks, explaining that the two companies had been unable to agree on financial terms.
But behind the scenes, recent contentious letters exchanged by Sprint's and E.D.S.'s top executives indicate that deeper mutual differences may have helped scuttle the deal.
General Motors, the corporate parent of the computer services company E.D.S., indicated yesterday that it was still willing to spin off the unit even though E.D.S. would not be merging with Sprint.


Strodes Creek O.K., Stays In the Belmont
Strodes Creek, widely regarded as the favorite to win the Belmont Stakes on Saturday, galloped one mile at Belmont Park yesterday morning with no sign of trouble, one day after he had stopped galloping for no apparent reason.
"He's fine," said Charlie Whittingham, the colt's 81-year-old trainer.
"We thought maybe he stepped on a stone, but two veterinarians checked him over and his legs are clean."


Interactive Move By Leo Burnett
The Leo Burnett Company in Chicago said yesterday that in an effort to expand its interactive capabilities it had formed an alliance with Giant Step Productions, a Chicago company specializing in interactive technologies.
Though the terms of the agreement were not disclosed, Burnett said that the owners of Giant Step, Adam Heneghan, 24, and Eric Heneghan, 26, who are brothers, would become full-time consultants, working exclusively with the agency's creative department and interactive marketing group for a year with an option to renew.


Olajuwon Gets His Man: Ewing; When You Wish Upon a Star for the Finals, He May Show Up
Throughout their grueling, uphill battle in the playoffs, the Knicks have had an unlikely fan in their corner: Hakeem Olajuwon, the Houston Rockets' talented center.
Even as he fought his own battles out West, ultimately leading Houston to the Western Conference championship, Olajuwon watched the Knicks out of the corner of his eye, and pulled for them to join Houston on center stage in the National Basketball Association championship series.


A New Day Dawns for South African Investment
Comforted by visions of Nelson Mandela visiting the Johannesburg Stock Exchange, institutional investors are beginning to look at the country they once shunned.
But few are pulling out their checkbooks and, so far, the main business beneficiaries of South African political change have been large American companies whose stocks were once boycotted.
The big public pension funds that led the anti-apartheid charge are now free to invest in more than 100 of the largest United States corporations with ties to South Africa.
In Michigan, for instance, the $24 billion state employees pension fund no longer faces a ban on more than 40 percent of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index -- including in-state giants like Ford Motor and General Motors.  'Fertile New Fields'
Barry Stevens, the Michigan system's director of investments, said that the change "opens up fertile new fields" and that "before, we could just invest in teeny parts of the American market."


Slump? Try a Yankee Texas Stampede
There had been so many tortuous evenings at old Arlington Stadium for the Yankees that they would have helped operate the wrecking ball to destroy it.
After one splendid evening at the new Ballpark in Arlington tonight, they were ready to help operate the lawn mowers or anything else to preserve the scenery for what transpired.
Especially Bernie Williams.
Perhaps Williams liked the grassy field, perhaps he enjoyed the inviting right-field fences or perhaps he was motivated by having his center-field job threatened, but he responded with a virtuoso performance of two homers and seven runs batted in to steer the Yankees to a 17-7 victory over the Rangers tonight.
The triumph ended New York's four-game losing streak and prevented Texas from reaching .500 for the first time this season.


VOLVO
Volvo A.B., the Swedish car maker, saw its American depository receipts rise sharply after USA Today reported that Volvo might build its first auto plant in the United States.
But a spokesman for Volvo's American subsidiary said such a plant was not "on our front burner" because the company had sufficient capacity in Europe.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Miami Eliminates Auburn  Danny Buxbaum's two-run double in the seventh inning helped Miami overcome six errors and eliminated Auburn from the College World Series by defeating the Tigers, 7-5, yesterday in Omaha.
Miami will play Arizona State today, with the loser being eliminated.
Oklahoma will play the winner in a semifinal Thursday afternoon.


Wells Rich Wins 2d Insurer Account
Wells Rich Greene BDDP has landed a second insurance account and, as expected, is hiring a creative executive from J. Walter Thompson New York.
The American General Corporation, a life insurance company in Houston, awarded its account to Wells Rich, joining the Liberty Mutual Insurance Company, which sells casualty and property insurance.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $10 million.
Linda Gavlick Heaney, a spokeswoman for Wells Rich in New York, confirmed a report of the assignment this week in Adweek.
She said the agency was awarded the account after a three-month review that was narrowed to two other New York-based finalists, Adler Boschetto Peebles &amp; Partners and Grey Advertising.


Law on Abortion Protesters Gets First Test
Demonstrating its intention to crack down on abortion protesters who block access to clinics, the Clinton Administration announced tonight that Federal prosecutors had used the new Federal law to arrest six demonstrators who tried to block a clinic in Milwaukee over the weekend.
An affidavit filed in Federal court in Milwaukee today said the demonstrators used chains and containers weighted with concrete to attach themselves to two cars blocking the entrance to the downtown clinic on Saturday.
The protest closed the clinic for more than an hour before local police and firefighters pried the protesters loose.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Mixing East and West, Now From the Asian Side  The Kitchen
Western composers of an experimental stripe have been trying for decades to mix Asian and Western techniques.
Now Asian composers are offering their own perspective, and in recent years their hybrids have been far more persuasive than those of their Western predecessors.
The New Music Consort offered a few recent efforts in this direction on Saturday evening.


Sanderson Farms Inc.(SAFM,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Valenzuela 9-2 in Mexico Play
FERNANDO VALENZUELA, 33, improved his record to 9-2 by pitching a five-hitter as the Jalisco Charros defeated Dos Laredos, 9-3, Sunday in a seven-inning Mexican League game, the second half of a doubleheader in Guadalajara. (AP)


9 Youths Shot at Party Near Los Angeles
Frank Chen's parents were asleep upstairs in their million-dollar home and the last few teen-age partygoers at his "end of the year jam" were cleaning up quietly early Sunday morning when gunfire raked the swimming pool area and someone screamed, "Everybody run!"
Bullets crashed through the glass patio doors and ripped through the drawn curtains where half a dozen young people were watching television at about 1 A.M.
Only one managed to rise from the couch before all were gunned down, Chief Frank Wills said today.


Moore Medical Corp.(MMD,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


The Day of Decision: G.I.'s 'Pulled This Out'
On the fog-shrouded evening of Jan. 15, 1944, Gen.
Dwight D. Eisenhower arrived in the Addison Road Station in London aboard a train from Scotland, the final leg of his trip from Washington, to take up his duties as Supreme Commander, Allied Expeditionary Forces.
He did so with a directive from the combined chiefs of staff of the United States and Britain:


Hold It! Rangers Are the First to Say Cup Isn't in the Bag Just Yet
A continent away, their followers are in a strange position the Rangers have not inspired in generations: Somewhere between staking out positions along the victory parade route and waiting for that bolt of lightning to strike the team bus on its way to Pacific Coliseum.
The spot on the curb may appear more promising than it has in the lifetime of many of those fans.
Especially after the implausible trifecta that struck the Vancouver Canucks in Game 3 of this final series: the two shockingly bad goals allowed by gifted goalkeeper Kirk McLean, and Pavel Bure's first-period game misconduct penalty.


Soothing Report on Labor Relations
A Presidential commission on labor-management relations released a scrupulously balanced fact-finding report last week to the applause of labor and business.
But the warm reception was testimony to the commission's decision, for now, to sidestep controversy.
The commission, headed by former Labor Secretary John Dunlop, points to several disturbing trends: slow productivity growth, falling wages of low-paid males, declining union membership and escalating workplace litigation.
These trends are mostly beyond Congress's reach.
But the report does show where Washington could help.


Reviews/Television; Priests, Boys and Abuse, As Considered by HBO
The subject: priests sexually abusing very young boys.
How can television, addicted to the sensational and explosive, possibly resist?
Recurrent headlines provide the fodder; institutional wafflings fuel speculation.
So tonight, HBO's "Lifestories: Families in Crisis," a series of fact-based, 25-minute dramas, offers "A Child Betrayed: The Calvin Mire Story." Calvin (Blake Bashoff) is an 11-year-old chosen by Father Rooney (Craig Wasson) to become an altar boy.
Calvin's joy quickly fades when the priest summons him to receive a "special type of confession" in church.
Bruce Harmon's script does manage to convey a good deal of emotion in a short amount of time.
Calvin's battered innocence is sensitively reflected as he feels increasingly isolated, not only from his devout mother, who has no idea of what is happening, but also from the other altar boys, who do know but feel that complaining will "only make it worse."


Stocks Rise on Fed News, Then Slip
For much of yesterday, the stock market rallied as a report that the Federal Reserve Board was unlikely to raise interest rates in the next few weeks sent bond prices higher.
But by the afternoon, stock traders were selling their suddenly more valuable shares as they took profits after having little to show in the trendless market of the last few weeks.
The major indexes closed mixed and barely changed.


Pollution Threatens World's Caviar Source
AFTER two million years of a most celebrated existence in the Caspian Sea, the sturgeon -- and caviar, its revered offspring -- have been pushed by pollution, corruption and greed to the edge of extinction.
More than 90 percent of sturgeon and 95 percent of all black caviar come from the Caspian, which despite its name is the world's largest lake.
A full-grown beluga, the largest member of the sturgeon family, can weigh a ton and carry more than two million eggs, although its relatives, the sevruga and osetra, are more common and not nearly as big.


Lawyer Joins Wasserstein; Latin Focus
Mario L. Baeza, a Wall Street lawyer with short-lived diplomatic aspirations, switched careers yesterday and joined the Wasserstein Perella Group as a senior executive who will concentrate on building Latin American business for the New York investment bank.
"Every so often the spirit of adventure calls," said Mr.
Baeza, who is leaving the law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, where he started 20 years ago after graduating from Harvard Law School.


Hope and Frustration: A Ghost Village Is Born
IT was a Sunday in the Hamptons as bright as new chrome, and the chairs and blankets were unfolding in lazy profusion.
No activity seemed the best.
But for some people -- too many for narrow Dune Road -- it was the perfect day to drive out and see the wracked land and ruined houses that became a village the other day.


Ewing's Challenge Grows Ever Tougher
Although some suggested that John Starks or Charles Oakley were the keys to the Knicks' success this season, Pat Riley knew that they would never reach the National Basketball Association finals without a strong performance by Patrick Ewing.
"I told him one time that in order for us to get there you're going to have to play your best ever, and he did it," Riley said yesterday after the team met in Purchase, N.Y., before leaving for Houston, where the Knicks will begin the four-of-seven-game series with the Rockets on Wednesday night.


Invasion And Evasions
No, there was really no place for us Germans at the D-Day celebrations on the beaches of Normandy.
The simplest reason for the Allies refusal to invite us is the most telling: from everything we know about that day, it wasn't the Germans who landed near Caen to free Europe from Fascism.
The Russians have a significantly better reason to be upset over not being invited to Liberation Day.
Without the Red Army's victories at Stalingrad and Kursk and in Byelorussia, the Allied invasion forces would never have advanced so quickly to the Rhine.
It is true that the Red Army liberated "its" part of Europe, then forced it under Stalin's yoke.
But it wouldn't have done any harm to remind the world and the Russians of the really liberating part that their Great Patriotic War played in the fight against Fascism, and to honor them on D-Day.


Mets Don't Mess Around With This One
The Colorado Rockies were the start of this awful mess with the Mets, their three-game visit to Shea Stadium last week a sweep that sent the Mets on this current road trip tinged with more than a little embarrassment.
Things got worse in Cincinnati this past weekend, when a series that started so neatly -- the Mets won 4-3 on Friday -- finished with two disastrously blown games and a tirade of epic proportions by Dallas Green, the Mets' manager.


Citibank Quietly Joins New York Cash Exchange
Citibank has quietly joined the New York Cash Exchange nearly a decade after other big Northeastern banks formed the network to share their automated teller machines.
Citibank mainly wants to enable its more than three million customers in the United States to use their cash machine cards to make purchases at supermarkets, gas stations and shops that accept NYCE cards.


U.S. Steps Up North Korea Talks And Drafts an Embargo Plan
The United States intensified consultations here today, seeking to build a coalition in favor of punitive action against North Korea if it continues to defy United Nations nuclear inspectors.
American officials said the United States had drafted a proposed resolution for an economic embargo but had not yet shown the text to other countries.


In Budapest, Signs Of a Literary Life After Communism
The Budapest Book Week used to be a worthy event, where Hungary's state-run publishing houses dutifully released art volumes, comradely fiction from the Warsaw Pact countries and, in the 1980's, a smattering of Western titles.
Then, after the collapse of Communism, the literary fireworks that everyone anticipated failed to materialize and publishing, afflicted by economic hardship, went into the doldrums.
But at the 65th annual fair, held here last week on graceful Vorosmarty Square in the center of the city, a fresh spirit seemed to dominate, suggesting that new writing was at last emerging in Eastern Europe after a five-year dry spell.


Chess
Judit Polgar registered the greatest success of her life by running away with the Madrid International Tournament, which ended in mid-May in Spain.
The 17-year-old Hungarian grandmaster took first prize with a 7-2 tally in an illustrious field.
Second prize went to the Bosnian grandmaster Ivan Sokolov, who scored 5 1/2-3 1/2.
Three grandmasters tied for third place: Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn, Miguel Illescas Cordoba of Spain and Alexei Shirov of Latvia.
They each had 5-4.


A Sinister Political Turn in Virginia
Many of the retrograde forces that brought us the ugliest Republican National Convention in recent memory have now conspired to nominate Oliver L. North for the United States Senate in Virginia.
Hard-right evangelical activists, educated by Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition, easily defeated Mr.
North's opponent, James C. Miller, a budget director in the Reagan Administration.
Responsible conservatives and moderate Republicans cannot be pleased with this turn of events -- even though Mr.
North could win and thus help realize the party's hope of capturing control of the Senate in this year's midterm elections.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The marketing giant Grand Met picks a boutique shop to create a global campaign for Gilbey's gin.
A TINY new New York agency, offering another example of the fundamental changes remaking the advertising industry, is creating work that is beginning to appear around the world for a giant marketer.
The agency, Krimstein/Clapps Ltd., was opened in September by Ken Krimstein and John Clapps, creative partners for three years at the huge New York shop McCann-Erickson.
The pair, co-presidents and co-creative directors of Krimstein/ Clapps, are introducing a consumer and trade campaign for Gilbey's gin, a brand with an annual budget of $15 million that is marketed in 150 countries by W &amp; A Gilbey Ltd., a unit of the International Distillers and Vintners Group of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C.


Record Label Reissues A Treasured Collection Of Rhythm-and-Blues
When Rhino Records recently reissued seven compact disks of rhythm-and-blues from the vaults of King Records, it not only reclaimed material that had long been lost but also accorded the music something it deserves but has rarely received: a measure of respect.
The music, by artists like Hank Ballard and the Midnighters, Freddie King, Little Willie John and Wynonie Harris, is sometimes raucous and wild, sometimes cool and often extreme.
It's the sound of the American Saturday night.
Harris's rendition of "Bloodshot Eyes" -- "Your eyes look like two cherries in a glass of buttermilk/Don't roll those bloodshot eyes at me" -- is not just a humorous party song.
It is, in many ways, an important pop-cultural artifact.


Ex-I.B.M. Agencies Talk With Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation said yesterday that it had begun talking to agencies dismissed by I.B.M..
Michelle Hoey, a spokeswoman for Digital in Maynard, Mass., confirmed a report this week in Adweek that Morgan, Anderson &amp; Company, the consulting company Digital has been using in a review that began in April, had also sent questionnaires concerning a second assignment to Lintas Worldwide and Wells Rich Greene BDDP, among other large agency networks.
Those two shops were among more than 40 notified on May 24 they were being dismissed by the International Business Machines Corporation in the largest account reassignment ever.


O &amp; M Named To Breyers Account
The Good Humor-Breyers Ice Cream unit of Unilever P.L.C. in Green Bay, Wis., selected Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago to handle advertising for its Breyers ice cream brand.
The account was previously handled by Young &amp; Rubicam New York until Unilever acquired Breyers from Kraft General Foods in September.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $8 million to $15 million.


Balloon Teams Vie to Be First Around World
TO ride the winds around the world in a balloon has been the dream of aeronauts for two centuries, but despite many attempts -- some of them disastrous -- none has succeeded.
Now, at last, the smell of success is in the air, and world-class balloonists are scrambling to join competing teams for what may be the greatest balloon race of all time.
As many as five teams may try for the ultimate ballooning achievement: a nonstop circumnavigation of the globe.
Hopes are riding not only on high spirits but on new technologies and the innovative balloon designs that the competing groups have devised.
Some of the contestants hope to fly higher than any previous balloonist, and they will carry sophisticated scientific apparatus to conduct experiments in the upper atmosphere.


High Court to Rule on Bank Annuities Issue
The Supreme Court agreed today to resolve one of the most contentious issues in banking law -- whether federally regulated banks can sell annuities, an investment usually sold by insurance companies.
The case is an appeal by the Comptroller of the Currency, Eugene Ludwig, and Nationsbank of North Carolina that the Comptroller authorized in 1990 to act as a sales agent for a variety of annuities.
In a ruling last year, the Federal appeals court in New Orleans invalidated, as contrary to Federal law, a 1985 decision by the Comptroller's office that selling annuities was appropriate for national banks as an activity "incidental" to the business of banking.


New Baseball Disk: Hits and Errors
WHEN will digital media supplant books, newspapers and magazines?
"Now!" cry on-line revolutionaries.
"Never!" retort paper-wielding traditionalists.
A new CD-ROM makes both cases superbly.
Complete Baseball, from the Microsoft Corporation, requires a Multimedia PC and will open its season Friday at a suggested ticket price of $79.95, or about $55 from "scalpers." It is among the prettiest references on disk yet it does not stint on content.
According to Microsoft spokesmen, the CD-ROM contains more than 7,500 images, 2,500 biographies (including current players, whose "biographies" consist only of vital statistics), 84 audio clips, 12 video clips, and a featured collection of 100 articles from The New York Times.


Job Agency Head Resigns After a Report Criticizes Spending
The president of the New York State Job Development Authority announced her resignation yesterday, hours after the state Inspector General criticized her for spending about $10,000 in agency money on personal expenses like credit card bills.
The Inspector General, George R. Moresco, also found that the job agency's $99,750-a-year president, Audrey P. Bynoe, had improperly used staff members and equipment for political activities.
The inspector general's report said the authority lacked the management checks and balances needed to prevent the kinds of abuses Mr.
Moresco said had taken place.


Review/Television; Of Women, by Women, for Women: The Heroes
"A Century of Women" is a celebration of some lesser-known American heroes along with a few big-name figures who have helped better the lives and transform the image of women over the past 100 years.
The six hours smack of a progressive-school curriculum, but the vignettes are vivid.
The recounting of tribulations and accomplishments, narrated by Jane Fonda, begins tonight with two hours on "Work and Family." You can meet these worthies:


Review/Concerts; Hard Music in Nature's Soft Embrace
Awakening to the birds of the Ojai Valley as they run through their virtuoso repertory renders music somewhat of an anticlimax.
Yet for 47 years the Ojai Festival has sent its performances into the outdoors and hoped for the best.
Man-made art without a roof over its head is necessarily at cross-purposes.
It seeks nature's certification and at the same time struggles to be free of it.
Composers like Charles Wuorinen, Henry Cowell and Luciano Berio had indeed much to compete with last weekend: the riot of bougainvillea, the smell of jasmine, the dignified eucalyptus and the live oak and sycamore that bend protectively over Libbey Bowl, where all the music takes place.
For every biting exclamation by Varese or Bernstein there has been the soft touch of this blessed valley offered in refutation.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
First Bank N.A., is selling $100 million of 7.55 percent bank notes due in 2004 and priced at 99.722 to yield 7.59 percent through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities Corp., Lehman Brothers, Dain Bosworth Inc. and Piper Jaffray Inc.
The issue is non-callable and rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Panel's New Leader Offers a Health Program
The acting chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, Representative Sam M. Gibbons, sketched his vision of a universal health insurance program today.
It would guarantee health insurance for all Americans by 1998 while raising taxes less than President Clinton has proposed.
Mr.
Gibbons, a Florida Democrat, will preside over the committee when it meets on Thursday.
He will take the gavel from Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who stepped aside after he was indicted last week on Federal corruption charges.


METRO DIGEST
ALBANY EXPANDS WELFARE FINGERPRINTING
The Governor and legislative leaders have agreed to expand a contentious program for fingerprinting welfare recipients to a total of 12 New York counties.
But top officials said that the plan, part of an evolving deal on the state budget, excludes New York City, where two-thirds of the state's welfare recipients live.
A1.


Jet Crash in China Kills 160; Another Flight Is Hijacked
China's overstressed and fast-growing aviation industry suffered its worst single air disaster today when a Russian-built jet crashed near the ancient capital of Xian, killing all 160 passengers and crew members.
In a separate incident a Dragonair flight from Nanjing to Hong Kong made an emergency landing in Hong Kong that injured eight passengers.


SPORTS PEOPLE: COLLEGES;
A Los Angeles jury yesterday awarded $2.1 million to a former University of Southern California assistant athletic director who claimed the school breached his contract and discriminated against him.
MARVIN COBB claimed his salary was reduced and his responsibilities were cut after he complained that black student-athletes were not getting the education the school promised them.
A Superior Court jury awarded Cobb $1.1 million in economic damages and $1 million for emotional injury.
It deadlocked, 8-4, on the discrimination claim.
The university planned to appeal the verdict, its attorney, CARL DOUGLAS, said. (AP)


Specialty Retailers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Wynn's International Inc.(WN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Bosnians Join Geneva Talks On Cease-Fire
After a four-day boycott, the Bosnian Government joined talks today on stopping the fighting in Bosnia, but there was little indication that differences with the Serbs over the length and nature of a cease-fire could be bridged.
Ejup Ganic, vice president of the newly formed Muslim-Croatian federation in Bosnia, agreed to start talking after determining that no Serbian forces were left in the eastern Bosnian Muslim enclave of Gorazde.
The presence of a handful of Serbs, in defiance of a six-week-old NATO ultimatum, had been the reason given by the Muslim-led Government for its boycott.


CHRONICLE
BLAINE TRUMP and PRINCESS FIRYAL of Jordan weren't discussing hemlines at yesterday's Chanel fashion show and luncheon for New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center's department of obstetrics and gynecology.
They were discussing basketball as they sat under a tent at Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
"We didn't get to sleep until 3 A.M.," said Mrs.
Trump, who had sat courtside at Madison Square Garden with her husband, Robert, cheering on the New York Knicks on Sunday night.
Afterward, the Trumps celebrated the team's victory over the Indiana Pacers with Pat Riley, the Knicks' coach, at Elaine's.


New York City Seeks to Sell U.N. Plaza Hotel to Help Close Deficit
The very thought of checking into a hotel owned by a city government that faces a $2.3 billion deficit might be enough to send some tourists screaming back to Kansas.
Yet New York City has managed to become one of the premier hoteliers in town.
For nearly 20 years it has owned the sparkling pair of blue-glass-and-steel towers above the East River known as the United Nations Plaza Hotel.


Albany to Expand Fingerprinting Plan For Welfare Funds
The Governor and legislative leaders have agreed to expand a contentious program for fingerprinting welfare recipients to a total of 12 counties.
But top officials said today that the plan, part of an evolving deal on the state budget, excludes New York City, where two-thirds of the state's welfare recipients live.
Details of the fingerprinting program -- aimed at curbing welfare fraud -- emerged today as negotiators rushed to seal the final details of the roughly $34 billion state budget, which is now more than two months late.
Though several important parts of the budget remained unsettled, the package includes more than $450 million in tax cuts, mostly to businesses, and is loaded with election-year spending projects across the state.


U.S. IS SOFTENING STANCE IN TALKS ON JAPAN TRADE
Having learned in the last year that it did not have as much economic leverage over Japan as it thought, the Clinton Administration signaled today that it was ready to jettison its all-or-nothing, package-deal approach to a trade agreement with Japan and strike whatever arrangements it could get piece by piece.
The United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, first hinted at the change in remarks to reporters today, and he later elaborated in an interview.
Since opening trade talks with Japan last July, the Administration has been pressing Tokyo for a package deal, known as a "framework," that would consist of agreements for opening five priority markets in Japan: automobiles, auto parts, insurance, medical equipment and telecommunications.


Tarpley Doesn't Want Dallas
ROY TARPLEY wants to play in the N.B.A. again, but not for the Dallas Mavericks.
Tarpley, barred three years ago for a minimum of two years after violating the N.B.A.'s drug-abuse policy three times, has completed a substance-abuse program and has applied for reinstatement.
But he told The Chicago Tribune he did not want to rejoin the Mavericks.
"It would be like stepping back into the fire to return to Dallas," Tarpley said.
He expressed no team preference. (AP)


The News From Normandy


Executive Changes
ANHEUSER-BUSCH COS., St.
Louis, appointed John E. Jacob executive vice president and chief communications officer.
KING WORLD PRODUCTIONS INC., New York, named Anthony Hull chief financial officer.


Tigers Crash the Party By Punishing Red Sox
Tigers 11, Red Sox 5
For the first time all season, Sparky Anderson and the Detroit Tigers are allowing themselves to think about the pennant race.


Pepsi and South Africa To Get Together Again
Pepsi-Cola International announced yesterday that it would return to South Africa, nine years after selling its beverage business there in response to international economic sanctions.
In a bid to compete against Coca-Cola, Pepsi has formed a joint bottling venture in which black investors from the United States hold a majority stake, according to the company.


Patterns
Eye Patches from Barneys?
When Gabrielle began singing in London clubs in 1990, she was one of a kind: hair marcelled like Josephine Baker's, a sequin-encrusted eye patch over one eye, 1940's-style glamorous dresses and chunky sneakers.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CENTURY TELEPHONE ENTERPRISES INC., Monroe, La., a telecommunications company, signed a definitive agreement to sell its Minnesota cellular system to Pricellular Corp., a closely held company, for $21.5 million.
CONVEST ENERGY CORP., Houston, an oil and gas exploration company, said it had signed a letter of intent to repurchase oil and gas assets and about 1.3 million of its shares, or 31 percent of the stock outstanding, for $18.5 million in cash, from two units of Windsor Energy Corp., and a limited partnership of which Windsor is a general partner.


Fed Reports on Intervention and Currency Sales
Monetary authorities in the United States intervened on April 29 in foreign exchange markets to support the dollar and bought $700 million by selling German marks and Japanese yen, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York said in its quarterly report on foreign exchange activities.
The New York Fed report to Congress covers February through April.


Shostakovich to Louis Armstrong
The complete string quartets of Shostakovich, a farewell recital by the Dutch soprano Elly Ameling, a new series of Sunday morning concerts and a Louis Armstrong Festival are among the offerings on the Lincoln Center Productions schedule for the 1994-95 season.
Great Performers, the center's main series of symphonic, chamber and recital programs, opens on Oct. 21 with Seiji Ozawa conducting the Boston Symphony Orchestra in an all-Berlioz program that will include the recently discovered Messe Solonelle.
Other orchestras scheduled to perform in Avery Fisher Hall include the Los Angeles Philharmonic, the Russian National Symphony Orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, the Israel Philharmonic and the London Symphony.


H.I.V. Testing For Children In Foster Care
In the most aggressive effort yet to identify and treat children with H.I.V. in New York State, the Department of Social Services plans to begin routine testing of children in the foster-care system who are believed to have been exposed to the virus.
State Social Services Commissioner Michael J. Dowling said his department was developing regulations to require that all children entering foster care be evaluated for H.I.V. infection within five days.
If a child is found to have risk factors, like drug addiction at birth, an H.I.V. test would be performed within a month, he said.


Same Listeners Could Hear WNYC Programs
To the Editor:
I'd like to explain to B. Elizabeth Mina (letter, May 27) why I described the WNYC Foundation's understanding with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani about a sale of the license to FM 93.9 as "an elegant solution."


Man Shoots Wife to Death As She Holds Their Infant
After weeks of quarreling with his wife, Thomas Rodriguez surprised her yesterday morning at the elevator outside the door of a Bronx apartment and shot her to death as she cradled an infant in her arms, a 3-year-old at her side, the police said.
The woman, Joselina Quezada, dropped the infant and collapsed with four bullets in her body.
Mr.
Rodriguez then raised his .38-caliber revolver to his temple and killed himself with a single shot.


Smallpox Virus Gets One-Year Reprieve
The smallpox virus, which was targeted for destruction by last New Year's Eve, will survive in freezers in Moscow and Atlanta for at least another year, an official of the World Health Organization in Geneva said today.
Health officials had sought to destroy the remaining stocks of the smallpox virus to reduce the security costs associated with preserving it and to avoid the threat of an accidental escape from a laboratory or seizure by terrorists.


Westvaco Corp.(W,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  SEATTLE MARINERS -- Claimed Milt Hill, pitcher, on waivers from the Atlanta Braves.


Hidden Earthquake Toll Puzzles Experts
More than 60,000 buildings were damaged in the earthquake that hit the Los Angeles area on Jan. 17, with brick, concrete and wooden structures faring the worst.
But of the 400 or so steel-frame buildings in the quake region -- the type of structure believed to be among the safest -- all emerged standing, most with minimal damage.


Cairo Journal; In Bureaucrats' Castle, Everyone Else Is a Beggar
Egypt has many monuments attesting to the grandeur of human achievement, but Mugamma, the imposing stone building in Tahrir Square in Cairo, is not one of them.
Mugamma, or "the complex," is a 12-story arc-shaped structure.
Nearly every Egyptian enters its doors at some point to do official business with the state.
But the transactions are so impeded by procedures, obscure regulations (some dating from the Ottoman Empire), capriciousness and ineptitude that routine paperwork can take weeks, years or decades to complete.


TBC Corp.(TBCC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Checklist of Tax Cuts
Major Tax Cuts Agreed to By the Legislature and Gov. Mario M. Cuomo
Corporate Tax Surcharge: The rate will go from 15 percent to 10 percent in October 1994.
It will then drop to 5 percent in October 1995, and be eliminated in October 1996.
Mr.
Cuomo's original proposal would have reduced the tax to 10 percent over three years.


K-III Acquiring Stagebill
The K-III Communications Corporation, publisher of Seventeen, New York and other magazines and education products, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Stagebill, the nation's largest publisher of performing arts magazines, from B &amp; B Enterprises Inc.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed by K-III, but an industry executive said the purchase price was about $10 million.
B &amp; B Enterprises was formerly controlled by Arthur Levitt Jr., the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.


White's New Summer Tour
A year ago, REGGIE WHITE was roaming the country as a free agent, looking for a new football team.
This summer, the eight-time All-Pro defensive end is just shopping a message.
White was in town yesterday, addressing intermediate-school students at the Joan of Arc Public School Auditorium on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
Throughout his short talk, White stressed the importance of respecting authority and one another.
"Football taught me some of the greatest lessons about submitting to authority," White said.
"The thing that we are most missing in America today is that young people have no respect for authority. We have to learn how to care for one another and love one another."


Packers' Top Pick Injured
AARON TAYLOR, the Green Bay Packers' No. 1 draft pick, injured his knee during mini-camp yesterday and will be sidelined for up to six months.
The team said the Notre Dame guard was scheduled for surgery today by Dr.
PATRICK McKENZIE, the team physician.
Taylor tore the patellar tendon between the right kneecap and the lower leg.
A preliminary exam showed no damage to the anterior cruciate ligament, a more serious injury that might have ended Taylor's season. (AP)


California Primary Sets a Lavish Tone, Lifting a Long Shot
Seldom, if ever, has there been a better example of the power of money and television in politics than in California's 1994 Senate race.
Over the past few months, by pouring more than $6.5 million of his personal fortune into a television advertising blitz, Michael Huffington, a little-known first-term Republican Congressman from Santa Barbara, has made a real contest out of what once looked to be a political yawn.


Oldest Tracks?
Footprints unearthed in an ancient flood plain in northwest New Mexico may be the oldest dinosaur tracks yet discovered in North America, researchers from the University of Colorado and the United States Geological Survey say.
The four prints appear to have been made by a turkey-sized ornithiscian, a plant-eating dinosaur that lived some 225 million years ago, said Stephen Hasiotis, a doctoral student in geology at the University of Colorado in Boulder who also works for the Geological Survey.


Tiger Kills Zoo Worker


INSIDE
Tax on Illegal Drugs Vioded
In another sign of a new wariness about anti-drug tactics, the Supreme Court overturned a tax on illegal drugs, calling it a version of double jeopardy.
Page A18.
Testing Children for H.I.V.
In an effort to identify and treat children with H.I.V., New York State plans routine testing of children in foster care who are believed to have been exposed to the virus.
Page B1.
The Ultimate Balloon Race
As many as five teams of balloonists will draw on high technology and daring in equal parts as they vie to be first around the world nonstop in a balloon.
Science Times, page C1.


Commander in Chief In the Role of Protege
The week was not about Bill Clinton, the President's aides insisted.
It was about the veterans.
But it was very much about Bill Clinton, of course.
The President was seeking redemption this week on the issue of military service.
He deftly used his speeches to reposition himself in a more flattering light and to court the military with lavish praise and promises that the downsizing of the armed forces would soon be over.
And he relished his favorite role of President-as-pupil.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Badly Gored Matador Finds His Nurse Is the Bull  Alice's Fourth Floor
If you don't see what you want at Alice's Fourth Floor (432 West 42d Street, Clinton), where the Miranda Theater Company is presenting "Cinoman &amp; Rebeck," wait a few minutes: another play will be right along.


A Way Out, if the Right People Lead the Way
On a practice tee at St.
Andrew's Golf Club, the present watched the future hit balls yesterday.
Jim Thorpe, at present the only African-American golfer on the PGA Tour, stood near his golf bag and looked on as Eldrick (Tiger) Woods lofted some delicate lob shots into a small, tight circle.
Thorpe nodded his head approvingly.
"You know," he said, swatting at a swarm of mosquitoes that buzzed around his thick forearms, "this kid is doing everything right. He's got one of the most beautiful golf swings I've seen, the closest thing to Tom Weiskopf's swing I've seen in years. He's getting an education. He's getting all the tricks of the trade of the game. He's got a great work ethic and as an amateur he's already played a lot of the great courses. And he's got his dad there with him.


Chic by H.I.S. (JNS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 7


Dylex Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


No Headline
"June 6, 1944, sent a signal. It meant that though nothing was yet won, everything was possible." -- FRANCOIS MITTERAND, President of France.  [ A8:1. ]


Exclusion of Soviet Veterans From the Ceremonies Is a Source of Resentment
To many Russians, the absence of Soviet veterans at the ceremonies marking D-Day is another reminder of what they see as the West's reluctance to embrace the new Russia with much more than lofty words.
"The overall success of the Allies was due to the fact that the Soviet Union helped to accelerate the defeat of fascism," said Ivan Yershov, a 73-year-old retired colonel.
"Now, the absence of our veterans at the ceremonies strikes a blow to the honor and worthiness of the alliance as a whole."


Metlife Healthcare Pact
Metlife Healthcare, a subsidiary of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York, has agreed with Phycor Inc. of Nashville to use some Phycor clinics as part of Metlife's network of health maintenance organizations.
Phycor operates specialty medical clinics in 21 cities and will provide physician networks to Metlife Healthcare in six cities that were not identified.


Medical Consumers Need Malpractice Data; Minnesota Achievement
To the Editor:
I am delighted to see Minnesota used once again as an example in a discussion of health care reform.
But "Unhealthy Maintenance Organizations" by Kip Sullivan and Keith W. Sehnert (Op-Ed, May 30) draws all the wrong lessons from Minnesota.


Q&amp;A
Kamikaze Cardinal
Q.
A male cardinal has been bashing himself against a window of my house for weeks.
He did it last year, too.
Why is he doing it and how can I get him to stop?
And how long do cardinals live?


Watch Out: Here Comes Johnson on TV
Jimmy Johnson, the former Dallas Cowboy coach turned Fox Network football broadcaster, said yesterday that he had received two solid offers to return to coaching in the National Football League this season but would not come back until next season at the earliest.
Johnson said he has completely thrown himself into his new job, and has blinders on as far as coaching this season is concerned.
And he promised not to bite his tongue when commenting on controversial subjects.


Golden Venture Anniversary Is Remembered by Three Who Took Part


Books of The Times; Life's Plain Certainties Cast in Mysterious Guises
The Spectacle of the Body  By Noy Holland  190 pages. Alfred A. Knopf.. $20.
"The Spectacle of the Body," the title of Noy Holland's debut collection of stories, tells it all: her prose-poem tales, spun out of yards and yards of spangled language, are all concerned, at heart, with the mortality of the human body, its short, precarious holiday here on earth, its susceptibility to accidents and disease and sorrow.


John R. Wilhelm, D-Day Reporter, 78
John R. Wilhelm, dean emeritus of the College of Communication at Ohio University and a war correspondent who covered the Allied landing on Omaha Beach in Normandy, died yesterday at the Creighton Center at Collington, a retirement community in Mitchellville, Md.
He was 78 and the cause of death was pneumonia and asthma, the university said.


Nextel Signs $175 Million Mexico Deal
Nextel Communications Inc., an American company that already has an alliance in Canada, announced today that it would invest at least $175 million in a Mexican wireless telecommunications company to facilitate setting up an integrated North American network of cellular telephones, message-paging and two-way radio services.
Under the digital network planned by Nextel, which is based in Rutherford, N.J., international customers would be able to receive messages or make cellular phone calls throughout North America using the same piece of hand-held equipment, starting in 1996.
This is expected to be especially useful in border areas like San Diego and Laredo, Tex.


Wars and Generations
The occasion was electric with memory and feeling, and freighted with the ambiguity that surrounds this Commander in Chief's relationship with the military.
With three generations watching, President Clinton kept his footing in his difficult address yesterday at the U.S. cemetery on the bluffs above Omaha Beach.
Of the Americans who fell there 50 years ago, Mr.
Clinton's best phrase said it all: "They were the fathers we never knew, the uncles we never met . . . the heroes we can never repay. They gave us our world."
Mr.
Clinton was right to opt for homage and humility rather than the soaring martial rhetoric used in the same place 10 years ago by another noncombatant chief commander, Ronald Reagan.
The words touched the right chord not just for Americans, but for the British, the French, the Canadians and eight other nationalities in the extended Allied family.


Medical Consumers Need Malpractice Data
To the Editor:
"You Bet Your Life. Do You Know the Odds?" (The Week in Review, May 29) asks: "How much information about the competence of doctors are patients entitled to have?" The question is critically important to health care reform.


Intractable Pain Of Sickle Cell Begins to Yield
THE pain is like no other, its sufferers say, deep, gnawing agony that goes to the bone.
Those who have experienced other conditions known for their measure of pain, like cancer, childbirth, arthritis and surgery, almost always say none compares with the torment of sickle cell disease.
The pain of sickle cell is not only intractable but in many cases lifelong.
And while many people have heard that the condition is associated with acute suffering, experts say, few have a sense of how bad it can be.


Police Chief in Newburgh in Trouble Again
Skull shaved bare and armed with a badge, Christopher P. Gershel is a dead ringer for Kojak.
And like the detective in the 1970's television series, Mr.
Gershel, Newburgh's Police Chief, has a knack for flamboyance and speaking his mind.


Corrections
An article and a picture caption yesterday about the shooting of a grocery owner at his store in Brooklyn misidentified the neighborhood in some editions.
The store, on Third Avenue between Bergen and Dean Streets, is in Boerum Hill, not Cobble Hill.


Solemn Salute for Those Who 'Saved the World'
At places with names that gleam on the pages of history -- Pointe du Hoc, Pegasus Bridge, Utah Beach and more -- the victors today commemorated their success in breaching Hitler's Atlantic Wall a half-century ago and opening the way to ultimate triumph in World War II.
"When they were young, these men saved the world," President Clinton said of the D-Day veterans who gathered in the American cemetery on the bluff overlooking the bloodiest of the landing beaches, Omaha.
"We are the children of your sacrifice."


CHRONICLE
When FREDERICK E. HART, the sculptor, worked as a volunteer in Jimmy Carter's 1976 campaign, he could not have known that he would someday contribute something more permanent to the 39th President's legacy.
But this morning, his newest work, the James Earl Carter Presidential Statue, is to be unveiled on the grounds of the Georgia State Capitol in Atlanta.
Mr.
Hart, who also created the "Three Servicemen" sculpture at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, rendered the former President's torso from photographs but asked him to sit at the Carter Center in Atlanta while he worked on the head.
"It is a large statue, so I designed the head so it could be removed," Mr.
Hart said the other day.


Looking Back: D-Day's Heroes Tell Their Tales
They look no different from the other guys who hang out at the Grange Hall or the ones who bowl in the Friday league.
But talk to them, the heroes of Omaha and Utah Beach and the others, and they have a thousand tales to tell.
That is just the point.
Most led ordinary lives before their supreme test on D-Day, and ordinary lives afterward as well.
Most do not see themselves as heroes, and they talk hesitantly, if at all, about the scenes of carnage that met them on that gray morning in 1944.


Raiders Re-Sign McCallum
Running back NAPOLEON McCALLUM, an unrestricted free agent who led the Raiders in rushing and scoring in last season's playoffs, re-signed with Los Angeles yesterday.
McCallum, 30, rushed for 114 yards in 13 games last year, missing the final three games of the regular season after undergoing an emergency appendectomy on Nov. 27.
He had 137 yards and five touchdowns in the playoffs as the Raiders reached the A.F.C. semifinals. (AP)


It's Your Money or Strife in Zaire, Where Corruption Reigns
Traveler to Zaire, beware!
Stepping off the sweltering tarmac at Ndjili, the new arrival becomes a helpless fish in a sea of sharks.


Thor Industries(THO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Varco International Inc.(VRC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Ship to Screen 2,000 Haitians Each Week
Anticipating a major pickup in the number of Haitian boat people, the Clinton Administration expects to process about 2,000 Haitians a week when it begins reviewing applicants for refugee status this month on a ship off Jamaica's coast, United States officials said today.
That rate is far higher than the 130 Haitian boat people that the Coast Guard has stopped each week so far this year.
Administration officials foresee such a large increase because they expect Haitians to be encouraged by President Clinton's decision last month to grant individual interviews instead of forcibly returning Haitians without hearings.


U.S. Proposes Healthier Food At All Schools
The Clinton Administration plans sweeping changes in the school lunch program to improve the nutritional content of meals served daily to 25 million children, Administration officials said today.
New rules drafted by the Agriculture Department would set limits on fat, sodium and cholesterol in school lunches and would require more dietary fiber by increasing the use of vegetables, fruits and grain products.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The White House signaled that it was ready to jettison its all-or-nothing, package-deal approach to a trade agreement with Japan and strike whatever arrangements it could get piece by piece, having learned in the last year that it did not have as much economic leverage over Tokyo as it thought.  [ Page A1. ]


Knicks Take Off For Final Mission
Determined to win the franchise's first championship since 1973, the Knicks departed for Houston today -- excited, exhausted and ecstatic about their new status as Eastern Conference champions.
The Knicks will open the four-of-seven-game National Basketball Association finals Wednesday night at the Summit against the Rockets.
And for the first time in the playoffs, the Knicks enter a series as the underdogs.
Not only will the Rockets be well rested, but they have the home-court advantage, and they whipped the Knicks in both their regular-season meetings.


Drama Teacher's Drill: Re-invent the Classics
In "Fragments of a Trilogy," Andrei Serban distilled the essence of "The Trojan Women," "Electra" and "Medea" into an astonishing collage of freely interpretive theater.
Twenty years later, as the director of the Oscar Hammerstein 2d Center for Theater Studies at Columbia University, Mr.
Serban has led his graduate students through their own variations on his initial journey.
As an end-of-term exercise, the students recently created and performed abridgements of 20 Greek plays interspersed with 13 fables from Aesop.
Call it fragments of "Fragments." The breathless sweep from Euripides to Plautus included a modern "Electra," with Helen of Troy depicted as "the bitch who ran away with a white man," and a more lyrically inclined "Electra," complete with a gauzy scenic design and sculptural tableaux.


Chief Timoney: Point Man in Reorganizing Police Department
While visiting station houses, when he gets to the part of his address to police officers about excessive force, Chief of Department John F. Timoney speaks of his former partner, the only New York City officer in the last 20 years to be convicted of homicide while on duty.
Chief Timoney, the department's No. 1 uniformed officer, wonders whether things might have been different had he not been on vacation that day in 1975 when Officer Thomas Ryan helped arrest a burglary suspect in the Bronx.
The prisoner, Israel Rodriguez, was beaten and died.


2 Insurers Face Suits
The New York Life Insurance Company and the John Hancock Life Insurance Company were accused of improperly selling new life insurance policies to replace existing policies, according to two class-action lawsuits filed last week in a Pennsylvania state court.
The suits, which are similar to class-action lawsuits filed earlier against the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, contend that the companies' agents were replacing existing life insurance policies with new policies, even when changing was not in the best interests of the customers.
The companies sanctioned the activity of agents who mislabeled new policies and concealed their true nature from customers, according to the suits.


Earle Warren Is Dead at 79; Jazz Saxophonist and Singer
Earle Warren, an alto saxophonist and singer best known for his work with the original Count Basie Orchestra, died on Saturday at Hope House Manor in Springfield, Ohio, where he lived.
He was 79.
The cause was complications of a stroke and kidney failure, said a friend, Phil Schaap, the radio disk jockey and jazz historian.


Medical Consumers Need Malpractice Data; Protecting Patients
To the Editor:
While our nation is trying to determine how to reform the health system, for-profit insurance companies have quietly worked to assure their shareholders continued dominance (and dividends) over our patients.
The doctors of the American Medical Association believe that no one's interest should come before our patients.
That is what "emboldened the A.M.A." and Senator Paul Wellstone (the Minnesota Democrat well known as a consumer advocate) to propose the patient protection bill, and not "flagging support for the President's plan," as you wrongly assert in "The A.M.A. -- Deja Vu, Again" (editorial, May 29).


Alcoholic Said He Killed, Colleagues Testify
Five and a half years ago, the authorities say, Paul Cox walked into the Larchmont house where he had lived as a child and, for seemingly no reason, brutally stabbed to death the couple -- both doctors -- who had bought the house from his parents.
The case remained unsolved for four years until the police were told that Mr.
Cox, by then a member of Alcoholics Anonymous, had, as part of his recovery efforts, been telling fellow members that he thought he killed the couple during a drunken blackout.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks, The Rockets, A Millennium
IN the madness of the moment that engulfed the Knick players and fans in Madison Square Garden Sunday, the unfettered John Starks, still aglow in sweat from the comeback victory in Game 7, told an interviewer at courtside: "After these tough playoff series we've had, Houston will be a breeze."
"He said that?" asked Charles Smith.
"Good, old John. That adds a little fuel to the fire." It was now Monday afternoon.
Smith had driven to SUNY-Purchase where he and the rest of the Knicks were meeting the team bus for the trip to Houston for the National Basketball Association finals starting Wednesday.


People
*
Jim Surmanek, senior vice president and client services director at International Communications Group, Los Angeles, was named to head a new Chicago office as general manager.


CHRONICLE
VANESSA REDGRAVE, who has provoked storms of protest in Israel by her vocal support of the Palestine Liberation Organization, is scheduled to make her theatrical debut in Israel next month.
ODED KUTLER, the director of the Haifa Theater, said the Academy Award-winning actress had agreed to appear there as a result of the Israel-P.L.O. peace agreement, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


That's No Joke About Cows and Methane
To the Editor:
Your microreport on a Federal grant of $500,000, "to find out if cattle belch enough methane to contribute to global warming," will produce much sophomoric mischief.
In this case the Environmental Protection Agency seems to be investing our money wisely, contrary to the tone in "Of Global Warming and Burping Cows" by The Associated Press (some editions, May 29).


The Bra's Revival Is a Youth Movement
The bra, which has had a checkered career in the last few decades, has moved back into fashion's graces.
Push-up bras like the Wonderbra that emphasize cleavage have attracted business in lingerie departments all over the country.
Seamless, molded styles to wear under sweaters, and sports bras to wear to the gym are also selling briskly.
Most important: younger women are among the most enthusiastic customers.


Signs of Life After Pan Am; Thousands of Workers Stranded by Airline's Sudden Demise Find Training and Jobs
John Wallace remembers the day Pan American World Airways flew for the last time: the Kennedy International Airport maintenance shop where he had worked as a machinist for 24 years was "the quietest thing I've ever seen in my life."
"There was no screaming, no complaining," he said.
"We all just got our tools and left."


Mormons Pick Lawyer, 86, as Leader
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints yesterday announced the selection of Howard W. Hunter, an 86-year-old former corporate lawyer, as its 14th president, recognized as the supreme authority and "prophet, seer and revelator" by the world's 8.7 million Mormons.
As successor to Ezra Taft Benson, who died at 94 on May 30, Mr.
Hunter heads a church that is rapidly growing but is also facing lingering disputes about feminism, intellectual freedom, a recent series of excommunications and, indeed, about the system that has a top leadership advanced in age and in some cases failing in health.


Biagio M. Corvo, 74, Intelligence Officer During World War II
Biagio Max Corvo, a Connecticut publisher who helped organize the Allied thrust in Italy 50 years ago, died on Saturday in Middlesex Hospital in Middletown, Conn.
He was 74 and lived in Cromwell.
The cause was an aneurysm, his family said.


Three Recent Fires May Be Work of One Person, Officials Say
Fire investigators said yesterday that the same person may have been responsible for setting three recent fires in lower Manhattan, including a blaze Sunday night in which the authorities said an arsonist deliberately set out to injure firefighters.
The Sunday fire, which occurred in a commercial building at 79 Worth Street, left a fire lieutenant in "extremely critical" condition, said Fire Commissioner Howard Safir.
The lieutenant, George Lener, suffered carbon monoxide poisoning and cardiac arrest. 'Absolutely Disturbed'
Commissioner Safir said fire marshals believe that two of the recent fires and possibly all three were set by the same person and, because oil had been poured down an interior stairwell and a fire escape in Sunday's fire, the arsonist had been trying to hurt firefighters.


Observer; Farce Among the Swells
For a long time the bumper stickers said, "Virginia Is For Lovers." This was silly.
Virginia for lovers?
Surely it hadn't come to that for the Old Dominion.
For lovers?
Virginia, Mother of Presidents, was being advertised as just another piece of hot-mattress geography like Las Vegas?


Haze Gets Worse in 2 Eastern Parks, But 10 Parks in the West Fare Better
CONFOUNDING the expectations of environmentalists, a 10-year study of air quality in national parks has found that atmospheric haze increased markedly in Shenandoah National Park in Virginia and the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in Tennessee and North Carolina.
In 10 parks in the West, however, visibility improved or held steady, two researchers from the University of California at Davis reported.


Fight Looms Over Curbs On Smoking In New York
Opening what is likely to be a bitterly fought battle, the tobacco industry officially began its campaign yesterday to challenge a set of proposals that would ban smoking in virtually all public places in New York City.
The City Council's Health Committee opened hearings on the bill with a full day of often-spirited testimony that drew a broad array of people, from anti-smoking advocates and public officials to tobacco industry spokesmen, restaurateurs and cancer victims.


Alfred Moran, 67, First to Head New York Planned Parenthood
Alfred F. Moran, chief executive officer of Planned Parenthood of New York City from 1966 until 1989, died on Sunday at his home on Martha's Vineyard, Mass.
He was 67 and formerly lived in Bedford Hills, N.Y.
The cause of death was pulmonary fibrosis, his family said.


Medical Consumers Need Malpractice Data; Consumption Tax
To the Editor:
As an octogenarian and having had a career in the Foreign Service and as an international business consultant, I venture to suggest a solution to the health care impasse.


Santorini Volcano Ash, Traced Afar, Gives a Date of 1623 B.C.
ASH believed to be from a great explosive eruption that buried the Minoan colony on the island of Santorini 36 centuries ago has been extracted from deep in an ice core retrieved last year from central Greenland.
Its depth in the core indicated that the Aegean eruption, which may have given rise to the Atlantis legend, occurred in or about 1623 B.C.
From the top half of the 9,000-foot core evidence has been found of some 400 volcanic eruptions in the past 7,000 years.
The ash spewed into the air was high and voluminous enough to reach Greenland, about 3,500 miles away.
A prominent ash layer at a depth corresponding to 4803 B.C. may have come from the eruption in Oregon that destroyed Mount Mazama, leaving the giant caldera that is now Crater Lake.


Esterline Technologies (ESL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Airliner Crashes in China, Killing 160


It's Not a Dream Season If You Can Only Watch
Five years ago, when both were barely in their 20's, Eddie Olczyk and Jimmy Carson were two of the hot, young stars of the National Hockey League.
They were part of the new wave of Americans with bright futures.
Olczyk, a Chicago native, had hit his stride with the Toronto Maple Leafs, with seasons of 42 and 38 goals, after arriving in a trade from the Blackhawks.
Carson, born and raised in suburban Detroit, was a sniper with Edmonton, scoring 49 goals with the Oilers after scoring 55 the year before in Los Angeles.
It seemed as if both had found a niche and might someday might lead their teams to Stanley Cup contention.


Bitter Memory of Defeat Amid Pomp and Medals
Of the 156,000 Allied troops who landed in Normandy on D-Day, only 177 were French.
Survivors of their commando unit gathered today in the little port they liberated on June 6, 1944, to be honored by President Francois Mitterrand for their heroism.
But while there was wreath-laying, distribution of medals and a rendering of the "Marseillaise" near the end of a day packed with ceremony, France's commemoration of its own role in D-Day could not help evoking the mixed feelings that the event still stirs among many French.


Carter-Wallace Inc.(CAR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Group Admits School Gains Weren't Real
Education Alternatives Inc., the Minneapolis company that manages public schools for profit, said yesterday that it had overstated the academic progress of students attending the schools it manages in Baltimore.
In an admission that is sure to fuel the debate over the privatization of public schools, Education Alternatives said its error in reporting the Baltimore test scores had been "completely unintentional." It corrected the error yesterday; the mistake was reported last weekend by the Minneapolis Star Tribune.


Big Doings In Biology In a Small Puddle
AS a junior field biologist, you visit freshwater ponds in North and South America, Africa, Europe, Asia and Australia, study the creatures that live in them, classify them and then ship them to the Bio-Ark, a floating environment run by the World Biological Council for Sustainable Development.
That is the premise of Puddles to Pondwater, an educational program for the 7-to-14 set and for computers running DOS, from the NIAD Corporation of Buffalo, N.Y.
You start on a continent of your choice and see a freshwater pond on the screen.
The pond is full of creatures at various depths, which you can select by moving the cursor and clicking a mouse button.
A quiz asks you to classify the creatures and, if you answer all the questions correctly, they are is moved to the Bio-Ark's aquarium-terrarium.
If you give a wrong answer, you can go into the database on the Bio-Ark's big computer for further study.
You can also enter the Bio-Ark itself for quizzes in the test center, to see ranks of the top 10 players or even to create your own creature.
You can advance through 10 ranks, through senior field biologist and director of research to worldwide chief of operations.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Donald Byrd's War of the Sexes Ends Almost Happily, if Warily  Majestic Theater, Brooklyn
The war of the sexes is an eternally relevant theme that lends itself easily to choreographic treatment.
Yet dances that show men and women perpetually slugging one another can easily grow predictable and monotonous.


IN PERFORMANCE: RECORDINGS
Movie Soundtrack Takes Little From Other Sources  'The Crow' Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Atlantic 82519, cassette and CD
The death-obsessed, God-haunted, heavily armed avenger who is the title character of "The Crow" has a fitting soundtrack: a canny selection of mope-rock and the mopiest hard-rock, topped off with consoling female voices at the end.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an item in a Reporter's Notebook article on Sunday about speeches marking the 50th anniversary of D-Day referred incorrectly to remarks by Prime Minister John Major of Britain, who cited a letter written by Roosevelt to Churchill.
The letter, in which Roosevelt quoted Longfellow, was dated Jan. 20, 1941; Mr.
Major did not say it was written on the eve of the 1944 invasion.


Louis A. Brown, 89, A Developer
Louis A. Brown, a New York-area real-estate developer, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89.
The cause was heart failure, said his son, Richard A. Brown, the Queens District Attorney.


The Trouble With a Bull Run Theme Park
To the Editor:
William Safire betrays misunderstanding in "Third Manassas" (column, May 26) of opposition to Disney's proposed development in Virginia.
The issue is the site, in some of America's most beautiful and historic countryside.
Opponents would welcome the theme park closer to Washington, where it could be served by public transportation, thus eliminating the air pollution of adding 77,000 car trips a day to a gridlocked Interstate 66.


The Trouble With a Bull Run Theme Park; 'Like a Stone Wall'
To the Editor:
Whatever the merits of William Safire's arguments in "Third Manassas," he errs in calling the man responsible for the nickname "Stonewall" for Gen.
Thomas J. Jackson at First Manassas an Alabamian.


The Tug of Memory, the Call of Home; With Apartheid's End, South African Emigres Wrestle With Options
Courtly and silver-haired, Dr.
Philip Lanzkowski is a prominent physician, chief of staff of a children's hospital here.
But there is one corner of his life he has not always felt comfortable confiding: his origins in South Africa.
"The politics was embarrassing to me," he said.
"At times I was ashamed to mention to people that I'd been a South African."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Brandon Huntsman and Brad Crills, pitchers; Sean Hugo, Kedrick Porter, Rolando Avila, and Thomas D'Aquila, outfielders; Noel Ramos, Michael Wolff and Ryan Hendricks, first basemen; Michael Nadeau and Craig Daedelow, shortstop; and Chris Sauritch, infielder.


Stop Benefits for Aliens? It Wouldn't Be That Easy
On a sultry day in July, a 25-year-old woman, Laura C., waded across the Rio Grande, slipped past the Border Patrol in Brownsville, Tex., and boarded a $49 Southwest Airlines flight to Houston.
Hoping for work and a better life, she has instead subsisted on government benefits and become one more straw threatening to break the back of America's uneasy patience with illegal immigrants.


Dow Falls 12.61 in Lackluster Trading
The stock market closed down slightly yesterday, following the falling bond market, as traders posted the 11th consecutive day of below-average trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange.
Blue chips like Caterpillar and the Aluminum Company of America, cellular telephone companies like Airtouch Communications and regional banks like Banc One all fell, as did Nasdaq stocks like Microsoft and Cisco Systems.


A Big Gain In Consumer Borrowing
Consumers borrowed $8.9 billion more in installment loans than they paid off in April, raising credit-card use by a record amount, the Federal Reserve reported today.
It was the biggest overall rise in more than nine years.
The surprisingly vigorous gain in borrowing, which was on top of a $1 billion upward revision for March, was generally considered to be a sign of continued confidence by households in their ability to handle new debt and not as a sign that they were pressed for cash and forced to borrow.
Installment loans include credit-card debt, automobile loans and other personal loans.


It's Mutual: Both Monk and the Jets Are Excited
For Art Monk, the National Football League's leading receiver who spent 14 seasons in Washington and is now with the Jets, the last few months have been a series of firsts.
When he worked out for the Jets three weeks ago it was the first time he had auditioned for a job in 14 years.
Now, he has to learn a new offensive system for the first time in 14 years.
After his first workout with the team during the Jets' passing camp yesterday, Monk said he experienced another feeling that he hadn't had in a long time.


Watch It, New York! Houston's Desperate
It is the city that never sleeps versus the city that never wins.
Houston, whose Rockets will play host to the New York Knicks on Wednesday night in the opening game of the National Basketball Association finals, is desperate for its first-ever, bona fide world-class championship -- and an intangible measure of world-class, major-league respect to go with it.


Foreign Tie Discussed For Sprint
A day after ending merger talks with Electronic Data Systems, the Sprint Corporation confirmed today that it was negotiating a multibillion-dollar alliance with the state-owned telephone companies of France and Germany.
Although Sprint would not discuss specific figures, people familiar with the discussions said that France Telecom and Deutsche Telekom were seeking to invest a total of about $4 billion in Sprint, the third-largest American long-distance carrier.


Maxwell Is Giving Rockets Their Go
The Indiana Pacers brought you Reggie Miller, the mouth that scores.
On Wednesday night at the Summit, the Houston Rockets will present Vernon Maxwell, the Mad Max of the National Basketball Association.
Maxwell is the Rockets' feisty 6-foot-4-inch shooting guard.
He is a deadly 3-point streak shooter who keeps up a steady stream of chatter.
When provoked -- either by an opponent or an official's call -- Maxwell has been know to fly into a rage.
He has earned a team-high nine technicals in the playoffs.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
A Brother Act In New York Debut  Merkin Concert Hall
Leonid Briskin, a violinist who was trained in Russia and is now a member of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, made his New York recital debut on Monday evening with his brother, Efrem Briskin, as his accompanist.
The repertory was mainstream: Tartini's "Devil's Trill" Sonata, the Brahms Sonata in A (Op. 100) and the Franck Sonata in A. In their best moments, the performances were enlivened by passionate phrasing and a pleasingly rich, sometimes buttery tone.


Knicks Have Champagne Wishes and Defensive Dreams
After overcoming so many challenges to reach this point, there is only one hurdle remaining.
For both the Knicks and the Houston Rockets, the next two weeks will decide whether this season ends with condolences or champagne.
The Knicks and the Rockets open the four-of-seven-game National Basketball Association finals with Game 1 on Wednesday night at the Summit.
It is the Rockets' chance to win their first title.
And it's the Knicks' chance to win their first title since 1973.


'46 Menus Are Stale, Schools Say
UNDER the Agriculture Department's regulations for school lunches, a school that substitutes yogurt for meat loses its Government reimbursement for the cost of the food.
And while it is possible to buy fat-free, salt-free tortilla chips to serve with salsa, schools are not reimbursed for them either, because the rules prevent the use of any kind of chips.


Miller Brewing Selects Bates
The Miller Brewing Company in Milwaukee said yesterday that it had selected Bates U.S.A. in New York to handle the media planning duties for the estimated $150 million national sports television and local media portion of its account.
The decision involves all Miller brands except Molson; the media planning for Molson brands continues to be handled by Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago.


South African Commission to Investigate Past Political Violence
The new South African Government announced plans today for a commission to investigate past acts of politically motivated violence and to make recommendations on those who might be eligible for amnesty.
The panel, to be called the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, would review cases that arose between 1990 and 1993 and would be set up by legislation scheduled to be introduced in Parliament in August, according to Dullah Omar, the Minister of Justice, who announced the plans in Cape Town.


2 Favorites Nominated For Senate
The two major candidates for party nominations for the United States Senate easily defeated their lesser-known challengers in today's primary elections while tougher and more expensive battles were fought for Republican nominations in two Congressional districts.
Frank R. Lautenberg, the Democratic incumbent who is seeking a third term in the Senate, and Chuck Haytaian, the Republican Speaker of the State Assembly, paid little attention to their primary opponents and spent little of the millions they are collecting for the general election.


DeVito, Meet Madden
JOHN MADDEN, the movie star?
Now that Madden is the top football analyst for Fox Sports, anything is possible.
Yesterday, he began filming a role as himself in a comedy, "Little Giants," about Little League football.


METRO DIGEST
ACCORD IS REACHED ON BUDGET IN ALBANY
Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders said they had cobbled together the details of the $34 billion state budget in a deal that reflected both the revival of New York State's fiscal health and the political needs of an election year.
A1.
With a $1.5 billion surplus to spread about like election-year tonic, there were winners and lesser winners.
News Analysis, B4.
SCHOOLS FIND SPACE IN UNUSUAL PLACES
Most of the children who squeeze into the elementary schools of District 24 in southwest Queens, the most crowded in New York City, seem not to realize that they are learning under extraordinary circumstances.
But for their teachers and administrators, life is a scramble of workarounds and compromises.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SYMBOL OF BLIGHT SHOWS PROGRESS
Nothing symbolized quite so powerfully the problem of urban blight in the 1980's as the pictures of curtains and potted plants that were placed on the windows of abandoned apartment buildings in the Bronx.
Now, 563 of the apartments in a once-devastated area have been renovated in Crotona Park West.
B3.
SCHOOL FOE OF 'RAINBOW' TO RESIGN
Mary A. Cummins, the Queens school board member who came to prominence as a vocal opponent of a multicultural curriculum that taught tolerance for homosexuals, said she would resign her board seat.
B3.
HIT-AND-RUN DRIVER KILLS 2
A Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, woman and her 4-year-old daughter were killed by a hit-and-run driver as the mother, holding on to her daughter with one hand and a bag of groceries with the other, tried to cross a busy residential street.
B3.
A VIRULENT BACTERIUM MAKES A COMEBACK
A highly virulent strain of streptococcal bacteria, often referred to in popular accounts as "deadly, flesh eating bacteria," is making a comeback in the United States, experts say.
C11.
The City Council is challenging the Mayor's plan to crack down on food vendors. B2.
Hasidic Jews are said to have abandoned plans to settle a lawsuit against the city. B4.
Mayor Giuliani defended the hiring of four relatives to positions in his administration.
B4.
REGION  ARMAND D'AMATO FIGHTS VERDICT
A lawyer for Armand P. D'Amato, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's brother, told an appeals court that his client's conviction for mail fraud represented an abuse of prosecutorial power.
B6.
AGREEMENT WILL END TOLLS ON 2 ROUTES
Legislative leaders in Albany have agreed to terminate the 25-cent tolls on the Hutchinson and Saw Mill River Parkways.
B6.
SENATE LEADER BACKS PART II OF TAX PLAN
Ending the only remaining political suspense over whether Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey would have her way on Part II of her promised income-tax cut, the President of the State Senate publicly endorsed the idea.
B6. 2 FAVORITES ARE NOMINATED FOR SENATE
The two major candidates for party nominations for the United States Senate easily defeated their lesser known challengers in primary elections in New Jersey.
B6.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3


CHRONICLE
When ARDA NAZERIAN, the director of Governor Mario M. Cuomo's New York City press office, speaks publicly, it is normally the words -- or at least the ideas -- of her boss that come from her mouth.
On Saturday, Ms.
Nazerian was speaking for herself when she paid tribute to HIRAIR HOVNANIAN, the New Jersey developer and philanthropist, at a dinner of the Armenian Assembly of America at the Waldorf-Astoria.
When she finished, ROSS VARTIAN, the executive director of the assembly, congratulated her and said, "You Cuomo'ed the audience."


Whittingham Still Seeks a Belmont
At 81 and counting, Charlie Whittingham is the dean of American horse trainers.
He has won more than 2,400 races, 600 of them stakes, including the Kentucky Derby twice and the Preakness once.
He has earned more than $104 million in purses.
He has trained 10 national champions.
He has won the Hollywood Gold Cup 8 times, the Santa Anita Handicap 9 times, the San Bernardino 11 times and the San Juan Capistrano 14 times.
But in 60 years of prizes, he somehow has missed one: the Belmont Stakes.
He will try it for the third time on Saturday with Strodes Creek, who has raced only five times in his career, who did not win either the Santa Anita Derby or the Kentucky Derby and who did not even run in the Preakness.


DEMOCRATS BEGIN PUSH TO PRODUCE HEALTH CARE BILL
With an ominous fight over abortion in one Senate committee, Congress today stepped off into four weeks of activity on health care legislation that the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt, called "critically important."
Unless its committees produce bills this month for their colleagues to vote on, Congress may lose the chance to overhaul health care this year.
Mr.
Gephardt said, "The way I see it, we need to be on the floor in July."


No Loss for Maddux, but He and the Mets Know Better
Officially, the Rockies won tonight's game at Mile High Stadium on an error by shortstop Jose Vizcaino, whose failure to field a grounder by Dante Bichette in the eighth inning allowed Nelson Liriano to score the tie-breaking run of Colorado's 10-8 victory over the Mets.
In reality, though, this loss belongs squarely on the shoulders of Mets pitcher Mike Maddux, who put together one of his specialities -- a hideous relief appearance that all but blew the Mets out of another game.


CHRONICLE
What authors put up with to promote their books: WILLIAM KOTZWINKLE , whose works include the novelization of the movie "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial," does not like to leave his cabin in Maine.
But he has a new book out, a mystery called "The Game of Thirty," published by the late Seymour Lawrence's personal imprint at Houghton Mifflin.
Mr.
Lawrence died in January.
Yesterday, Mr.
Kotzwinkle set off on an eight-city tour.
"I was his last book," he said.
"I owe it to him."


Top Michigan Court Reinstates Assisted-Suicide Ban, for Now
The Michigan Supreme Court has issued an order that temporarily reinstates the state law banning assisted suicide.
But the order also insures that the law will be terminated by the end of the year.
This is so because the order had the further effect of reviving a commission that was created to recommend how the State Legislature should treat the assisted-suicide issue.


Remembering French Town's Joy, and the Canadians Who Fell to Free It


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; An anti-drug public service campaign wins a prestigious prize for advertising effectiveness.
A PUBLIC service campaign has, for the first time, won a prestigious prize for advertising effectiveness.
The Partnership for a Drug-Free America and two agencies that created national television commercials intended to help "unmarket" drugs among children living in the inner city were awarded the Grand Effie last night at the 26th annual Effie Awards ceremony in New York.
It was the first time since the Grand Effie was created in 1978 that it was awarded for public service work.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
To those Upper East Siders bemoaning the never-ending construction project otherwise known as York Avenue, consider, if you will, the plight of the parent of a 2-year-old.
As the work has plodded along, my son has grown (at a comparatively faster pace) and so has his insatiable interest in cement mixers, backhoes (known as "dig dozers") and that wonderful mystery, blacktop.


Bangladesh Seeks Writer, Charging She Insults Islam
The police across Bangladesh are scouring the country for an outspoken woman writer who is in hiding after Muslim clerics said she should be put to death for blaspheming Islam.
The writer, Taslima Nasreen, 32, slipped out of her apartment in Dhaka, the capital, a few hours before officers arrived there to arrest her on a blasphemy charge.


Dell Computer Closes Out Bad Investments
Continuing to shore up its financial position, the Dell Computer Corporation said today that it had closed out some bad financial investments that had forced the company to take a charge in the first fiscal quarter and would require a charge in the second quarter.
The personal computer company, based in Austin, Tex., had announced its strategy to get out of the investments last month when it released its first-quarter earnings, which were surprisingly strong despite a charge of $26.3 million for losses related to the investments.


Pianist Promotes Elementary School Focusing on Music
Seven years after immigrating to New York from Moscow, the concert pianist Vladimir Feltsman is spearheading plans to open a public elementary school in Manhattan for musically gifted children.
Based on the Soviet model, it would be what educators describe as the first school of its kind in the United States.
The Special Music School of America, which appears to have been catapulted from possibility to probability by a recent $500,000 grant from the philanthropist Walter H. Annenberg, has a projected opening date of September 1995 with 45 children attending kindergarten through second grade at the Elaine Kaufman Cultural Center, a private, nonprofit Jewish music and arts center on West 67th Street, near Lincoln Center.
It is believed to be the first public school in this country to combine early, rigorous instruction in music with a standard academic program.


Mr. Foley, Still Dancing on Reform
"Your ideas," House Speaker Thomas Foley tells grass-roots Democrats in a recent fund-raising letter for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, "will help us formulate a list of our legislative priorities."
Mr.
Foley does not, however, care to hear from the grass roots on one pressing issue.
Missing from the "Legislative Agenda Survey" enclosed with his mailing are any questions about the cleanup of the Washington influence game that undermines government integrity and that was supposed to be a high priority for both Mr.
Foley and President Clinton.


Using Sound to Disarm Still-Deadly Mine Fields
Acoustic scientists report that new devices using sound as a probe may help find some of the millions of deadly land mines that kill and maim the people of many countries every day.
New and old battlefields, from Bosnia to Indochina, are sewn with explosive mines, many of which cannot be detected with conventional metal detectors because their cases are made of wood or plastic.
But scientists meeting here say that a new generation of detectors based on sound echoed from concealed objects could reduce the far-reaching scourge of forgotten mines.


In School; In North Carolina, it's full speed ahead into the digital age and new lessons in ethics.
As Rheamia Nixon taught a lesson in computer ethics, her sixth graders strained to be as law abiding as possible.
"You all have files on our computer," she said, walking over to the classroom Macintosh LCII.
"Does Ms. Nixon go in and see what's in your files? No. That's an invasion of your privacy. W-r-o-n-g."


Corrections
The calendar of events in the Long Island Weekly on Sunday misstated the date of the opening reception for "A Cartoon Celebration: The Berndt Toast Gang," at the Mills Pond House on Route 25A in St.
James, L.I.
It will be on Saturday at 2 P.M.; it was not last Sunday.


More College Women Drinking to Get Drunk
The number of college women who drink abusively has tripled in the last 20 years, to the point that as many college women as men engage in drinking to get drunk, according to a Columbia University study released yesterday.
The study, conducted by the university Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, said 35 percent of the college women polled last year said they drank to get drunk, compared with 10 percent in 1977.
It did not report how often college women engaged in this type of drinking.


THEATER
Variations on Odysseus In a Play From Britain  Ohio Theater
"Waiting at the Water's Edge," a play by Lucinda Coxon, both celebrates and demands patience.
This fablelike tale is as fat, leisurely and dense with social detail as a novel from the early 20th century, the period in which it is set.


Book Notes
A Cookbook That's Hot
When describing a quick-selling book, it's a cliche of the highest degree to say that bookstores can't keep it on the shelves.
But this happens to be true right now of "In the Kitchen With Rosie," Rosie Daley's Oprah-diet cookbook, which booksellers are describing quite seriously as the fastest-selling book they've ever come across.
"This is the biggest, I mean the biggest," said Robert Wietrak, a director of merchandising at Barnes &amp; Noble and a man not given to hyperbole.
"No one on the planet could have predicted this."
The book is so big, in fact, that the publisher, Alfred A. Knopf, hasn't been able to print new copies fast enough to keep up with the demand, and many stores are having to endure numerous short stretches in which "Rosie" is out of stock.
In an unusual move, Knopf took out a full-page ad in The New York Times last week to tell people not to fret because the situation was under control.
"If your bookstore is sold out, don't worry," the advertisement said.
"We're printing more copies as fast as we can."


Fox Picks Seiniger
The Fox Broadcasting Company said yesterday that it had selected Seiniger Advertising in Beverly Hills, Calif., as the first agency to handle the creative portion of the Fox Sports account to advertise the network's coming telecasts of the N.F.L.'s National Football Conference games.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.
Seiniger was awarded the account after a two-month review that also included Cimarron/Bacon/O'Brien in Los Angeles; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Los Angeles; Livingston &amp; Company in Venice, Calif., and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific in Torrance, Calif.
Seiniger will produce consumer print ads, outdoor ads and radio commercials and will work with the in-house production department to develop television commercials.
A campaign is expected in late August or early September.


Brooklyn Woman and Her Child Are Killed in a Hit-and-Run Accident


Critic's Notebook; New Project From Director of 'Les Atrides'
The French director Ariane Mnouchkine and her Theatre du Soleil finally made it to New York in the fall of 1992 with their 4-play, 10-hour onslaught of Greek tragedy, "Les Atrides." The rapture may not have been universal, but the visit established her as one of the theater's most vital, distinctive forces.
Now she has unveiled a new project, which will be playing at her home base at the Cartoucherie theater complex in the Bois de Vincennes until July 10.
This one is unlikely to make it to the United States.


Review/Television; Bohemians of 'Boheme' Reawaken as Beatniks
Of all opera's repertory chestnuts, none has more often been roasted to a fare-thee-well than "La Boheme" by Puccini, a work that had its premiere in 1896.
Familiarity can indeed breed ennui, but an occasional jolt of an imaginative freshness can work wonders.
Irresistible proof is available tonight on PBS's "Great Performances" as it presents an Australian production of "La Boheme" taped at the Sydney Opera House in January last year.
The director is Baz Luhrmann, the young Austalian whose film "Strictly Ballroom" has been warmly welcomed on these shores.
For this opera production, which he first staged in 1990, Mr.
Luhrmann has resorted to the potentially irritating, not to mention dangerous, gimmick of updating.
His Paris jumps forward to the late 1950's.
It is a city bursting with neon lights and espresso bars.
Not everything falls into place.
Animated 19th-century bohemians do not translate very smoothly into laid-back 1950's beatniks.


DANCE
New Faces, Some Unsmiling, In City Ballet's 'Jewels'  New York State Theater
Not even the jolliest smile can mask a dancer's lapses.
Yet there are times when a smile can add sparkle to an already brilliant portrayal.
That was made clear on Saturday afternoon when a new cast took over roles in the New York City Ballet's production of George Balanchine's "Jewels."


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
American uranium producers are fighting an unusual trade agreement between the United States and Russia that would allow the Russians to export far more uranium fuel for American nuclear power plants at a far lower price than would normally be allowed under U.S. trade laws.  [ Page A1. ]


Feet of Dancer, Touch of Surgeon, and a Shot, Too
The skinny on Hakeem Olajuwon is that he was taller when he was Akeem Olajuwon.
He used to be a 7-foot center, when he played for the University of Houston and for many of his years here with the Rockets.
He never looked seven feet.
In fact, when he played against the Boston Celtics in the 1986 finals, he appeared to be dwarfed by Bill Walton, who was listed as 6 feet 11 inches.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  FIGHTING A RUSSIAN URANIUM DEAL  American uranium producers are fighting a trade accord that would allow the Russians to export far more uranium fuel at a far lower price for American nuclear power plants than would normally be allowed under U.S. trade laws.
A1  ISRAELIS GREET AN ANTI-ZIONIST  Jerusalem Journal: Tens of thousands of people welcomed the spiritual leader of the Satmar Hasidic sect.
A hero of the anti-Zionist struggle, the rabbi came to Jerusalem from Brooklyn to urge his disciples to stay true to their beliefs.
A1


U.S. Will Not Fight I.B.M. on Court Ruling
The Justice Department will not, for the time being, oppose I.B.M.'s efforts to end a 1956 Federal court order restricting its business operations, the Government's top antitrust lawyer told a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday.
I.B.M. plans later this week to seek repeal of the 38-year-old rules, which among other measures require the company to provide computer services as an entirely separate business from the company's computer manufacturing and sales operations.


Off the Menu
Shades of Tahiti
The final touches are now being applied to Gauguin, the South Seas fantasy in the Plaza Hotel where Trader Vic's once was.
The first dinner guests will be greeted on Tuesday, starting what may be the longest trial run in restaurant history.


Jerusalem Journal; Hailed in Zion, Anti-Zionist 'King' From the U.S.
His triumphal return, long anticipated by devoted followers, finally came to pass today.
Tens of thousands of people, both the ardently loyal and the discreetly respectful, poured into the streets to welcome back this long-absent leader, hero of the anti-Zionist struggle, who had stayed away from this land for so many years.


O.E.C.D. Suggests Ways to Fight Unemployment
Confident that the industrialized world is pulling out of recession, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development today urged that advanced nations introduce new flexibility to their labor markets to combat stubbornly high levels of unemployment.
In doing so, the organization, based in Paris, identified the most politically explosive question facing many Western European governments: how to reduce "structural" unemployment without eroding living standards and slashing welfare and other social benefits?


Orthodox Judaism in No Way Forbids Divorce
To the Editor:
Accompanying your coverage of the burial of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis you published an article about Maurice Tempelsman, the companion of Mrs.
Onassis.
It states that "his wife, as an Orthodox Jew, would never grant him a divorce" (news article, May 24).


Eric A. Nordlinger; Foreign Affairs Expert, 54
Eric A. Nordlinger, a foreign affairs expert and university professor at Brown, Harvard and Brandeis, died on Friday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 54.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said his wife, Carol.


Tribute for Moses Rosen
A memorial tribute is scheduled for 4:30 P.M. today for Chief Rabbi Moses Rosen of Romania, at the Park East Synagogue, 163 East 67th Street.
He died on May 6 in Bucharest and was buried in Jerusalem.


Australia Doesn't Wink at East Timor Abuses; Parts of a Campaign
To the Editor:
"Timorous on Timor" (editorial, May 24) is testimony of your continuing campaign against Indonesia.
You once again cast aspersions on Indonesia's role in East Timor when the historical facts pertaining to the former colony speak for themselves.


Judge Won't Sever 13 Terrorist Cases
Despite efforts by their lawyers to have them tried separately, the 13 men charged in a terrorist conspiracy that included the World Trade Center bombing will go to trial together, a judge ruled yesterday.
The ruling, by Judge Michael B. Mukasey of Federal District Court in Manhattan, means that prosecutors can employ the same tactics they used earlier this year to win convictions of four men charged directly with the bombing on Feb. 26, 1993, at the trade center.
Lacking any one piece of conclusive evidence that tied the men together, Government lawyers built their case out of fragments and circumstantial evidence involving each defendant that convinced a jury of their collective guilt.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Dr.
A.
Wilbur Duryee, a cardiovascular specialist, misstated his residence.
It was Great Barrington, Mass., not Maine.


Speaker Vallone's Opportunity
The New York City Council has no more vehement champion than Peter Vallone, its Speaker since 1986.
He never hesitates to point out that the revised City Charter has given the Council more muscle.
Now -- city budget time -- is his moment to prove it.
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's budget for the year that starts July 1 heads the Council's agenda.
At issue is his proposal for deep cuts in social service agency funds, while he refuses to seek similar cuts in the police and fire departments.


Mayor Defends City's Hiring Of 4 Relatives
Brushing aside suggestions of patronage, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday defended the hiring of four relatives to positions in his administration, saying that they were hired because of merit, not family ties.
The Mayor said that until Monday he had not known that one relative, his cousin's son, Chris Halligan, had joined the Department of Housing and Preservation as a community coordinator.


Political Battle Lines Drawn in California Races for Governor and Senator
Voting without much enthusiasm and coming up with no surprises, Californians nominated candidates today for this fall's elections for governor and the United States Senate, contests with national political implications.
For governor, Republicans chose the incumbent, Pete Wilson, and Democrats chose Treasurer Kathleen Brown.


A Giant Restrained; Superpower Obligations and Huge Deficits Tie U.S. Hands in Trade Talks With Japan
A top American trade official argues that the Japanese always have an edge in their negotiations with the United States for one simple reason: they get to practice "commerce," while the American side always has to practice "diplomacy."
Commerce is the art of the deal.
It is practiced with a narrow lens, focused on one's own profits and competitive advantage.
Diplomacy is the art of compromise.
It is practiced with a wide-angle lens, focused on what is good not only for the nation's economy, but also for its global relationships.
Commerce is about going for the jugular.
Diplomacy is about holding hands.


Review/Dance; Long, Long Body Lines, Extending And Coiling
It is easy to see why Alonzo King is an internationally popular dance teacher and why he calls his company Lines Contemporary Ballet.
Mr.
King gave his performers a chance to stretch just about every muscle in just about every direction on Monday night, when his San Francisco-based troupe opened for a week at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
Each of his 15 dancers has a distinctive look and way of moving, with a long ballet body-line in common.
Mr.
King takes that line and extends and knots it, over and over again.


Challenging the Mayor, Council Moves to Restore Food Vendors
The City Council is mounting a challenge to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plan to crack down on food vendors in midtown Manhattan.
The Council's consumer affairs committee passed a measure yesterday that would allow food vendors to operate on 17 midtown streets that were previously restricted and were among the streets subject to a vigorous enforcement effort by the Giuliani administration two months ago.


School Foe Of 'Rainbow' To Resign
Mary A. Cummins, the Queens school board member who came to prominence as a vocal opponent of a multicultural curriculum that taught tolerance for homosexuals, said yesterday that she would resign her board seat.
In an interview, Mrs.
Cummins said she had become increasingly disillusioned with the apathy of parents.
She also said she wanted to free herself for public speaking and travel, which have occupied her increasingly since she attracted a nationwide conservative following during her campaign against the multicultural "Children of the Rainbow" curriculum.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae, is selling $150 million of medium-term notes due in 1999 priced at 100 to yield 6.88 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The issue is callable in three years.
Separately, Fannie Mae is selling $100 million of medium-term notes due in 1995 priced at 100 to yield 5.20 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The issue is noncallable. *
J.
C.
Penney Co., Plano, Tex., is selling $275 million of 7.375 percent notes due in 2004 priced at 99.48 to yield 7.45 percent through CS First Boston.
The issue is noncallable and rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Basmati Rice Basics: Pick a Green Vegetable
FOR a menu with an Indian accent, it is nice to use basmati rice.
In this country it is often called jasmati or texmati rice.
Almost any green vegetable is appropriate with the rice.
Asparagus, which is still in season, is a good choice.
The side dish of rice and asparagus is far more ample than the pork.
When paired, they make a satisfying combination.
Game Plan Prepare rice dish through step 4.
Prepare pork dish through step 4.
Add onion to rice and cook asparagus.
Finish pork dish.
Finish rice dish.
Spicy Pork
1 tablespoon coarsely grated fresh or frozen ginger  1 large garlic clove  8 ounces pork tenderloin  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 teaspoon ground cumin  1/4 teaspoon turmeric  1/8 teaspoon hot pepper flakes  1/2 teaspoon ground coriander  1/2 cup no-salt-added beef stock or broth  Freshly ground black pepper to taste  1 teaspoon lime juice.
1. Grate ginger; mince garlic.
2. Trim fat from pork and cut remainder into bite-size chunks.
3.
Heat oil until it is very hot in nonstick pot.
Saute ginger and garlic for 30 seconds.
Add the pork and brown on both sides.
4. Stir in cumin, turmeric, hot pepper flakes and coriander and cook about 30 seconds.
5.
Stir in beef stock and cook over medium-high heat until stock is reduced a little.
Season with pepper and lime juice.
Serve.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 180 calories, 7 grams fat, 80 milligrams cholesterol, 120 milligrams sodium, 25 grams protein, 2 grams carbohydrate.
Rice and Asparagus With Onions
3/4 cup basmati rice  1 1/2 cups no-salt-added beef stock or broth  8 ounces whole onion, or 7 ounces chopped, ready-cut onion (1 2/3 cups)  1 teaspoon toasted sesame oil  18 medium asparagus  3 sprigs mint  1/8 teaspoon salt.
1. Combine rice and stock and bring to boil in heavy-bottom pot.
2.
Chop whole onion and heat oil in small nonstick pot.
When oil is hot, add the onion, reduce heat to medium high and saute onion until it softens and begins to brown.
3.
When rice begins to boil, reduce heat to simmer and cover, cooking a total of 17 minutes.
4.
Wash and break tough stems from asparagus at the point where the woody part meets the tender part.
Cut the asparagus just below the head and then cut remaining stems into one-inch pieces.
5.
When the onion is soft, stir it into the rice.
Place a steamer in the pot in which the onion was cooked and place asparagus in the steamer; cook about 3 minutes, until asparagus is crisp but tender.
6. Wash, dry and mince enough mint to make 2 tablespoons.
7. When rice is cooked, stir in drained asparagus and add mint and the salt.
Yield: 2 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 360 calories, 4 grams fat, 4 milligrams cholesterol, 320 milligrams sodium, 15 grams protein, 70 grams carbohydrate.


Personal Health; Chronic illness need not sap the vitality of life.
MILLIONS of Americans know firsthand that, as President Jimmy Carter said, "Life is not fair." Despite the many miracles of modern medicine, it is still far from preventing or curing a host of ailments that strike prematurely and compromise the quality of a life.
Infants still succumb mysteriously to sudden infant death syndrome.
Babies are born with debilitating chronic illnesses like congenital heart disease, cystic fibrosis or epilepsy.
Children get cancer and die, or live for years under the Damoclean sword of cancer in remission.
Young adults get multiple sclerosis, AIDS, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis or cancer.
Middle-aged and elderly people are prone to heart disease, cancer and stroke.
And anyone at any age can suffer an injury that causes substantial deterioration of health and permanently alters the course of that person's life.


Wine Talk; Onto the beaches, and into the barrels.
THE adage about war being weeks of monotony punctuated by moments of sheer terror applied as much to the invasion of Normandy as any other military campaign.
Once the beachheads had been secured, the operation was for many a slow time.
As soldiers have always done in foreign places, many G.I.'s took advantage of that time to absorb the local color.
And as many of them discovered, that meant Calvados, the famous apple brandy of Normandy.


CHRONICLE
JOHN GAVIN, a former United States Ambassador to Mexico and former movie idol, was on a plane yesterday, too.
He was headed from his home in Los Angeles to Albany, where today he is to have a news conference for a favorite cause: clamping down on drunken driving by young people.
Mr.
Gavin, the chairman of the Century Council, an organization of vintners and distillers that works to reduce alcohol abuse and under-age drinking, will appeal to state legislators to pass a bill that would make the blood-alcohol limit for minors lower than that for adults.
The bill stipulates suspension of drivers licenses for infractions.


Food Notes
To Market, to Market
The Greenmarkets are moving into their summer schedules.
Nine of the Greenmarkets in the city are open year-round.
Others are open only in the summer, and start doing business in June or July.


An Epoch Is Ending But Why?
In the ornate limestone State Capitol that Huey P. Long built and Edwin W. Edwards dominated for 23 years, there was only one question today: Why is Mr.
Edwards stepping down at the end of his term as Governor, a post he has defined in his era as much as Mr.
Long did in his?
Mr.
Edwards, who announced on Monday that he would retire, isn't saying why he will not seek re-election.
But amid the welter of rumors flying through the Capitol corridors this morning, the bottom line seemed to be this: Louisiana, long the nation's capital of anything-goes politics, has lost its taste for even the appearance of sleaze in government.


Like a Summer Breeze, Opera Returns to Central Park


Anyone for a Party? Rangers Are 1 Victory Away
One more victory by the Rangers will end the hockey season and give the Broadway Blues their first Stanley Cup championship since 1940.
They moved to the brink of a championship tonight at Pacific Coliseum with a 4-2 victory over the Vancouver Canucks that gave them a three games to one lead in the four-of-seven-game final round.
Game 5 will be played Thursday night at Madison Square Garden, where the possibility of a clincher will have New York's long-suffering hockey fans primed for a celebration.


Foreign Policy: A Fresh Start
The long D-Day weekend celebrating unity of purpose, commemorating individual acts of bravery and recalling the eventual triumph of good over evil lifted spirits on both sides of the Atlantic and allowed President Clinton to float, at least momentarily, above the foreign policy frustrations that have plagued his first 17 months.
If only today's foreign policy agenda lent itself to such clarity and back-to-the-wall heroism.
But the challenges of 1994 are less cataclysmic -- and far more ambiguous -- than those of 1944.
And when the President tried, in his speech to the French National Assembly yesterday, to summon some of that D-Day spirit to address present European challenges, the exercise looked strained.


Ethnic War Lacerates Former Soviet Resort Area
In the Soviet era, one of the favored spas of the Communist elite was the Georgian province of Abkhazia, where the cragged range of the Caucasus, snow-covered most of the year, lies within sight of mile after mile of Black Sea beaches.
The land now lies in ruins.
At hillside homes with sweeping views, artillery shells collapsed the roofs, and looters followed.
Downtown, buildings are charred skeletons.
Luxury beach-front hotels are empty hulks.


Data Affirm Higher Cancer Risk For Female Spouse of a Smoker
Women who do not smoke but are married to men who do have a small but increased risk of developing lung cancer, a study has confirmed.
The study, being published on Wednesday in The Journal of the American Medical Association, extends findings that were reported three years ago from preliminary data.


Hit-and-Run Driver Kills Mother and Daughter Crossing a Street in Brooklyn
A Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, woman and her 4-year-old daughter were killed by a hit-and-run driver yesterday as the mother, holding on to her daughter with one hand and a bag of groceries with the other, tried to cross a busy residential street.
Neighborhood residents and relatives of the woman, Donna Blanchard, 43, said her life revolved around her family.
A fiercely devoted mother, she was seldom seen alone in the neighborhood; rather, she would be accompanying her 5-year-old son, Andrew, to nearby Public School 104 or running errands with her daughter, Michele.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about stock market activity on Monday misstated the trading volume of the Microsoft Corporation's shares.
A total of 47.8 million Microsoft shares were traded, not 4.8 million shares.


GREAT COOKS: Joachim Splichal; There's a Surprise in Every Dish
IF Oscars were awarded for cooking, Joachim Splichal would have to bunk out in his garage to make room for them in the house.
The chef of Patina, a French-California-style restaurant on the fringe of the Hancock Park section of Los Angeles, and Pinot, a casual bistro in the Studio City section, Mr.
Splichal has won over that fame-propelled city with his electrifying and highly personal food.
"You know, cooking in a restaurant is a lot fancier than cooking at home, but the basics are really the same," said Mr.
Splichal (pronounced SPLEE-shahl), while assembling ingredients for a four-course dinner at Pierre Franey's house on eastern Long Island.
No sooner had he spoken than the phone rang.
It was his wife and partner, Christine, calling from Los Angeles to update him on the two restaurants.
Although the couple have received more press than the chardonnay grape in recent years, they continue to exude the zeal of beginners.


Verlon Biggs Dies; Ex-Jet Player, 51, Was on Title Team
Verlon Biggs, a soft-spoken, big-play defensive end on the Jets' team that won the 1969 Super Bowl, died yesterday at Singing River Hospital in Moss Point, Miss.
He was 51.
The cause of death was leukemia, his family said.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 3
May 27
June 4
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.6
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.5
3.1
Gasoline stocks
216.8
215.8
225.8
Distillate stocks
114.5
110.3
101.8
Crude imports, daily
7.5
6.4
5.7
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.3
2.0
Crude stocks
328.8
333.2
350.2
Crude production, daily
6.6
6.6
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
95.1
95.3
91.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


100 Are Killed As Earthquake Hits Colombia
An earthquake measuring 6.8 on the Richter scale shook several areas of southwestern Colombia on Monday, causing avalanches and floods that totally or partly destroyed several villages.
There were confirmed deaths of about 100 people and reports today of many others missing.


DANCE
Works Old and New In Ballet School Workshop  Juilliard Theater
The School of American Ballet offered the final performance of its delightful spring workshop program on Monday night at the Juilliard Theater.
Once again, the highlight was Jerome Robbins's new "Two- and Three-Part Inventions." There also were cast changes in two other pieces.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Business Week Drops Agency
Business Week said yesterday that it had ended its relationship with Ted Chin &amp; Company of New York, which had handled the magazine's trade advertising account for the last two years.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


Largesse, Even Late
In a $34 billion state budget with a $1.5 billion surplus to spread about like election-year tonic, it would be misleading to suggest there were winners and losers.
More to the point, there were winners and lesser winners.
A vast majority of the state's 718 school districts will receive an increase in school aid.
Seventeen towns will get new sports stadiums.
Most corporations will pay lower corporate income taxes, and an influential few will receive reductions beyond that.
And every county will benefit from $9.6 billion in road and bridge work over the next four years.


AT LUNCH WITH: Mikhail Zhvanetsky; For Russians, Laughs From Home
SEATED comfortably on a red leather banquette at the Russian Tea Room, Mikhail Zhvanetsky, Russia's most famous living satirist and comedian, stopped briefly between bites of his beef Stroganoff one day late last month.
He smiled.
"This dish reminds me of how Americans speak Russian," he said.
"I know what it's supposed to be, but I don't understand it."
Mr.
Zhvanetsky (pronounced jeh-vah-NYET-skee) had just flown from Moscow for a 12-city tour of the United States.
The first show, on May 27 at Carnegie Hall, was sold out: 2,800 seats for a performance entirely in Russian.
Many New Yorkers may be surprised, but not the 300,000 Russian-speaking people who live in the region.


Illness as Marriage Threat
WHEN a married person's health takes a turn for the worse, marital happiness often deteriorates as well, according to a recently published survey of 1,298 married people 55 years old and younger.
The healthy spouse, in particular, is likely to report a decline in the quality of the relationship, and there is an increased tendency toward divorce.
While this finding may seem obvious given the stresses of coping with illness in a marriage, earlier, less exacting studies often showed conflicting results.
In the current study, conducted by Dr.
Alan Booth and Dr.
David R. Johnson, sociologists at the University of Nebraska in Lincoln, respondents were interviewed twice, three years apart, to determine the effects of a decline in health in one of the partners.
The new study also explored the factors that contributed to a decline in marital satisfaction.


Mastodon Findings Raise Question on Human Route
The remains of a butchered mastodon found in sediments deep below a river in Florida are surprising but strong evidence, scientists say, that people were hunting and butchering large animals in eastern North America 12,200 years ago, hundreds of years before any sign of similar activities in the West.
The discovery raised questions about current ideas that the early hunters, arriving from Asia across a land bridge in what is now the Bering Strait, migrated first to the American West and later to the East.
It could also undermine the hypothesis that overhunting by these newcomers swiftly drove the elephant-like mastodons, mammoths and other prehistoric animals to extinction.


Yanks Can't Surmount Kamieniecki's Woes
As a frustrated Scott Kamieniecki sat in the quiet visiting clubhouse tonight after the worst start of his career had lasted two-thirds of an inning against Texas, his feelings were suddenly and unexpectedly buoyed.
Kamieniecki was watching the lopsided game on television and realized that the Yankees might win.
They might save his sorry night.
Forget the 6-2 deficit he left them with in the first inning, the ditch that expanded to 8-2 by the third.
Kamieniecki grew more encouraged after the Yankees sliced the score to 8-5 in the sixth and 8-6 in the seventh and then became as interested as the most ardent fan.
He was a biased fan, even when the Yankees stumbled behind 10-6 in the eighth.


Clinton in Normandy: Hands Across a Generation
It was the soldiers whom people will long remember.
Mostly brittle old men now, no longer the lusty youngsters who "saved the world," they were touching in their simple eloquence, heartbreaking in their heartache for their lost comrades.
Like the old men of the Grand Army of the Republic, veterans of Bull Run and Vicksburg and Antietam who lived through the direst days of their century, the survivors of the first momentous hours on the Calvados coast half a century ago have become icons for today, the symbols of courage and conviction that democracies crave.


Leetch Simply At a New Level
"I remind myself to keep it simple," Brian Leetch said.
It is the Ranger defenseman's way to deal with a playoff tension that has grown for weeks.
As New York's fortunes have ebbed and flowed, and now, even as they have come within one game of a Stanley Cup championship, the most dominant player on the ice has struggled to keep his emotions under control.
"When the opportunity is there, get involved," Leetch said, "but otherwise get it off the boards and get it out of the zone."
His mindset is part of a spectacular final stage of his continuing development this season.
Leetch's goal and three assists became a powerful enough factor in the 4-2 Ranger victory tonight to all but guarantee that an American-born player will win the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the finals.
Spectaular Playoffs
Leetch has scored four goals with five assists in the series.
He has 10 goals, with 22 assists, in the playoffs.
Leetch's total of 32 playoff points passed Al MacInnis of Calgary to become second to Paul Coffey's record of 47 points in 1985.
But his presence again extended beyond offensive statistics.
On an evening when the Ranger defensive unit struggled at times to deal with the sudden strikes of the Vancouver Canucks, Leetch took advantage of enough opportunitites to help change a game, and perhaps a championship series.
"It's hard to say that his play has improved since the Islander series, but it has," said Coach Mike Keenan.
"He started the playoffs playing his best hockey and he has improved it every series from that point on. He has just been an exceptional player for us. He's making things happen offensively. He's playing exceptionally well defensively. He has been able to withstand a tremendous amount of ice time, and he has the stamina and endurance and drive to lead the hockey team."
Leetch's 10th goal of the playoffs, at 4 minutes 3 seconds of the second period, presented a reward for Mike Richter's game-saving goaltending.
The play ended with Leetch waiting for Joe Kocur to present a problem in front of the net, a technique he explained was developed in part to compensate for the power that was lost because of an injured shoulder.
But the start of the play underlined the unspectacular but essential part of Leetch's game -- a poke check at the Ranger blue line that sent the flow in the opposite direction.
His smooth pass that helped create Aleksel Kovalev's third-period power-play goal, the game-winning score, was part creativity and part necessity.
Leetch felt a slash from the stick of Canuck defenseman Brian Glynn, whom he had just passed to create a two-on-one, with Jyrki Lumme the one Canuck back.
"I didn't think I could get off a good shot there," said Leetch, who had his shoulder iced after the game.
So as the two approached the net, seemingly in slow motion, Leetch made himself into a playmaker.
"I tried to make it look like I was going to shoot," he said, "and I just slid it under the guy's stick."
When the game was over and the Cup was a game away, Leetch had one more move to make.
Mark Messier was behind a desk in an interview area, already dressed in a suit, sitting in the television lights.
Leetch was standing to the side, in the wings, in a blue Ranger windbreaker and shorts.
His hair was still matted.
He studied the floor as Messier spoke.
Finally, the Ranger captain heard the question:
"Mark, you've won a Conn Smythe Trophy. Is Brian Leetch a Conn Smyth winner?"
Down the hall, in the Ranger dressing room, Leetch's teammates were already reciting how difficult the final step would be.
There is a party line to remember.
But near the end of Leetch's remarkable spring, with his team one game away, it seemed the exit polls were all closing early.
"We're not going to fall into that trap," Messier said at first.
But then, he skated around it.
"Obviously," Messier observed, "His performance, in the last two games, he has been the best we've all seen in a long time."
That is still for the others to say.
Maybe it will always be that way for Leetch.
He was asked what thought appears in his head when he hears the name Conn Smythe.
"That really doesn't matter to me," Leetch said.
"I haven't won the cup before. I haven't been to the finals before."
He was keeping it simple to the end.


Fingerprinting For Welfare Is Defended
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani vowed yesterday to move ahead with a plan to fingerprint welfare recipients, despite an agreement between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the State Legislature that would exclude New York City from a pilot program involving 12 counties.
Mr.
Giuliani, who says such a system would reduce welfare fraud, maintained that fingerprinting did not amount to a change in welfare eligibility standards and therefore did not need state approval.


How to Improve Peacemaking at the U.N.
To the Editor:
Re "Whose Fight Is It?" by Brian Urquhart (Op-Ed, May 22):


Hasidic Jews To Press Suit Over Violence
Hasidic Jews who filed a lawsuit against New York City over the 1991 racial violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, have decided to pursue the suit and have abandoned a plan to propose a settlement, people close to the case said yesterday.
The lawyer for the Hasidim said early last week that he would propose a settlement in response to a request from a lawyer for the city after the Giuliani administration took office.


North Korea Said to Have A-Bomb Fuel
North Korea could process the fuel it recently removed from its Yongbyon reactor by the end of the year and produce enough plutonium for four or five nuclear bombs, Administration officials said today.
The speed with which North Korea could reportedly break the remaining constraints on its nuclear program has raised the stakes for Washington's push to block that program.
It has also become a key consideration in deliberations over what economic sanctions to seek and when to impose them.


The Grass Roots Game
If the sport of tennis is really dying, as some observers have suggested, JOHN McENROE is doing his part to keep it alive among younger, non-elite players.
"At the grass roots level, we need to have a spurt because there has been a lull," he acknowledged.
McEnroe was in Bryant Park yesterday for a brief clinic with about six children from Safe Passage, the academic/tennis program founded by Arthur Ashe.
All proceeds from the clinic, and from McEnroe's exhibition with ANDRE AGASSI before the Pathmark Tennis Classic next month in Mahwah, N.J., will go to Safe Passage.
The foundation, just three years old, is already writing modest success stories.
JOHN McFADDEN, a 19-year old from Newark, has set his sights on playing in college or going to Nick Bollettieri's academy.


New Chant: '1915! 1915!'
With about eight minutes left tonight in the second period of Game 4 of the Stanley Cup finals, Vancouver Canucks' fans in the Pacific Coliseum could be heard shouting that familiar Ranger-haters' chant: "1940! 1940!"


Dennis Potter, Television Writer, Dies at 59
Dennis Potter, the caustic and controversial writer of the innovative British television dramas "The Singing Detective" and "Pennies from Heaven," died yesterday at his home near Ross-on-Wye, England, about 100 miles west of London.
He was 59.
The cause was cancer.
In an interview earlier this year, for a segment of the British television program "Without Walls" that was broadcast on April 5, Mr.
Potter revealed that on Valentine's Day he had been told he was suffering from cancer of the pancreas, and that it had spread to his liver.


Iran Accuses U.S. of Reneging on Hostage Deal
President Hashemi Rafsanjani accused the United States today of reneging on secret assurances that Iranian assets frozen by the United States would be freed in exchange for Iranian mediation to gain the release of American hostages in Lebanon.
It was the first time since the Iran-contra arms-for-hostages affair of the Reagan Administration that a senior Iranian official had asserted that an American-Iranian deal had been reached for the release of Western hostages in Lebanon.


For Italy, Arrival Is Warm and Confident
The Italian World Cup team arrived here from Rome this afternoon and was greeted by about 100 fans who chanted Italian slogans and sought autographs and brief chats with the players.
The chants of "Forza Italia" (Let's Go, Italy!) and "Italia Gioca Casa" (Italy Will Play Home!) filled the usually quiet Terminal B at Newark International Airport long before the team arrived.
Fans came from all parts of the metropolitan area.
Sal Logrande, for example, came from Queens, Mike Bonavita from Staten Island, Peter Puma from Fairview, N.J., and Anthony Zaza from Lindenhurst, N.J.
Some arrived hours before Alitalia flight No. 640, which left Fiumicino Airport in Rome at 11:30 this morning Italian time and landed here at 2:55 this afternoon.


Starbucks
Starbucks, the fast-growing coffee bar company in Seattle, saw its share price drop yesterday as it announced an accelerated and presumably costlier expansion plan for the year ending in September 1995.
It plans to open 200 stores, up from 165.
It now has 364 stores and plans to add 150 in its current fiscal year.


Crowded Schools in Queens Find Class Space in Unusual Places
After 23 years of teaching social studies at Public School 19 in Corona, Queens, Jack Cohn finally has an office, bright and clean, that he can call his own.
The toilet, which is at least two feet from his filing cabinet, is always brushed and shiny, and the sink, next to his rolling cart full of school supplies, never overflows.
Like many teachers at the largest and one of the most overcrowded elementary schools in the city, Mr.
Cohn does not have his own classroom, so he pushes his cart from one second-grade class to another throughout the annex on a corner of the playground.
Because all the school's closets are being used as classrooms, he was happy to make use of the men's bathroom as office space, excusing himself when other teachers need to use the room.


Accounts
*
Financial Times to Luca &amp; Moore Inc., New York, to handle the newspaper's American trade advertising account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


A.L. to Name New President
Major league baseball remains without a commissioner 21 months after the last one resigned, but the American League will get a new president on Wednesday.
The league's club owners will elect Gene Budig, the chancellor of the University of Kansas, to succeed Bobby Brown, who will leave the position later this year after serving for 10 years.
Although reports of Budig's impending election first surfaced six weeks ago, the owners will take no formal action until the search committee, chaired by John Harrington of the Boston Red Sox, recommends him at the league meeting on Wednesday.


N.T.T. Deal With Silicon Graphics
Silicon Graphics Inc. said today that it had reached an agreement with the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation to test interactive multimedia service systems in Japan.
Silicon Graphics is the first computer systems company named by N.T.T., the Japanese telephone company, in its plan to test interactive digital networks.
N.T.T. planned to announce the deal on Wednesday in Tokyo.


No Headline
"There is no question that winning it all is an extremely important psychological thing for Houston. Houston feels that it is in fact a great city, but it has never had a championship and never gotten that recognition even though it is such a dumb thing, really." STEPHEN KLINEBERG, a Houston sociologist.  [ B10:2. ]


To Them, There's No View Like a Lighthouse View


Corrections
A diagram in Science Times yesterday about balloons competing to be the first to circumnavigate the world nonstop misidentified the one that is to carry instruments from Los Alamos National Laboratory and other institutions.
It is Odyssey, not Windstar.


Alexander Gets Infusion And Hires a New Chief
Alexander &amp; Alexander Services Inc., the country's second-largest insurance broker, improved its financial condition yesterday with a $200 million investment from the American International Group.
Alexander also hired Frank G. Zarb, a Wall Street executive, as its new chairman and chief executive.


Australia Doesn't Wink at East Timor Abuses
To the Editor:
"Timorous on Timor," your egregious May 24 editorial, gravely misrepresents Australia's position on East Timor.
Although Australia has recognized the sovereign authority of Indonesia over East Timor since February 1979, our public concerns and representations over violations of human rights in the region are well-documented.
Recognition of Indonesia's sovereign authority in no way implies approval of the circumstances of the Indonesian acquisition of East Timor.


INSIDE
Deadly Bacteria
An alarmingly virulent form of strep, which has killed a dozen people in England and now seems to be striking closer to home, can be treated if caught early enough.
Page C11.
Do Re Mi on West 67th
The pianist Vladimir Feltsman is leading efforts to establish what is believed to be the first elementary school in the United States for musically gifted children.
Page C13.
Rangers Go for Clincher
The Rangers defeated the Vancouver Canucks, 4-2, to take a 3-1 lead in the Stanley Cup finals and can clinch the championship tomorrow.
Page B13.


Orthodox Judaism in No Way Forbids Divorce; How Loved She Was
To the Editor:
I too, like Frank Rich in "The Jackie Mystery" (column, May 26), was surprised by my reaction to the death of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
But the more I thought about it, the more I understood why.
Her death brought back memories of the end of a time when we all had hope.


Irwin Stark, Professor, Poet And Writer, 81
Irwin Stark, a writer, poet and professor emeritus of English at City College of New York, died on Saturday at his home in Hillsdale, N.Y.
A former resident of Bronxville, he was 81.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Leetch Simply At a New Level
"I remind myself to keep it simple," Brian Leetch said.
It is the Ranger defenseman's way to deal with a playoff tension that has grown for weeks.
As New York's fortunes have ebbed and flowed, and now, even as they have come within one game of a Stanley Cup championship, the most dominant player on the ice has struggled to keep his emotions under control.
"When the opportunity is there, get involved," Leetch said, "but otherwise get it off the boards and get it out of the zone."
His mindset is part of a spectacular final stage of his continuing development this season.
Leetch's goal and three assists became a powerful enough factor in the 4-2 Ranger victory tonight to all but guarantee that an American-born player will win the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the finals.
Spectaular Playoffs
Leetch has scored four goals with five assists in the series.
He has 10 goals, with 22 assists, in the playoffs.
Leetch's total of 32 playoff points passed Al MacInnis of Calgary to become second to Paul Coffey's record of 47 points in 1985.
But his presence again extended beyond offensive statistics.
On an evening when the Ranger defensive unit struggled at times to deal with the sudden strikes of the Vancouver Canucks, Leetch took advantage of enough opportunitites to help change a game, and perhaps a championship series.
"It's hard to say that his play has improved since the Islander series, but it has," said Coach Mike Keenan.
"He started the playoffs playing his best hockey and he has improved it every series from that point on. He has just been an exceptional player for us. He's making things happen offensively. He's playing exceptionally well defensively. He has been able to withstand a tremendous amount of ice time, and he has the stamina and endurance and drive to lead the hockey team."
Leetch's 10th goal of the playoffs, at 4 minutes 3 seconds of the second period, presented a reward for Mike Richter's game-saving goaltending.
The play ended with Leetch waiting for Joe Kocur to present a problem in front of the net, a technique he explained was developed in part to compensate for the power that was lost because of an injured shoulder.
But the start of the play underlined the unspectacular but essential part of Leetch's game -- a poke check at the Ranger blue line that sent the flow in the opposite direction.
His smooth pass that helped create Aleksel Kovalev's third-period power-play goal, the game-winning score, was part creativity and part necessity.
Leetch felt a slash from the stick of Canuck defenseman Brian Glynn, whom he had just passed to create a two-on-one, with Jyrki Lumme the one Canuck back.
"I didn't think I could get off a good shot there," said Leetch, who had his shoulder iced after the game.
So as the two approached the net, seemingly in slow motion, Leetch made himself into a playmaker.
"I tried to make it look like I was going to shoot," he said, "and I just slid it under the guy's stick."
When the game was over and the Cup was a game away, Leetch had one more move to make.
Mark Messier was behind a desk in an interview area, already dressed in a suit, sitting in the television lights.
Leetch was standing to the side, in the wings, in a blue Ranger windbreaker and shorts.
His hair was still matted.
He studied the floor as Messier spoke.
Finally, the Ranger captain heard the question:
"Mark, you've won a Conn Smythe Trophy. Is Brian Leetch a Conn Smyth winner?"
Down the hall, in the Ranger dressing room, Leetch's teammates were already reciting how difficult the final step would be.
There is a party line to remember.
But near the end of Leetch's remarkable spring, with his team one game away, it seemed the exit polls were all closing early.
"We're not going to fall into that trap," Messier said at first.
But then, he skated around it.
"Obviously," Messier observed, "His performance, in the last two games, he has been the best we've all seen in a long time."
That is still for the others to say.
Maybe it will always be that way for Leetch.
He was asked what thought appears in his head when he hears the name Conn Smythe.
"That really doesn't matter to me," Leetch said.
"I haven't won the cup before. I haven't been to the finals before."
He was keeping it simple to the end.


Japanese Book Praises Hitler For His Electoral Techniques
An official of the Liberal Democratic Party urges in a new book that his party try to regain power by adopting a new role model: Hitler.
The book, "Hitler Election Strategy: A Bible for Certain Victory in Modern Elections," says the Nazi leader's process for "unifying public opinion in a short period of time and snatching power" provides "very important teachings."


Alternative Sites for Yankee Stadium Are Studied
City and state officials have begun examining sites other than the South Bronx as a home for a new Yankee Stadium, at the request of team officials who say fans are staying away from home games because of concerns about safety in that neighborhood.
Officials said last night that 8 to 10 sites in all 5 boroughs are under study, including the rail yards on the West Side of Manhattan, where Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo had earlier proposed building a stadium over the tracks.


A Down-Home Barbecue for a City Crowd
"ALL this meat!" said the woman with the tatooed arm, short blond hair, white T-shirt, black jumper, black hiking boots and white socks.
"I can't believe I'm eating it."
This very downtown woman had traveled to Rockefeller Center on Monday night for the ninth annual James Beard Citymeals-on-Wheels benefit, which raises money to provide food for thousands of home-bound elderly.


Sports of The Times; Richter's Career Save On Bure
AS soon as Pavel Bure, swooping in on a breakaway, was dragged down from behind by Brian Leetch, Referee Terry Gregson pointed to the small blue faceoff circle in the red line at center ice.
Penalty shot.


A D'Amato Appeal Says Fraud Law Was Misapplied
A lawyer for Armand P. D'Amato, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's brother, told an appeals court yesterday that his client's conviction last year for mail fraud represented an abuse of prosecutorial power.
The lawyer, John L. Warden, called for the conviction to be overturned and warned that if it were not, it could "distort the mail fraud statute beyond recognition."


Public &amp; Private; The Baby Bill
Occasionally there emerges an issue of such exquisite simplicity that it's a good bet it's more complicated than it seems.
Such a one is proposed legislation in New York State mandating the reporting of newborns' H.I.V. status to their parents.
It seems so right at first blush, the idea that the results of AIDS tests now done anonymously on babies after birth should be reported to their mothers.


A Deal With Russia on Uranium Draws Protest From U.S. Industry
An unusual trade agreement in which the United States has tried to cement good relations with Russia and stabilize the Yeltsin Government is under siege.
The uproar is a lesson in what happens when noble foreign-policy goals clash with rigid trade laws that were constructed to protect American industry.
The agreement, signed in March, allowed the Russians to export to the United States far more uranium fuel for nuclear power plants at a far lower price than would normally be allowed under American trade laws.
At the same time it required that the Russians pay American uranium producers a subsidy to compensate for the falling price caused by the exports.


U.S. Says Haiti's Military Runs Cocaine
Haiti's military leaders have been working with Colombian traffickers for the past four years to help move hundreds of pounds of cocaine each month from South and Central America to the United States, American diplomats and other officials say.
In their first detailed account of the role of the Haitian armed forces in international narcotics traffic, American officials said that much of Haiti's military leadership, including its commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, either has been actively involved with Colombian drug dealers or has turned a blind eye to their trafficking in cocaine, accepting payments for their cooperation.


Review/City Ballet; An Exchange of Lore
The season's first performance of "In the Night," the most rapturous of Jerome Robbins's ballets to Chopin's music, was ostensibly the focus of the New York City Ballet on Sunday night.
The evening, however, had its other moments.
When, for instance, the last ballet ended with the rollicking sailor dances of George Balanchine's "Union Jack," the standing ovation in the audience came largely from real sailors.
All had been invited as part of Fleet Week, the annual naval review, and were welcomed by Gary McDougal, the company's general manager.
After "Union Jack," the sailors met the dancers backstage.
There, a ballerina explained the mysteries of the toe shoe, and in return a Navy signalman confirmed that the semaphore message in "Union Jack" does spell out "God Save the Queen."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.17
2.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.10
4.15
3.12
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.47
4.53
3.29
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.94
6.90
6.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.26
7.21
6.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.10
8.06
7.84
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.20
6.21
5.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Governor Is Ousted, but Others Prevail
On the busiest election day so far this year, four incumbent Governors withstood primary challenges yesterday, while a fifth, Walter Miller of South Dakota, was defeated.
Terry E. Branstad of Iowa only narrowly earned victory in in a tough race for a fourth term against a more moderate Republican, Representative Fred Grandy, a former actor on the "Love Boat" television series.


Review/Pop; America's Pulse as Taken by ZZ Top
There isn't an unexamined moment in a ZZ Top show.
Everything these three musicians do -- from their circumscribed choreography and the way they dress, to the Vargas-like showgirls they have wandering around the stage -- is one big, ironic and completely controlled joke.
ZZ Top may be a major concert draw, but it doesn't take the pop process seriously.
What the three do take seriously is the show, and they know exactly how to fill up a concert with a good-natured, cartoon version of sexuality and rock entertainment.
At Madison Square Garden on Monday night, their songs, and the way the musicians represented themselves, could have been taken in all sorts of ways.
The easiest route would be to write off the three as sexist louts playing bar-band music.
With songs like "Fool for Stockin's," "She Loves My Automobile" and "Legs," they create a male world so lascivious that it comes off as a parody.


Albany Leaders Strike Deal to End 25-Tolls on Hutchinson and Saw Mill River Parkways
Legislative leaders in Albany have agreed to terminate the 25-cent tolls on the Hutchinson and Saw Mill River Parkways, the last remaining state roads outside the Thruway system that are not free to motorists.
While the end of the tolls on Oct. 31 may be good news for drivers, it worries Westchester County officials.
Part of the toll money pays the salaries of the 26 county police officers who patrol the parkways.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about the issue of abortion in the New York gubernatorial race misstated the position of Elizabeth P. McCaughey, who is running for lieutenant governor with State Senator George E. Pataki, the endorsed Republican candidate for governor.
Ms.
McCaughey, who said information provided by the Pataki campaign about her position was incorrect, does not support terminating Medicaid financing for abortion, nor does she support any law that would prevent a teen-age girl from making her own choice about whether to have an abortion.


A Dangerous Form of Strep Stirs Concern in Resurgence
A HIGHLY virulent strain of streptococcal bacteria, often referred to in popular accounts as "deadly, flesh eating bacteria," is making a comeback in the United States and elsewhere, experts say.
Although the number of people affected is relatively small, medical scientists say they are concerned because the bacteria are so dangerous and yet the symptoms they produce are often disregarded in the early stages of disease, when treatment is still possible.
The bacteria, called group A strep, are reported to have caused a dozen deaths in England this year, giving rise to widespread alarm.
The microorganisms in their severe, invasive form can cause a fatal drop in blood pressure, toxic shock and organ failure and, in about 25 to 50 percent of cases, in a form known as necrotizing fasciitis can eat away at flesh.
Another form, called myositis, eats at muscle.


Books of The Times; Just a Little Too Nice Really to Be Thurber
People Have More Fun Than Anybody
A Centennial Celebration of Drawings and Writings by James Thurber
Edited by Michael J. Rosen
Illustrated. 169 pages. Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $22.95.
Growing up in flat Midwestern country amid flat Midwestern voices, James Thurber devised a writing style of ostensibly flat sentences that managed to keep wild events and disorderly sentiments just barely in line.
Here he is in 1930, at the age of 26, writing a "Brief Biography" of himself:


In America; The Job-Killer Policy
To anyone who has grown up with the deeply American belief that the best way to get ahead is to roll up your sleeves and get to work, it must seem peculiar that the Clinton Administration has adopted a policy that deliberately puts a brake on the economy, and thus on the number of Americans who can work.
The Administration, genuflecting before the Federal Reserve, is now more concerned with inflation than with the chronically high unemployment that is eroding the promise of the American dream for millions of men and women.


Governments Are Joining Haiti Force
Administration officials say they have enlisted about a dozen countries to take part in a United Nations task force of more than 3,000 soldiers and civilians who would maintain order and strengthen democratic institutions after the Haitian military leaders cede power, whether voluntarily or through military intervention.
In recent days, Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott and William H. Gray 3d, the special adviser on Haiti, have asked countries throughout the Western Hemisphere to join the force, which is aimed at insuring the safe return of Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Senate President Backs Part 2 Of Whitman's Tax Cut Plan
Ending the only remaining political suspense over whether Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman would have her way on Part II of her promised income-tax cut, the President of the State Senate publicly endorsed the idea today.
"I wouldn't say I was ever a roadblock," Donald T. DiFrancesco said.
"I was someone who suggested that you can't do the tax cut until you see what the budget looks like. And that's what I did."


Clinton Sees 'Cancerous Prejudice' in Nationalism


Two Ways New York Can Really Economize
To the Editor:
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's plans to sell New York City's capital assets to cover the operating budget deficits is deja vu all over again.
In the 1970's, New York's mayors sold bonds in the capital markets to cover operating budget deficits.
To say that it turned out badly is a wild understatement.


PG Man Hangs Up That Hat
TALKING to Richard D. Heffner makes you realize just how many buffalos are gone.
Once there were great herds of these unabashed liberals of the old school, expressing passionate belief in polite, civilized discourse and rational persuasion.
As Mr.
Heffner did the other day, they would cite John Stuart Mill and de Tocqueville, whose works he edited, or Lionel Trilling, his teacher at Columbia, and Walter Lippmann.
You listen to his soft-spoken talk and you become aware how uncommon common sense has become, how sharply scholarly authority has been eclipsed by the style and spleen of stand-up comedians, how Socratic dialogue has given way to sound bite.


Crotona Park Sets a Pace for the Bronx's Recovery
Nothing symbolized quite so powerfully the problem of urban blight in the 1980's as the pictures of curtains and potted plants and other signs of supposed life that were placed on the windows of abandoned apartment building in the Bronx.
The window decals were meant to disguise the tenements for commuters and others just passing through, yet they did little for residents in those neighborhoods, who often had no way out.
But yesterday, with the sun beating down and a band playing on, 563 of the apartments in a once-devastated seven-block area were dedicated in Crotona Park West, representing a new era for what became a national image of urban decay.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the United States' intervention in the currency markets on April 29 misstated the amount of German marks earmarked by the Federal Reserve Board at the end of April for intervention.
It was $13.61 billion in marks, not $1.361 billion.


Air Passengers' Call: A Film, Video Games or Shopping?
Interactive television may be years away from entering the home, but its advent away from home is another matter.
A growing number of airline passengers will soon be able to sit back and press the buttons of a computer system that will offer them many of the entertainment options of their living rooms, the business capabilities of their offices and real-time information on where to pick up their baggage and at what gate to make a connecting flight.
Northwest Airlines already has such a system -- including Nintendo games -- in place on several jets, and it plans to add more planes in the coming months.
United Airlines is putting a competing system on its wide-body fleet.
British Airways and Singapore Airlines have similar plans.
And passengers can play video mah-jongg on China Airlines.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AVON PRODUCTS INC., New York, opened a distribution center in Shanghai as a first step in its planned expansion into central China.
ENGELHARD CORP., Iselin, N.J., a chemical and engineered materials company, agreed to acquire certain assets of the specialty minerals operations in Quincy, Fla., of Floridin Co., from U.S.
Silica Co., for an undisclosed amount of cash.


N.B.A. FINALS: Sports of The Times; At Last, Derek Harper Makes It to the Finals
IT must still bother him because, when it is mentioned, Derek Harper closes down part of his face and says bluntly: "I don't want to talk about it. It's in the past." And he doesn't talk about it.
He was just a rookie, 22 years old out of the University of Illinois, but he was old enough to run the Dallas Mavericks' offense, old enough to read the clock, old enough to know the score.


The F.T.C. Explains Its Joe Camel Decision
The Federal Trade Commission, in an unusual post-mortem, issued statements yesterday explaining its narrow decision not to take action against Joe Camel.
The cartoon character, which has appeared in American advertising for Camel cigarettes since 1988, has been the subject of rancorous debate over its purported appeal to children.


LEADERS IN ALBANY FINALLY ANNOUNCE A BUDGET ACCORD
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders said tonight that they had finally cobbled together the last details of the $34 billion state budget in a deal that reflected both the revival of New York State's fiscal health and the political needs of a difficult election year.
Sixty-eight days after the legal deadline passed, Mr.
Cuomo and the leaders of the State Senate and the Assembly had reached agreement on one last issue: exactly how much the state would increase assistance to schools and local governments.
Lawmakers returned to the session late tonight to begin debating the package, and were expected to finish voting early Wednesday.


Pacers and Fans Celebrate, While Brown Recuperates
Coach LARRY BROWN, who underwent hip replacement surgery, missed the Indiana Pacers' homecoming rally in Indianapolis yesterday before some 10,000 wild fans.
But REGGIE MILLER did not miss the opportunity to offer his take on the events of Pacer Pride Day.
"The New York media, they can call us hayseeds, they can call us hillbillies, but we're winners," Miller shouted during the lunch-hour celebration on the City Market Plaza.
"That's all that matters."


Market Place; Revlon Bond Slide Raises Questions
The price of the Revlon Worldwide Corporation's $1.1 billion in junk bonds has slid almost 15 percent since March, raising the eyebrows of traders who specialize in high-yield and "distressed" securities.
The bonds have become so cheap that some are wondering why there has been no move to buy them back by Ronald O. Perelman, whose Mac Andrews &amp; Forbes investment group owns Revlon Worldwide and its operating subsidiary, the Revlon Consumer Products Corporation.


Slump May Be Ending for Janzen
When Lee Janzen birdied four of the first eight holes last week in the final round of the Kemper Open, he felt like a man who had finally broken the surface after being trapped under water until his lungs were about to burst.
After months of struggling, he could finally breathe.
Janzen, the defending United States Open champion, broke out of a yearlong funk by shooting a round of 66 and finishing tied for fourth.
It was his first top-10 finish since he won the Open, and it was an important indicator to him that his game is back.


Brand Names Get Attention
Brand-name products -- their growth, power and health -- were the subjects of two news conferences yesterday in New York.
At one, Trout &amp; Ries Inc., the marketing consulting company that since 1969 has been promoting the importance of the concept of "positioning" a brand, or giving it a distinctive reason in consumers' minds to exist, said that "refocusing" would be the most important factor for advertisers seeking to build their brands in the 1990's and beyond.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Arizona State Blasts Ahead  Coach Jim Brock wasn't there to see his team tie a College World Series record and give him a milestone 1,100th victory.
Jacob Cruz and Antone Williamson each hit two home runs last night to lead Arizona State to a 9-5 victory over top-seeded Miami in a College World Series elimination game.
Brock is suffering from cancer and left Omaha earlier yesterday on his doctor's advice.
The Sun Devils tied a series record with five home runs -- Todd Cady also hit one.
In another elimination game yesterday, Mark Kotsay knocked in seven runs to tie a series record, powering Fullerton State past Florida State, 10-3.
Fullerton State (46-15), seeded seventh, moves into today's semifinal against second-seeded Georgia Tech (49-16). (AP) TENNIS  Becker Upset by Bates  Boris Becker's difficult year continued yesterday when he was upset by a local favorite, Jeremy Bates, in the second round of the Queen's Club grass-court tournament in London.
The sixth-seeded German, playing his first match in more than three weeks, admitted he was in need of match practice as he fell, 7-5, 7-6 (10-8), to a player ranked No. 94 in the world. (AP) GOLF  Quinn Leads Qualifying  Fran Quinn Jr. of Northboro, Mass., playing on the Nike Tour after losing his PGA card two years ago, shot 68-69-137 yesterday, four under par, to lead 20 qualifiers into the United States Open, which begins next Thursday at the Oakmont (Pa.) Country Club.
A field of 130, including 11 amateurs, competed at Old Oaks Country Club and the Century Country Club, both in Purchase, N.Y.
The 29-year-old Quinn, who also reached the United States Open in 1992, his only year on the regular tour, finished one stroke ahead of Bob Tway, who had 71-67, and Trevor Dodds, who posted 68-70.


Clinton Warns of Violent Nationalism
President Clinton told the French National Assembly today that the allies who united to stop the dictators of Europe must once again band together to stop the "disease" of "militant nationalism" in Bosnia and elsewhere.
Mr.
Clinton, the first American President to speak at the Assembly since Woodrow Wilson promoted the League of Nations there in 1919, said:
"Our trans-Atlantic alliance clearly stands at a critical point.


McGriff, With 5 R.B.I., Powers the Braves to Victory
Braves 12, Padres 3
Fred McGriff homered for the third time in four games and drove in five runs as the Atlanta Braves, playing at home, pounded the San Diego Padres, 12-3, last night for their seventh victory in eight games.


U.S. Agrees to Deployment Of U.N. Force in Rwanda
With the United Nations now close to recruiting the troops it needs for an expanded Rwandan peacekeeping operation, the Clinton Administration has given its consent to the force's deployment.
A new draft Security Council resolution prepared by the United States and circulated to members calls for the new, mainly African force to start moving into Rwanda with the task of protecting displaced people inside the country as well as the relief workers aiding them.


Honors for Doby's '14'
The Cleveland Indians have decided to retire LARRY DOBY's uniform No. 14 on July 3, honoring the first black player in the American League.
Doby, 69, played with the Indians for 10 seasons, from 1947-55 and in 1958.
In his 13-year career, he hit .283 with 253 home runs, leading the American League in homers twice.
He also played for the Chicago White Sox and Detroit Tigers, and he became the majors' second black manager with the White Sox in 1978.


Our Fellow Creatures Shouldn't Trust Us
To the Editor:
"The Children? Or the Cub?" (editorial, May 29) misinterprets the public response to the orphaned mountain lion cub in California.


Vermont Shows Way A Health Bill Can Fail
For years, Vermont set an example to the nation, showing how to regulate health insurance to control prices and expand coverage.
Now it offers a different lesson, showing the perils of trying to enact a health care overhaul that is both ambitious and complex.
Gov.
Howard Dean, a doctor who is vice chairman of the National Governors' Association and who will soon be the group's chairman, listed health care as his top priority in January.
He asked the General Assembly to pass legislation very similar to that proposed by President Clinton.
But the Governor's plan collapsed last month, spurned by liberal Democrats who said it did too little and by Republicans who said it did too much.


Eric A. Nordlinger, Foreign Affairs Expert, 54
Eric A. Nordlinger, a foreign affairs expert and professor at Brown, Harvard and Brandeis universities, died last Friday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 54.


Expect New York's Finest if Fans Act Up
It has been 54 years since the Rangers won their last Stanley Cup.
So tonight the New York City Police Department and Madison Square Garden security officials have prepared several precautions to deal with any celebration that threatens to get out of hand if the Rangers should beat the Vancouver Canucks to win the championship.
After decades -- even generations -- of frustrating disappointment and crushed hopes, police officials expressed concern yesterday that Ranger fans might become deliriously unpredictable as their celebration spills into the streets.


Classic Layout Offers a Primer
Fred Couples was standing in the rough to the right of the 15th fairway today, looking down at his golf ball.
All he could see was the barest sliver of balata, like a bald spot peeking through a thick thatch of poa annua grass.
Ordinarily, PGA Tour pros don't see this kind of lie at regular events.
But the Buick Classic, which gets under way Thursday at the Westchester Country Club, is not like many of the other tournaments on tour.
On this classic old layout, designed and built by J. Walter Travis in 1919, there are an assortment of blind shots, firm and fast greens, tough lies in heavy rough and enough difficult holes to provide a thorough examination of a player's game.


Rwanda Rebels: Army of Exiles Fights for a Home
Refugees, exiles, many barely acquainted with the country of their birth, Rwanda's rebel soldiers have come home to wage war.
For many of these troops, including their leader, Maj.
Gen.
Paul Kagame, it is the first time in their adult lives that they have traveled so far into Rwanda.


Officials Gird For Walkout On L.I.R.R.
Rail, subway and traffic officials yesterday announced their battle plan for a Long Island Rail Road strike that both management and labor say is likely a week from today.
And they warned that their most extensive efforts could only begin to address the chaos for commuters.
They said they have lined up scores of extra buses and subway trains, crowd-control barricades, park-and-ride lots, tow trucks, extra toll collectors and other accouterments of controlled chaos.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The F.C.C. is winning praise from the communications industry for its plan to encourage a new generation of wireless telephone and data services.
Today, the commission is expected to vote to revise its rules for auctioning off more than 2,000 licenses for "personal communication services."  [ Page D1. ]


Scientists Hope to See Effects of Comet Bombardment of Jupiter
When some 20 chunks of a comet smash into Jupiter next month, the giant planet will be the noisiest place in the solar system outside the Sun -- so noisy, in fact, that scientists may be able to see effects of the acoustic blasts.
At a meeting here this week of the Acoustical Society of America, specialists from the Naval Research Institute, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute reported that although the impacts of Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 will be on the far side of Jupiter and not visible from Earth, the sound of their titanic explosions will circle the planet and perhaps leave visible traces.


Corrections
A brief report by Reuters in Business Day on Tuesday about trade in Latin America misstated Chile's association with the Mercosur group of countries.
Chile is not a member.


N.B.A. FINALS: GAME 1
In a game more suitable for the scrap heap than the scrapbook, the Rockets hung on to defeat the Knicks in Houston in the opening game of the N.B.A. championship series.
Both teams shot poorly, especially in a low-scoring second half, but Houston, which lead after every quarter, kept the Knicks at bay down the stretch.
Details, page B13.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.03
2.92
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.12
4.10
3.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.49
4.47
3.25
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.95
6.94
6.05
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.27
7.26
6.88
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.10
8.10
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.16
6.20
5.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Lin Broadcasting Plans Spinoff of 7 TV Stations
The Lin Broadcasting Corporation said yesterday that it planned to buy an ABC television affiliate, WTNH-TV in New Haven, then spin off seven TV stations to shareholders.
The moves makes Lin, which operates cellular phone systems in five of the nation's top markets, almost exclusively a cellular company, positioned for the ultimate acquisition next year by its majority owner, McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., analysts said.


Ralphs Grocery Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 24


CHRONICLE
CICELY TYSON returned yesterday to 178 East 101st Street in Manhattan, where she lived from age 9 to 17, and it was more than a sentimental journey.
The actress was helping to dedicate the building and three others in the neighborhood that were recently renovated by the SFDS Development Corporation, a partnership of three East Harlem churches, for 58 low-income families.
Ms.
Tyson's old home now bears her name.
She went into her old railroad flat on the fifth floor.
"There was a gentleman sitting there in his shorts watching TV, and in came an onslaught of people," she said.
"I also went up to the roof because I used to spend a lot of time up there."


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Georgia Tech to Play for Title  Nomar Garciaparra's leadoff home run in the top of the 12th inning last night gave Georgia Tech a 3-2 victory over Fullerton State in the College World Series, putting the Yellow Jackets into Saturday afternoon's championship game at Omaha.
Georgia Tech (50-16) was seeded second in its first appearance at the series.
The Yellow Jackets will play either Oklahoma (48-17) or Arizona State (45-17), who play today.
The Sooners would advance to the title game with a victory, while an Arizona State victory would force a second semifinal game between the teams on Friday.
Garciaparra's homer was his 15th this season and first of the series. (AP)


3 Near Death in Fire
Three people were near death after a fire in a Brooklyn brownstone early today, rescue workers said.
The Emergency Medical Service said the three, whose hearts had stopped, were pulled from a building at 4603 6th Avenue, near 46th Street in Sunset Park.
Their names were not immediately available.
The fire, reported at 1:51 A.M., was limited to the third floor of the building, said Jerry Sanford, a Fire Department spokesman.


Judge Says He Will Create a Nassau Legislature on His Own if Supervisors Fail to Act
A Federal judge today warned the Nassau County Board of Supervisors that unless it agrees on a plan to create a county legislature by next week, he will impose a plan himself.
"We're at a critical point here," said Judge Arthur D. Spatt of the Federal District Court here.
"And if the Board of Supervisors doesn't approve a plan, I may approve a new government, with or without a referendum."


Knicks Make Late Run but Olajuwon Has the Head Start
The Knicks kept shooting. The Knicks kept missing.
Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals could have belonged to the Knicks, if they had only made more shots.
They held the Houston Rockets to 13 points in the fourth quarter.
Anthony Mason, despite giving away five inches to Hakeem Olajuwon, harassed the Rockets' brilliant center into 1 for 9 shooting from the field in the second half.


In Azerbaijan, Armenia Is the Aggressor
To the Editor:
"Azerbaijan, Potentially Rich, Is Impoverished by Warfare" (front page, June 2) unfortunately perpetuates a myth central to the dispute between Azerbaijan and Armenia regarding Nagorno-Karabakh: "In 1923 Stalin made the region of Nagorno-Karabakh part of Azerbaijan, despite the fact that most of its population was Armenian." This is not true.


Owners Pass Cap Plan To Present to the Players
Major league baseball club owners reached a critical stage in their season today, approving a proposal for a salary cap, or revenue participation, for their labor negotiators to present to the players Tuesday.
Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, said no details of the proposal would be disclosed until it is presented to the Players Association.
But the elements of the proposal, specifically the percentage of their revenue the owners will offer the players, could have an impact on the players' decision to set a strike date.


Giant Food Inc.(GFS.A,A) reports earnings for 12wks to May 21


Topics of The Times; Still Dancing After All These Years
"First, a school," George Balanchine replied when asked to come to New York and start a ballet company.
Balanchine got his school; the United States got a great choreographer and, in the New York City Ballet, a national treasure.
Last week the School of American Ballet celebrated its Diamond Jubilee, by dancing.
Its students -- all of them young and some of them on the edge of brilliance -- performed Balanchine's first American ballet, "Serenade," a Bournonville pas de deux and a new ballet by Jerome Robbins.
In the audience was the man who, more than 60 years ago, invited Balanchine to America: Lincoln Kirstein.


Forget the Centers, Study the Guards
For all the talk about the matchup between Patrick Ewing and Hakeem Olajuwon, the Knicks and Rockets said the series would be determined by each team's supporting cast.
Specifically, the championship would come down to whether Houston's guards would fold under the pressure of New York's suffocating defense.
The Rockets' formula for success this season has been simple: Get the ball to Olajuwon in the low post and if he's double- and triple-teamed, kick the ball out to the Rocket guards -- Kenny Smith, Vernon Maxwell, Mario Elie and Sam Cassell -- and let them fire away.


Review/Theater; Casting a Fearless Eye on a Sacred Text
The Stratford Festival has always had a lavish hand when it comes to staging the classics.
Since the 42d season is made up of such offerings as "Cyrano," "Twelfth Night" and a "Pirates of Penzance" that is set, of all places, on a sound stage in the early days of Hollywood, there are plenty of opportunities to indulge in displays of profligacy.
So you just may think about bypassing the production of Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into Night" on the grounds that a brooding, five-character American drama is not exactly the festival's specialty.


A Budget: Delayed and Deficient
Without a trace of embarrassment, Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the Legislature have finally agreed on a state budget they should have adopted 10 weeks ago.
Heaping praise on themselves for cutting taxes and adding money for all sorts of popular causes in an election year -- like school aid and baseball stadiums -- they neglect to mention that, once again, they failed to remove the Medicaid burden on New York City and county governments statewide.
Over all, New York City fares well.
It will get more state aid than Mayor Rudolph Giuliani sought, including token Medicaid relief and a significant increase in aid for schools.
Moreover, the increase in school aid is more generous than the basic aid formula that has shortchanged the city for years.


Accounts
*
Upjohn Co., Kalamazoo, Mich., to TBWA Advertising, New York, to handle its Doxidan laxative account, previously at Grey Advertising, New York, until Grey resigned the brand in January after being assigned the Ex-Lax laxative account.
TBWA already handles new product advertising for Upjohn.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Acapulco Restaurants Inc., Long Beach, Calif., to Mendelsohn/Zien, Los Angeles, to handle its account, previously divided between two Los Angeles shops, Partners By Design, for creative services, and Bucher &amp; Russell, for media services.
Billings were estimated at $2 million. *
Carson Products Inc., Savannah, Ga., to Lockhart &amp; Pettus Advertising, New York, for Excelle, a new hair-relaxer product.
Lockhart &amp; Pettus already handles the company's other accounts.
Billings were not disclosed.


Just the Museum for a City the Car Built
LIKE American automobiles of the 1950's, the Petersen Automotive Museum, which opens here on June 11, has fins: 10 gray steel ones that soar from the sidewalk 70 feet into the air, extending 15 feet above the four-story building.
To nearly everyone, the fins spell automobile, said Marc Whipple, a partner in Russell Group Architects in Beverly Hills, Calif., which renovated the 1961 building, originally a department store.


All Children, Rich or Poor, Need Summer Camp
To the Editor:
It is a bit ironic that "Our Schools Are Failing. Do We Care?" by Louis V. Gerstner Jr. (Op-Ed, May 27), calling for, among other things, an extended school year, appeared the same day as an excellent news article on the benefits of summer camp.


AT HOME WITH: Bill Monroe; Lots to Sing, Little to Say
THE Father of Bluegrass Music was walking slowly and nursing a bruised bottom.
He had risen at dawn in the century-old cabin where he has lived for 40 years and stalked across a buttercup field on his way to feed the hens.
He fell and landed on a rock.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GREAT AMERICAN COMMUNICATIONS CO., Cincinnati, a television and radio broadcasting subsidiary of the American Financial Corp., Cincinnati, has changed its name to Citicasters Inc.
MARQUETTE ELECTRONICS INC., Milwaukee, a manufacturer of electromedical and electrotherapeutic equipment, completed the purchase of Corometrics Medical Systems Inc., Wallingford, Conn., a manufacturer of fetal monitoring equipment from American Home Products Corp., New York, for $73 million.


Sanders May Cease Glittering for Falcons
Unless an agreement is reached soon, the All-Pro cornerback DEION SANDERS will not play for the Atlanta Falcons next season, the team said yesterday.
The Falcons are offering Sanders, who also plays major league baseball, a one-year contract for $2.88 million, prorated by the number of games he plays.
Sanders is demanding a three-year contract, said his agent, EUGENE PARKER.


Eight States Sue Comcast, Accusing It of Deceptions
Eight states filed lawsuits against the Comcast Corporation yesterday, charging the cable television operator with deceiving customers in its marketing of programming and repair services.


Quake's Toll In Colombia Rises to 500
Rescue efforts continued today in southwestern Colombia as the police assessed the damage caused by an earthquake and avalanches that struck on Monday.
Rescue authorities in Bogota said that there were 250 confirmed deaths but that the toll could rise.
Radio reports said village officials in the Cauca and Huila regions estimated 500 to 2,000 people dead.
Thousands more are homeless.


Rostenkowski's Panel Meets, Though It Isn't His Anymore
When the Democratic members of the House Ways and Means Committee arrived this morning at their conference room on the second floor of the Capitol, there was a faint 3-inch-by-18-inch scar on the mahogany door where there used to be a nameplate that read "Mr. Rostenkowski."
Inside, at the head of the long, oval table where Dan Rostenkowski had sat for the last 13 years, was Sam M. Gibbons of Florida, a tall stack of papers on health care before him and the committee's staff director and chief counsel, Janice A. Mays, at his side.
His face was lobster-red, a result of days in the sun in Normandy over the last week with other veterans of the D-Day invasion.


Mutual Fund Bailout; Paine Spends $33 Million to Cover Losses, But the Gesture Proves Troubling to Some
Some Wall Street executives were likening it to the arrival of Santa Claus to the securities markets: For the second time this spring, a brokerage firm said it would inject millions of its own money into a mutual fund to rebuild investors' confidence.
Paine Webber Group Inc. said yesterday that it would put $33 million into its popular Short-Term U.S.
Government Income Fund, which has attracted $1.7 billion from investors since it was started in 1990.
The fund has suffered as a result of losses in the fixed-income market this spring.


Intel Forms Chip Pact With Hewlett-Packard
The Intel Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company announced an alliance today to develop computer processor technologies that could be brought to market toward the end of the decade.
Intel, the world's largest chip maker, and Hewlett-Packard, the second-largest computer maker, said they would focus on 64-bit microprocessor designs and new semiconductor processes for a family of chips that would not arrive for another three semiconductor generations, or shortly before the end of the decade.


Rabin Facing Public Doubts On Credibility
As it tries to move forward on several fronts in peace talks with the Arabs, the Israeli Government is also looking over its shoulder, where it has found a growing number of domestic critics questioning whether it can be trusted to tell the truth about where the country is headed.
The credibility issue landed here like a low-megaton bomb this week, zeroing in on promises that the Government had made in private about the future of Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem.


Berlin Wright Gets Basketball Account
NBA Properties, the marketing arm of the National Basketball Association in New York, said yesterday that it had selected Berlin Wright Cameron in New York as the first agency to handle consumer and trade advertising for its consumer products group, the league's licensing division.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them to be $10 million.


British Vote Is About Europe But Major's Role Is Top Issue
Voting for delegates to the European Parliament will take place Thursday, but in Britain the outcome is likely to tell less about Europe than about the political future of Prime Minister John Major.
Britain's opposition parties have campaigned at times as if the balloting were not about the European Parliament -- an institution most Britons regard as remote and irrelevant -- but about a referendum on Mr.
Major's leadership.


In Budget, Albany Preserves Some Hometown Goodies
Since 1986, when the State Legislature was ridiculed for appropriating $175,000 to help build the Museum of Cheese in Rome, N.Y., legislative aides say they have been trying to clean up the process that produces the budget items referred to here by euphemisms like "legislative initiatives" and "member items." Elsewhere the spending is more commonly known as pork.
But that did not prevent this election-year budget from including grants like $2,500 for the Farmingdale Midget Football league, $5,000 for the Firefighters Monuments for the Massapequas, $100,000 for Carnegie Hall, and $250,000 for the Boonville Fair.


MTV Worker Dismissed Over Cuba Concert
After complaints by the leading Cuban exile group, the fledgling Spanish-language network of MTV has dismissed an employee here who was helping to organize a private tour to Havana for a concert by a Cuban singer.
The employee, Maria Romeu, an assistant to the managing director of MTV Latino, was dismissed on Monday, five days after an official of the Cuban American National Foundation called the network.
The network said the group had complained that material promoting the Havana trip, in which MTV Latino is not involved, had been faxed from the network's corporate offices here.


Fed Tightens Its Policies On Ethics
Thanks to their chief critic in Congress, Federal Reserve officials face the prospect of life without free meals at pricey restaurants or free tickets to baseball games.
After years of maintaining vaguer conflict of interest rules than any Federal regulatory agency, the 12 regional banks of the Federal Reserve system have cracked down, telling employees they can no longer accept free meals and gifts from officials of the banks they regulate or anyone else in financial markets.
Longtime Critic
The change by the Federal Reserve, which oversees 960 banks around the country as well as all of the nation's bank holding companies, was made public today in a letter to Representative Henry B. Gonzalez of Texas from William J. McDonough, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


Ranger's Winning Blend Heads for the Biggest Moment
Like most good National Hockey League teams of the 1990's, the Rangers are a roaring confluence that flows as one river blended from many talent streams.
As they prepare for a possible clinching of the Stanley Cup Thursday night at a festive Madison Square Garden, their primary identity remains that of the Olde Oilers, a group of veterans led by Mark Messier.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the dispute over logging on Federal land in the Pacific Northwest misstated the size of the timber harvest foreseen by the Clinton Administration proposal.
It is approximately one billion board feet per year, not one million.


Member Won't Quit School Board Post
Irritated that her adversaries had suggested she was being forced out, a Queens school board member announced yesterday that she was rescinding her decision to resign and would stay in her post, at least for now.
Mary A. Cummins, a member of Community School Board 24 who came to prominence in 1992 as an opponent of a curriculum, "Children of the Rainbow," that taught tolerance for homosexuals, announced on Tuesday that she would relinquish her board seat on July 1.


Events: Auction Of Glass, And Tours
Glass Auction  Christie's, 502 Park Avenue (59 Street); (718) 625-3685.


Where to Find It
ALTHOUGH personal computers are now standard equipment in many homes, mastering an Apple Macintosh or an I.B.M.
PC is considerably more challenging than learning to use a vacuum cleaner.
Enter the electronic personal trainer, the computer consultant who makes house calls and tailors hardware and software to an individual's requirements.


Price/Costco Inc.(PCCW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 8


Books of The Times; Low Shock Threshold In White House Expose
The Agenda  Inside the Clinton White House  By Bob Woodward  Illustrated. 352 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster.


CHRONICLE
SUSAN EGAN, who plays Belle, the beauty in "Beauty and the Beast," ran out of the castle into clouds of smoke at the beginning of Act II on Tuesday night and disappeared, not to be seen again.
After a few minutes the curtain came down, and when it rose, KIM HUBER, the understudy, had taken over, looking for all the world like Ms.
Egan but seven inches taller.


Tigers Get 10-Run 5th and Rout Red Sox
Tigers 14, Red Sox 5
The Detroit Tigers sent 14 batters to the plate in the fifth inning yesterday and scored 10 runs in beating the Boston Red Sox, 14-5, in Detroit.


Honors
*
Jacqueline Leo, senior vice president and editorial director of the Women's Magazines Group at The New York Times Company, was named to receive the 1994 Human Relations Award by the publishers division of the American Jewish Committee.
Ms.
Leo will be honored at a dinner on June 22 in New York.


Verlon Biggs Dies; Ex-Jet Player, 51, Was on Title Team
Verlon Biggs, a soft-spoken, big-play defensive end on the Jets' team that won the 1969 Super Bowl, died yesterday at Singing River Hospital in Moss Point, Miss.
He was 51.


Review/Rock; How Fame Can Soothe a Rowdy Crowd
"If you want to hear Live, you're going to have to wait 40 minutes," the singer and guitarist Vic Chesnutt yelled on Tuesday night at Irving Plaza.
Then, using less polite words, he screamed something similar about Pearl Jam.
He was only a few songs into his opening set for the alternative rock band Live.
The new face of the alternative rock audience had revealed itself in all its glory, yelling "go home" and "go Rangers" as Mr.
Chesnutt and his band tried to perform.
It's probably time to find a new name for the genre, because Mr.
Chesnutt, who has had to use a wheelchair for roughly a decade, seemed to be the alternative tonight.
He shifted from rambling acoustic folk to electric squelch, imbuing each slow song with world-weary cynicism.


Agriculture Chief Questioned on Gifts
Federal investigators are examining whether Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy illegally accepted free travel, tickets to sporting events and other gifts from Tyson Foods Inc., the country's largest poultry processor, people with knowledge of the case said today.
The inquiry, conducted by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, centers on a possible violation of the 1907 Meat Inspection Act, which makes it a crime for officials like Mr.
Espy to receive any "thing of value" from any company or person regulated by the 87-year-old Federal law.
A violation is a felony punishable by a mandatory one-year prison sentence.


In Rome, Renovation Worthy of the Medici
ONCE the cocoon of scaffolding came off the neoclassical palazzo on the Janiculum Hill high above the city, tour-bus drivers began hitting the brakes whenever they passed by.
Here is the present splendor that is the American Academy, the Roman sanctuary for American artists and scholars since before the turn of the century.
What about this building makes it worth even a drive-by in a place like Rome, where, as Edith Wharton wrote, "the very air is full of architecture" and where the "neophyte . . . coming from the American wilderness to study the fine arts" (in the words of Van Wyck Brooks, a fellow at the academy in the mid-1950's) has long found a haven?


Hoping for Big Savings, Senate Votes to Streamline Government Purchasing
In an effort to save billions of dollars, the Senate approved by voice vote tonight legislation that streamlines the way the Government spends $200 billion a year for goods and services, from pencils to nuclear submarines.
The bill, the first major legislation of its kind in a decade, consolidates hundreds of rules, encourages Federal agencies to buy off-the-shelf commercial products instead of custom-designed ones and simplifies paperwork for purchases under $100,000.
It also allows Government managers to buy products faster and more cheaply.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  JAPAN BALKS AT SANCTIONS  The Clinton Administration's plan to seek new global sanctions against North Korea for its defiance of nuclear inspectors has run into resistance from Japan.
Concerned about North Korea's reaction, Japan is balking at a quick cutoff of the hundreds of millions of dollars that Koreans in Japan send to North Korea.
A1  OXFORD DONS HONOR CLINTON  Oxford Journal: Wearing a red gown beneath a high ceiling painted with cavorting cherubs, President Clinton received an honorary doctorate in civil law at the glamorous but musty place where he studied as a Rhodes Scholar from 1968 to 1970.
A1


Bid for Allied Clinical Is Cut After Investigation Widens
Federal officials have issued new subpoenas in an investigation of Medicare billing practices at Allied Clinical Laboratories Inc., one of the nation's largest blood-testing companies, the company said yesterday.
After learning that the Federal investigation of Allied Clinical had widened, National Health Laboratories Inc. said yesterday that it would reduce its takeover offer for the company by about $13 million.
National Health will also extend the offer, now valued at $204 million, until June 21.
The deal, which still includes $24 million in Allied Clinical debt, had been scheduled to close on Tuesday.


Economic Scene; South Africa's huge challenge: bringing the good life to blacks.
IT seems a miracle: South Africa has become a multiracial democracy.
But democracies can't live by virtue alone, and the economic challenge facing the new Government is far greater than generally understood.


Richfood Holdings Inc.(RCHF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Suspended Cancer Studies Get Limited Approval to Resume
Two months after suspending entry of new patients into flawed cancer studies coordinated by the University of Pittsburgh, Federal health officials yesterday approved resumption of the trials on a limited basis.
Entry will be permitted into three of the six trials that the university coordinates at nearly 500 hospitals in the United States and Canada.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Houston's role as a host city for the National Basketball Association finals misstated the affiliation of a Houston sociologist, Stephen Klineberg, who said, "There is no question that winning it all is an extremely important psychological thing for Houston." He is with Rice University, not the University of Houston.


Era of Smaller and Cheaper Satellites Begins
The nation's space agency announced contracts today for a pair of small satellites that it said would usher in a new era of smaller and cheaper spacecraft developed and launched in a fraction of the normal time.
Daniel S. Goldin, the Administrator of NASA, said the new "Smallsats' are expected to go from the drawing board into space in 2 years instead of the normal 5 to 10. He said they exemplify his efforts to have the agency adopt a faster, better and cheaper way of doing business in which the contractors will do more of the design work.


Rifkin Given Maximum Sentence for Murder


And an Outsider Will Lead A.L.: Budig
Baseball owners, continuing to turn to nontraditional talent pools to fill the game's highest-ranking executive positions, today named Gene Budig, the chancellor of the University of Kansas, as president of the American League.
Budig, 55, was unanimously elected to a five-year term by the 14 American League owners.
He will become the league's seventh president on Aug. 1, succeeding Dr.
Bobby Brown, a former Yankees infielder and cardiologist, who is retiring after 10 years as league president.


Florida Will Deport Illegal Aliens Jailed for Nonviolent Crimes
Florida today became the first state in the nation to begin deporting illegal immigrants imprisoned for nonviolent offenses while living in the United States.
Florida officials, hoping to reduce the costs of illegal immigration and to ease crowding in state prisons, approved a plan in collaboration with Federal immigration authorities to deport 113 illegal aliens.


Yvonne Istel, Wartime Volunteer, 99
Yvonne Istel, a volunteer worker during World Wars I and II on both sides of the Atlantic, died on Saturday in Paris.
She was 99.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Brandon Huntsman and Brad Crills, pitchers; Noel Ramos, Michael Wolff and Ryan Hendricks, first basemen; Sean Hugo, Kedrick Porter, Rolando Avila and Thomas D'Aquila, outfielders; Michael Nadeau and Craig Daedelow, shortstops; and Chris Sauritch, infielder.


Barbara Howell, Novelist, 59
Barbara Howell, a feminist novelist and short story writer, died on Tuesday in Lenox Hill Hospital.
Ms.
Howell, who lived in Manhattan, was 57.


Rockies' Cheap Hits Are Costly For Mets
It was something of a routine question, at least when it comes to Bret Saberhagen, whose starts generally are the best things that can happen to the Mets.
With the Mets ahead by one run after seven innings this afternoon at Mile High Stadium, Manager Dallas Green asked his pitching coach to make sure Saberhagen felt up to pitching against the Rockies in the eighth.


GARDEN Q. &amp; A.
Designing a Mix
Q.
Walking through a nursery recently, I overheard gardeners discussing their designs for "mixed borders." Could you clarify this term? -- Linda H. Friedlander, Queens.


TOKYO RELUCTANT TO LEVY SANCTIONS ON NORTH KOREANS
The Clinton Administration's plan to impose new global sanctions against North Korea for its defiance of nuclear inspectors has run into strong resistance from Japan, throwing into question the effort to impose strict financial sanctions against the Communist Government.
The Japanese, concerned about North Korea's reaction, are balking at a quick cutoff of the hundreds of millions of dollars that Koreans living in Japan send back to relatives in the North.
Combined with China's reluctance to exert greater pressure on North Korea, the sharp debate threatens to greatly reduce the pain inflicted on the North.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  HOTEL IS SEIZED IN DRUG-LAW TAKEOVER
Federal authorities seized the Kenmore Hotel, a filthy, dilapidated residential hotel near Gramercy Park, saying that drug dealers used it to operate "a virtual supermarket for crack cocaine." The owner, prosecutors said, did nothing about it.
A1.
If ghosts roam the Kenmore, they bear names like Dashiell Hammett and Stephen Crane.
B3.


A Winning Combination -- a Book and a Day in the Park


In Largest Drug-Law Takeover, U.S. Seizes New York City Hotel
Federal authorities seized a filthy, dilapidated residential hotel near Gramercy Park yesterday, saying that drug dealers used it to operate "a virtual supermarket for crack cocaine." The owner, prosecutors said, did nothing about it.
Roving bands of drug dealers and addicts took over whole floors at the Kenmore Hotel, the largest single-room occupancy hotel in New York City, regularly robbing and sometimes killing elderly residents for a few dollars, prosecutors said.
With unlighted stairwells, broken toilets in common bathrooms and prostitutes plying their trade in the hallways, the hotel "was permeated with violence," said the United States Attorney, Mary Jo White.


Hit-and-Run Is Prompting Wide Inquiry
Several dozen investigators combed the streets yesterday looking for a white delivery van involved in a hit-and-run accident on Tuesday in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, in which a mother and daughter were killed.
Hundreds of vehicles matching the van's description were stopped in New York City, New Jersey and Nassau and Suffolk Counties, the police said.
Investigators were awaiting the results of lab tests on the victims' clothing, hoping that paint residue might identify the vehicle's make, model and type.
But with no report on the delivery van's license plate, the police said they were relying on tips -- and perhaps remorse -- to lead them to the driver responsible for the deaths of Donna Blanchard, 43, and Michele, 4.


Louis A. Brown, 89, A Developer
Louis A. Brown, a New York-area real-estate developer, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 89.


A Sharper View of Gay Consumers
A portrait of gay men and lesbians as consumers has emerged from what is probably the first nationally representative survey on the subject, and it is providing marketers with data that debunk some widely held beliefs, confirm others and offer a surprise or two.
For the first time, the research company Yankelovich Partners Inc. included a question about sexual identity in its annual Yankelovich Monitor survey, which has tracked consumer values and attitudes since 1971.


INSIDE
New Federal Purchasing Plan
The Senate approved legislation to streamline the way the Government spends $200 billion a year.
Page B10.
Running From Clinton
Democratic candidates, uneasy about the President's low popularity, are distancing themselves.
Page A22.
No Free Lunch at the Fed
Federal Reserve employees can no longer accept meals and gifts from the banks they regulate.
Page D1.


Fragrance Account Awarded to McCabe
CP Holdings in Cambridge, Mass., which last week acquired the rights to market fragrances like Chantilly, Raffinee and Lutece, said yesterday that it had named McCabe &amp; Company in New York as the first agency to handle its advertising, promotions, marketing and public relations.
Billings were estimated to exceed $15 million.


Breaking the Rules
THERE'S always something irregular about a good garden, says the painter Robert Dash.
It has to break the rules.
Madoo, Mr.
Dash's garden in Sagaponack, L.I., keeps changing with the artist who tends it.
Who knows?
The chartreuse garden gate might be different color next week, depending upon Mr.
Dash's mood and what paint is in his studio.


In Performance; DANCE
Exercises in Structure, With People as the Blocks  New York State Theater


Chiefs Release Lowery
The most accurate place-kicker in National Football League history is out of work.
In a much-rumored salary cap move, the Kansas City Chiefs yesterday released NICK LOWERY.
The Chiefs hope to re-sign him at a lower salary as a free agent.
Lowery, 38, who succeeded the Hall-of-Fame kicker Jan Stenerud in 1980 after being cut 11 times by 8 teams, will be asked to take a cut in his scheduled base salary of $675,000.
Bonuses and incentive clauses could have raised the figure to $771,000.


Paine Webber to Aid Investors in a Mutual Fund
In a virtually unprecedented bailout of a money losing mutual fund, Paine Webber said yesterday that it would put $33 million into one of its funds to partly compensate investors for unexpectedly heavy losses.
Paine Webber's Short-Term U.S.
Government Income Fund, which promised investors high returns with low risk, invested in various complex one-of-a-kind securities based on home mortgages.
The fund performed well last year, but declined by 5.7 percent this year, including a drop of 4 percent in a single day, May 6.


California Utility Seeks Power Pool
In the first move of its kind, an electric utility in California has proposed setting up a central market where the producers of power and their customers could buy and sell electricity through a new company that would not be under the control of individual utilities.
The move by Southern California Edison is a reaction to a proposal by the California Public Utilities Commission that could open a new era of competition among utilities.


Gotti Relatives Held In Attack on Officer
A son and a son-in-law of John Gotti, the imprisoned Mafia boss, tried to stop a police officer from writing a ticket in Queens yesterday, and the nephew attacked the officer, the police said.
Peter Gotti, the youngest son of John Gotti, and Carmine Agnello, who is married to John Gotti's daughter, Victoria, were among six men arrested outside Agnello Auto Parts, a business in Jamaica that the police said is owned by Mr.
Agnello.


Review/Opera; 'Tosca' Opens the Met's Park Series
In what has become a summer ritual, opera fans began gathering on the Great Lawn of Central Park early Tuesday afternoon, intent on securing prime seats for the opening of one of New York City's great seasonal freebies, the Metropolitan Opera's series of concerts in the parks.
The conditions, by curtain time, were as close to idyllic as one could hope for in the middle of Manhattan.
The weather was comfortably cool and breezy.
Balloons floated over blankets arrayed with picnic dinners, wine and candles.
Pinkening clouds floated over the Carlos Mosely Music Pavilion, and the roar of passing aircraft competed for attention with the strains of Puccini's "Tosca."
By police estimate, about 50,000 people turned up, which is either one-tenth of the audiences at Central Park concerts by Luciano Pavarotti or Paul Simon, or the equivalent of 12.5 full houses at the Met, depending on one's point of view.


The Homeless Have Other Recourse Than the Emergency Unit
To the Editor:
New York City provides homeless families with 24-hour access to shelter.
Conditions at the city's last emergency assistance unit, in the Bronx, have received much legal and media attention, but that unit is not the only office where emergency housing assistance is available.


In Performance; JAZZ
On a Winding Trail With a Young Jazzman  Iridium
The saxophonist Ravi Coltrane, who is performing at Iridium (44 West 63d Street, Manhattan) through Sunday, has been circling jazz's center stage as a sideman for several years now, working with Elvin Jones, Steve Coleman, David Murray, Rashid Ali and occasionally his own groups.
It's easy to hear why he's so popular.
At 28, Mr.
Coltrane is rapidly acquiring a distinctive voice, with a thoughtfulness that sometimes eludes more experienced musicians.
His set on Tuesday night showed him to be an improviser who, in his reticence, forces a listener to follow him.
At first he sounded almost timid.
But after a few minutes it became clear his improvisations were loaded with turnbacks, repetitions, asides and afterthoughts, as if he were having a conversation with himself.
He broke his solos into fragments, short bursts that were always self-referential and oddly balanced.
Where jazz instrumentalists often seek a linear flow, Mr.
Coltrane's solos were occasionally still, as if he were building a static monument out of ideas, repeated, examined, turned over, turned sideways and then added to a pile of previously used motifs.
He can burn, too.
Backed by Billy Childs on piano, Calvin Jones on bass and Cindy Blackman on drums, Mr.
Coltrane, on up-tempo tunes, draped harmony over harmony, compressing dense phrases into small spaces.
He has the gift of ease and even ideas that should have been unmanageably dissonant, or pitches that sailed way off the mark, floated back into his schema.
Mr.
Coltrane hasn't yet figured out how to use dynamics, or articulate all his ideas.
And he doesn't have a group conception, at least on the evidence of this one set.
But he has promise, intelligence and individuality, which is more than half the battle.
PETER WATROUS


Essay; Korean Conflict II?
Only the temporary absence of the Soviet Union's representative from the U.N.
Security Council in 1950 enabled the United States to counter aggression from North Korea under a U.N. flag.
That diplomatic cover was useful; it was not a case of North Korea against the U.S. and its ally South Korea, but of an aggressor against the world.
Though the Korean Conflict was never officially called a war, it cost the U.S. about 150,000 casualties.
Because Chinese "volunteers" intervened after MacArthur had victory in his grasp, it ended in stalemate.


Blue Cross Account Is Put Into Review
Blue Cross of California said yesterday that after five and a half years it had dismissed BBDO Los Angeles and was reviewing its account, with billings estimated at $12 million.


Worries About Abuse Are Changing Camps
"DOES anybody know the three safe places to touch a child?"
Bob Ditter, a family therapist who specializes in training camp counselors, posed this question last week to 150 young counselors from Harbor Hills Day Camp in Mount Freedom, N.J., as he led a training session in a nearby school.


Design's Future
ROBERT VENTURI, who with Denise Scott Brown restored ornament, humor and history to modern architecture and thereby invented post-modernism, has a new theory: call it virtual ornament.
Inspired by the huge computerized billboards in Tokyo and Osaka, Japan, Mr.
Venturi foresees a new public architecture that combines plain-surfaced buildings with superscale video monitors inside and out.


11 Stowaways Use Old Plan In Asylum Bid
Eleven Romanian stowaways followed each step of the plan that some of their compatriots used in April: They sealed themselves inside the same kind of metal container, crossed the Atlantic aboard the same cargo ship and broke out midway through the voyage with the same kind of tools.
And, like the earlier stowaways, they met the same fate when the ship arrived in Boston today: They were taken into custody by agents of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


Essex County Seals Votes In Primary
Winning the Democratic primary for virtually any office in Essex County has usually meant an easy victory in November, but this year the wheels have been threatening to come off the once-vaunted political steamroller.
In the days before Tuesday's primary election, the Democratic campaigns for County Executive and Sheriff turned nasty, leaving rifts that must be mended if the party is to hold on to the top county posts and the patronage that goes with them.


Doubles Team Picked
JARED PALMER and RICHEY RENEBERG will play doubles for the United States Davis Cup team next month in its second-round match against the Netherlands, the American captain, TOM GULLIKSON, said yesterday.
"I like their contrasting styles," Gullikson said.


After Humdrum Primary, California Candidates Gird for Tough, Costly Races
The 1994 California races for Governor and the United States Senate got officially under way today after a round of lackluster primary voting on Tuesday that routinely produced the expected nominees.
The fall contests shape up as anything but routine.


Bill on Education Spending Adds Complexities to Budget
It sounds harmless enough, the sort of phrase bureaucrats invent to chew all the meaning out of words.
But "maintenance of effort" has emerged as a potent budgetary weapon as Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has looked to the state to help close his budget gap in New York City.
For years, the Legislature has complained that cities in financial trouble tend to use state assistance earmarked for education to help pay for deficits.
And in January, when Mayor Giuliani appeared before lawmakers he said he might do exactly that.
This upset many lawmakers, especially the Democrats who control the Assembly, who already didn't like many of the Mayor's proposed cuts.


Lions Get Carter
The free-agent wide receiver ANTHONY CARTER, the Minnesota Vikings' career leader in receiving yards (7,635) and touchdown catches (52), has signed with the Detroit Lions, the team announced yesterday.
It's a return home for Carter, who set the National Collegiate Athletic Association record for all-purpose yards at Michigan and started his professional career with the Michigan Panthers of the United States Football League.


Head of Civil Rights Group Plans to Resign
After more than a decade of battling Republicans in the White House and then working with their Democratic successor, one of the nation's most prominent civil rights figures announced today that he would step down.
Ralph G. Neas, the executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights for 13 years, said today that he would resign when his replacement is chosen next year.


Executive Changes
ALEX.
BROWN &amp; SONS INC., Baltimore, named Scott Wieler senior investment banker in the media and communications group.
CORRECTIONS CORP.
OF AMERICA, Nashville, said that Doctor R. Crants, the chief executive, had added the post of chairman, and that David L. Myers had succeeded Mr.
Crants as president.


Democrats See Voters Lashing Out at Clinton
Craig Mathis is a Democrat running for Congress from Albany, Ga.
He is also running from President Clinton.
The best clue is in his campaign brochure, which leaves prospective voters no clue as to whether Mr.
Mathis is a Democrat, Republican or some kind of hybrid.
"I will support the President when I believe he's right," he says in the brochure in bold type.
"And I will oppose him when I think he is wrong."


Bridge
The Reisinger Knockout Team Championship was won Sunday in a 59-imp victory by Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, Queens, Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif., Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, and Michael Polowan of Manhattan.
In the diagramed deal both teams reached three no-trump.
In one room the opening lead was a heart to the nine, and Polowan as South won with the king.
He guessed right by leading to the spade ace and continuing spades.
When the queen appeared, he took his spade winners and led a club.
West played the jack, dummy's ace won, and the diamond jack was led for a losing finesse.
West took two diamond tricks and exited with a diamond, but South then played the king and another club.
West had to lead hearts at the finish, and South's queen scored the ninth trick.


Spring Rite for the Yankees: Complaining About the Stadium
They have the best record in the American League.
Their right fielder is hitting like Ted Williams.
And their pitching staff has one of the league's best earned run averages.
But when it comes to attendance, the New York Yankees seem the essence of mediocrity: 7th in the league, according to the latest available figures, and 16th overall.
The Yankees principal owner, George M. Steinbrenner 3d, blames the South Bronx.


Legacy of '93 Flood: Sand, Sand and More Sand
First came the flood, which tore nearly 500 holes in the farm levees along the Missouri River last year and drowned $150 million in crops.
Now the water is gone, but the rampaging river left even greater trouble: millions of tons of sand that have transformed miles of fertile bottom land into a desert landscape of blowing grit and shifting dunes, in some places five feet deep.


Rangers Must Cope With Tumult at Garden
There was one challenge left as the Rangers made their long trip east today, perhaps the final leg of a 54-year odyssey that has covered too many miles and broken too many hearts to produce an accurate count.
Their challenge extends far beyond the carefully recited responses that we haven't won anything yet, even after they had just earned the chance to win a Stanley Cup in New York for the first time in the often-painful history of the franchise.
Even the poised hands from those Edmonton Oiler championship teams, imported for their steely-eyed sense of purpose as much as their ability, have not dealt with a circumstance quite like the one they will face Thursday night.
Their earliest triumphs were achieved when everything up north seemed fresh and new, when the charged atmosphere of Northlands Coliseum did not have to exorcise any ghosts.
Coming so soon after the Oilers joined the National Hockey League from the old World Hockey Association, the house, the effort and the opportunity were all too new for any lingering bitterness or regret.


Milan Journal; Going, Going . . . The Fall of the House of Ferruzzi
They used to grace the villa along the Appian Way in Rome, the hunting lodge in Tuscany, the apartment in Milan.
But this week they were up for sale, on auction at Sotheby's here, the walnut 17th-century armoires, the paintings in the French and Flemish style, the Oriental carpets.
They once graced the rooms of the powerful Ferruzzi family, the founders of a business empire built on farming and the foodstuffs trade, chemicals, insurance and a hundred other things.


A Spring Tradition: Yankee Complaints
They have the best record in the American League.
But the New York Yankees seem the essence of mediocrity in attendance, and the Yankees' principal owner, George M. Steinbrenner 3d, blames the South Bronx.
Article, page B1.


Music Notes
Benefit for WNYC
A few months ago -- before the mayoral election and before there was talk of selling WNYC's radio frequencies -- John Schaefer, director of music programming at the city-owned station, decided to give a party to celebrate WNYC's 50th anniversary.
Now the station's staff is worrying about the future, begging listeners for contributions and hoping that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani will keep his promise to maintain WNYC's classical music and National Public Radio programming even if he finds a buyer for its current position on the radio dial.


Freshening New York's Air
Three months ago a bill was introduced in the City Council that would impose sweeping restrictions on smoking in public places in New York.
This week the Council's Health Committee had its first hearing on the Smoke-Free Air Act and attracted speakers ranging from cancer victims to restaurant owners to tobacco industry representatives.
That last group is more or less resigned to seeing the bill pass -- among its supporters are the five Borough Presidents and the City Health Commissioner -- but are hoping for a weaker version.
They may, however, see a final bill even stronger than Council Speaker Peter Vallone's initial proposal.
The act requires employers of all sizes to restrict smoking to enclosed, specially ventilated rooms, with a limit of one room to each floor of a building.
Smoking would be restricted to separate sections of outdoor cafes, and would be banned in the seats in Shea and Yankee Stadiums, as it is now in 20 out of 28 major league ball parks.


C.B.A. Alumni Reach the Pinnacle
For two days, every player and coach involved in the National Basketball Association championship series has talked about being fortunate to make it this far.
But for seven of the players, the feeling of good fortune runs deeper than usual because they have come so far to get here.
The seven -- Scott Brooks, Earl Cureton, Mario Elie and Chris Jent of Houston, and John Starks, Anthony Mason and Corey Gaines of New York -- are alumni of the Continental Basketball Association.


Turning a Profit On Dirty Reactors
To the Editor:
You report (Business Day, May 31) a plan to "shift responsibility from private companies to the Federal Government for millions of dollars in damages from certain types of nuclear accidents outside the United States." The idea is promoted by the Energy Department.
The cited beneficiaries will be Bechtel, Combustion Engineering, Nuclear Fuel Services and Raytheon.
Westinghouse, General Electric or both should gain too.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
American General Finance, Evansville, Ind., is selling $150 million of senior notes due 1999 through CS First Boston Corp.
The issue was re-offered with a coupon of 6.875 percent at 99.776 to yield 6.927 percent.
The notes are rated A-1 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P.


All Children, Rich or Poor, Need Summer Camp; Minds-on Activities
To the Editor:
As a teacher with 30 years' experience teaching science and math from first grade to senior year, I generally agree with Lou Gerstner's estimate of where American education is failing its students (Op-Ed, May 27).


An Appreciation; The Potter Legacy: Faith in Quality TV
Dennis Potter died this week.
And so did a powerful voice cantankerously insisting that television, which he always praised as the most democratic medium, could be far more than a tireless purveyor of fluffy diversions.
Mr.
Potter, who was 59, wrote novels, plays and screenplays, but his talents flourished most splendidly, and often controversially, in television drama.
If the medium can lay claim to masterpieces, two would have to be the Potter mini-series: "Pennies From Heaven" and "The Singing Detective."
Probing themes of reality and illusion, sex and death, public and personal betrayal, Mr.
Potter had boundless contempt for timid industry accountants or feel-good critics who refused to acknowledge that television could be as serious and significant as literature or films at their best.
His credo: "A confidence in common culture, an assumption that people are very much brighter than the market men say they are, that something in them is capable of responding to things that are very complex."


Jane Elizabeth Richmond, Writer, 57
Jane Elizabeth Richmond, a writer with a special interest in films and television, died on Monday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She was 57 and had homes in Pawcatuck, Conn., and Manhattan.


U.S. Backs Bid To Press Peace On Bosnia Foes
The United States has decided to support a European strategy for ending the war in Bosnia that envisions possible punitive steps against either warring party that does not accept an emerging peace plan, senior American and French officials said today.
President Clinton told the French Prime Minister, Edouard Balladur, in a meeting on Tuesday that it was important for American, Western European and Russian negotiators to work as one to complete a map dividing the country, present it to the Bosnian Serbs and the Muslim-Croatian federation based in Sarajevo, and make clear that there would be consequences if either side rejected it, the officials said.


Shareholder Opposes Plan At United Air
The second-largest shareholder of United Airlines' parent, the UAL Corporation, says he will vote against the proposal by two of the company's unions to gain majority control of the carrier.
The pledge by John B. Neff, manager of Vanguard/Windsor Funds Inc., which owns 9.7 percent of the airline's stock, casts a new measure of doubt over the fate of the proposal to create the nation's largest employee-owned company.
The largest shareholder, Alliance Capital Management L.P., however, reiterated yesterday its plan to vote for the deal.
Alliance, which has been buying UAL shares recently, owns about 17 percent of the stock.


All Children, Rich or Poor, Need Summer Camp; Classes for the Gifted
To the Editor:
I heartily agree with Louis Gerstner's call for sweeping change in "Our Schools Are Failing. Do We Care?" (Op-Ed, May 27).
I care.


ABM Industries(ABM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


CHRONICLE
No longer does it seem sufficient to pay tribute to the authors of new books with just one party in one city.
There were two parties in New York this week for LYNN SHERR, a correspondent for the ABC News program "20/20," and JURATE KAZICKAS, a freelance writer, for their book, "Susan B. Anthony Slept Here: A Guide to American Women's Landmarks," published by Times Books.
Two more celebrations are planned later this month in Washington and Boston.
The book is a compendium of more than 2,000 sites around the country associated with women of renown, from Amelia Earhart's birthplace (Atchison, Kan.) to Calamity Jane's burial site (Deadwood, S.D.)


No Headline
"In a lot of places out there we have sand five feet deep. The river turned the best farmland in the world into a giant sandbox." RUSSELL C. MILLS, a Federal official in Missouri.  [ B12:1. ]


HarperCollins Forms Multimedia Division
HarperCollins Publishers, a division of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, announced yesterday that it had formed a new division to produce and market computer software, including of some of its best-selling books.
Most of the software will be distributed as CD-ROM products.


Market Place; Closed-end country funds are not always what they seem to be.
IF you want to know how excited investors are about various foreign stock markets, there's no easier place to look than the quirky world of closed-end country funds.
These country funds generally raise a fixed amount of money that they invest in stock markets abroad.
Americans can buy shares in the fund here that trade for more or less than the value of the underlying foreign stock portfolio.
When the price of shares has been bid up to well over the price of the underlying assets -- that is, a premium, -- that's usually a sign that investors are enthusiastic about a given country's prospects.


U.N.'s Rwanda Deployment Slowed by Lack of Vehicles
Even though the United Nations has recruited most of the troops it needs for a peacekeeping mission in Rwanda, Clinton Administration officials said today that it would take at least a month to send the American armored vehicles they need and to train the troops how to use them.
The schedule for delivering the vehicles has slowed the deployment of African peacekeeping troops and has delayed efforts to protect civilians in Rwanda, where hundreds of thousands have been killed.


Jeannette Walters, Soprano and Teacher, 52
Jeannette Walters, a soprano, teacher and vocal coach, died on June 1 at Mary Immaculate Hospital in Queens.
She was 52.


Pool Praised By Governor In Turnabout
Three weeks after he derided a proposed $24 million state-financed aquatic center for the 1998 Goodwill Games as a Taj Mahal, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo made a flip turn yesterday, welcoming plans to build both the pool and a new stadium on Long Island.
The state will pay the full cost of the aquatic center, which is to be built in Eisenhower Park in East Meadow.
It will also contribute half the $40 million construction cost of the new 25,000-seat multi-use stadium to be built in Mitchel Park, across the street from the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale.


I.B.M. and the Limits of a Consent Decree
Is I.B.M. a colossus astride the computer industry, a force so potent that special court rules are needed to protect competitors?
The idea may seem bizarre at a time when the International Business Machines Corporation is shedding employees and reorganizing divisions in a desperate effort to remain a major player in the computer market.
But that is the issue facing a Federal court, which on Tuesday was asked to release I.B.M. from a 1956 consent decree limiting its room to maneuver for new business.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about Chinese refugees who marked the first anniversary of their arrival in the United States on the Golden Venture reversed the identities of two men.
Li Bin (Alan) Wang was at the center; Lin Guo Wu was at the right.


Stocks Off a Bit; Nasdaq Index in Sharp Fall
The stock market as a whole dropped modestly yesterday, but a rout in computer stocks abruptly pulled down the Nasdaq composite index in advance of a computer-industry indicator coming out today.
Otherwise the session was uneventful, although it did not help that bond prices fell, the dollar fell against the yen and commodities prices appeared to be rising.


Corrections
A picture caption in some copies yesterday with an article about an agreement to end tolls on two Westchester County parkways misidentified the one shown.
It was the Saw Mill River Parkway, not the Hutchinson River.


The Harm in Family Welfare Caps
A destructive provision in President Clinton's forthcoming welfare-reform bill would allow states to put a cap on family welfare benefits.
Under the cap, mothers who give birth while on welfare would receive no additional money for the care of the additional child.
That will do little good and much harm.
According to nearly every careful study, family caps do nothing to discourage childbirth but they do victimize innocent children.
Family caps, which are also included in several bills already before Congress, are based on the false notion that larger benefit checks encourage welfare mothers to have more babies and thereby stay longer on welfare.
But a welfare mother would have to be crazy to think of babies as an economic advantage.
The average extra stipend to welfare mothers who give birth is less than $75 a month -- which does not even cover the cost of diapers and other expenses for the new baby.


Strodes Creek, Dazzling in Drill, Ends Mystery
His regular rider was sick, his trainer was sick and for a while everybody thought he was sick, too.
But Strodes Creek broke through the bustle and bruises of Belmont Week yesterday morning and delivered a sizzling performance, streaking three-eighths of a mile in 344/5 seconds and completing his countdown to the 126th Belmont Stakes.
The big bay colt from California did it three days after he had created some mystery when he stopped galloping for no known reason, raising eyebrows and even some doubts about his role as one of the favorites for the Belmont on Saturday.
But yesterday he ran so fast in his final workout that people were wondering whether he ran too fast.


New Gear for Summer
Golf the Easy Way For the golfer who would like a place to rest between putting greens, now there's a pull cart with a seat attached.


The Pop Life
A Roger Waters Update
Roger Waters, the former Pink Floyd vocalist, bassist and songwriter, learned the value of a name the hard way.
Although he was the chief architect of Pink Floyd's best-known recordings, his last solo album, "Amused to Death" in 1992, sold well below his expectations, and his two previous solo tours were disappointingly underattended.
As a result, he has performed only once in the last four years.
Meanwhile, his former band mates have sold more than three million tickets for their North American tour (they will be at Yankee Stadium on Friday and Saturday), and their most recent album, "The Division Bell," was No. 1 for four straight weeks.


Journal; The North Crusade
As Americans fixed their attention last weekend on the heroic military men who saved the world from Fascism, a tin soldier was leading a quiet coup back home.
At a Richmond convention overflowing with zealots, Oliver North won the Republican nomination for the Senate in Virginia and in that instant gave the radical Christian right its most ominous victory yet in its stealthy pursuit of political power nationwide.
To appreciate how scary Mr.
North and his movement are -- and not just to moderate Virginians -- consider this list of those on the right who have tacitly or actively opposed his Senate campaign: Ronald Reagan, The Wall Street Journal editorial page, George Will, Robert Bork and Edwin Meese.
Virginia's Republican Senator, John Warner, will back an independent candidate rather than support Mr.
North against the tarnished incumbent Democrat, Charles Robb.
Bob Dole and Gerald Ford are wavering.


Montedison and Shell Given Approval for $3 Billion Plan
Italy's Montedison S.p.A. and the British-Dutch Royal Dutch/Shell Group received approval from the European Union today to create a $3 billion joint venture that would produce and sell the chemicals from which plastics are made.
Officials from the European Union's antitrust agency approved a revised version of a plan to form a new company.
The parent corporations control the technology responsible for about two-thirds of the world's production of polypropylene.


Henri Lesieur, 93; Helped Air France On Atlantic Route
Henri Lesieur, who introduced trans-Atlantic passenger service for Air France in 1946, died last Saturday in Mount Sinai Hospital in Miami Beach.
The retired aviation executive was 93 and lived in Miami Beach.


In Its Literary Heyday, the Kenmore Offered a Haven and Hospitality
If ghosts roam the corridors of the Kenmore Hotel, they bear names like Nathanael West, Dashiell Hammett, and S. J. Perelman.
The red-brick Kenmore, at 145 East 23d Street, was never one of the city's elite hostelries, but in its literary heyday it was a far cry from the shabby hotel, with its littered lobby and ravaged rooms, that was seized yesterday by Federal authorities.


Sports of The Times; Ranger Rooters: Cool It
TO all you Ranger rooters holding your breath, this is an open letter:
If the Rangers win the Stanley Cup tonight at Madison Square Garden, some of you will be on trial.
On trial figuratively tonight.
And not really on trial later.


Topics of The Times; The Festival of Democracy
It was a day of mixed results for the show-business politicians.
Sonny Bono won the Republican Congressional nomination in a largely Republican California district.
Say this for him: No one with a worse voice ever became more famous in the singing business.
Not even Joe Cocker.
Also, he could fit in on Capitol Hill, given his description of his entertainment career: "I'm just a guy who joked all the time."
Out in Iowa, Fred Grandy, the Congressman who once played Gopher on "The Love Boat," lost his attempt to wrest the Republican gubernatorial nomination from Terry Branstad.
Mr.
Grandy conceded there had been criticism of his challenge.
"Maybe I was a little bit impatient, but hey, I'm an actor."


Poland to Seek Closer Ties With Russia
Reversing a longstanding policy that had sought to distance Poland from Moscow's sphere of influence, the Polish Government says it will seek closer relations with Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
"Poland cannot turn its back on the East," Foreign Minister Andrzej Olechowski said on Tuesday.
He said Poland would encourage closer diplomatic relations with Moscow and new trade with the commonwealth.


Paul V. Ames, Real-Estate Broker, 71
Paul V. Ames, a retired New York real-estate broker, died on Monday at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in East Orange, N.J.
Mr.
Ames, who lived in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., was 71.


O.E.C.D., Seeking Wider Membership, Signs Russian Pact
Signaling that it is no longer an exclusive club of rich nations, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development signed its first cooperation agreement with Russia today and declared itself ready to welcome new members from Eastern Europe and Asia.
The 25-nation organization, which monitors and analyzes the economic performance of industrialized countries, said it would talk with Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia about membership and expected an application from South Korea.


Williamson Is Sidelined
CORLISS WILLIAMSON, who helped Arkansas to the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship, has a broken wrist and cannot play basketball for three months, a university spokesman said yesterday.
The 6-foot-7-inch Williamson, who just completed his sophomore year, believes he injured his left wrist when Arkansas beat Duke, 76-72, in the title game in April, said BILL ROGERS, Arkansas's assistant sports information director.


McMichael Signs
STEVE McMICHAEL, the veteran defensive tackle for the Chicago Bears, signed yesterday with the Green Bay Packers.
McMichael, 36, an unrestricted free agent, is believed to have signed a one-year contract.


Retraining but No Layoffs, Fortune Editor Tells Staff
In the face of demands by Time Inc. for greater efficiency and savings, the new managing editor of Fortune, Walter Kiechel 3d, is promising his staff that there will be "no mass layoffs, no mass firings, no lining up eight writers and shooting them" -- although some people might have to be retrained for other jobs.


Onlookers at D-Day Rites, Germans Are Ambivalent
A postgraduate law student from Hamburg said he watched the live coverage of the D-Day anniversary ceremonies in Normandy on German television on Monday without any feeling of resentment that Chancellor Helmut Kohl had not been among the 19 allied leaders present.
"I can understand why," the student, Johannes Laitenberger, 29, said.
"It was primarily a tribute to veterans who participated in the landing, though it was the beginning of the liberation of Europe, and of Germany as well."


Giuliani Faces New Quandary With More Aid
New York City has received an unexpected windfall of at least $85 million in new aid from Albany and Washington.
But rather than soothing the city's budget fight, the money has created a political quandary for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who has pledged all along to spend less money, not more.
At a time when the City Council is looking for ways to restore some of the $1 billion in cuts that Mr.
Giuliani has proposed in city agencies, the Mayor pointedly refused yesterday to promise that the extra money would be used to scale back the cuts.


Oxford Journal; Whereas, He Is an Old Boy, If a Young Chief, Honor Him
President Clinton returned today for a sentimental journey to the university where he didn't inhale, didn't get drafted and didn't get a degree.
The last got rectified by Oxford University in a ceremony conducted by men in black gowns speaking in Latin in a 325-year-old stone building designed by Christopher Wren.
Mr.
Clinton, who studied politics at University College as a Rhodes Scholar from the fall of 1968 to the spring of 1970, was awarded an honorary doctorate in civil law.


World Cup To Be Safe, Officials Say
Girding for the most popular sporting event on the planet, senior law-enforcement officials today unveiled their plan for insuring that the violence that has marred soccer matches in Europe does not break out at the World Cup games at Giants Stadium.
Deborah T. Poritz, the New Jersey Attorney General, said the security operation would be one of the largest ever conducted in the region, coordinated among a who's who of officialdom, from the Defense and State Departments to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to state and county agencies.


U.S. Shifts Stress to Haiti Sanctions
Encountering more opposition than it expected on military intervention in Haiti, the Clinton Administration sought today to signal a shift in its policy by voicing a new confidence that economic sanctions would succeed in ousting the Haitian military leaders.
In separate appearances, both Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott and William H. Gray 3d, President Clinton's special adviser on Haiti, played down the prospects of military intervention while trying to bolster the notion that sanctions would work, even though they have failed to budge Haiti's military for more than a year.


Software Venture for Spielberg
Knowledge Adventure Inc. said today that the film maker Steven Spielberg had agreed to help the company develop educational software products.
Mr.
Spielberg will also acquire an equity stake in Knowledge Adventure, a privately held company based in La Crescenta, Calif.


New Gear for Summer
Compact Fishing People who fish often find themselves toting all sorts of gear.
The Coleman Company of Wichita, Kan., has developed a box that minimizes the load.
The Fish-N-Tackle Cooler is an insulated food and bait cooler in one, with the bait well on one side and a storage compartment for food or drinks on the other.


New Gear for Summer
A Plant Tote The hit of the international plant sale known as the Journees des Plantes de Courson near Paris last month was an English item called a Bosbag.


Mets Give Way To Rangers
Call it Stanley Cup mania or simply a gesture of good will, but the Mets, whose games are normally broadcast over WFAN, have waived their rights to the station's 50,000-watt signal to allow WFAN to broadcast tonight's Game 5 of the National Hockey League championship series between the Rangers and the Vancouver Canucks at the Garden.


New Gear for Summer
Skating Cool The in-line skate is taking a cue from running shoes.
The K2 Corporation in Vashon, Wash., has crafted a boot made of open-weave nylon mesh and synthetic leather -- a breathable boot that the company says duplicates the rigidity and lateral control of a plastic boot.
A frame of hard composite materials like carbon fiber and fiberglass enfolds the footbed, heel and ankle cuff.
The K2 skates come in nine models, costing from $160 to $580. BARBARA LLOYD


Call St. John's The Red Storm
After completing its worst basketball season in 31 years, St.
John's has changed its nickname.
Red-faced after a disappointing 12-17 campaign, the Redmen will now be known as the Red Storm.
At a Manhattan news conference today, Lou Carnesecca will officially announce the name change and unveil the team's new logo.
Brian Mahoney, who succeeded Carnesecca as head coach two seasons ago, will also be on hand.


New Fuel for the Fed's Rate Fire
The chairman of the Federal Reserve, Alan Greenspan, has found another argument to justify its attempts to shove inflation ever lower with repeated increases in short-term interest rates.
Buttressing his argument with a new Federal Reserve study, he is contending that the central bank can increase the productivity of the nation's people and factories by at some point pushing consumer price inflation even lower than the 2.4 percent for the year that ended in April.
The reasoning goes that lower inflation forces businesses to become more efficient because they cannot raise prices, and that when businesses are more efficient, the nation's economic output and standard of living rise.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on May 26 about the Hewlett-Packard Company's earnings expectations misstated the company's financial estimates.
The company said it expected revenue growth to be slower in the second half of its fiscal year; it did not project lower revenues.


Sports of The Times; Knicks Still Need to Win One in Dome
IT all came back to me, as the plane approached Hobby Field.
The sight of the Astrodome reminded me of the last time the cities had anything significant to do with each other.
All the way back in 1986, it was the Mets and the Astros in a memorable National League championship series, but last night it was the Knicks and the Rockets going after each other in the first game of the basketball finals.


If There's a Stoop, Look for a Sale; n Brooklyn, Occasional 'Finds' Amid the Odds and Ends
Heloise Gruneberg claims a world title as the "only single female with five sets of dishes."
Miss Gruneberg, 62, of Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, has never met a stoop sale she did not like.
"Don't even talk to me about sheets," she said.
"My whole house is put together from stoop sales."


4 of 5 Governors Withstand Challenges in Primary Votes
While four out of five incumbent Governors withstood primary challenges on Tuesday, the winners expect a bitterly fought season of campaigning in the general election.
On the busiest election day so far this year, the only major upset was the defeat of Gov.
Walter D. Miller of South Dakota in the Republican primary by William Janklow, a former Governor.


Smithfield Foods Inc.(SFDS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Details and Vanity Fair Getting New Publishers
Continuing his shake-up of publishers and executives, Steven T. Florio, president of Conde Nast Publications, named new publishers yesterday for Details and Vanity Fair magazines.


This Texas Hoedown Turns Into Slowdown
Along the left baseline, late in the third quarter, Hakeem Olajuwon tried to take a jump shot over Anthony Mason.
The former minor leaguer dared to knock the best player in pro basketball to the floor.
When Olajuwon realized no foul had been called, he was tagged again, this time with a technical foul.
Not through one game, Olajuwon was already lamenting the premature altering of the script, of his showdown with Patrick Ewing.
He was already tired of Mason, sick of Pat Riley's Knicks.


F.C.C. Plan Is Praised By Industry
The Federal Communications Commission is winning praise from the communications industry for a new plan to encourage a new generation of wireless telephone and data services.
On Thursday, the commission is expected to vote to revise its rules for auctioning off more than 2,000 licenses for "personal communication services" -- a broad term that covers pocket telephones, advanced paging, wireless fax machines and computers that communicate over the air.


Anti-Drug Group Shifts
The Partnership for a Drug-Free America, a nonprofit organization based in New York and best known for its national anti-drug public service advertising campaigns, has made a series of changes involving its top executives.
Thomas A. Hedrick Jr., 46, who has been president of the organization since 1990, was promoted to vice chairman.
He assumes the title from Louis Hagopian, who retired in March, but Mr.
Hedrick's duties have been revamped to include broader contact with news organizations.
Richard D. Bonnette, 58, executive director, was named to succeed Mr.
Hedrick as president and was also named chief executive.


Rifkin Gets Maximum Sentence for Murder
Joel Rifkin, the unemployed landscaper who confessed to killing 17 women, was sentenced today to 25 years to life in prison for murder by a Nassau County Court judge who described Mr.
Rifkin's crimes as "brutal and horrific."
Mr.
Rifkin, 34, showed no emotion as he stood before Judge Ira H. Wexner, who, in response to a request from the defense, said he would recommend that Mr.
Rifkin be given psychiatric care and counseling in prison.


A Rwandan Child Escapes Her Mother's Fate


Health Care Bills Gain Significant Ground
As pivotal committees met on both sides of Capitol Hill today, health care legislation advanced in the Senate, and its prospects brightened in the House.
The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee voted to require employers to pay most of the cost of health insurance for their workers and to limit increases in insurance rates.
The chairman, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, said he expected final committee approval of the bill on Thursday.


Block Drug Co.(BLOCA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Topics of The Times; City Game
Basketball is the city game.
New York's playgrounds resound with slam dunks and trash-talking, not slap shots and Franglais.
So even with the New York Rangers battling to win the Stanley Cup for the first time in 54 years, it still came as a shock to see the neighborhood kids out on the sidewalk on Rollerblades, hockey sticks in hand, slamming pucks into a net.
They kept on playing even as the Knicks playoff game began blaring from a TV set upstairs.


In Performance; THEATER
A Lampoon of Lesbians On a Triple Bill  Here


Reformer Pope
To the Editor:
Pope John Paul II, by his insistence on a male celibate priesthood (front page, May 31), makes his place in history as an unwitting reformer.
With a dearth of heterosexual male candidates, Roman Catholic seminaries have had to be more open to gay candidates, and the gay population of Catholic priests is growing.


Yankees Lead the Rangers In Questions but Not Runs
Who would Yankee fans want to bat with the bases loaded, no outs and a two-run deficit in the ninth inning?
Paul O'Neill?
Don Mattingly?
Wade Boggs?
All three were available tonight, but the Rangers employed left-handed reliever Darren Oliver so the Yankees stayed with Gerald Williams and Bob Melvin as their last batters and lost, 6-5.
After another ninth-inning New York rally fizzled and Texas snatched another one-run victory, there was considerable blame to be shared throughout the Yankee clubhouse.
For a team that is still in first in the American League East, the Yankees did not look or sound like it tonight.


Jeanne Mitchell, Solo Violinist, 70
Jeanne Mitchell Biancolli, a violinist who appeared as a soloist with the New York Philharmonic and other major orchestras, died on Monday at the Albany Medical Center Hospital.
She was 70 and lived in Millerton, N.Y.


Puckett Keeps Adding To Big R.B.I. Numbers
Twins 8, White Sox 4
Kirby Puckett drove in four runs with a double and two solo homers, giving him 59 r.b.i. in 55 games, as the Twins defeated Chicago, 8-4, last night in Minneapolis.


Rebels in Rwanda Said to Slay 3 Bishops and 10 Other Clerics
In another of the massacres that have punctuated Rwanda's two-month tribal war, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kigali, two other bishops and 10 priests were killed on Wednesday by soldiers of the rebellious Rwanda Patriotic Front.
An official of the rebel group, which is dominated by the minority Tutsi tribe, acknowledged today that the killings were committed by "misguided" rebel soldiers who had been assigned to guard the clerics at a religious center at Kabgaye in southwestern Rwanda.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ESQUIRE RADIO AND ELECTRONICS CORP., Brooklyn, a telecommunications products concern, began an offer to repurchase all its shares outstanding at $54.35 a share in cash.
EUNETCOM, a newly formed international joint venture of France Telecom and Duetsche Telekom, obtained a $200 million, five-year contract from Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corp., to provide phone services, data base transmission services and electronic mail operations.


Raising Children Benefits All of Society
To the Editor:
I was disheartened by the shortsighted selfishness of some childless workers you quote in "Childless Workers Demanding Equity in Corporate World" (front page, May 29).
They begrudge working parents the limited and hard-won flexibility to tend to their children's needs that some employers offer.
If these workers remain childless, it will be the children of their colleagues who pay for their Social Security and Medicare, who wait on them in restaurants, fix their cars, find cures for their cancers and buy the goods and services that keep them employed.


James Slattery, 98; Built Landmarks
James M. Slattery, founder of the Slattery group of construction companies, which built many New York landmarks, died on Wednesday at his Manhattan home.
He was 98.
Founded in 1927 as the Slattery Contracting Company, the business expanded over the years into an umbrella group over many companies that were involved in heavy construction projects in the New York Metropolitan area.


In Switch, Dole Endorses North For the Senate
After four days of uncertainty, Senator Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, endorsed Oliver L. North today as Virginia's candidate for the Senate, a move that would appear to narrow the gap between Mr.
North and the more moderate Republicans eager to present the face of a unified party.
"I told Ollie that I will do everything possible to assist in his election to the U.S. Senate," Mr.
Dole said in a statement.
"Including, of course, campaigning for him in Virginia."


Gooden Returns, but the Response Is Cold
Manager Dallas Green was hoping that the return of Dwight Gooden from the disabled list would add some stability to his starting rotation and give his pitching staff some grounding.
But in his first outing for the Mets since April 21, Gooden proved to be anything but rock solid.
Moises Alou greeted Gooden with a home run in the first inning and bid Gooden farewell with another homer in the fifth last night at Shea Stadium.
Take away Alou, who had four hits for the Montreal Expos, and Gooden didn't have such a bad night.
But it wasn't the type of performance Green was looking for.


Kenmore Hotel: The Place at the End of the Line
One old woman walks through the Kenmore Hotel and spells her name over and over, as if she is afraid of losing it somewhere down the long, dark hall.
Another woman, her cheeks rouged a candy-apple red, goes from person to person in the lobby, asking people she has never seen before what they would like for dinner.
On the eighth floor, a man sits amid jumping fleas, crusted dirt and six-month-old newspapers, screaming that he should not have to live like this because he is an American.


Books of The Times; When Love Conquers a Curmudgeonly Scholar
The Russian Girl
By Kingsley Amis
296 pages. Viking. $22.95
"Women," one of Kingsley Amis's put-upon heroes once remarked, "were like the Russians -- if you did exactly what they wanted all the time you were being realistic and constructive and promoting the cause of peace, and if you ever stood up to them you were resorting to cold-war tactics and pursuing imperialistic designs and interfering in their internal affairs."


Arnold P. Johnson, Apparel Retailer, 83
Arnold P. Johnson, a businessman widely known for his efforts to support black-owned businesses in Harlem and to expand job opportunities there, died on June 3 at Harlem Hospital.
He was 83.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said his wife, Etienne Johnson.


Clinton Gives Support to Agriculture Chief
Dee Dee Myers, President Clinton's press secretary, said today that Mr.
Clinton supported Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, who is under investigation by the Justice Department.
The department is looking into allegations that Mr.
Espy illegally accepted free travel, lodging and tickets to sporting events from Tyson Foods, the giant Arkansas poultry processor.


Art in Review
Frances Barth
E. M. Donahue Gallery  560 Broadway (at Prince Street)  SoHo  Through July 1
Frances Barth's new paintings put the techniques of Color Field abstraction to the service of landscape.
It is not the coherent, semi-abstracted landscape of Milton Avery, who influenced the movement and whose soft shapes and colors are sometimes visible here, nor the gestural extravagances of Helen Frankenthaler.
It is, rather, a more fractured, multi-layered terrain similar to that in the work of 80's artists like David Salle and Julian Schnabel.
It combines suggestive abstract motifs with a relatively precise landscape vocabulary derived from maps, charts and topographical diagrams, and flavors it all with intimations of Japanese art.


Mexico Is Now in Picture For Possible Expansion
Major league baseball, for the first time, today invited cities in Mexico to seek an expansion franchise.
Of course, owners haven't decided if they want to expand, and they won't decide until after they settle labor differences.
They certainly don't know when that will be.
Richard Ravitch, the clubs' chief labor executive, expressed hope today that the clubs could reach an agreement with the players without a work stoppage.
But in almost the same breath, he raised the rhetoric of the talks by replying to the union's threat to strike, calling the possible action unnecessary and a misjudgment.


Key to Trolley Successes: Connecting Popular Areas
Many cities have tried adding or restoring trolley lines in the last few years but only some have been successful; a major factor is whether the routes connect enough popular destinations.
A prominent success, opened last July, is the 18-mile line through St.
Louis, running past Busch Stadium, the University of Missouri campus, the arch downtown and across the Mississippi River to East St.
Louis, Ill.
Later this month the last of 18 stations opens, at Lambert-St.
Louis International Airport.


Slain Rwanda Bishops Had Urged Peace Talks
Two months before they died, the three Catholic bishops killed in Rwanda on Wednesday joined in an impassioned plea for peace negotiations between Government forces and the rebels who were reported to have committed the killing.
"The Catholic bishops of Rwanda urge the Government and the Rwandan Patriotic Front to avoid the logic of war to settle their disputes," the Rwandan Catholic Bishops' Conference said in an appeal in April, after the eruption of ethnic killing in the Central African country.
"May they do everything possible to stop the bloody troubles in some parts of the country so that they do not consume the rest of the country."


Does the Truth Lie in the Former Yugoslavia?; International Police
To the Editor:
The report of a United Nations commission confirms that Bosnian Serbs have committed "crimes against humanity" and "genocide" and may be responsible for "a systematic rape policy" (news article, June 3).
The commission's documentation demonstrates the need for a sustained policy in Bosnia.
Such a policy must include constructive multilateral intervention with the use of ground troops.
These international soldiers should have the authority to use force under United Nations command with possible North Atlantic Treaty Organization participation.


Accident Kills a Queens Student at Her High School Prom


Officer Is Leaving Earle Palmer Brown
Earle Palmer Brown said yesterday that Bill Southard, the president of its New York office, will leave the agency later this month after two years.
Randall Bloomquist, a spokesman for Earle Palmer in Bethesda, Md., confirmed a report this week of Mr.
Southard's departure in The Delaney Report, a newsletter.
He said Mr.
Southard, 37, would open his own public relations company.


Gay Protest March Planned Amid Stonewall Celebration
Several gay organizations angry at the Giuliani administration are planning an unauthorized march up Fifth Avenue, on the same day that another march is planned to commemorate the Stonewall clash that helped inspire the gay-rights movement.
City officials denounced the plan yesterday and said the police would take action against it.
They said a second march would paralyze a large part of lower Manhattan and would pose a public safety hazard because ambulances and fire trucks would not be able to reach people between Fifth Avenue and First Avenue, where the main march is planned.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a picture caption yesterday about the history of the Kenmore Hotel in Manhattan, which was seized by Federal authorities who cited drug dealing there, referred incorrectly in some editions to the writer of "The Red Badge of Courage," who lived in a previous building on the site.
He was Stephen Crane, not Stephen Hart Crane.
In some editions the picture caption also misstated the writer's connection to the site.
Crane, who died in 1900, never lived in the Kenmore building itself, which was built in 1928.


Critic's Notebook; Irish Festival Of Repression And Rebellion
TWO men, an unmarried woman and a baby of uncertain paternity, all living in splendid isolation in an Ulster farmhouse by the sea.
Can a clergyman be far away?
In Thaddeus O'Sullivan's 1990 film "December Bride," the local minister is indeed troubled by this domestic arrangement, as is practically everyone who lives nearby.
The time is turn of the century, and it is the minister's job to point out that this living arrangement violates the rules of the community.
Sarah (Saskia Reeves), the quiet but shockingly bold heroine of the title, simply ignores him.
She thinks some rules are made to be broken.
Repression and rebellion are constantly at war throughout the films in a new, landmark series exploring the full range of Irish cinema.
In the Name of the Nation: Celebrating Irish Film Making 1910-1994, which begins today and will run through July 7 at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center, explores an astonishing variety of similar tensions.
These dramas are often played out against rugged, lonely landscapes of extraordinary natural beauty, and acted by a small circle of fine Irish actors whose work has been seen elsewhere, but not to such obvious advantage.
The great appeal of this series rests on both academic interest and entertainment value.


Rough One For Richter But Beware Of Reversal
The question came, and Mark Messier seemed to expect it.
"Do you have confidence that Mike Richter can come back from this?" the Rangers' captain was asked after the Vancouver Canucks defeated New York, 6-3, in a sloppy Game 6 of the Stanley Cup finals last night.


Sports of The Times; The Cup's Still Waiting For a Kiss
IF you care about the Rangers, you knew.
If you suffered through any of the long years since 1940, you knew it would be like this.
You knew it wouldn't be easy.
You knew the Rangers would find a way to waste last night's opportunity to win the Stanley Cup in Madison Square Garden for the first time, before 18,200 of their frustrated faithful.


Executive Changes
GOODY'S FAMILY CLOTHING INC., Knoxville, Tenn., named Edward Carlin chief financial officer.
INSILCO CORP., Columbus, Ohio, appointed James D. Miller executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Egghead Inc.(EGGS,NMS) reports earnings for Year to Apr 2


Companies Again Raise Plans for Spending in '94
Corporate America intends to raise investment in new equipment and buildings by 8.3 percent in 1994, somewhat more than when last polled in the early months of the year, the Commerce Department reported today.
"We're going after market" by adding new products, said Tim Omstead, vice president of Ductmate Industries in Monongahela, Pa., a metal products company that plans to invest as much as $200,000 after spending nothing on capital improvements last year.


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Same Old Strep?
It sounds like a science-fiction horror.
A germ that is virtually everywhere, causing sore throats in millions of Americans, develops a rare but highly virulent form that can kill or maim in a matter of days or possibly even hours.
Terrified victims can actually see their flesh or muscle deteriorating as they anxiously watch the progress of this rampaging pathogen that some have erroneously dubbed a "flesh-eating" bacterium.
Suddenly we all feel vulnerable, forced to confront the knowledge that the war between humans and germs is never settled.
Even in the age of antibiotics, vaccines and other miracle drugs, there is no chance to let down one's guard.


Ralph Shriner, 94, Chemist Who Wrote Influential Textbook
Dr.
Ralph Lloyd Shriner, a prominent organic chemist and author of a widely used textbook on the subject, died on Tuesday at a nursing home in Riverwoods, Ill.
He was 94 and most recently lived in Lincolnshire, Ill.
Dr.
Shriner was one of the scientists who laid the foundations of modern organic chemistry in the 1920's, 30's and 40's.
Among other things, he came up with a system to identify organic compounds well before the advent of advanced technology for qualitative analyses.
He specialized in determining the structures of organic compounds, including drugs, and how to synthesize them.


Party Poopers! Canucks Postpone Rangers' Plans
The Stanley Cup is still locked in a box. The champagne is still on ice.
The Vancouver Canucks stunned the Rangers and their loyal fans last night with an astonishing 6-3 victory at Madison Square Garden that sent the championship series back to Western Canada for at least one more game.
The Rangers hold a three games to two lead in the four-of-seven series.


Intertrans Corp.(ITRN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Improving Teacher Competence
How can school districts in New York State improve the quality of teachers -- and get rid of incompetent ones?
A good start would be to revise the disciplinary procedures that make it hard to dismiss truly bad performers.
But an effective long-term solution requires changing the way all teachers are trained and licensed.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo and even the state teachers' union have supported revised disciplinary procedures; reforms may finally pass muster in the State Legislature.
But training and licensing reforms have fewer allies, and the union's friends in Albany may try to block changes.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  IMMIGRANTS WELCOME, LEGAL OR NOT While political leaders across the country talk loudly about illegal immigrants as a costly burden, the two most prominent politicians in New York go so far as to describe them as a boon.
Whatever their legal status, immigrants are considered a fact of life, a point of pride and an integral part of New York City's identity.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  COUNCIL BACKS PLAN FOR 42D ST.
TROLLEY Reviving images of urban travel from another era, the City Council approved a plan to build a trolley line along 42d Street from one side of Manhattan to the other.
Officials say it will cut traffic, pollution and noise, encourage development on the West Side of Manhattan, and add a spectacular tourist attraction to one of the city's most congested thoroughfares.
A1.


At the Bar; An outspoken lawyer tests the limits of free speech in court.
Stephen Yagman of Los Angeles has spent his life in scrapes, either fighting what he says were anti-Semitic classmates at Port Jefferson High School on Long Island or wrestling in college or butting heads with allegedly abusive police officers and the lawyers representing them.
But nothing compares to the battle he now finds himself in, one that could ruin his practice and redefine the outer limits of lawyerly free speech.
Mr.
Yagman specialized in suing the police long before Rodney G. King got his learner's permit; indeed, he was the first lawyer to collect punitive damages from Daryl F. Gates, the former Los Angeles police chief.


Starks Is Left Walking Mental Balance Beam
The big family reunion was supposed to have begun here, not back home in Tulsa, Okla.
John Starks requested and received 30 tickets for Games 1 and 2 of the championship series.
Then the telephone call came Tuesday that he would be needing one fewer seat.
His 85-year-old great-uncle, Frank Tate, had died suddenly.
He said yesterday that his grandmother's sister's husband had been a positive and spiritual influence in his life, a man who didn't help raise him but had helped him "move forward." From bagging groceries at Safeway to the National Basketball Association finals, that's how far Starks had come.
He wanted to celebrate that and future triumphs with his relatives, have them all make the drive from Oklahoma to watch him play.


Lucas Quits the Spurs and Looks Ahead
JOHN LUCAS, who questioned his future with the San Antonio Spurs after ownership smarted over an early playoff exit, resigned as coach yesterday and may be heading to the Philadelphia 76ers.
The Spurs' president, JACK DILLER, announced that Lucas was released from his contract at his request.
Lucas reportedly had at least two years remaining on his contract, and Diller said there was no monetary settlement.


L.I. Boy Accused of Fatally Shooting His Brother
Tortured by sibling rivalry and angry about a guidance counselor's reprimand, a 15-year-old boy went home from school on Wednesday morning and shot and killed his 19-year-old brother with their father's licensed .38-caliber revolver, police officials said today.
The younger brother, Joseph Brooks, had long resented his older brother, George, the police said, adding that the boys' parents had pressed Joseph to be more like George, who went through school without getting in trouble and had been working at a movie theater.


North Korea Threatens Japan Over Backing U.S.-Led Sanctions
North Korea threatened today to mete out a "deserving punishment" to Japan if it cuts off the North's chief source of hard currency or joins in other economic sanctions, apparently in an effort to intimidate its wealthy neighbor from participating in an American-led effort to force the North to accept nuclear inspections.
North Korean officials have denounced Japan before and have accused it of harboring plans to build nuclear weapons of its own.
But this appeared to be the first time that the North threatened to target Japan if it joined the movement for sanctions in the United Nations.


George Ball, European
To the Editor:
You write (obituary article, May 28) of George Ball's friendship with Jean Monnet, which went back to 1944.
The husky George Ball spent much of the summer of 1950 squeezed into a tiny room under the stairs at 18 rue de Martignac, to help Monnet convert the Schuman Plan into the European Coal and Steel Community.
Mr.
Ball was a private United States citizen working, at times clandestinely, for France, and through France for creation of the European Union.


Review/Art; Picasso's Weeping Women, United
Life and art are never very far apart, but within the 20th century they may never be closer than in the work of Pablo Picasso.
From the beginning to the end of his prodigious career, his intimates -- friends, dealers, children -- figured frequently in his art, and depictions of women, predominantly his wives and mistresses, form its very core.
Few artists have invented so many ways to convert the machinations of ego and id into image.
At no time in Picasso's oeuvre was the overlap of life and art more clear-cut, intense or esthetically fruitful than in the tumultuous years of 1927 to 1942.
This period saw the bitter failure of his marriage to the Russian dancer Olga Koklova and his passionate but manipulative affairs with successive and competing mistresses: Marie-Therese Walter, who when he met her was a 17-year-old schoolgirl, and the photographer Dora Maar.
In addition, Picasso's personal turmoil was heightened by the wanton violence of the Spanish Civil War, which gave him a renewed and anguished awareness of his homeland that culminated in "Guernica," the monumental mural he painted in the spring of 1937 for the Spanish Pavilion of the Paris World's Fair.
Now, for the first time, some of Picasso's most personal works from these years are the subject of their own show.
"Picasso and the Weeping Women: The Years of Marie-Therese Walter and Dora Maar," organized by Judi Freeman for the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, has come to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, albeit in a substantially enlarged and reconfigured form.
By the standards of many Picasso shows, it is rather small -- only 84 works -- but it is nonetheless exciting and revealing.
Like most Picasso shows, it has something for everyone, and then some.
For the general public, it has extra amounts of the usual Picasso fireworks: love and passion, anger and catharsis, empathy and despair, spelled out in a series of powerful, often richly worked paintings and drawings.
Throughout the show, one can see Picasso's passions wax and wane, as new love generates new painting styles.
Olga is reduced to an animalistic abstraction, a hard-edged monster with a jagged screaming mouth; Marie-Therese is a floating dream of lavender curves and post-coital sensuality, the decorative apotheosis of the Surrealist unconscious.
The beautiful, intensely intelligent, increasingly distraught Dora Maar inspired an angular style that gives Expressionism a Cubist infrastructure and recalls the vibrant striations of the "Demoiselles" period.
Occasionally the main characters meet: in the astounding drawing "Murder" of 1934, a fleshy version of Olga's "screaming head," now equipped with giant rotting teeth and pinwheel arms, plunges a butcher knife into a sketchier victim who has the rounded tell-tale profile of Marie-Therese.
Needless to say, the implications of biography are so heavy in the air here that one can almost hear screenplays and story treatments chugging out of fax machines all over Hollywood.
For anyone deeply interested in painting, this show is a fascinating exegesis on the medium's ways and means, a series of themes and variations -- and more variations -- based on the female body and face.
It is also an invaluable commentary on form following feeling, which highlights Picasso's powers of invention and reinvention.
And surreptitiousness: in "Guitar Hanging on a Wall" (1927) he covertly acknowledges his new relationship with Marie-Therese by showing her shadowlike profile surveying their linked initials, with hers being arranged to suggest a body with open legs.
There are a few instances of startling ineptness, like the awkward forms and heavy-handed surface of "Bust of a Woman," in which a screaming head appears to bite a black, Malevichian painting.
More frequent are moments of blissful beauty: a small painting of Marie-Therese in which her weightless lavender body is dotted with colored circles that may be the most delectable spinning spheres in painting since van Gogh's "Starry Night." And from 1937 and '38, when Picasso was dividing his time between Dora Maar and Marie-Therese, there is a series of images of the latter depicted in the angular style usually reserved for the former.
Best of all are the images that form the core of the show: the drawings and paintings of weeping women that were a byproduct of Picasso's studies for "Guernica." In her essay, Ms.
Freeman meticulously delineates the various signs and devices Picasso developed to convey human features under stress.
Prominent among these are eyes shaped like teardrops, storm-tossed boats or liquid-spilling saucers; tears that hang from eyes like long nails or narrow cascading waterfalls.
Nostrils, ears, tongues, teeth, fingers, fingernails and even handkerchiefs: every detail is manipulated to maximum effect, usually to convey double meanings, always to give the convulsions of grief an almost architectural grandeur and an emotional reality beyond realism.
Finally, for Picasso aficianados, both professional and amateur, this show has inside baseball to die for, most of it hiding in plain sight.
As much as Picasso himself, its inadvertent subject is the conflict between the old and the new guard of Picasso scholarship.
If one takes the time to read Ms.
Freeman's essay and compare it with the works and wall texts in the show, one discovers a substantial discrepancy between her thoughts about Picasso and the thoughts of William S. Lieberman, chairman of the Metropolitan's 20th-century department and a veteran of many Picasso projects and exhibitions, who enlarged and reshaped this show for its Met appearance.
(Mr. Lieberman seems to have other disagreements as well. Picasso's 1923 "Woman in White," displayed just outside the entrance to the exhibition, is listed in its brochure under the heading "Prologue: Olga Picasso," despite a recent article by the art historian William Rubin arguing that the painting is a portrait of the 1920's socialite Sara Murphy.)
It is difficult to assess what Ms.
Freeman's show accomplished in its original version, especially since the publication that accompanies the show is more a freestanding book than a catalogue and reproduces about 135 Picassos, of which only 40 were actually shown in Los Angeles.
But her essay clearly intends to set Picasso's motif of the weeping woman against a backdrop that extends beyond the confines of love, infidelity and individual personality.
Her thesis, while not entirely new, is that Picasso's images of weeping women were not inspired by the anguish he caused Marie-Therese or Dora Maar, but by his own anguish about the Spanish Civil War and its slaughter of innocent civilians.
This approach makes the victimization of women less completely central to Picasso's greatness, and places that greatness in a less isolated, more historical context. (Ms. Freeman also reproduces works made by Julio Gonzalez and Joan Miro for the Spanish Pavilion that involved the motif of women in distress.)
Also implicit in Ms.
Freeman's treatment is the possibility that the tragedy of the war, especially after the bombing of Guernica, moved Picasso to create an image of female suffering that was deeper and more sympathetic and humane than the animalistic screaming head of Olga, one that he blended with the features of Dora Maar and Marie-Therese.
Mr.
Lieberman has more than doubled the number of works exhibited, often by adding rather conventionally realistic prints or drawings of Picasso's wife and mistresses.
Some additions are simply eccentric, if not a bit malicious.
He opens the show with "Woman's Arm," a little-known sculpture of a clenched fist that Picasso made in 1951 and, more bizarrely, ends it with a 1962 linocut of Jacqueline Picasso, as if to remind us of the last weeping woman in Picasso's life.
More interesting are the additions of two dark paintings of Dora Maar from 1942, in which abstracted animalistic features recall Olga's screaming head and suggest that the humanizing effect that began with the studies for "Guernica" did not last.
Mr.
Lieberman's additions give us more to look at, but they also tend to soften and blur the show's focus, diminishing the prominence of the weeping-women images and reinstating the more conventional lover-by-lover treatment that Ms.
Freeman wants to revise.
Still, it's hard to complain too energetically.
Together, Ms.
Freeman's book and Mr.
Lieberman's version of her show form a kind of two-for-one bargain that, in the end, gives everyone more to think about, adding a note of curatorial tension that is not out of place in this dramatic exhibition.
"Picasso and the Weeping Women: The Years of Marie-Therese Walter and Dora Maar" remains at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street, through Sept. 4.
It is sponsored by Paine Webber.


Stock Prices Are Mixed As Low Volume Persists
In the 13th consecutive day of below-average trading volume on the New York Stock Exchange, stock prices closed mixed but barely changed yesterday.
Three factors that usually move markets also barely budged.
The value of the dollar against the yen and bond prices were little changed, and commodity futures prices rose only slightly.
Pepsico Inc. and other beverage stocks were hurt because of a weaker than expected profit outlook at Pepsico's restaurants.
Otherwise, stock traders continued to stay mainly on the sidelines.


Yohai Bin Nun, 69, Ex-Israel Navy Chief
Rear Adm.
Yohai Bin Nun, the commander of Israel's naval forces in the 1960's, died on Monday in the New York University Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 69 and lived in Kibbutz Maagan Michael in Israel.
The cause of death was a heart attack, the Israeli consulate said.


Marsh &amp; McLennan Leads Investors' Insurance Fund
Flush with its success at creating new, highly profitable insurance companies, Marsh &amp; McLennan, the world's largest insurance broker, is leading a new $663 million fund for big investors to put money into property insurance companies or related ventures.
While many executives at other insurance companies are complaining that their industry as a whole has too much capital, which has led to too much competition for customers, depressing prices and profits, Marsh &amp; McLennan executives counter that there is ample opportunity for new capital, particularly as older companies are reorganized.


Shoney's Inc.(SHN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 15


On Stage, and Off
A year ago, the Tony Award winners were all but obvious long before they were announced.
Everyone figured "Millennium Approaches," Part 1 of Tony Kushner's "Angels in America" would walk off with most of the drama awards, and it did, winning four.
And although it wasn't a grand season for musicals, two, "Kiss of the Spider Woman" and "Tommy," won a total of 12.
There wasn't much left for anyone else.
This year things are different.


REX Stores Corp.(RSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


What Do the Knicks Need? Some Easy Hoops Off the Fast Break
Somewhere, somehow the Knicks must find more offense to beat the Houston Rockets.
Low-scoring games, defense and poor shooting were the topics of discussion as the Knicks and Rockets prepared for Friday night's Game 2 of the National Basketball Association finals at the Summit.
Houston's 85-78 victory in Game 1 could be described as terrific defense or horrific offense, depending upon one's viewpoint.
The second half was the lowest-scoring half (63 points combined) in league playoff history, and the fourth quarter was the lowest-scoring quarter in finals history, when Houston and New York combined for just 28 points.


For Children
Doll Exhibition
Museum of the City of New York  Fifth Avenue at 103d Street  (212) 534-1672  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Through September
Alice sits looking dejected, as if she has been underground too long; across the table set with pinkie-size teacups, Dormouse looks as if he's praying (maybe for Alice's return above ground), while the Mad Hatter's polka-dot bow tie reveals his lurking looniness.
Around the corner from these dolls, no more than 12 inches high, is Cinderella, her hair a concoction of copper-colored thread so delicately wound that she looks beautiful.
But horrors, the beaded slipper on her foot looks too small!


CHRONICLE
JACQUELINE TAYLOR, the managing director of the Tisch Center for the Arts at the 92d Street Y, is moving across town to become the executive director of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center.
"The Tisch Center encompasses more than music," said Ms.
Taylor, 29.
"But my expertise is in music, and my great love is chamber music. I am so thrilled to be joining the chamber music society."


Craig Miller, Lighting Designer For Ballet and Opera, Dies at 43
Craig Miller, a lighting designer for ballet, theater and opera, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 43 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Giuliani Faces Pressure to Cut Police Budget
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani faced increasing pressure yesterday to include the Police Department in his efforts to reduce New York City's budget, as Democratic elected officials in the city and in Albany said the city could save millions by cutting overhead or hiring more civilians.
For his part, the Mayor indicated more strongly than before that he would be willing to accept some cuts in the $2 billion budget he has proposed for the police.
But he insisted that he would not accept any decrease in the total number of police officers.


Corrections
A headline in Business Day on Wednesday about a Federal Government decision not to take action against Joe Camel, the cartoon character in Camel cigarette advertising, referred incorrectly in some copies to the Government agency involved.
It was the Federal Trade Commission, not the Federal Communications Commission.


Keenan's Future at Issue Again
Throughout more than a half-century of disappointments, some more bizarre and bitter than others, there have been many times when questions concerning the future of a Ranger coach have coincided with the end of a season.
But not like this.
As the Rangers tried, and failed, to win the Stanley Cup at Madison Square Garden last night, they also faced speculation that their coach, Mike Keenan, was headed elsewhere.


Merck Gets Outsider as New Chief
In a surprise ending to an 18-month search, Merck &amp; Company said yesterday that it had chosen Raymond V. Gilmartin, an outside executive with no pharmaceutical experience, to succeed P. Roy Vagelos, who has headed the world's largest drug maker since 1985.
Mr.
Gilmartin, a 53-year-old electrical engineer, has headed Becton, Dickinson &amp; Company, a medium-size hospital supply company, since 1989.
He will become chief executive and president of Merck on Thursday and will add the position of chairman on Nov. 1, when Dr.
Vagelos retires at 65.


Corrections
A front-page caption on Sunday with a Reuters picture of President Clinton at the World War II memorial in the American Cemetery in Cambridge, England, misstated the first name of an Arkansas veteran at the scene.
He was Woodrow Crockett, not Woodward.


N.B.A. FINALS: Sports of The Times; Olajuwon Survives The Knick Hordes
ONE of the nicest things about Hakeem Olajuwon and there are many -- is that he seems to be comfortable with reality.
If he has trouble breathing at high altitude in Salt Lake City, he does not mind admitting it.
If he runs out of gas in the opening game against the Knicks, he does not mind admitting it.
It's only a game, albeit a very important one.
His parents have never seen him play a professional game in this country so far away from Nigeria.
They were supposed to arrive in time for Wednesday night's game, but they were delayed, for reasons Olajuwon does not think are significant.


Launching Turtles Requires a Deft Hand


A Tough Decision for Europeans: Who Will Lead Their Union?
Europeans began voting for members of the European Parliament today, but a campaign of greater significance is taking place behind the scenes to determine who will succeed Jacques Delors as president of the European Union's powerful executive commission.
Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene of Belgium, 54, a Christian Democrat, is the current favorite to be chosen when European leaders meet on the Greek island of Corfu on June 24 and 25.


Salute's Not in Order For the President
To the Editor:
Re "Clinton Faces Heroes: Judgment Day" (news article, June 4): Ronald Reagan, a war-movie warrior with a clear need to identify with men of action, started the unfortunate Presidential habit of saluting, but I don't recall George Bush (who had been in combat) forgetting his military manners.
Service saluting protocols vary, but I can pass along the rules according to the Marine Corps.


Precise Putting Touch Puts Reid in Lead
He is an unlikely-looking burglar.
He is thin bordering on skinny, wears oversized glasses and has unassuming demeanor of a high school chemistry teacher.
But today on one of the hardest golf courses on the PGA Tour, Mike Reid coolly pulled off one of the biggest heists of the year in golf.
With his putter as a weapon, Reid carved up Westchester Country Club for a six-under-par 65 in the Buick Classic.
That gave him a one-stroke lead over five others -- Bob Estes, Dillard Pruitt, Steve Brodie, Steve Pate and Wayne Levi, all of whom shot 66.
Those five, at least, used conventional means to the same end.


Europe, Not Japan, Is Called America's Frontier for Trade
Since taking office, the Clinton Administration's message to American business has been unambiguous: "Follow the Sun." At every opportunity the Clinton team has described the Asia-Pacific region as the nation's most lucrative economic frontier.
But a new study published today challenges that thesis, by amassing trade data that suggest that Europe remains America's most important economic partner and will be for years to come.
The Economic Strategy Institute, a private research group financed by American corporations, compared Asia and Western Europe in categories like trade, foreign direct investment in the United States, American direct investment abroad and technology transfers.
The study concluded that the links between the United States and Europe benefited the American economy far more than those between the United States and Asia.


Tobacco Farmers Stage 'Tea Party' Protest
About 3,000 tobacco farmers mounted what was billed as a modern-day "Boston Tea Party" today, cheering as bales of tobacco were tossed into the Kentucky River to protest proposals to increase taxes on tobacco products to help finance health care.
The farmers also met with members of the State Legislatureand attended a rally billed as "Fairness for Tobacco Farmers." At the rally, John Rose, president of the Kentucky Senate and a tobacco farmer himself, and Joe Clark, the Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives, described resolutions adopted by both chambers earlier in the day opposing new taxes on tobacco.
The resolutions are to be sent to Gov.
Brereton Jones and then to President Clinton.


Art in Review
Richard Serra
'Weight and Measure Drawings'  The Drawing Center  35 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through July 30
This new group of six large drawings, made of black paintstick on double-laminated Hiromi paper, is yet another remarkable achievement by Richard Serra, along the lines of the drawings he has been doing for several years now.
All the drawings are larger than human scale, and, like sculptures, their physicality and size in relation to a viewer has a great deal to do with their power and impact.
They are architectural, too, as a group enclosing the viewer within a space, delimiting boundaries, becoming walls in the sense that the paintstick panels are thick masses (with the texture and color of tar) that exist simply as masses, as intractable weighty blocks, and not as allusions to something else.


Abe Rosenberg, 85, Importer of Liquors
Abe Rosenberg, a retired liquor importer and distributor who was active in many philanthropies in recent years, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
Mr.
Rosenberg, who lived in Manhattan, was 85.
The cause of death was cancer, his daughter, Susan Goldstein, said.


Extortion Is Alleged Over Phone-Sex Debts
A company that specialized in collecting debts for calls to telephone-sex lines extorted more than $2 million by threatening to inform spouses and employers about clients' debts for the calls, Federal prosecutors said today at a news conference.
Some victims said they had never called the sex services but had paid the collection agency to avoid embarrassment, according to complaints made to state and Federal authorities.
The company, TMD Enterprises, did business as Standup Communications and Productions in Huntingdon Valley, a Philadelphia suburb.
Paying the company, however, did not bring relief, the complainants said.


Trying to Americanize World's Favorite Game
Seamus Malin, a World Cup analyst for ABC and ESPN, recently arrived in New York from his home in Boston, where he plays midfield on a team in a 50-plus soccer league.
"We even have a 64-year-old sweeper," he said.
Within days, he sat for a haircut from the father of the United States team's goalkeeper, Tony Meola, in Kearny, N.J.


New York's Council Votes Plan to Build 42d St. Trolley Line
Reviving images of urban travel from another era, the City Council approved a plan yesterday to build a trolley line along 42d Street from one side of Manhattan to the other.
Officials said the project would cut traffic, pollution and noise, encourage development on the West Side of Manhattan and add a spectacular tourist attraction to one of New York City's most congested thoroughfares.


Jays Take First Step In Pursuit Of Yanks
After all the challenges the Blue Jays have overcome in winning the last two World Series, the notion that they must prove themselves two months into this season seems ludicrous.
Not to Paul Molitor, though.
Before the game with the Yankees tonight, he expressed his feelings about Toronto's need to get untracked and then helped make sure they were realized by unleashing his explosive bat during the game.
There was urgency in the voices of some Jays players before they played the first-place Yankees.
Molitor was especially articulate about chasing the Yankees because he knows the season has passed the one-third point and these four games against the Yankees could invigorate Toronto.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  NORTH KOREA POLICY ELUDES U.S.
One week after Washington said it would push for economic sanctions against North Korea, the Administration is still struggling to complete its plan and says it will be weeks before the United Nations will be ready to vote on the matter.
A1  North Korea threatened to punish Japan if it froze currency.
A11


TWENTIETH CENTURY INSURANCE IN PACT WITH CALIFORNIA
The California Insurance Commissioner and Twentieth Century Insurance, a company hit hard by losses caused by the Los Angeles earthquake in January, announced an agreement yesterday under which the insurer, which does primarily all its business in the state, would leave the homeowner and earthquake insurance businesses.


Raising Children Benefits All of Society; Academic Inequities
To the Editor:
"Childless Workers Demanding Equity in Corporate World" (front page, May 29) should not have excluded the discrimination in academia.


Northwestern Steel &amp; Wire Co.(NWSW,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Diner's Journal
Elegant Prices
What is going on at Restaurant 222?
Is the owner, Frank Valenza, yearning for the luxurious 1970's when his Palace in New York was famous as the most expensive restaurant in the country?
Has the success of Edward Albee's "Three Tall Women," playing just down Broadway, gone to his head?
Doesn't he know that times have changed?


Critic's Choice/Dance; Bravura Skills, Sly Surprises
Desmond Richardson and Dwight Rhoden are stand-out performers in an outstanding group of dancers called the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Now the two have teamed up to form a company called Complexions, which makes its debut at Symphony Space this weekend.
Mr.
Richardson is one of the great modern dancers of his time, a remarkably modest bravura performer with extraordinary technical skills.
Mr.
Rhoden is a star of another sort, a performer who slyly captures the stage and the eye without warning.
He has choreographed for the Ailey and other companies, and Complexions will present his work, including "The New Piece," a world premiere.


Tokyo Journal; How Do Japan's Rulers Approach U.S.? Carefully
There is nothing simple about sending the Emperor of Japan on a two-week tour, especially when the destination is America.
So much can go wrong -- just ask the bureaucrats who thought it would be a nice touch to send the royal couple to Pearl Harbor until someone thought better of it -- and there are so many uncomfortable issues to be neatly sidestepped, like a $60 billion trade surplus.


First Data to Pay $595 Million for a Rival
The New Valley Corporation agreed yesterday to sell its Western Union Financial Services unit for $595 million to the First Data Corporation, a suitor whose original lower proposal was spurned as inadequate.
The deal, which needs the approval of antitrust regulators and a Federal bankruptcy court, would make First Data the dominant force in the business of transferring cash by wire, a service used by consumers without checking accounts.
It would also mean that First Data would assume New Valley's pension liabilities, which could total $400 million, and obligations to union workers.


Stewart Enterprises (STEI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Review/Dance; 3 Sailors Aging Gracefully at City Ballet
Think of three sailors on the town during World War II, and you will think "Fancy Free," the very first ballet created by Jerome Robbins and Leonard Bernstein.
Nothing better illustrates the difference between a cliche and a classic in art than this evergreen masterpiece, especially as it is being performed on its 50th anniversary this season by the New York City Ballet.
Although the actual premiere in 1944 took place with Ballet Theater (now American Ballet Theater), "Fancy Free" has gradually found its proper niche in the City Ballet.
In 1979, Mr.
Robbins transferred the work from his first company to the troupe where he has done most of his creative work and where his esthetics have been very different.


Israel Freeing Palestinians, But Slowly
Israel freed about 180 Palestinian prisoners today, some of them convicted killers serving life sentences, but the action did nothing to end a dispute over procedures for the continued release of Palestinians.
As part of the self-rule agreement it signed last month with the Palestine Liberation Organization, Israel was supposed to have released 5,000 prisoners by Wednesday as a "confidence-building measure." But the deadline came and went with at least half that number still behind bars, captives to differences between Israel and the P.L.O. over the terms of the deal they had struck.


Dent Signs Two-Year Deal With 49ers
RICHARD DENT, the veteran defensive end of the Chicago Bears, has agreed to a two-year, $3 million contract with the San Francisco 49ers.
Dent, a free agent, faxed the team a copy of the agreement he had signed in Chicago and the 49ers expected to sign it today, according to CARMEN POLICY, the team president.


Restaurants
"Ooooh!" The shout of happy surprise was so loud that heads popped up across the room, searching for its source.
A seafood cocktail had just been placed in front of a small, gray-haired woman.
As she looked down, her face went pink with pleasure, taking on the excited air of a small child who has been given a cake ablaze with birthday candles.
The appetizer actually looked more like a party hat than a cake, a colorful confection of shrimp, mussels and scallops loopily arranged in a martini glass amid a bouquet of carrots, asparagus and green beans.
Rings of fried potatoes were tossed casually about.
It was the giddiest plate of food I have ever seen.


Lodgenet Strikes an Interactive Video Deal
The Lodgenet Entertainment Corporation announced yesterday that it had signed an agreement with the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company to provide to 19 of its hotels an interactive video entertainment and information system.
The system, which will greet guests in about 6,300 rooms, will include movies, Super Nintendo video games and interactive services like guest surveys and information directories.
It will also include satellite-delivered basic and premium cable television programming.


NATO Rebuffs the Russians On Role in Decision-Making
NATO decided today to pay special attention to Russia because of its history and military strength, but it rejected Moscow's demand for a voice in NATO decision-making.
In agreeing to join the American-inspired Partnership for Peace program, which offers a sort of junior partnership to members of the former Warsaw Pact, Russia had hoped that it could have a special formal relationship with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization that was on a higher level from that of smaller countries.


Beukeboom 3d Man In, Then Odd Man Out
The next four days in the frenzied existence of the Rangers may determine whether what happened 10 minutes 6 seconds into Game 5 last night will be remembered as the most costly offside call in the team's history.
Within the moments that followed, with the clock stopped and the frantic crowd at Madison Square Garden roaring for an apparent goal that had the feel of the start of a celebration, the fortunes of the Rangers began to change dramatically.
Esa Tikkanen's shot from the blue line, which had eluded Vancouver goaltender Kirk McLean, was nullified when linesman Randy Mitton ruled that Stephane Matteau had preceded Tikkanen into the offensive zone.
A videotape showed that Matteau's left leg, the rear one, was on the blue line, and one league official, who did not want his name used, said that Mitton's call had been incorrect.


Review/Film; Girl Meets Girl, Laughter Included
Who could blame the women of "Go Fish" for complaining about those "touchy-feely, soft-focus, sisters-of-the-woodlands" movies that account for so many lesbian images on screen?
Rose Troche, the director, wrote the film with Guinevere Turner, and obviously intended it to be a funnier and more realistic alternative.
Working in black and white on a near-nonexistent budget, they still display a solid comic sensibility that shines through.
"Go Fish" has its arty, annoying excesses, but it also looks at love between women with a wit that's long overdue.


On a Mission to Turn Spotlight on His Jailers; He Claims Japan Mistreats Its Inmates
A rising sun was bleaching the nighttime sky over Osaka when Christopher Lavinger, a ponytailed New York disk jockey winding up two weeks of bookings in music clubs, returned to his hotel with a takeout breakfast.
The elevator suddenly filled with dark-suited Japanese who crowded him into a corner.
"Seventh floor," one said, in English.


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(FMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 21


L.I.R.R. Deadline Nears


Amex Names Officers
The American Stock Exchange said yesterday that it had appointed Jules L. Winters as its president.
He will continue to hold the title of chief operating officer.
Mr.
Winters, 47, joined the exchange in 1965.
He was named chief operating officer in 1992 and served as acting chief executive from August 1993 to April 1994.
The exchange also named William D. Strauss senior executive vice president and chief financial officer; Stephen L. Lister becomes executive vice president, member firm regulation, and James F. Duffy becomes executive vice president and general counsel, legal and regulatory policy.


Before Talks With North Korea
To pressure North Korea into compliance with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, the Clinton Administration is trying to mount a credible threat of U.N. sanctions.
Now Japanese misgivings and flat-out Chinese opposition have temporarily set back that effort.
This is discouraging news.
Without China's acquiescence in the Security Council, there can be no U.N. sanctions.
Without full Japanese participation, there can be no meaningful economic pressure on Pyongyang.


Akira Mitsui; Marine Scientist, 65
Dr.
Akira Mitsui, a marine scientist and professor of the University of Miami, died on May 31 at Mercy Hospital in Miami.
He was 65.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Review/Film; Slickers Mount Up Again, For a Slow Treasure Hunt
"City Slickers II: The Legend of Curly's Gold" centers on a treasure hunt, and there's no mistaking the kind of loot it's after.
This sequel has no real purpose beyond the obvious one of following up a hit, although the original film was just as casual at times.
Both of them rely on Billy Crystal's breezy, dependably funny screen presence to hold the interest, even when not much around him is up to par.
Both also count on the irascible Jack Palance, even though Mr.
Palance's Curly was dead and buried when the first film was over.
One mark of this sequel's listlessness is that it takes so long to orchestrate Mr.
Palance's return, this time in the role of Duke, Curly's twin brother.
Twin brother?
That's almost as desperate as suggesting the first film's ending was all a dream.
But the real problem with the screenplay (by Mr. Crystal with Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel) is that it unfolds so slowly.
It takes almost an hour to get Mitch Robbins (Mr. Crystal) away from the New York radio station where he works, and away from some gruesome marital hanky-panky with his wife (Patricia Wettig), who isn't any more fun than she was the first time.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.13
4.00
3.01
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.09
4.12
3.10
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.48
4.49
3.24
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.95
6.95
6.05
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.27
7.27
6.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.09
8.10
7.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.16
6.16
5.88
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Times Begins On-Line News
The New York Times Company and America Online started a service yesterday to give computer users access to an electronic data base of articles and information from The New York Times.
People who subscribe to the service, which is called "@times," will have access through their computers to the main news articles of the day from The New York Times News Service.


Getty Petroleum Corp.(GTY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Value City Department Stores Inc.(VCD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


His Neighborhood Is His Canvas


Newbridge Networks Corp.(NNCXF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30





Messier Is All-Everything But Fans Still Hold Breath
Coincidentally perhaps, the Ice Blue Messiah and I joined the Rangers in the same season.
Mark Messier wanted a team that could finally establish him as a singular superstar; after a career under the wing of Wayne Gretzky, he needed to become Captain Dad, the moral center of a winner.
I wanted a team to follow as a fan, as justifiably suspect as that sounds.


An acquisition gives D.M.B.&amp; B. a passport to the new world of interactive technologies.
THE pace of activity over interactivity is quickening along Madison Avenue, as D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles Inc. joins the lengthening list of giant agency companies delving into the volatile realm of new media technologies.
D.M.B.&amp; B., the world's 11th-largest agency company, according to Advertising Age, with $4.8 billion in billings, is acquiring Einstein &amp; Sandom Inc., a multimedia company in New York that since 1984 has been creating interactive products like software and marketing presentations.


New Moscow Mob Terror: Car Bombs
People here take misery in stride: gangland slayings, daylight robberies, bribery of officials have all become part of life in the new Russia.
But this week, for the first time, one of modern terror's most deadly instruments -- the car bomb -- has appeared in Moscow, introduced by gangsters who seem to become more brazen and willful every day.
Bombs have exploded in some of the city's most crowded pedestrian areas.
They have maimed bystanders and destroyed food kiosks at rush hour.
Most important, they have left usually stoic Muscovites feeling as if their personal safety is more at risk than it has ever been.


Electric Car Venture Set With Itochu
U.S.
Electricar Inc., a fledgling company that recently established the capacity for converting small pickup trucks and cars to electricity, announced a deal yesterday with the Itochu Corporation, a Japanese trading concern, for Itochu to market its electric vehicles in Japan.
Itochu will also pump $15 million into U.S.
Electricar, in equity and loans.
U.S.
Electricar, based in Santa Rosa, Calif., said that it had recently established the capacity to convert 400 vehicles -- Chevy S-10 pickup trucks and Geo Prizms -- a month, using sealed lead-acid batteries.
Both have ranges of 60 to 80 miles, Ted D. Morgan, the chairman and chief executive, said.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Released Greg Cadaret, pitcher.
Activated Mike Timlin, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Capriati's Father Says He Made Mistakes
JENNIFER CAPRIATI's father, acknowledging mistakes he made raising the troubled tennis star, said she will be released next Thursday from a treatment center and will again be a productive player.
Capriati, 18, was arrested May 16 on marijuana possession charges and is undergoing treatment at a rehabilitation clinic in Miami.
"I put too much pressure on her," STEFANO CAPRIATI was quoted as saying yesterday in an interview with the newspaper La Gazzetta dello Sport in Milan, Italy.
"I should have given her more room. Instead, I cooked for her and lived with her 24 hours a day. Sometimes she would say, 'I don't want to practice this week.' But I would insist that she prepare for the next tournament."


Officials Told to Avoid Calling Rwanda Killings 'Genocide'
Trying to avoid the rise of moral pressure to stop the mass killing in Rwanda, the Clinton Administration has instructed its spokesmen not to describe the deaths there as genocide, even though some senior officials believe that is exactly what they represent.
That decision has left the Administration at odds with the Secretary General of the United Nations and a cast of distinguished experts who say there is no doubt that the violence, which is said to have killed at least 200,000 people and perhaps as many as 400,000, is part of the deliberate and widespread extermination of an ethnic group.


A Bright Day Gets a Shiny Touch


A Bus Ride to Terror In 'Speed' (Film Review, C12)


Health Legislation Advances in Senate
National health insurance took two major strides forward in the Senate today as one committee approved a bill, guaranteeing a Senate vote on the issue, and another, perhaps more crucial, committee shifted from general discussion to serious work on new legislation.
By a comfortable 11-to-6 margin, Senator Edward M. Kennedy's Labor and Human Resources Committee adopted the Senator's more generous version of President Clinton's health care proposal.
It is the first Congressional committee to act, and its vote insures that the full Senate will confront the issue this summer.


On My Mind; Fighting A Former War
The United States makes a specific military-technological commitment to two foreign Governments, allies in a struggle of life and death, many lives and deaths.
A year after it goes into operation, the arrangement starts a legal dispute between sets of U.S.
Government lawyers.
So the U.S. breaks the commitment, snap, like that, without consulting in advance the countries Washington had talked into the deal.
They happen to think it was working well and was exquisitely important.


Judge Is Out to Jail Any Budget Makers Who Shortchange El Paso in Texas Capital
The chief highway administrator of Texas was summoned here recently to discuss financing for El Paso's roads and bridges.
But before he began his presentation, the official, Bill Burnett, faced something unique in his 23-year career as a transportation engineer.
He was warned of his legal rights.
Mr.
Burnett had the right to remain silent.
Mr.
Burnett had the right to confer with a lawyer.


CHRONICLE
Another dispatch from the job front: KATHY SPAHN, the director of operations for God's Love We Deliver, has been appointed its executive director.
She succeeds GANGA STONE, the founder of the organization, who is to become its president.
God's Love We Deliver provides 1,500 meals a day to 750 homebound people with AIDS.
Ms.
Spahn joined last year.
Before that, she was the executive director of the New York International Festival of the Arts.


2 Newark Officers Indicted in Sex Assault
Two Newark police officers were indicted yesterday on charges of sexually assaulting a 17-year-old girl in their patrol car nearly two years ago while they were on duty.
If convicted of all charges, the officers, Bazyt Bergus, 32, and Victor Diaz, 27, could be sentenced to 50 years in prison, said Ray Weiss, a spokesman for the Essex County Prosecutor.


Ford Offering Right-Drive Cars in Japan
Making an aggressive push into the Japanese market, the Ford Motor Company began sales here today of its first imported cars with right-hand drive.
The Japanese, like the British, drive on the left, and Tokyo has often cited the absence of American cars with steering wheels on the right to counter Detroit's complaints that Japan's auto market is closed.


Bowne &amp; Co. (BNE,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Merck has chosen an outsider -- the head of Becton, Dickinson -- to be its new chief executive, in a surprise ending to an 18-month search by the world's largest drug maker.  [ Page D1. ]


Wilson? Quayle? Dole? Anyone?
The Republicans have to nominate somebody for President in 1996.
But who?
Pete Wilson looks less promising since he lost 34.2 percent of the vote to a relative unknown in California's gubernatorial primary Tuesday.
Dan Quayle's candidacy has hardly been advanced by his book "Standing Firm."
Bob Dole is likely to fizzle early -- if he runs.
It is Republicans in the provinces who pick nominees, not Washington's press corps, and only once in this century have they nominated a sitting senator (Barry Goldwater, 1964).


Office Depot
The market jitters about weak demand for personal computers and computer-related products has spread to retailers of office supplies.
Office Depot, the nation's largest such retailer, saw its share price fall sharply after a Dean Witter analyst told clients that the company's personal-computer sales were weaker than expected.


Arbor Drugs Inc.(ARBR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Corrections
An obituary headline on Thursday about Barbara Howell, a novelist and short-story writer, misstated her age.
She was 57, not 59.


Thomas Peck; Choral Director, 56
Thomas Peck, the founder and director of the St.
Louis Symphony Chorus and the Grant Park Symphony Chorus of Chicago, died on Wednesday at his home in St.
Louis.
He was 56.
The cause was AIDS, said a spokeswoman for the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra.


Canucks Rain on A Ranger Parade
With all the buildup for an anticipated party and parade by the Rangers, few at this end of the continent gave the Canucks a chance last night.
But the Canucks refused to buckle before a raucous New York crowd of 18,200.
They refused to yield when they were assessed a five-minute major and the Rangers were awarded an extended power play, and also when their three-goal lead in the third period vanished before you can say Mark Messier.
"For our guys to bounce back like that, it makes me real proud," Coach Pat Quinn said after his team's 6-3 victory in Game 5 last night at the Garden.
"This gives us another chance to fight more."


Everything's Coming Up Vanilla
Vanilla is no longer plain vanilla.
Suddenly this age-old, ho-hum flavoring is a hot marketing concept.
Women are spraying it on as perfume, bathing in it and using it as a lip gloss.
Men will soon be sampling vanilla cologne.
Makers of cake frosting, flavored coffee and ice cream say every new vanilla offering these days becomes an instant best seller.
Food companies are using vanilla to put some zest in low-fat dairy desserts.
And a recent study of patients undergoing tests at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York praised vanilla's scent as soothing -- especially while undergoing magnetic resonance imaging.


Judge Relents On I.B.M.
A Federal judge reversed his ruling yesterday and agreed to let I.B.M. file a motion seeking dismissal of a 1956 court order that restricts the company's business activities.
The 38-year-old order, the result of a Federal antitrust suit in the early 1950's, requires the International Business Machines Corporation to sell computer services through an entirely separate business from its computer manufacturing and sales operation.


Accounts
*
NBC Super Channel, London, to TBWA U.K., London, as the first agency to handle its pan-European account.
Billings were estimated at $8 million. *
Canadian Cycle and Motors, Montreal, to Burkhardt &amp; Christy, New York, to handle the account of the maker of hockey jerseys and equipment, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


Ziffs Seen in Plan to Sell Publishing Empire
The intensely private Ziff family is putting its publishing empire up for sale, several publishing industry executives said last night.
The executives estimated that the Ziff Communications Company could fetch $1.5 billion to $2.5 billion in an auction, based on its sales of about $1 billion last year and cash flow of roughly $150 million.


Corrections
A chart on Wednesday with articles about the New York State budget misstated the date when the legislature finished approving the budget for the 1994 fiscal year.
It was June 8, not June 7.


New York Officials Welcome Immigrants, Legal or Illegal
While political leaders across the country talk loudly about illegal immigrants as a costly burden, the two most prominent politicians in New York go so far as to describe them as a boon.
This week, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo quietly decided against suing the Federal Government to recover the costs of social services to illegal immigrants, rejecting for now a tactic chosen by Florida, California and Texas.
He opted instead to negotiate with the Clinton Administration for reimbursement.
He thus avoided a public debate that would put Mr.
Cuomo, long a champion of immigrants, in the awkward position of portraying some as a drain on society.


Review/Film; Excesses of Pop Stardom
The title character of Dan McCormack's satirical film "Minotaur" is a monstrous pop star who looks like a cross between Meat Loaf and John Belushi, sounds like a mediocre Frank Sinatra imitator and is as popular as Elvis.
In the opening scene, the star, whom everyone calls the Boss, is shown in his Las Vegas hotel suite inhaling stimulants, popping handfuls of pills, and shooting drugs until the veins bulge in his forehead and his eyes roll back.
Clad only in shorts and a studded leather harness, he climbs into a giant glass of pink champagne in which a beauty contestant lolls about, laughing hysterically.
Moments later, he strangles her.


The Belmont: Scramble to the Wire
Seven colts were entered yesterday in the 126th running of the Belmont Stakes, the last and longest race in the Triple Crown series.
And Nick Zito, the trainer of the Kentucky Derby winner Go for Gin, conjured this vision of the way the race would be run and won:
"Ulises will go to the front, and will be there as far as he can. And we'll be right there behind him. Then he'll drop out, and we'll be No. 1. Then the rest of them will come at us. Here comes Brocco. Here comes Strodes Creek. Here comes Tabasco Cat. And the four of us will round the turn into the homestretch, and we'll be together in the lane headed for home."


P.L.O. Pleads for Faster Disbursement of Foreign Aid Money
The Palestine Liberation Organization is pressing for a speedier disbursement of millions of dollars pledged by foreign governments and international agencies for projects in Gaza and Jericho, asserting that it urgently needs $177 million from a Paris meeting of aid donors that will conclude on Friday.
But P.L.O. officials are resisting some donors' insistence on stringent measures to supervise the spending of the money, complaining that some of these requirements for accountability are humiliating and cumbersome.


Gas Explosion Kills One
A construction crew broke a gas pipe outside an eight-story apartment building for the elderly this evening, setting off an explosion that killed one person and injured dozens.
The explosion occurred at about 7 P.M. in Allentown, a city of 105,000 people north of here, causing a small fire that was quickly brought under control, said Michael Hilbert, a supervisor in the Command Center for police, fire and ambulances.


Review/Theater; A Sondheim Musical Keeps Evolving
When it opened it 1981, "Merrily We Roll Along," the Stephen Sondheim-George Furth musical, had a dazzling score that put stars in your eyes, and a troublesome book that left a sour taste in your mouth.
While the show folded after 16 performances on Broadway, no one was willing to lay it to rest.
If the book could be tidied up and some of its sourness tempered, the thinking went, the creators would surely have a full-fledged hit on their hands.


F.C.C. Opens Airwaves To Fierce Competition
In opening up a big portion of the airwaves for new wireless telephone and data services, the Federal Communications Commission set the stage today for a fierce technological competition to serve people on the go.
While the conventional wisdom holds that wireless communications will be increasingly popular for some time, that hardly means that every market participant will succeed.


The Man Who Brings The Owners Together
Bud Selig has been labeled a lot of things, not all of them kind, certainly not all of them fair.
But there's no denying that if anything has come from the 21 months that baseball has been without a commissioner, it's this: Selig has undergone an incredible transformation of image.
Selig was once viewed as an impassioned -- but not necessarily persuasive -- spokesman of the small-market clubs and the leader of a Player Relations Committee that could claim no victories in the endless battles with players.
He is now believed by his fellow owners to be the glue that binds them together in a way never achieved before.


Does the Truth Lie in the Former Yugoslavia?
To the Editor:
In "The Hatred of Memory" (Op-Ed, May 28), Ivan Lovrenovic writes of the burning of the National Library in Sarajevo.
He gives a moving account of how the people of Sarajevo tried in vain to rescue the precious books in their library.
However, this version does not agree with either the Serbian or Muslim official account of the incident, both of which claim that the books had been saved.


President to Campaign Against Teen-Age Pregnancy
The Clinton Administration has settled on a campaign against teen-age pregnancy that includes new restrictions on welfare payments, $400 million in grants to schools and neighborhoods over five years, and the use of the President's bully pulpit to promote responsible behavior.
Officials who outlined the plan said three-quarters of the grant money would go to a thousand needy schools, to be used for education and counseling programs.
While there will be much local flexibility, the programs may be loosely patterned after an Atlanta model that promotes both abstinence and contraception and uses older students as mentors.


Art in Review
'Tracking the West'
New York Public Library  Fifth Avenue and 42d Street  Through June 18
In 1868 Andrew Joseph Russell began to photograph for the Union Pacific Railroad, recording the company's efforts to construct a transcontinental railroad west from Omaha.
Over the next year Russell photographed many aspects of the project, culminating in the completion of the track at Promontory Point, Utah, on May 10, 1869.


U.S. Aides Avoid Labeling Horror
Judging that a stark label could inflame calls for United States military action, the Clinton Administration has instructed its spokesmen not to describe the mass killings in Rwanda flatly as genocide.
The State Department and National Security Council have told spokesmen to say only that "acts of genocide may have occurred."
Such wariness puts the Administration in conflict with prominent experts, who say the violence -- in which 200,000 to 400,000 people have died -- reflects the deliberate extermination of an ethnic group.


A New York Tourist In His Own Hometown
A MAN and a woman walk into the River Cafe, the elegant waterside restaurant in the Brooklyn-side shadow of the Brooklyn Bridge.
It's about 1:30 P.M., the tail end of lunch hour on a Tuesday.
They give the maitre d'hotel their name, tell him they have a reservation and hand him a voucher, with the River Cafe typed explicitly on it, for their meal.
They're on a tour package, they explain, to which he responds that he is sorry, but the restaurant is not participating in the package.
Furthermore, looking down his list of reservations, he finds the couple's name nowhere.
The couple, a casually but not inappropriately dressed pair who might be from Des Moines or Boston or Painted Post, look at each other, disappointed if not aghast.


No Headline
"You know what I'd like to do? I'd like to live in the suburbs. I like the suburbs. In the suburbs, your neighbors don't light fires in the hall." PHILLIP YEE, a resident of the Kenmore Hotel in Manhattan.  [ A1:5. ]


Giuliani Budget Reflects a Strategy to Make Poverty a Crime
To the Editor:
While the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies joins in the effort to restore funds for youth, educational, social, health and housing services in Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's first executive budget for New York City, we wish to focus on the philosophical direction the budget reflects.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Crown Cork and Seal Co., Philadelphia, is selling $100 million of 7 percent notes due 1999 priced at 99.710 to yield 7.07 percent through Salomon Brothers Inc. and CS First Boston Corp.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-1 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Amcast Industrial Corp.(AIZ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Market Place; Wall Street forgives Autodesk's delay, but for how long?
AUTODESK has long dominated the low end of the market for computer software used by engineers, architects and designers.
But earlier this year the company, based in Sausalito, Calif., announced that the vital Release 13 of its flagship product, Autocad, would be delayed.
The distribution, originally set for May 20, will take place in October, Autodesk said, giving it time to work out some bugs.


Cott Corp.(COTTF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Swimmers Protest Proposed Budget Cuts


CHRONICLE
At least three winners in the 48th Tony Awards ceremony on Sunday will not offer up thank-you's to encyclopedic lists of friends, relatives and colleagues.
GARY SMITH, the executive producer of the awards show, to be broadcast on CBS, has devised a way for the winners in the costumes, sets and lighting categories to receive their medallions with nary a "Thanks, Mom."
Instead, he said, "I went to the 12 designers nominated and offered them the opportunity to pretape a brief segment, 20 seconds each, on their approach to their work."


Disturbed Man Shoots 4 at Hotel Pool
Saying "I just hate all people," a mentally deranged man fired all the bullets in a semiautomatic handgun at a hotel's poolside patio here today, wounding three men who he mistakenly thought were harassing his daughter, and grazing a bystander, the authorities said.
The man, who had been treated for paranoid schizophrenia for 10 years, watched his 12-year-old daughter from a lounge chair for a few minutes at the pool and then walked toward a table where three men were playing cards, spoke quickly, pulled a 9-millimeter semiautomatic pistol from the waistband of his shorts and began shooting, said John J. Fahy, the Bergen County Prosecutor.
A fourth man sitting nearby was grazed on a leg.


Abroad at Home; Drawing A Line
The moving ceremonies to commemorate D-Day should do more than celebrate the courage and sacrifice of 50 years ago.
They should remind us of what made that sacrifice necessary: the earlier failure to stand up to evil.
Hitler made no secret of his hatred, his violent nationalism or his megalomania.
But European leaders did not act to confront the menace when it appeared.
They treated Hitler as a joke, then believed his promises and swallowed his aggression -- until their own countries were threatened.


As In-Line Skating Grows, Injuries Multiply, U.S. Says
Once just a quirky way to spend Saturday afternoon in the park, in-line skating has become not only a hip means of exercise but also a health hazard.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission said today that skating injuries would more than double this year, to 83,000 emergency room cases, compared with 37,000 in 1993.


Red Storm Rides Into Town at St. John's
St.
John's University formally unveiled its new Red Storm nickname and logo at a midtown Manhattan news conference yesterday, although LOU CARNESECCA was at a bit of a loss over how to explain the presence of a horse as the mascot.
"Everyone loves horses," said Carnesecca, the school's longtime former basketball coach.
"And if we're going to ride, we're going to ride this horse."
Actually, according to SISTER MARGARET FITZPATRICK, a senior vice president of the university, there was a little more involved.
"Once we picked the name, we were going through mythology trying to find figures to represent the school," she said.
"In mythology in general, one of the representations of a storm is a horse. We wanted to pick a mascot that if you look right away at it, you don't know if it's a male or a female. Because both men and women will be using the name, we were sensitive that the name and mascot we chose would represent both teams."


Commencements; Gore, Class of '69, Warns Harvard '94 Against Cynicism
Twenty-five years after members of Al Gore's graduating class took over the Harvard dean's office, the Vice President returned to his alma mater today as its commencement speaker and warned the class of 1994 againstcynicism.
After an article in this morning's Harvard Crimson wondered which side of Mr.
Gore would be shown today -- "Boring or Charismatic" -- the Vice President opened with a battery of jokes about himself, like: "How do you tell Al Gore from a roomful of Secret Service agents? He's the stiff one."


Ayer Hires Executive From DDB Needham
Ayer Inc. said yesterday that it had hired a top executive of DDB Needham New York, Mary Lou Quinlan, as president of its New York office.
Ms.
Quinlan, 40, was one of three executive vice presidents and managing partners at DDB Needham New York, handling accounts like James River, Johnson &amp; Johnson and Seiko.
As president of Ayer New York, she assumes duties temporarily handled by Patrick Cunningham, 50, who returns to his position as vice chairman and chief creative officer at Ayer Inc.
Mr.
Cunningham had stepped in after Jerry Siano, Ayer's former chairman, relinquished the presidency.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Edwards Gets Hot as United States Wins  Teresa Edwards scored 10 of her 17 points in the final six minutes as the defending champion United States advanced in the women's world championships with a 103-96 victory over Slovakia yesterday in Sydney, Australia.
The unbeaten Americans meet Brazil and China meets Australia in the semifinals today. (AP) YACHT RACING  Heineken Limps to Whitbread Finish Line  Heineken finally made port in Southampton, England, ending the Whitbread Round the World yacht race.
The only entry with an all-woman crew sailed across the finish line late Wednesday night, the last boat of the 14 to complete the sixth and final 3,818-mile leg from Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
The Heineken broke two rudders in the last week. (AP) TENNIS  Stich and Ivanisevic Are Upset in London  The defending champion, Michael Stich, and fourth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic were upset yesterday in the third round of the Queen's Club tournament in London.
Stich, seeded No. 2, lost 7-6 (8-6), 6-3 to 15th-seeded Jamie Morgan of Australia in the fading light after a day plagued by rain delays.
Ivanisevic was beaten by Jan Apell of Sweden, ranked 127th and playing in his first grass-court event on the ATP Tour.
Ivanisevic lost, 7-6 (11-9), 7-6 (7-2). (AP) Shriver Victor in England: Pam Shriver and Rachel McQuillan exchanged words yesterday after a 6-0, 6-4 third-round victory by the American in the DFS Classic at Edgbaston near Birmingham, England.
The Australian would not shake hands with Shriver after the match, and said the 31-year-old American was old and should retire.
Shriver laughed it off. (AP)


Police Arrest 5 in Bribery
Five men were arrested yesterday and another was being sought in what the police said was a scheme to bribe officers to overlook narcotics operations in three smoke shops in Queens.
For three months, officers from the Queens narcotics district pretended to accept bribes amounting to $8,500, the police said.


Review/Film; An Express Bus in a Very Fast Lane
At the time of year when Hollywood traditionally bludgeons its audience back into the Stone Age (sobering statistic: the witless "Flintstones" grossed as much in its first weekend as "Four Weddings and a Funeral" has grossed in the United States in three months), you can still pick your poison.
The summertime no-brainer needn't be entirely without brains.
It can be as savvy as "Speed," the runaway-bus movie that delivers wall-to-wall action, a feat that's never as easy as it seems.
This film's dialogue isn't much more literate than a bus schedule, but its plotting is smart and breathless enough to make up for that.
"Speed" presents a falling elevator, a hijacked subway train, the above-mentioned bus and Jack Traven (Keanu Reeves), the Los Angeles Police Department trouble-shooter whose business is solving such problems.
This role, for Mr.
Reeves, is less an acting challenge than a rite of passage.
It's a means of proving that he's ready to play the tough guy in suitably grim, purposeful style.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"FOREVER PLAID," Steve McGraw's, 158 West 72d Street, Manhattan.
A musical comedy about a 1950's singing group, written and directed by Stuart Ross; with David Benoit, Drew Geraci, Jeffrey Korn and Richard Coombs.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35 and $37.50.
Information: (212) 595-7400.
"MOE'S LUCKY SEVEN," Playwrights Horizons, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
A romantic comedy about the reunion of two former lovers, by Marlane Meyer; directed by Roberta Levitow.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
"MORT SAHL'S AMERICA," Theater Four, 424 West 55th Street, Clinton.
Former Senator Eugene McCarthy joins Mort Sahl this week.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 757-3900.


Rare Ruling Leaves a Monet Hanging
At the end of World War II, Gerda Dorothea DeWeerth found that her painting by the French Impressionist Claude Monet had disappeared from the halls of her family's German castle.
It had been taken, she was told, by Allied troops stationed there.
Now, after more than a decade of legal battles in which Mrs.
DeWeerth (pronounced de-VEERT) tried to recover the painting, a Federal appeals court has ruled for the second time that the work, "Champs de Ble a Vetheuil," should remain with its current owner, a woman living on Park Avenue in Manhattan.


Pepsi Profit Outlook Hurts Stocks
Shares of Pepsico Inc. and several other food and beverage stocks were hit by a wave of selling yesterday after Pepsi disappointed Wall Street with the disclosure that its second-quarter profit was going to be flat rather than well ahead of last year, as investors had been expecting.
Pepsi's financial projection reflected two trends, according to securities analysts: vicious soft drink competition among colas and so-called New Age beverages, and slow growth at restaurant chains.
Pepsi owns Pizza Hut, Taco Bell and KFC.


Review/Film; 'Blue' and 'White' as Different as Day and Night
Anyone who has seen the austere, pretentious "Blue," the first film in Krzysztof Kieslowski's "Three Colors" trilogy, will scarcely believe that the witty, deadpan "White" was made by the same man.
How could the creator of "Blue," the story of a woman who grieves by moping around Paris in a chichi haircut, possibly have followed it with such a rich, light-handed marvel?
Here Mr.
Kieslowski takes Karol, an apparently hapless hero, and ships him from Paris home to Poland hidden in a suitcase, only to have the suitcase missing from the baggage claim on the other side.
How can Karol's helpful accomplice explain to the airline that the lost luggage held 165 pounds worth of clothes?
Mr.
Kieslowski is always uncompromising, leaving it to his viewers to follow him or not, sometimes in wildly wrong directions.
Though "Blue" was widely praised by some critics when it opened last year, its minimalist manner and laughably serious tone played like a parody of a film by a Major European Director.
"White," which opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, is laughable on purpose.
When Mr.
Kieslowski is at his best, as he is here and in earlier films like "The Double Life of Veronique," he simply is a major director without making a fuss about it.


MFP Technology reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Inside Art
Questions at the Whitney
With all the turmoil during the tenures of Leonard A. Lauder as president of the Whitney Museum of American Art and David A. Ross as its director, there has been no end of speculation about what will happen when their terms expire.
Mr.
Lauder is known as Mr.
Ross's staunchest supporter on a divided board.
So when the museum announced after the board met on Wednesday that Mr.
Lauder had resigned as president a year before his term expired, and would become its chairman, and that Gilbert C. Maurer, an 11-year board member, would assume the presidency, the question was inevitable: What does this mean for Mr.
Ross, whose contract runs out in February 1996?
Mr.
Lauder denied that the board was divided on Mr.
Ross.
"They're solidly behind David," he said.
"Are there one or two naysayers? Sure."


U.S. FINDS IT HARD TO WIN CONSENSUS OVER NORTH KOREA
One week after Washington said it would push for economic sanctions against North Korea, the Administration is still struggling to complete its plan and says it may be weeks before the United Nations Security Council will be ready to vote on the matter.
With China voicing objections and Japan expressing reservations about imposing tough sanctions, and with differences within Administration ranks, the White House has yet to draft a sanctions resolution.


Review/Pop; Down Memory Lane the Elvis Costello Way
When Elvis Costello played with his old backup band, the Attractions, on Wednesday evening at the Central Park Summerstage, it was less a reunion than a rediscovery.
Mr.
Costello, who hasn't toured with the Attractions since 1986, never looks back for nostalgic reasons.
For this 39-year-old singer, songwriter and guitarist, music from the past, whether his own or others', is a vertical stack of records.
He can only put his on top.
Mr.
Costello's songs rarely fail to acknowledge, in some surreptitious way, the musicians that influenced them.
The music is insider's rock made by the ultimate outsider.


Review/Film; Gothic Horror With a Point to Make
The Gothic horror film "Jack Be Nimble" has a hallucinatory power and psychological refinement that you won't find in any number of movie adaptations of Stephen King novels, including "Carrie." Written and directed by Garth Maxwell, a young New Zealander, it tells the story of Jack and Dora (Alexis Arquette and Sarah Smuts-Kennedy), a young brother and sister whose mother's nervous breakdown leads to their separation and adoption by different couples.
Growing up apart, the siblings cling to their childhood memories of one another, each longing for a time when they will be reunited.
As the film cuts back and forth between scenes of their childhood and adolescence, it evokes their misery and isolation with a feverish intensity that recalls scenes from Hitchcock and De Palma.


INSIDE
Pressure Over Police Cuts
Mayor Giuliani is facing increasing pressure from Democratic officials to include the Police Department in his efforts to reduce New York City's budget.
Page B1.
New Chairman at Merck
Merck, the world's largest drug maker, picked an outside executive with no pharmaceutical experience to become its top official.
Page D1.
Champagne Stays on Ice
Poised to win their first Stanley Cup since 1940, the Rangers lost to the Canucks, 6-3, and will take a 3-2 lead to Vancouver for Game 6.
Page B9.


Coach's Fight Harder Than Team's
This would be no win one for the Gipper saga.
None of that maudlin stuff.
Arizona State wanted to win because that's what the players were there for, because that's how the coach, a brusque but admired man, had trained them.
But, while they did not say it openly, there was the feeling that, yes, they'd like to win it for him, too.
There were two signs of this attitude as Arizona State's baseball team prepared to play Oklahoma today in the semifinals of the College World Series here in Rosenblatt Stadium.


Air Force Sergeant In a Sex Complaint Tells of Reprisals
Just a week after the Navy was forced to apologize to a lieutenant who had suffered retaliation for reporting sexual harassment to her superiors, the Air Force today found itself in a similarly embarrassing spot.
House members were furious and senior Air Force officials were scrambling to head off potential trouble after an Air Force sergeant said her command had retaliated against her after she returned from testifying before Congress in March about sexual harassment.


Review/Art; End of an Era: The Rockefellers And the Modern
AS much as the Guggenheims and the Whitneys are synonymous with their museums, the Rockefellers are synonymous with the Museum of Modern Art.
The Modern was founded in 1929 by Abby Aldrich Rockefeller, along with Lillie Bliss and Mary Sullivan, and for most of its history either Mrs.
Rockefeller or one of her children has headed its board.
So when David Rockefeller, her youngest son, recently relinquished his post as chairman to Agnes Gund and became chairman emeritus, it signaled a kind of sea change.
Mr.
Rockefeller still has his hand in affairs like the search for a new director, and his son David Jr. and Nelson A. Rockefeller's son Rodman are trustees.
But an era of Rockefeller management at the Modern, stretching back to its beginning, has come to a close.


High School Senior Killed By Falling Pipe at a Prom
The senior prom was almost over, and the 200 students from Springfield Gardens High School were waiting for the balloons to drop from the ceiling of the New York Hall of Science in Queens, signaling an end to a night of dancing and animated conversation.
But what fell instead from the building's 70-foot-high ceiling early yesterday morning was a 10-pound steel pipe.
After it struck 17-year-old Micha Chatmon in the head, she collapsed to the floor.
Two hours later, the popular high school senior who wanted to be a nurse was pronounced dead at Elmhurst Hospital Center.
She never regained consciousness, according to Sgt.
Edelle James, a police spokeswoman.


Home Video
In case anybody plans to ignore the second coming of "Jurassic Park," due on cassette Oct. 4 from MCA/ Universal, consider this: if all the video's advertisements and promotions have the penetration the company says they will, 98 percent of the adult population of the United States will have been exposed to some sort of mention of the movie 25.2 times between the first big promotional salvos in July and the end of the campaign in January.
In a kind of Normandy invasion of video promotions, MCA/Universal says it will send eight billion "consumer impressions" into an engagement that illustrates, perhaps as no video release has before, how broadly a big movie can be deployed across the merchandising landscape.


Does the Truth Lie in the Former Yugoslavia?; Croatian Coin Reborn
To the Editor:
On May 30, Croatia introduced a new currency called the kuna.
"Kuna" is a Croatian name for marten, a small ferretlike mammal found commonly in some Croatian forests.
The introduction of the monetary unit kuna has, unfortunately, led to some controversy and misunderstanding because the monetary unit kuna was also in use in pro-fascist Croatia during World War II.


Two Journals in Dispute Over Research on Kaposi's Sarcoma
In the kind of dispute that is usually carried out privately in the rarefied atmosphere of academic medicine, two prestigious scientific journals are squaring off in public.
The dispute involves the validity of findings in a published report about Kaposi's sarcoma, a skin cancer that affects many AIDS patients.
The dispute involves an experimental compound that Dr.
Robert Gallo, one of the world's leading AIDS researchers, believes holds promise for treating Kaposi's sarcoma.
The hope is based only on experiments carried out on mice.


Rita W. Smith, 55; Counselor in Harlem Fought Drug Dealing
Rita Webb Smith, a community advocate whose work to rid a neighborhood of drug trafficking gained her national attention, died last Saturday at her home in Harlem.
She was 55.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


TV Weekend; Serious Entertainment From a Rare Resource
Wim Kayzer, a Dutch television producer, had a simple idea: bring together several eminent American and British intellectuals for open-ended conversation.
The result, more than a dozen hours of talk that broke viewing records in his country last year, arrives Sunday and dominates Channel 13's prime-time schedule through the week.
Starting with the neurologist and psychiatrist Oliver Sacks, "A Glorious Accident" continues with Rupert Sheldrake, cell biologist and biochemist; Daniel C. Dennett, philosopher; Stephen Toulmin, philosopher of science; Freeman Dyson, physicist, and Stephen Jay Gould, paleontologist.
On Saturday they all join Mr.
Kayzer for a three-and-a-half-hour chat.
And on Sunday, June 19, viewers can fill in anything they missed, or if they missed it all, can make up the entire series, from 7 A.M. to 12:45 A.M.


Art in Review
Wendy Ewald
James Danziger Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through June 24
For nearly two decades, Wendy Ewald has worked with children in poor and isolated communities, whether in the Appalachian Mountains, the Andes of Colombia or rural India, giving them cameras and film and prompting them to document their lives as well as their dreams and fears.
This intriguing exhibition provides a large selection of photographs made by the children and by Ms.
Ewald herself.


House Votes To End Curbs On Bosnians
Spurning last-minute lobbying attempts by the Administration, the House voted today to order President Clinton to circumvent the NATO alliance and end United States participation in the arms embargo against the Bosnian Government.
In an emotional and anguished debate, 117 Democrats joined 127 Republicans in voting to compel the Administration to act alone in the former Yugoslavia.
The measure, which passed 244 to 178, was a stern rebuke to the President and an expression of House members' frustration with what they said was a lack of resolve in American foreign policy.


In Russia, Gang Violence Is Escalating


A Superfund Plan Divides the Insurance Industry
Facing claims that could total hundreds of billions of dollars and bankrupt large segments of their industry, insurance companies are fighting about which of them should pay the most for cleaning the approximately 1,300 hazardous waste sites spread around the country.
On one side are insurers like the American International Group and the Allstate Corporation that want the cleanup paid by the insurance companies that issued the liability policies covering the polluted sites.
On the other are such heavyweights as Aetna Life and Casualty and the Chubb Corporation that argue the pain should be shared among industry members.
Alternative to Lawsuits
This intramural conflict will reach a crucial point in the next few weeks as Congressional committees consider a proposal to reform Superfund, the Federal program for hazardous waste cleanup, that was announced in May by the American Insurance Association, trade groups representing the chemical and other industries, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
A crucial element of the proposal is how to levy an $8.1 billion tax on the insurance industry during the next 10 years.


Corrections
A brief article yesterday about relatives of John Gotti who were accused of trying to stop a police officer from writing a ticket included an erroneous identity, supplied by the police, in some editions.
The man charged with assault was Peter Gotti, John Gotti's son -- not Peter Gotti Jr., John Gotti's nephew.


La Guardia Safety Zone Extension Passed
The New York City Council voted unanimously yesterday to extend the safety overrun area of La Guardia Airport's main runway, the site of three accidents that claimed 29 lives in the last five years.
By a vote of 47-0, with one abstention, the Council approved a plan to add 400 feet to the current 60 feet of overrun, a landfill beyond the 7,000-foot-long Runway 13-31, adjacent to Flushing Bay.


Two Marketers Changing Agencies
Two consumer marketers said yesterday that they would change agencies.
The Starter Corporation in New Haven, which markets licensed sports apparel, named Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos of Boston to handle its account, which had been at Damian Bisch &amp; Partners of New York since 1988.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.
Hill, Holliday was awarded the account after a six-week review that also included Damian Bisch and the New York offices of Chiat/Day and Ogilvy &amp; Mather.


For Fans, Some More Suffering Is Required
The momentous evening was to end with a seminal moment -- with Mark Messier and company gliding around the ice, the Stanley Cup aloft on their shoulders and Madison Square Garden trembling at the core.
Finally, 54 years of wandering for the Rangers and their worn-out fans would end in a famous New York night.
The fans believed this so deeply, wanted it so fervently, they forgot to be nervous.
They forgot to be scared.
They forgot to know better.


Suffolk Aims to Buy Cheaper Power Off Island
Faced with some of the highest electric rates in the nation, the Suffolk County Executive, Robert J. Gaffney, today proposed that the county end the monopoly enjoyed by the Long Island Lighting Company and begin buying lower priced power from other utilities off Long Island.
At a news conference this morning, Mr.
Gaffney said that the county electrical agency, which has bought small amounts of hydropower and nuclear power from the state over the last decade, would vastly increase its purchases, pending approval by the Federal Government.
Lilco would be paid a fee to distribute the energy over its grid to businesses and homes.


Corrections
A music review yesterday about a performance of "Tosca" by the Metropolitan Opera in Central Park, the first of a series in local parks, misidentified the site for the performance on June 25.
It will be at Cooper River Park in Pennsauken, N.J., not in New Brunswick, N.J.


Kurt Burnheim, 85, Literary Agent
Kurt Bernheim, a literary agent who helped bring the works of prominent European authors to the United States and American writers to Europe, died on Wednesday in Hewlett, L.I., at the home of his longtime companion, Erica Amsterdam.
He was 85.
The cause was cancer, said Monica Bernheim, his daughter.


Even Wealthy Haitians Starting to Feel Pinched
The BMW's and bougainvillea of the hilltop neighborhood of Juvenat sometimes make it difficult to remember that Haiti is the hemisphere's poorest country, or that for more than two years it has been subjected to a series of ever tighter international embargoes.
This enclave of mostly newly made fortunes is shaken only by the rumble of earth-moving equipment rushing to complete private roads whose access will be monitored by the latest in electronic security devices.
Despite a worldwide ban on trade with Haiti, great cement and marble mansions are still going up here that would make denizens of Beverly Hills blush.


Breastfed Adoptees
To the Editor:
I would like to point out one inaccuracy in your article about hormones in mother's milk (Science Times, May 24).
While most adoptive parents choose to bottle feed their infants, it is physically possible for an adoptive mother to lactate and breastfeed the infant.
It takes dedication on the part of the mother and planning, but it sometimes is done.
Do not be so quick to say adopted children are formula- fed.
DEENA ZIMMERMAN, M.D.
Asst.
Prof. of Clinical Pediatrics University of Medicine &amp; Dentistry of New Jersey New Brunswick, N.J., June 1, 1994


As Beukeboom Exited, Canuck Attack Entered
Real blood flowed from the nose of Sergei Zubov and from the ear of Doug Lidster, both of whom stayed in the game for the Rangers, despite their wounds.
Figurative bad blood flowed between Jeff Beukeboom of the Rangers and Sergio Momesso of the Canucks.
But only Beukeboom left the game, ejected because he started a major fistfight by jumping into someone else's minor tiff.
These ill omens early in Game 5 preceded a 6-3 Vancouver victory at Madison Square Garden Thursday night, a result that sent the series back to British Columbia for Game 6 of the Stanley Cup finals on Saturday night.
If Game 7 is necessary, it will be played at the Garden on Tuesday night.


Bias May Be Motive In a Sexual Assault
The police said yesterday that they were investigating the possibility that three men sexually assaulted a woman in Greenwich Village last month because they believed she was a lesbian.
The victim, 35, was walking near Grove and Bleecker Streets about 3:30 A.M. on May 21 when three men in their 20's followed her into a building where they pushed her into an elevator and robbed her of money and credit cards, the police said.


Giuliani Vetoes Bill to Oversee Privatizing
As the fight over New York City's budget intensified, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani vetoed legislation yesterday that would allow the City Council to hold public hearings on the Mayor's efforts to turn some municipal services over to private companies.
It was Mr.
Giuliani's first veto of legislation, after signing into law the first 18 bills that crossed his desk.
It heightened the confrontation over the City Council's authority to oversee the privatizing of services.


Why Does U.S. Let Beijing Tell Us What to Do?
To the Editor:
Secretary of State Warren Christopher told the Asia Society that China is "too big to be pushed around," you report (news article., May 28).
Well, so is the United States, and the State Department should stop letting itself be bullied by Beijing about whom it permits on United States territory.
Last May 4, for example, the plane carrying President Lee Teng-hui of Taiwan stopped in Honolulu to refuel, and Mr.
Lee asked permission to spend the night.
His request was denied when the Chinese Ambassador reminded the State Department that no president of the Republic of China on Taiwan was to be allowed into the United States.
After a humiliating hour and a half, Mr.
Lee was sent on to Central America and Africa.


High-Speed Collision Leaves 7 Dead


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
California has been operating the first state-sponsored insurance-purchasing alliance for small companies that allows their employees to choose health coverage at relatively lower rates.
Congress is considering proposals to provide Federal money to help states set up alliances like California's year-old program.  [ Page 1. ]
The Government issued a mixed report on inflation, showing that producer prices edged down one-tenth of 1 percent in May but only because of big declines in food and energy prices.
Excluding those components, the Producer Price Index's core rate rose four-tenths of 1 percent.  [ 37. ] Companies
A Federal judge ordered Microsoft to stop selling and to recall two versions of its MS-DOS operating system, which is by far the most commonly used personal computer software.  [ 37. ]
The Ziff family's surprising decision to sell its computer magazine empire can be traced back four years, when three younger members began to show signs that they did not want to follow in their father's and grandfather's footsteps.  [ 37. ]
The Fidelity mutual fund group has sharply cut its stake in United Airlines' parent company, signaling its distaste for the proposed buyout of the carrier.  [ 37. ]
A Federal appeals court overturned new regulations intended to force local phone companies to accept more competition.  [ 37. ]
Perot Systems is said to be considering a partnership or possibly a merger with SHL Systemhouse, Canada's largest independent computer services company.  [ 39. ]
Jamesway's chief executive departed to become the head of its bigger rival, Ames Department Stores, in a move that may have sounded the death knell for the ailing Jamesway.  [ 39. ]
Directors of Curtice-Burns Foods accepted a takeover offer from Dean Foods with an effective value of $453 million.  [ 39. ] International
In the third big scandal to hit Germany's financial community this year, bankruptcy papers were filed by Balsam A.G., an international sports flooring company that is the focus of a huge fraud investigation.  [ 39. ] Markets
The stock market rose moderately, aided by gains in blue-chip stocks and a surge in some technology-related stocks.
The Dow Jones industrials rose 20.31 points, to 3,773.45.
But the trading volume remained slow.  [ 38. ]
Treasury prices fell and interest rates rose as investors became increasingly concerned whether inflation would remain subdued, especially in light of the Government's mixed report on May producer prices.  [ 46. ]
The dollar slipped against other currencies, pulled down by falling bond prices.  [ 48. ]
Volatile grain prices climbed following forecasts of a few more days of rain-free weather in the Corn Belt.  [ 48. ] Your Money
Corporate retirement plans are subject to regulations and backstops of varying degrees, but sometimes there are no guarantees -- merely good faith and financial strength.  [ 35. ]
Government bond funds are often less conservative than investors may think, with some consisting of leveraged pools of highly complex securities.  [ 35. ]
BankAmerica pumped $17.4 million in capital into its Pacific Horizon Prime money market fund in May to make up for losses from investments in exotic securities.  [ 35. ]
State insurance regulators are looking more closely at companies that provide terminally ill people with early payouts on their life insurance policies.  [ 36. ]


COMPANY NEWS
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Wayne, Pa., a paper products distributor and office products manufacturer, acquired Paul B. Williams Inc., Greensboro, N.C., a copier and facsimile dealer, for an undisclosed price.
COASTAL HEALTHCARE GROUP INC., Durham, N.C., agreed to acquire Healthnet Corp. for an undisclosed amount of Coastal stock.
In a separate transaction, Coastal agreed to buy Southeast Health Systems Inc. and Medical Associates Systems Inc. for about 1.09 million shares of Coastal stock.
XTRA CORP., Boston, a holding company, acquired Caravan Trailer Rental Co. for $37 million.


Traffic Makes New Delhi Air Most Polluted in South Asia
A bluish haze hangs over the Indian capital these blistering days when temperatures hover around 114 degrees and vehicles crawl bumper to bumper in rush hour, emitting diesel fumes, lead, sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide to make New Delhi's air the most polluted in South Asia and among the worst in the world.
Motorcyclists wear face masks to prevent being overcome by dust and pollutants.
At some crossings, young men go from vehicle to vehicle selling masks.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks' Croquet Ballet
FOR the last three weeks, all we've heard is what an "ugly" team the Knicks are.
That curious ambiguity has passed for analysis during New York's long-awaited pilgrimage to the National Basketball Association finals.
They beat New Jersey, 3 games to 1, survived Chicago, 4-3, and finally prevailed over Indiana, also 4-3.
After each series the analysis was the same: The Knicks were winning ugly.


Piedmont Natural Gas Co.(PNY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Holly Corp.(HOC,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


The Prison on Varick Street
On Sunday, 150 people gathered outside the Immigration and Naturalization Service's detention center on Varick Street in Manhattan to protest the inhumane treatment of those held inside.
A letter from the longest-held detainee, Lulseged Dhine, was read.
It described his harrowing four-year detention, and he promised that if released, "I will leave all bitterness behind and will dedicate much of my time to helping I.N.S. detainees."
News coverage of the rally focused on the Chinese who were taken into custody last year when their ship, the Golden Venture, ran aground off Brooklyn.
But Mr.
Dhine's plea apparently did not go unnoticed by the I.N.S.
He was awakened at 4:30 Tuesday morning and put on a plane to a detention center in Arizona -- separating him from his lawyer and supporters.


How Safe Is Your Retirement Cache?
The Atlantic Richfield Company recently disclosed that its employee savings fund lost $22 million in April because of investments in derivatives, whose value is derived from underlying instruments like mortgages and stocks.
Although it is not compelled to make up the loss, ARCO has agreed to do so.
The company's employees, who had long-term savings and 401(k) retirement plan money in the fund, can breathe a sigh of relief, but workers at other companies may be left to wonder just how safe their retirement money is.


A Stronger Case for Police Cuts
Rudolph Giuliani was elected Mayor of New York as a relentless crime-fighter.
The police union gave him strong support, and he is now engaged in difficult negotiations over the next police contract.
So his ritual rejection of critics who tell him to cut the police budget is understandable.
But a little mayoral flexibility would serve the city better.
New analyses by State Comptroller Carl McCall and City Comptroller Alan Hevesi expose the weakness of his position.
Also, the City Council is pressing for a small cutback that would let it restore some of the brutal cuts he proposes for other agencies, cuts made deeper by exempting police, firefighters and teachers.


IN PERFORMANCE
POP A Belgian-African Quartet Mixes Traditions in Many Ways  Gould Hall
Unlike most of the transcultural hybrids that come under the heading of world music, the vocalizing of the Belgian-African a cappella quartet Zap Mama isn't a set fusion of styles.
The female group, which performed at Gould Hall (55 East 59th Street, Manhattan) on Thursday evening, makes music that is a fluid, open-ended interplay of various African and European idioms.
Not only musically, but also in its playful theatrics, the group illustrates the way a form can travel across continents and change and be changed as it mingles with other traditions.


Problems Erupt in Money Market Group
The BankAmerica Corporation disclosed this week that it had pumped $17.4 million in capital into its Pacific Horizon Prime money market fund in May.
Along with BankAmerica, at least "a handful" of other money fund sponsors have injected cash into their funds in the last few months, said Barry Barbash, director of the division of investment management for the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Without the infusion, the funds' share prices would have dropped below $1 because of losses from investments in exotic securities.


Trooper Challenges Woman's Account of Encounter With Clinton
In court papers filed here today, an Arkansas state trooper named in a Federal lawsuit accusing Bill Clinton of sexual harassment denied ever telling the plaintiff that Mr.
Clinton, who was then the Governor of Arkansas, wanted to meet her in his hotel room.
The trooper, Danny Ferguson, said that the plaintiff, Paula Corbin Jones, had asked which room was the Governor's and that he had accompanied her in an elevator and pointed out which room was Mr.
Clinton's.


Fidelity Cuts United Airlines Stake
Adding another discordant opinion on the proposed buyout of United Airlines, the Fidelity group of mutual funds has sharply cut its stake in the carrier, signaling its distaste for the deal.
Fidelity sold 72.4 percent of its stake -- about 1.46 million shares -- of the UAL Corporation, United's parent company, between March 31 and May 31, according to documents filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
As of May 31 Fidelity still held more than 557,000 shares, roughly 2.2 percent of all UAL shares.
Its officials did not comment on the decision to sell most of its shares.


Panel in House Outlines A Generous Health Plan
Another Congressional committee weighed in today with its vision of what an overhauled health care system should look like.
It looked like this: more generous benefits, greater costs and more Government involvement than any of the other committees' visions.
Republicans, who have already denounced the previous plans as too expansive, called this one fat, ugly, irrelevant, a cruel hoax and, in one instance, "bad as dog's breath."


Five Myths In Pensions
People have many misconceptions about the scope and safety of their retirement plans, said Karen W. Ferguson, director of the Pension Rights Center, a public advocacy group.
To wit, she named the five most common myths about corporate pensions.
If your company has a pension plan, you will be entitled to a benefit.


Rules for Companies That Buy Life Policies
Companies that provide terminally ill people with early payouts on their life insurance policies are getting increased scrutiny.
State insurance regulators, who fear fraudulent companies could bilk or mislead ailing policyholders, are creating guidelines for this growing business.
But a debate continues about how much the concerns, known as viatical companies, should be regulated.


Octavio Paz Goes Looking for His Old Friend Eros
As Octavio Paz approached the age of 80, his thoughts turned back to love.
"Isn't it a bit ridiculous, at the end of my days, to write a book about love?" he asked himself, thinking that a satirical sonnet might be more appropriate.
"Or is it a farewell, a testament?" he wondered.
But the idea of such an essay had long been with him.
His poetry had spoken of love since he was a teen-ager, but when he fell in love 30 years ago, he decided he had more to say.
He wanted to study the image of love in our civilization, the state of love at the end of the 20th century.
Finally, he has done so.


For Giuliani and Green, It Might as Well Be 1997
Perhaps it all began last January when the Mayor's chief deputy and political enforcer, Peter J. Powers, told Mark J. Green, the Public Advocate, that the Giuliani administration had considered the Democrat's inaugural speech "too mayoral."
Or perhaps it's just that no matter what you call Mr.
Green's office -- City Council President as it was long known, Public Advocate as it was reincarnated, or simply, as mayors often suspect, Mayor-in-waiting -- its occupant is destined to end up in a feud with the Mayor.


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, an article on Wednesday about Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards of Louisiana misstated his age.
He is 66, not 55.


Palestinians Given Pledges For More Aid
Facing a severe cash flow problem just as they begin administering Gaza and Jericho, Palestinian authorities obtained some relief today as international donors pledged an additional $42 million worth of aid to cover start-up costs.
Nabil Shaath, who headed the Palestinian delegation to a two-day meeting with donors here, said the outcome was "much better than expected" and would help set up a Palestinian national authority "that can survive on its own."


Tyson: Celebrity Visits, Not Study Hall
If MIKE TYSON doesn't impress a judge on Monday with his educational record, he may have his celebrity friends to blame.
Tyson dropped out of his high school program at the Indiana Youth Center near Indianapolis for more than a year because of numerous visits from friends such as WHITNEY HOUSTON, SPIKE LEE and CHARLES BARKLEY, said PHIL SLAVENS, assistant superintendent of operations at the prison.


Review/Opera; A Lyrical Dream From China's Past
At about the time of the first Western operas in Italy, the greatest Ming-dynasty playwright, Tang Xianzu (1550-1616), wrote "The Peony Pavilion," a 55-act musical drama that, properly performed, lasted for several days.
After the 18th century, it was usually staged in condensed versions, which is what the Taiwan-based Lan Ting Chinese Opera Troupe did on Thursday night at the Taipei Theater (1221 Avenue of the Americas, between 48th and 49th Streets).
So intriguing and lovely was this abridged example of the kun-qu style, however, that I almost wished for a Chinese counterpart to Bayreuth, so such works could be seen in their entirety.
Presumably this opera would then be shown to be a hypnotic, languorously unfolding fantasy about Du Liniang, a young woman who, despite being isolated by a jealous father, finds her true love in the person of a young scholar.
The distinctive Chinese turn in this archetypal tale is that the scholar appears to her only in a dream.
She dies out of love for the imagined figure, but the Lord of the Underworld allows her to return to earth and seek him in the flesh.
Much else would happen over the course of several days of dramaturgy, but after a while, I imagine, the minutely chronicled emotional life of the heroine would take on a mythic character while the sinuous lyricism of this ancient musical style would coax one into a dream state not unlike her own.


Seeking a Bronx Muse For a Borough's Lyric
JUST as the Yankees threatened again to bolt from the gritty Bronx like their Civil War namesakes at first Manassas, the much maligned borough was deep in celebration of Bronx Week with parades, concerts and art shows.
Probably the timing of yet another Yankee snub was more a matter of coincidence than provocative design, though considering the personnel, who can be sure?
Scorning the only part of the city that is attached to the American mainland has long known no season.


Yeltsin Prods Government On Economy
Sounding more like an impassioned critic of the administration than its leader, President Boris N. Yeltsin attacked his Government today for dragging its feet on economic reform and failing to protect consumers and the poor.
Mr.
Yeltsin also said he would sign an agreement making Russia a member of the loose alliance known as the Partnership for Peace, which offers a kind of junior partnership in NATO to members of the former Warsaw pact.
Russia delayed joining, insisting that as a former superpower it should have a more important role than other, smaller countries.


Blue Jays Deliver 2 Messages To Yanks
Polite John Olerud is not the type of player to gloat, but he smiled slightly after gaining sweet revenge tonight.
Feisty Todd Stottlemyre is more apt to gloat and he was all smiles after sending the Yankees a message with his first pitch of the game and then silencing them with most of the ones that followed.
The message?
Do not toy with the Blue Jays.
Jim Abbott was not smiling after the Jays rumbled to a convincing 7-2 victory at the Skydome.
Olerud, whom Manager Cito Gaston felt was intentionally hit with a pitch by the Yankees on Thursday, socked a pivotal three-run homer off Abbott that altered a 1-0 game and buoyed the Jays.


For Ziffs, Sale Is a Family Affair
The computer publishing industry was still registering surprise yesterday at the unexpected disclosure late Thursday that the family-owned Ziff Communications empire was up for sale.
But for the family, the seeds of that decision lay in a meeting four years ago in Manalapan, Fla.
It was there that the billionaire William Ziff Jr., who is now 63, had one of the frequent gatherings at his house with his three adult sons from his first marriage, Dirk, Robert and Daniel.
As usual, the talk eventually turned to the future of the business that Mr.
Ziff's father, William Ziff founded in 1927.


Public &amp; Private; The Legal Drug
For some it is a beverage, for some a habit, for some an addiction.
And those differences, perhaps more than anything else, explain why we have yet to come to terms with the vast damage that alcohol can do, with those it kills, those it harms, those who can't get loose from its sharp fishhook.


Mets Strike Out, at Bat and at the Umpires
For two straight nights Montreal pitchers have been working over the Mets' batters.
But last night a few Mets felt they were also getting the squeeze from the home-plate umpire Jeff Kellogg and his crew.
Kellogg tossed Mets catcher Todd Hundley during the Expos' seventh inning for arguing balls and strikes, and Mike Winters, the third-base umpire, ejected batting coach Tom McCraw during the Mets' eighth for protesting a strike call on a checked swing.
Thursday night, Winters ejected Mets pitching coach Greg Pavlick for arguing balls and strikes when Winters was working behind the plate.


Observer; Our Meter Is Deranged
Now that all humanity has voiced its outrage about the White House people who took a military helicopter to the golf course, let's get serious: Why did this trip cost $13,129.66?
That's how much the golfers are said to have been charged for the outing.
Golfers who regularly take helicopters when they head for the course say the White House players were wildly overcharged.


Q &amp; A
Zero-Coupon Municipals  Q. When a zero-coupon municipal bond is called, is any portion of the proceeds taxable?
RICHARD MATULA, Westhampton, L.I.
A.
Part of the proceeds may be taxable, depending on your purchase price and the call price.
Zero-coupon bonds do not pay interest periodically, but instead pay at maturity the principal plus interest compounded at a stated yield.
Zero-coupon municipals, as opposed to zero-coupon Treasury or corporate bonds, earn interest that compounds free from Federal income tax.
The interest is also free from state and local tax to residents of the area where the bond is issued.


Marsh Supermarkets Inc.(MARSA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


Oarsman From Croatia Helps Brown Dominate
An enduring feature of college rowing is losing your shirt.
Tradition dictates that after the races those who have lost come around and hand over their shirts, each with its distinctive school color and design, to the victors.
Igor Boraska, a world-class oarsman from Croatia, says he has collected "about 80 shirts," and no wonder.
Boraska rows in the seven seat for Brown, the No. 1 crew in the nation, which has won its last 16 races over two seasons and goes for No. 17 on Saturday at the national championship regatta on Harsha Lake, Ohio, near Cincinnati.


Newbridge Networks Corp.(NNCXF,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


CHRONICLE
What do Britain's most industrious road sweeper, a cricketer and Sir ALEC GUINNESS and DIANA RIGG have in common?
They're among 1,000 British citizens being honored today by Queen Elizabeth II.
Each year, the Queen marks the official celebration of her birthday by bestowing various grades of honors, from Members of the British Empire to Companions of Honor, knighthoods to peerages.
She turned 68 on April 21.


Japan's Emperor Unflappable in Atlanta
Making his first stop in a low-key, two-week tour of the United States, the Emperor of Japan arrived here today, chatted with Atlanta schoolchildren at the airport, lunched with former President Jimmy Carter and breezed around town in a politically correct Cadillac limousine.
The visit by Emperor Akihito and his wife, Empress Michiko, is intended to project an image of friendly relations at a time of heightened tensions between Japan and the United States over trade issues and over how to respond to North Korea's defiance of nuclear inspections.


Dow Posts Gain of 20.31; Volume Is Uninspiring
The stock market rose moderately yesterday, aided by a modest rise in blue-chip stocks like Aluminum Company of America and Bethlehem Steel and a strong rise in computer-related stocks like Microsoft and Intel after the release of an unexpectedly favorable computer-industry index.
But despite the price rise, traders continued to hold back.
In the 14th consecutive session of below-average trading, volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 222.6 million shares, compared with the average this year of 296 million shares.


Condition of Rabbi Is 'Very Critical'
Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, the leader of the Lubavitch Hasidim who has been hospitalized for three months, was in very critical condition yesterday with failing kidneys, officials said.
The 92-year-old Jewish leader's condition had been relatively stable for the past two weeks, but on Tuesday he began suffering from "complications with his kidney function," said Lubavitcher spokesman Rabbi Yehuda Krinsky.


Berlin Journal; Coming of Age, Without the Old Ideology
In the old East Germany, no tradition was more widely observed than the Jugendweihe, the atheists' answer to religious confirmation.
More than 95 percent of East German youths went through the ceremony when they reached the age of 14.
It symbolized not only the passage from childhood into maturity, but also a commitment to Marxism.
The book that each participant received, a history of the workers' and anti-fascist movements in Germany mixed with adoring biographies of Communist leaders, was on almost every East German bookshelf.


IN PERFORMANCE
DANCE  Flamenco With Buried Lessons On Life, Death and Love  Westbeth Theater Center
A good selection of favorite traditional flamenco styles was on view on Tuesday night in "Noche Flamenca," which will be presented through June 19 at the intimate Westbeth Theater Center (151 Bank Street).
The performing was first rate, but what stood out about the program was its warmth and joy.Dressed in simple, pretty costumes with a real Gypsy look, thedancers performed in a way suggesting that each piece had a buried lesson about life, death and love.


Jose Jaime Pierluisi, 28, an Aide To Puerto Rico Governor, Dies
Jose Jaime Pierluisi, an aide to to the Governor of Puerto Rico, was killed on Tuesday night during a robbery in the San Juan area.
He was 28 years old.
Mr.
Pierluisi, the brother of Puerto Rico's Justice Secretary, was fatally shot just before midnight in what the police said was a carjacking outside his parents' home in the affluent Condado section of the capital.
The thieves stole his car, wallet and briefcase, the police said.


METRO DIGEST
TITLE BIDS INSPIRE DIVERSE FANATICISM Clearly, the Rangers and the Knicks and their championships, real and within reach, have simple and pure meaning for many people in New York.
Across the city, the latest outbreak of chronic fatigue syndrome among fast-track professionals came mostly from midnight game finishes.
Sports bars were overcrowded, the flow of alcohol and cash unrestrained.
Page 1.
FOR GIULIANI AND GREEN, IT MIGHT BE '97 No matter what you call Mark J. Green's office -- City Council President as it was long known, Public Advocate as it was reincarnated, or simply, as mayors often suspect, Mayor-in-waiting -- its occupant is destined to end up in a feud with the Mayor.
The relationship between the Democratic Public Advocate and the Republican Mayor has taken on an ever-frostier chill since Mayor Giuliani slipped into his budget a 23 percent reduction for Mr.
Green's office.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  VIOLENCE GROWS IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS Many of New York City's special education schools, set up to teach disabled youngsters, now rank among the city's most violent schools, according to Board of Education statistics.
For the eighth year in a row, the school system as a whole reported an increase in assaults, robberies, rapes, and other crimes.
Page 25.
GIULIANI VETOES OVERSIGHT BILL As the fight over the city's budget intensified, Mayor Giuliani vetoed legislation that would allow the City Council to hold public hearings on his efforts to turn some municipal services over to private companies.
Page 25.
DEATH AT PROM REMAINS A MYSTERY Investigators ruled out foul play in the death of a high-school senior struck by a falling piece of pipe at the New York Hall of Science in Queens, but they still didn't know why the pipe was in the building or how it fell.
Page 25.
REGION  FRAUD CASE IS THREATENED A Federal judge rebuked the Government for allowing the destruction of business records of an armored car company whose operators have been accused of stealing $38 million from their customers and said that he would have to consider dismissing the case because of the lost material.
Page 26.
VANDALISM RAISES THE SPECTER OF HATE The weapons have not been very big.
Some eggs thrown at houses and cars, some rocks, a broken floodlight.
Probably just children.
But it has been enough to make people in Glen Ridge, N.J., ask themselves, how do you deal with hate?
Do you make it a big deal?
Or do you just wait it out and hope it disappears?
Page 26.
GUN PURCHASE CHECKED AFTER SHOOTING Loopholes and vaguely worded restrictions in Federal and New Jersey gun-control laws have come to light in the aftermath of the shooting of four guests at a hotel pool in Saddle Brook, N.J., by a 46-year-old man who the authorities say has been treated for paranoid schizophrenia for the last 10 years.
Page 26.
SPACE SHORTAGE FOR NUCLEAR WASTE Companies that generate low-level nuclear waste in Connecticut will probably have nowhere to dump it until at least the end of the decade.
Page 26.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman.....25


The Nerve of Anti-Smoking Zealots!; Illogical Comparisons
To the Editor:
The difference between William Safire's position (column, May 23) on differential health insurance premiums for smokers versus nonsmokers and Prof.
Felicia Ackerman's objection (letter, May 30) is that Mr.
Safire is interested in equity.
Her ironic proposal to subject other categories of individuals to increased premiums involves illogical comparisons: airline pilots do not suffer long, futile, expensive treatments in work-related deaths; tennis players and ballet dancers don't as a rule continue to perform long after it is clear they are harming themselves, and the disasters of whitewater rafters, if they occur, are more likely to involve life insurance than health insurance.


A Weekend For the Stars At Belmont
New York will unfurl its grandest weekend of racing in 1994 today with the 126th running of the Belmont Stakes and four other prestige races that may help decide championships for fillies, turf runners and 3-year-old colts, who are closing their Triple Crown series still in search of a leader.
Cloudy but dry weather was forecast for the $500,000 Belmont and its satellite races: the $100,000 Riva Ridge for 3-year-old colts of lesser magnitude; the $100,000 Colin Stakes, yet another test for 3-year-olds, and the $150,000 Early Times Manhattan, with Paradise Creek looking for a sweep of the spring turf classics.


Review/Dance; Peter Martins, Uncharacteristically
"Barber Violin Concerto" and "Vienna Waltzes" are in their slightly offbeat ways signature works of their choreographers, a point made when the New York City Ballet presented both ballets on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.
"Barber Violin Concerto" displays Peter Martins in fairly uncharacteristic moods of romanticism and playfulness.
But those moods are expressed largely through the kind of jagged, quirky, off-balance partnering for which Mr.
Martins is known as a choreographer.
This is a meeting of elegantly distanced classical ballet with a modern dance informed by unruly passion.
Each is introduced in pas de deux, then the two forms mix with largely predictable consequences.


Violence Grows in New York Schools
Many of New York City's special education schools, set up to teach disabled youngsters, now rank among the city's most violent schools, according to Board of Education statistics released yesterday.
For the eighth year in a row, the school system as a whole reported an increase in assaults, robberies, rapes, and other crimes, according to the Board figures, which covered the second half of 1993.


Rwandan Rebels on Patrol


Capriati Goes Home From Drug Clinic
JENNIFER CAPRIATI checked out of a substance abuse clinic in Miami Beach yesterday, 26 days after she was arrested on a charge of possession of marijuana.
Capriati, accompanied by her mother, left Mount Sinai Medical Center, where she had been staying since her arrest May 16.
Her agent, BARBARA PERRY, said she did not know whether the 18-year-old tennis star would remain in Florida.
"That's something the family is dealing with now," Perry said.
"There haven't been any definite plans made."


Roy Kaiser Appointed By Pennsylvania Ballet
Roy Kaiser has been named to succeed Christopher d'Amboise as the artistic director of the Pennsylvania Ballet for the 1994-95 season, effective July 1.


Sometimes a Hug Is Better Than a Diploma


Editors' Note
An article on May 19 reported that child welfare and police officials in Chicago had concluded that a group of fourth graders seeking to retaliate against a strict substitute teacher had concocted a tale accusing him of molestation.
The article added that parents, unhappy with the conclusion, were threatening to file charges against the teacher, Albert Thompson.
While the article quoted parents and two school officials extensively in support of the children, there was no comment from Mr.
Thompson about the findings, or about the parents' threats.
The article should have noted that attempts to reach Mr.
Thompson through the union were unsuccessful, and that calls to the Albert Thompsons in the Chicago telephone directory failed.


Protecting the Targets of Protest: A Debate Now Shifts to Hunting
Congress, which last month granted sweeping protections to abortion clinics from harassment, now has to decide whether to grant similar protections to hunters who say they are being harassed by members of animal-rights groups.
Both liberals and conservatives are finding themselves in the awkward position of defending groups to which they are sympathetic while opposing protection for another group to which they are generally less sympathetic.


When the Rules Change
In a merger, acquisition or corporate spinoff, the fate of a company's pension plan is hard to predict.
The new company may assume the pension obligations, or it may leave them with the previous company.
Any benefits already earned will remain intact.
But any benefits that workers would have earned by continuing to work for the same company may change.


Knick and Ranger Title Bids Inspire a Search for Meaning
The firefighters of Engine Company 24 and Ladder Company 5 in Manhattan stood in the doorway of their firehouse, talking about grief, the Rangers and carrying on.
The Rangers, trying to rediscover how to win after 54 years, are helping the men in the doorway figure out how to smile again.
"I swear, John Drennan is up there pulling strings, making saves," Firefighter Craig Monahan said of his former captain, one of three firefighters killed in a SoHo fire earlier this year.
"He's taking care of us still. And the Rangers are doing their part, too."


Reconstructing Sarajevo


Microsoft Dealt Blow By a Judge
A Federal judge in California has ordered the Microsoft Corporation, the largest software company in the world, to stop selling and recall from dealers and distributors two versions of its MS-DOS operating system, which is by far the most commonly used personal computer software.
The ruling, issued late Thursday, exempts consumers and most business customers using the software from any penalty.


Henry J. Tumen, Gastroenterologist, 92
Dr.
Henry J. Tumen, a pioneer in the development of gastroenterology as a medical specialty, died yesterday at the Unitarian Universalist House in Philadelphia.
Dr.
Tumen, who lived in Philadelphia, was 92.
His death was announced by the Graduate Hospital of Philadelphia, with which Dr.
Tumen had been affiliated.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.17
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.10
4.09
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.51
4.48
3.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.01
6.95
5.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.31
7.27
6.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.14
8.09
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.16
6.16
5.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Temple With No Place For God Seeks a Place
After 14 years as an independent temple, Congregation Beth Adam wants to join the national Reform Jewish organization because, in its rabbi's words, the time has come "to be part of something bigger than ourselves."
But when the time comes this weekend to discuss its application to the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, members of the congregation will encounter opposition because their liturgy does not explicitly acknowledge something bigger than them all: God.


Canucks Navigate Comeback Trail
The Canucks traveled this road earlier in these playoffs.
Down by 3-1, they faced elimination in five games by Calgary; they responded by winning three games in overtime to start their valiant march to the Stanley Cup finals.
The Canucks will have another chance to write the comeback script against the Rangers tonight in Game 6 of the Stanley Cup finals because they did several things well, strategically and physically, in their 6-3 triumph over the Rangers Thursday night at Madison Square Garden.


Greek Team Offers Millions to Kukoc
If the Chicago Bulls don't want to pay the salary TONI KUKOC requests, a Greek team is more than eager to sign the Croatian star.


12 Children Are Injured as a School Van Overturns


Three Winners Named In Piano Competition
The Juilliard School has named the winners of its 1994 Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition.
They are Blair McMillen, a 24-year-old from San Francisco, and Theodora Satolia, 19, from Greece, both in the college division, and Eun Kyung Lee, 16, a Korean, of the pre-college division.
All three are to receive full tuition for the 1994-95 school year; in addition, the first two are to receive expenses for the year and will be soloists in a recital on Sept. 28 at 9 P.M. that will be broadcast live on WQXR-FM (96.3).


Reyna Sidelined, but Not for World Cup
CLAUDIO REYNA, who could be an important midfield player for the United States World Cup team, strained a right hamstring during a team practice in Mission Viejo, Calif., on Thursday and is expected to be out for five or six days.
The 20-year-old Reyna, a former two-time Hermann Award winner as the best collegiate player in America while at the University of Virginia, is the youngest player on the American team.


Dean Nearer To Acquiring Food Canner
A year-old battle for control of Curtice-Burns Foods Inc., a maker of private- and brand-label canned foods, came to a turning point yesterday when its directors accepted an offer from the Dean Foods Company with an effective value of $453 million.
But the deal, consisting of an offer of $172 million for shareholders and the assumption of $280 million in debt, is contingent on the settlement of a long-running financial dispute with Pro-Fac Cooperative Inc.
Curtice-Burns, which is based in Rochester, was founded in 1961 by 700 members of the cooperative to process produce harvested from local fields and farms, mostly in Midwestern states.


No Headline
We are trying to put together a monument to the guys who died, and so we have rehashed a lot of awful feelings.
Can the Rangers mean something to us?
Yeah, it's been a solace. - PAT RUDDICK, captain of the New York firehouse that lost three men in a fire this year.  [ 24:1. ]


INSIDE
Nuclear Test by China
Secure in the renewal of American trade privileges, China exploded a hydrogen bomb as part of a series of nuclear-oriented tests.
Page 7.
Mixed Report on Inflation
A Government report showed that producer prices edged down one-tenth of 1 percent in May.
Page 37.
Ruling Against Microsoft
A judge ordered Microsoft to stop selling two popular versions of its computer software.
Page 37.
Medieval Same-Sex Riteual
A Yale professor says a prayer dating to 1147 A.D. suggests a Christian gay marriage ceremony.
Page 27.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Shultz Fires a Record 22 Aces in Victory  Brenda Shultz served 22 aces yesterday -- the most by a woman in a singles match -- and moved into the semifinals of the women's grass-court tournament in Birmingham, England.
Shultz of the Netherlands, seeded fifth, served her way to a 6-4, 5-7, 6-0 victory over No. 3 Iva Majoli.
The 22 aces topped her own record of 16, set at Wimbledon in 1989 against Monica Seles.
Shultz will face the defending champion, second-seeded Lori McNeil, in the semifinals.
McNeil defeated No. 14 Joanette Kruger of South Africa, 6-3, 6-4.
The other semifinal will be between top-seeded Zina Garrison-Jackson and No. 4 Nathalie Tauziat. (AP)
Edberg Is Toppled: Fifth-seeded Todd Martin upset third-seeded Stefan Edberg, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Queen's Club grass-court tournament in London.
Top-seeded Pete Sampras scored a 6-1, 6-4 victory over eighth-seeded Wayne Ferreira, and unseeded Jan Apell and Christo van Rensburg also advanced. (AP) CYCLING Ukrainian Wins Tour of Italy Stage  Vladimir Poulnikov of Ukraine edged Nelson Rodriguez of Colombia in the final sprint to win the 20th stage of the Tour of Italy yesterday.
The overall leader, Yevgeny Berzin of Russia, held his lead of 2 minutes 55 seconds over Marco Pantani of Italy.
The race ends tomorrow with a 122-mile stage from Turin to Milan. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Powell Leaps to Long-Jump Victory  Mike Powell of the United States, the world record-holder at 29-4 1/2, took the long jump with a leap of 27 feet 6 inches yesterday at a meet in St.
Denis, France.
Powell beat Stanislaus Tarasenko of Russia, who finished second to Powell at last year's world championships. (AP) GOLF Nine Birdies Help Give Gilbert Early Lead  Returning to his old putter, Gibby Gilbert collected nine birdies, shot a seven-under-par 65 yesterday and took a one-shot lead after the opening round of the PGA Senior Tour Nationwide Championship in Alpharetta, Ga.
Bruce Devlin and Jim Albus each posted 66's, with Devlin missing a share of the lead when he three-putted the final hole from 15 feet for a bogey. (AP)


F.C.C. Can't Force the Bells To Let In Rivals, Court Says
In a decision hailed by the Bell telephone companies as a victory, a Federal appeals court overturned new regulations today that were intended to force local phone companies to accept more competition.
Industry analysts said the ruling was likely to give traditional telephone monopolies extra breathing room from competition, mainly by creating legal uncertainties for both Federal and state regulators.


A Credit Card With a Little Bonus for Retirement
David DuBois, 37, of Norwalk, Conn., is the chief operating officer of a drug rehabilitation center based in Minneapolis, and trevels around teh country on business.
Last year, he got a credit card called the Start card, which funnels a small portion of his total purchases into a tax-deferred annuity.
He said he checked into other rebate cards but found most useless.
"I don't need frequent flier miles because I travel so much anyway," he said.
"And I found that the others were so confusing, I couldn't figure out how to make them work for me."


Bramalea Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Matthew Cohen, 41; Founded a Museum Of U.S. Culture Icons
Matthew S. Cohen, an artist, graphic designer and a founder of the Museum of Modern Mythology in San Francisco, died on June 2 at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 41.
The cause was non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, said Ellen Havre Weis, the museum's executive director.


U.S. BARS FLIGHTS AND MONEY DEALS WITH THE HAITIANS
President Clinton announced two measures today to increase pressure on Haitian military leaders and their wealthy supporters: a halt to commercial flights between Haiti and the United States and a ban on financial transactions between the two countries.
Administration officials said the ban should hit rich Haitians hard because many of them have bank accounts or investments in the United States.
The ban, which takes effect immediately, will prevent Haitians from wiring money from their American accounts to Haiti or from making deposits in American accounts.


Jamesway's Chief Shifts To Ames
In a move that may have sounded the death knell for the Jamesway Corporation, the ailing discount chain's president and chief executive unexpectedly announced his departure yesterday to become president and chief executive of a bigger rival, Ames Department Stores Inc.
Joseph R. Ettore, 55, is replacing Peter Thorner, president and chief operating officer of Ames, who resigned to pursue other interests, Ames said.
Mr.
Thorner, who last year led Ames to its first profit in five years, could not be reached for comment yesterday.


Rostenkowski Donors Had Stakes in Bills
Representative Dan Rostenkowski raised more than $750,000 last year for his legal defense from a wide array of powerful interests that had stakes in the legislation handled by the committee he headed until his recent 17-count indictment on corruption charges.
As Mr.
Rostenkowski pleaded not guilty today in Federal District Court here, the House released his financial disclosure statement, including an 11-page list of donors who gave to his defense fund last year.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-7  CLINTON TIGHTENS HAITI SANCTIONS  Seeking to step up pressure on Haiti's leaders to resign, President Clinton said he would halt commercial flights and ban financial transactions between the two countries.  1  Affluent Haitians are beginning to feel the pinch of sanctions.  6  U.S.
TOUGHENS THREAT TO KOREA  The Clinton Administration sent a firmer message that it will secure tough economic sanctions against North Korea, which is now threatening to sever all ties with nuclear inspectors.  7  CHINA TESTS A HYDROGEN BOMB  China exploded a hydrogen bomb in a remote western province as part of a series of underground tests.
Two people were killed and scores were hurt in the violence since Thursday.  6  COMING OF AGE, WITHOUT WALLS  Berlin Journal: In the old East Germany, the Jugendweihe symbolized not only the passage from childhood into maturity, but a commitment to Marxism.
SCORES  The average high school student's combined math and verbal S.A.T. score will soon rise 100 points.
But no one is getting smarter.  1  MUST JEWS RECOGNIZE GOD?
The makings of a Haiti policy.
Justice Powell's new wisdom.
The Manila folder.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: The legal drug.
Russell Baker: Our meter is deranged.
Dick Teresi: Physics is history.
Alisa Solomon: The prison on Varick Street.
Bridge 17 Chronicle 22 Crossword 15


Vandalism Raises the Specter of Racial Hatred in Glen Ridge
The weapons have not been very big.
Some eggs thrown at houses and cars, some rocks, a broken floodlight.
Probably just kids.
But it has been enough to make people here ask themselves, how do you deal with hate?
Do you make it a big deal?
Or do you just wait it out and hope it disappears?
The targets of the eggs and rocks include the houses of Jewish families and of a mixed-race couple with a black Hispanic husband and a white wife.
Some residents said a home with several adopted Asian children had been the subject of harassing telephone calls, but this could not be independently verified; the police, citing confidentiality, are withholding all details.


U.S. Blacks Gather to Chart a Path
In his 80 years on this earth, Charles Swailes has watched his fellow blacks humiliated by Jim Crow and lynched by its offspring.
But thank the Lord, he says, he has also lived long enough to cheer and cry with the other old men and women when a little black boy grew up and became Mayor of Baltimore.
"We've made a lot of progress since the 60's," Mr.
Swailes said here today.
"But now we're in a heap of trouble again. I sure hope we can come up with a program to straighten out this mess. I don't want to die with a broken heart."


No Schizophrenic Vets Suffered Harm in Bronx V.A. Tests
To the Editor:
"House Panel Told of More Tests Done Without Consent" (news article, May 24) reports on a Congressional hearing in which experts in medical ethics testified on cases where researchers had without proper consent withdrawn medication from schizophrenic patients.
These occurred at the Veterans Hospital in the Bronx, where Dr.
Michael Davidson allegedly led a study in which, according to you, 28 patients were withdrawn from therapy and given a drug "intended to make their symptoms worse" and "allowed to become severely ill" as "researchers counted off the time it took for relapse to occur."
These allegations constitute nothing less than character assassination of Dr.
Davidson and an indictment of our psychiatry research program and our human studies subcommittee, which oversees human research.
Let us describe what really was done.


In a Split Second at Summit, Knicks Square Series
It was a game the Knicks felt they had to win, and they played like it.
They made big shots, particularly Derek Harper and John Starks.
They made crucial defensive plays, particularly Patrick Ewing and Anthony Mason.
And when the final buzzer had sounded, the Knicks had not only tied the four-of-seven-game National Basketball Association finals at one victory apiece, they had changed the momentum of the series and had given the Houston Rockets plenty to think about.
Winning their first game in Houston since 1988, the Knicks captured the home-court advantage with a 91-83 victory in Game 2 tonight at the Summit.
The series shifts to Madison Square Garden for the next three games, beginning with Game 3 Sunday night.
The home team has never swept Games 3, 4, and 5 since the league switched to a 2-3-2 travel format for the finals in 1985.
But the Knicks have a 9-1 home record during the playoffs, and if they can win three in a row they will capture their first championship since 1973.


Justice Powell's New Wisdom
Too late for Warren McCleskey and numerous other executed prisoners, retired Justice Lewis Powell now concedes that he was wrong to cast the deciding fifth Supreme Court vote to uphold Mr.
McCleskey's death sentence in a major case.
But it is not too late for Congress to correct the Court's mistake and try to remove the stain of racial prejudice from the death penalty in America.
Justice Powell's acknowledgment appears in a new biography by John Jeffries, a law professor at the University of Virginia.
Asked whether he would change his vote in any of the cases that had come before him, the Justice replied: "Yes, McCleskey v. Kemp." Indeed, he added that he now found capital punishment itself unworkable and would vote against it in any case.


Hockey and Rodeo Part of Knicks' Mix
Dear N.B.A. Finals Diary:
I may have reached the point of hallucination.


U.S. Filter Corp.(USF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 14


Fedders Corp.(FJQ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Nerve of Anti-Smoking Zealots!
To the Editor:
As Russell Baker eloquently avers in "The Danger Stage" (column, May 31), the anti-smoking crusade is growing ominous.
Take, for example, the assertion that smokers should be punitively taxed because they allegedly account for a disproportionate share of medical expenses.
Sooner or later we are all going to die.
Barring such things as train wrecks and lightning bolts, we will die of something, even if plain old age.
It's silly to assert that someone who dies from smoking-induced problems at 65 is more expensive to society than a nonsmoker who dies at 85 from coronary disease.
The difference is longevity, not cost, and the question is when, not if, we will be a medical expense.
Alzheimer's disease is no less expensive than lung cancer. (The smoker may be owed a refund for not costing taxpayers 20 years of Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid.)


Connecticut Shuts Down Boot Camp for Troubled Teen-Agers
The nation's first National Guard boot camp for troubled teen-agers, which opened last summer in Connecticut as a national model, was ordered closed today by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. after an investigation substantiated reports of gang activity, drug use, violence and inadequate staffing.
The camp's supervisor has also resigned, National Guard officials said.


Fraud Case Is Considered For Dismissal
A Federal judge today rebuked the Government for allowing the destruction of business records of an armored car company whose operators have been accused of stealing $38 million from their customers and said that he would have to consider dismissing the case because of the lost material.
At a hearing this morning in Federal District Court here, Judge Arthur D. Spatt expressed disbelief that investigators had not saved thousands of documents that Revere Armored Inc. of Bohemia, L.I., had stored in a Connecticut warehouse.
The records were thrown away last summer by the building's landlord, several months after the Government had seized the company's assets.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about a literary agent who helped bring the works of European authors to the United States misspelled his surname.
He was Kurt Bernheim.


U.S. Is Pressing Sanctions for North Korea
As North Korea threatened to sever all ties with international nuclear inspectors, the Clinton Administration sought today to signal its determination to win approval of tough economic sanctions against the North, a message intended in part to overcome news reports of internal and international divisions.
In an unusually explicit speech, a senior Defense Department official also announced that the United States had intensified its intelligence operations in the region to analyze how and when North Korea might use nuclear or other weapons if fighting began on the Korean Peninsula.


Producer Prices Send Mixed Signal
In a mixed report on inflation, prices received by American producers edged down one-tenth of 1 percent for the second consecutive month in May, but only because of big declines in food and energy prices, Labor Department figures showed today.
Without those components, which often swing erratically in response to the weather or political developments, the Producer Price Index for Finished Goods climbed four-tenths of 1 percent, a pace a little faster than expected.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Purchased the contract of Bruce Dostal, outfielder, from Rochester of the International League.
Sent Tom Wegmann, pitcher, outright to Rochester.
National League  NEW YORK METS -- Signed Robert Cox, infielder, and Steven Arffa and Ross Wicks, pitchers.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Placed Willie McGee, outfielder, on the emergency 60-day disabled list, retroactive to June 8.
Recalled Rikkert Faneyte, outfielder, from Phoenix of the Pacific Coast League.
Football National Football League  CAROLINA PANTHERS -- Named Al Shuford assistant trainer.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Sebastian Barrie, defensive end; Derek Crenshaw, linebacker; Larry Wallace, wide receiver, and Jon Kiksey, defensive tackle.
Waived Bill Musgrave, quarterback, and John Johnson and P.J.
Preston, linebackers.
Canadian Football League  LAS VEGAS POSSE -- Waived Brent Huff, Bruce Plummer, Willie Cannon and Tyrone Ashley, defensive backs; Mike Forch, offensive tackle; Corey Ray, Joe Mickles, Chris Armstrong, Larry Thompson, Tremelle Taylor and Nate Burchette, wide receivers; Tim Sitala and Ken Voines, offensive linemen; Romero Brice, Ernie Lewis, Diron Reynolds and Joe Ruplslauk, linebackers; Zedrick Robinson, running back; Shane Brandon, defensive lineman; and Derrick Kelson, cornerback.
Suspended Len Gomes, nose tackle; John Leach, running back; and Derick Shepard, wide receiver.
Announced the retirement of Stefan Adams, wide receiver.
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Re-signed Manny Hazard, slotback, and Reggie Pleasant, cornerback.
American Hockey League  AHL -- Announced that Moncton has ceased operations.


Why Does U.S. Let Beijing Tell Us What to Do?; Our Best Leverage
To the Editor:
In "Trade, the Real Engine of Democracy" (Op-Ed, May 25), Senator Bill Bradley has sought the stillbirth of linking trade privileges to human rights before the concept gets a chance to experience life.
In dealing with China, he ignore our nation's proud heritage of principles over crass commercialism.
For example, there has been overwhelming support in Congress and the Presidency for economic sanctions as a tool to end apartheid in South Africa and restore democracy in Haiti.
China's harsh repression of political dissidents, students and trade unionists is no less deserving of available nonmilitary actions to influence that government's behavior.


Gun Purchase Is Checked in Shooting of 4
Federal and New Jersey gun-control laws are intended to control purchases of handguns by those who have been committed to mental institutions or received any kind of psychiatric treatment.
But the law's provisions are not ironclad.
Loopholes and vaguely worded restrictions in both laws have come to light in the aftermath of the shooting of four guests at a hotel pool here by a 46-year-old man who the authorities say has been treated for paranoid schizophrenia for the last 10 years.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Pepsico Inc.'s projected second-quarter profits misstated the ownership of Lipton tea in some editions.
Lipton is owned by Unilever N.V., not Pepsico.
The article also misstated the stock prices for two other companies.
Coca-Cola's shares finished down $1, not $1.25, at $40.625, and Grand Metropolitan's American depository receipts finished off 37.5 cents, at $25.75, not down 75 cents, at $55.75.


IN PERFORMANCE
THEATER They're Only Blind, Not Humor Impaired  Judith Anderson Theater
While the Gay Games don't begin until next Saturday, a group of performers at the Judith Anderson Theater (442 West 42d Street, Clinton) are presenting a fantasy Olympics-style competition for another minority.
It is called the Blink Games, and the events include finding paper towels in rest rooms, navigating a hazardous course through Bloomingdale's china shop and matching socks into pairs.
The contestants include Nancy Kerrigan's mother, who gets hit in the knees by a man with a white cane, and they are all visually impaired.


What to Do With the Children?; Some Views on Navigating Summer With the Little Ones
In the middle of winter, Carol Krause was on the telephone making summer plans for her 4-year-old daughter and 8-year-old son.
Now, as the school year ends, the summer looms ominously.
"I call it logistics from hell," she said.


The Citadel Seeks a Mistrial in Woman's Lawsuit
Lawyers for The Citadel requested a mistrial yesterday in the sex discrimination case brought by Shannon R. Faulkner, asserting that the judge presiding over the trial in Charleston, S.C., might have already made up his mind to end 150 years of tradition.
Miss Faulkner, 19, who is seeking to join the school's corps of cadets, sued after she was denied admission to the all-male military college in Charleston.
A Federal court order has allowed her to attend day classes at the school until the case is resolved.


Bridge
A long-shot contract came to the rescue of a long-shot team Wednesday night in the Greater New York Bridge Association's Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship.
Jerry Goldberg of Yonkers, Bob Jaffe of Long Island City, Queens, Jane Dillenberg, Nancy Kalow and Jeff Rothstein, all of Manhattan, were originally seeded 23d in the field of 34 teams, but defeated several top-ranked squads and were the only undefeated team.
But defeat now loomed against a team led by Dorothy Truscott of Riverdale, the Bronx.
With one deal left play at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, the Goldberg team trailed by 6 imps.
The players did not know that, but Dillenberg, as South, suspected it.
She was therefore ready for a do-or-die venture on the diagramed deal.


Nominee Has A Net Worth Of $8 Million
Judge Stephen G. Breyer, President Clinton's nominee to the Supreme Court, has a net worth of more than $8.5 million, which may make him the wealthiest member of the Court if he is confirmed.
In documents submitted to the Senate Judiciary Committee, Judge Breyer and his wife, Joanna Hare Breyer, reported having about $2.8 million in stocks and nearly $2 million in equity in four residences, including a vacation home on St.
Kitts in the Caribbean and part ownership of an apartment in London.
Mrs.
Breyer's mother holds the remaining interest in the London apartment.


Rostenkowski, At Courthouse, Vows to Prevail
Representative Dan Rostenkowski pleaded not guilty today to a 17-count criminal indictment and emerged minutes later on the steps of the Federal Courthouse here to level a defiant blast at Federal prosecutors.
"I will be vindicated!" Mr.
Rostenkowski shouted, as he read from a prepared statement.
"I will fight these false charges and will prevail!"


Abortion Foes' Court Losses Are Frustrating the Victors
With millions of dollars in court judgments and a new Federal law barring demonstrators from obstructing access to abortion clinics, it might seem that abortion rights groups have won the decadelong battle over clinic blockades -- and been well-compensated in the process.
But the money has proved almost impossible to collect from the individuals and anti-abortion groups that have lost in court -- groups like Operation Rescue and Rescue America.
And abortion rights organizations are beginning to acknowledge their frustration.


Value City Department Stores Inc.(VCD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Brown-Forman Corp.(BF.B,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


The Manila Folder
Credit President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines with blunt honesty in explaining why he bowed to Indonesian pressure and censored a conference in Manila on East Timor.
"What was at stake here?" Mr.
Ramos remarked to reporters.
"Some 15 billion pesos  [$700 million ]  worth of investments, projects, enterprises and agreed partnerships or consortiums."
For that consideration, the Philippine Government prohibited foreigners from taking part in the Manila meeting, barring Danielle Mitterrand, wife of the French President, and deporting the Irish Nobel Peace laureate Mairead Maguire.


Japanese Emperor Begins U.S. Visit


Els Is Making a Name Known at Westchester
In terms of big-time golf, he nearly qualifies as a minor.
He is just 24 years old, and his smooth, unlined face could belong to a teen-ager.
But in terms of the game, Ernie Els is a major player, a big-time talent on the verge of some very big things.
He gave another indication of that today at Westchester Country Club, where he went around in 66 strokes, without a bogey, and took over the lead after two rounds of the Buick Classic.
Els, who plays his best golf on difficult courses, stands at 134, eight under par, and holds a one-stroke lead over Mike Reid and a two-stroke lead over Joe Ozaki, who shot 67.


Boy, 9, in Recovery After Being Burned
A 9-year-old Brooklyn boy was recuperating yesterday from burns, caused, the police said, when an 11-year-old set the boy on fire by spraying him with flaming roach poison.
The victim, Garfield Stevenson, was in stable condition at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center's burn unit after suffering second-degree burns on his back and hands, his family and hospital officials said.


S.A.T. Increases the Average Score, by Fiat
The S.A.T. score of the average American high school student will soon be going up 100 points.
However, that doesn't mean that anyone is getting smarter.
Beginning in April 1995, the College Board, based in Manhattan, will be recalibrating its scoring of the Scholastic Assessment Test.
The bottom score will still be 200 and the top 800, but it will be easier for everyone to get higher scores.


Critic's Notebook; Jazz Turns Young, Both in the Audience And on Top Stages
Late on a wet, windy night not long ago, a couple of young jazz musicians named Craig Handy and Kenny Garrett were playing at the Village Vanguard and Sweet Basil.
Nothing unusual about that.
What was unusual was the size and age of the crowds at these two venerable Greenwich Village clubs.
While Mr.
Handy and Mr.
Garrett are saxophonists of much promise, they are not widely known.
Neither has fulfilled his potential and neither has cultivated a loyal following.
Yet midweek late shows for both players drew audiences that were large (for jazz), enthusiastic and perhaps most revealingly, young, mostly in their 20's.


Yeltsin Prods Government On Economy
Sounding more like an impassioned critic of the administration than its leader, President Boris N. Yeltsin attacked his Government today for dragging its feet on economic reform and failing to protect consumers and the poor.
Mr.
Yeltsin also said he would sign an agreement making Russia a member of the loose alliance known as the Partnership for Peace, which offers a kind of junior partnership in NATO to members of the former Warsaw pact.
Russia delayed joining, insisting that as a former superpower it should have a more important role than other, smaller countries.


No Foul Play, but Death at Prom Is Still Mystery
Investigators have ruled out foul play in the death of a high-school senior on Thursday after she was struck by a falling piece of pipe at the New York Hall of Science in Queens, but they still do not know why the pipe was in the building or how it fell.
Police Detective Frank Hunt said the department had ruled the death of Micha Chatmon, 17 years old, to have been an accident.
The pipe apparently fell from a catwalk that stretches across the ceiling.
Detective Hunt said it appeared to have been there for some time.


Bring Ticket Stub To View Rangers
If you're making plans to attend the video presentation of Game 6 of the Rangers-Canucks series from Vancouver tonight at Madison Square Garden, don't forget your ticket stub.
Individual tickets to the event are sold out, the Rangers announced yesterday.
However, fans with ticket stubs marked home games 1, 2, or 3 of the Stanley Cup finals will be admitted free, until all seats are filled.


Rison's Girlfriend Charged in Home Fire
The hip-hop performer LISA (LEFT EYE) LOPES surrendered to authorities yesterday on charges that she set fire to the two-story mansion belonging to her boyfriend, Atlanta Falcons receiver ANDRE RISON, and smashed his cars.
Lopes, 22, a singer with the group TLC, is accused of felony arson and criminal damage to property in Alpharetta, Ga.
The house, which Rison bought for $861,000 in 1992, was destroyed in the Thursday blaze.


A Community Grieves for Victims of a Hit and Run Driver


A Perot Systems Deal With SHL Is Suggested
The Perot Systems Corporation is considering a partnership or possibly a merger with SHL Systemhouse Inc., Canada's largest independent computer services company, several people familiar with the discussions said today.
The two companies refused to comment, but they appear to have strong motives for joining.
SHL, based in Ottawa, is an acquisition-minded company that wants to expand its business in the United States.
Perot Systems needs a big corporate brother that can help shove back the industry's bullies.
The companies are following similar strategies of helping customers shift from large mainframe computers to networks of desktop machines.
Slowing Sales Growth
Perot Systems was founded six years ago by Ross Perot, who is still the major stockholder but has turned management over to Morton Meyerson, who is now the chief executive.


Corrections
An entry in the Addenda listing on the Media Business page on May 31 about the 18th annual One Show awards competition, sponsored by the One Club for Art and Copy of New York, included an erroneous identification supplied by the club's press representative for one top winner.
The winner was the Portland, Ore., office of Cole &amp; Weber, not its Seattle office.


IN PERFORMANCE
CLASSICAL MUSIC  Mozart Piano Concertos Presented by Chamber Group Weill Recital Hall
Max Barros, an enterprising fortepianist who was born in California and reared in Brazil, has put together an ensemble of young period instrument players to explore the chamber music of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
Actually, chamber music may restrict the definition unduly: on Wednesday evening, the Barros Classical Consort included two piano concertos in its all-Mozart program.


China Explodes H-Bomb in Underground Test
China exploded a hydrogen bomb today as part of a series of underground tests aimed at modernizing its nuclear forces before test ban negotiations are concluded by 1996.
The test appeared to Western diplomats to have been delayed so as not to antagonize the Clinton Administration as it was deciding last month to cut the linkage between China's human rights record and trade relations with the United States.


Rangers' Run Is Slowed by Canucks' Rush
Of all the overwhelming images the Rangers left a continent away -- the police presence around Madison Square Garden and the intense demand of "We want the cup" inside -- the most significant memory was the most surprising.
It is the sight of black-shirted Vancouver Canucks in a succession of odd-man rushes: three on two, two on one, a series of opportunities that the Rangers had managed to prevent on their way to a once-commanding position in the Stanley Cup finals.
That position has been threatened by Vancouver's five third-period goals, a record for the finals, which produced a 6-3 victory in Game 5 Thursday night and brought the Canucks to within a game of tying the four-of-seven-game final with Game 6 here Saturday evening.


IN PERFORMANCE
POP Bassist Returns to New York With a New Band Around Him  Sweet Basil
The bassist Dave Holland opened the third tune of his set, "The Procession," on Tuesday night with a quietly bowed introduction.
He began walking a bass line, and his tempo -- slow, smooth and unpredictable -- had a gorgeous 4 A.M. eeriness to it that suggested that Mr.
Holland was in complete control of his skills as a band leader.


Russia Pledges to Join NATO Partnership
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia today set aside his country's reservations about a NATO plan that enhances military cooperation with its former enemies and reaffirmed Russia's commitment to join it.
Mr.
Kozyrev did not say exactly when that would happen, but senior American officials expressed confidence that it was likely to occur before President Boris N. Yeltsin participates in a summit meeting of the world's seven industrialized countries in Naples next month.


Gotti's Lawyer Is Sentenced For Comments In Contempt
In a case anxiously watched by criminal defense lawyers, Bruce Cutler, John Gotti's lawyer, was sentenced today to three months of house arrest and suspended from practice in some Federal courts for six months because of remarks he made to the press in defiance of a judge's orders.
The case has been seen as a test of a Federal court rule that limits lawyers in their public remarks that could affect the fairness of a trial.
Many lawyers have said they routinely speak to the press about a client as a counterweight to remarks made by prosecutors.


Risk Is No Stranger To Government Funds
Here's a quick test for investors in government bond mutual funds.
Is your fund: a) a stable and secure portfolio of conservative government-backed bonds or b) a leveraged pool of highly complex securities managed through esoteric computer models?
Most people will answer a, because that's how their fund was marketed.
But the correct answer is often b.
The trouble is nobody may know until it's too late.


Beliefs; A study of medieval rituals in same-sex unions raises a question: what were they solemnizing?
If these words, taken from a manuscript preserved in the Vatican and dating from the year 1147, were for a bride and bridegroom, no one would find them startling:
"Send down, most kind Lord, the grace of Thy Holy Spirit upon these Thy servants, whom Thou hast found worthy to be united not by nature but by faith and a holy spirit. Grant unto them Thy grace to love each other in joy without injury or hatred all the days of their lives."


Grand Union Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 2


India Opposes All Racial Discrimination
To the Editor:
Bob Herbert states in "Outrage in Boston" (column, May 25) that the United States Government has an interest in knowing if a foreign head of government has "been fostering racial discrimination." This was apropos the stay of Prime Minister P.V.
Narasimha Rao of India at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston in mid-May, in which, Mr.
Herbert states, "the Prime Minister had to be served by whites only."
Mr.
Herbert was jumping to conclusions.
Not only was the case against the hotel settled the day that the column was published, but also the record shows there was absolutely no Indian attempt to foster racial discrimination.
The Government of India has categorically stated there was no question of any Indian agency's asking its American counterparts to discriminate for race or color.
No such request was made to the United States agency responsible for the Prime Minister's security or to anyone else.


REX Stores Corp.(RSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


The Makings of a Haiti Policy
After months of ineffective fumbling and a brief, misguided lurch toward the hasty use of military force, the Clinton Administration finally seems headed in the right direction on Haiti.
The two new sanctions announced yesterday -- banning commercial airline flights and large private financial transactions -- are modest in themselves.
But Washington expects other countries to reinforce these U.S. measures with their own travel and financial restrictions.


CHRONICLE
The invitation said, "Come surprise Amazing Grace on her big birthday."
Dr.
WILLIAM CAHAN, a cancer specialist, gave a surprise birthday party for his wife, GRACE MIRABELLA, the founding editor and publication director of Mirabella magazine, at the couple's town house on the Upper East Side on Thursday night.


Stewart Enterprises (STEI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Physics Is History
For the past year, ever since the superconducting supercollider began its inexorable march toward extinction, there have been rumors in the scientific community that physics is dead.
According to the doomsayers, experimental physicists no longer have the accelerators with which to discover "new physics," and theorists are merely conjuring up beautiful mathematical fantasies with no hope of verifying them.
Then, in April, scientists at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, Ill., announced that they had convincing evidence to support the existence of the so-called top quark.
The top quark is the final missing elementary particle in what physicists call the Standard Model, the prevailing theory of particles and forces that explains how the universe is composed.
The discovery of the top quark, if confirmed, may turn out to be the biggest scientific event of the decade.
Optimists rejoiced, proclaiming physics alive and well.


It's Harper, It's Harper, and Just When It Counts
The word down here in Texas is that Derek Harper has always had Kenny Smith's number, that he routinely dominated the Rockets' point guard when Harper was in Dallas, playing for the Mavericks.
That was not hard to believe, watching Harper dominate Smith here tonight, cut him off at the point of attack the way he did Kenny Anderson way back in the first round.
While all discussions of the National Basketball Association finals begin with Patrick Ewing and Hakeem Olajuwon, the Knicks' 91-83 victory in Game 2 last night had their starting point's stamp all over it.


Corruption, Too, Is in the Eye of the Beholder
AT a time when contempt for Congress is so widespread that incumbents run for re-election on anti-government platforms, a powerful Representative facing a 17-count indictment may seem an unlikely object of sympathy.
Yet under the Capitol dome and throughout the rest of Washington, there are many who insist that Representative Dan Rostenkowski is being railroaded by zealous prosecutors imposing new ethical standards on common old practices.


The Bright Side of 'Secret Garden'
AS a musical about an orphan "The Secret Garden" has thoroughbred antecedents.
"Oliver!" and "Annie" come obviously to mind.
"Damn Yankees" and "High Spirits" are among its forerunners in the haunted-story department.
And with recurring waltz sequences, suddenly materializing sopranos and a darkly austere mood, the show recedes into the shadow of "A Little Night Music," as if expecting another source to send in the ghosts.
Even the ultimate theme of floral uplift evokes another musical, "Candide," and its finale, "Make Our Garden Grow."


Her Mission: To Stir Up More Fun
IN 1964, RUDOLF BING, THE GENERAL MANAGER of the Metropolitan Opera, said of the newly formed Lincoln Center that it was "deteriorating into a free-for-all jungle." The next five years saw almost constant conflicts among the Met, the New York City Opera, the New York Philharmonic and the New York City Ballet, organizations that had at great risk and expense made the experimental arts center their new home.
In 1967, John D. Rockefeller 3d, the chairman of the center's board, noted "feelings of mistrust, fear, competition and even bitterness" among the center's constituents.
With recurring budgetary crises, it often looked doubtful that the institution that had created the phrase "performing arts" would survive.
Tomorrow, Beverly Sills -- retired soprano, virtuoso fund-raiser, ebullient former director of the New York City Opera and member of the board of the Metropolitan Opera -- will assume the post Rockefeller once filled, heading the Lincoln Center board.
Miss Sills recently discussed her latest career move in her comfortable ninth-floor office in the center's new Rose Building, overlooking the complex.


In Ukraine, Barren Ground for Farm Reform
Marija and Ivan Olishchuk, a middle-aged couple with faces worn beyond their years and hands creased from working the soil, should represent the future of farming in the former Soviet Union.
They understand the concept of profit and know the imperative of private land.
They hold about 50 acres of their own.
But for the last two years, as the couple have coaxed higher yields of potatoes and carrots and wheat from their earth, they have been blocked at every turn by the state.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Consumer prices, May, pct. change
0.1
0.3
Retail sales, May, percent change
-0.8
-0.1
Wednesday
Industrial production, May, pct. chg.
0.3
0.2
Business inventories, April, pct. change
-0.2
0.2
Thursday
Housing starts, May, mils, ann. rate
1.46
1.43
Housing permits, May, mils, ann. rate
1.38
1.36
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
358
355
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Atlanta Fed business survey
Wednesday
Fed to release beige book
2- and 5-year note auction announcement
Thursday
Philadelphia Fed business survey


Barbara Agoglia, Kevin F. O'Connor
Barbara Anne Agoglia, the director of the Paul Kasmin Gallery in New York, was married yesterday to Kevin Francis O'Connor, a sales consultant at Rallye Motors in Roslyn, L.I.
The Rev.
Norris Clarke performed the ceremony at St.
Gertrude's Roman Catholic Church in Bayville, L.I.


Separatists in Georgia Look to Russia for Protection
On a dirt road that has become the border between Georgia and the breakaway province of South Ossetia, an impromptu market offered such items as pots and pans, cigarettes and bottled mineral water that were displayed on cars in an open field.
Because of another ethnic conflict on Russia's southern flank, the sellers were Georgians no longer allowed to enter Ossetia, and the buyers Ossetians unable to find what they needed in the anemic markets in Tskhinvali, the capital of South Ossetia, a province in northern Georgia.


The Executive Life; Flip Side of Success For Agent at Cannes
TRY as she might, the talent agent Bobbi Thompson just couldn't find time to find talent at Cannes this year.
With its nonstop screenings, around-the-clock parties and horde of self-promoters, the annual Cannes Film Festival has always been a good hunting ground for Hollywood's next best and brightest.
But it proved such fertile ground for Ms.
Thompson last year that most of her time at this year's festival last month was spent escorting her new star director to meetings, dinners, parties and celebrity introductions.


Corrections
A front-page contents entry in the Arts and Leisure section today refers incorrectly in some copies to the American Ballet Theater's history at the Metropolitan Opera.
This is the company's second season at the Met under its present artistic leadership, not its second season at the Met.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Dr. Mary S. Hartman; Heading the Restructuring of Education
MARY S. HARTMAN, dean of Douglass College, has gone from the relative obscurity of her quiet, ivy-covered campus here to the epicenter of a dispute over the future of higher education in New Jersey.
"No question, it is the toughest assignment I have ever had here," said Dr.
Hartman.
She was referring to her appointment by Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman to head a 15-member advisory panel that is taking a hard look at the structure of higher education in New Jersey.


Paris Hotel
To the Editor: I had a bad experience in February at a Paris hotel that has been mentioned twice in the Travel section (March 11, 1990, and Oct. 7, 1990) -- the Michelet Odeon, 6 Place de l'Odeon.
The hotel was undergoing renovation, although I was not informed in advance.
When I arrived at 9 A.M. on Feb. 24, the reception desk told me to return at noon because my room was not ready.
I returned and on the third floor found tarpaulins and construction debris all over the hallway.
The rooms were missing numbers and most had no doorknobs or locks.
Two workers were hammering and drilling.
My room at the end of the hallway did have a doorknob and other than a thin coating of plaster dust, was ready for occupancy.


A WRINKLE IN TIME
I wonder if anyone else noted a discrepancy in your Style feature "A Wrinkle in Time" (May 22)?
A splendid quote from Anna Magnani is followed by the face of a young female model, with no wrinkles.
This is followed by a picture of a man, with wrinkles.
How boring.
The wrinkles of a man have always been acceptable.
VICTORIA CHARKUT New York, N.Y.


Breathing Easier After the Last Shipment of Radioactive Waste
Residents and officials of Williamsburg breathed a collective sigh of relief last week as Radiac Research Corporation reported plans to ship out all that remains of its low-level radioactive waste products within the next month.
In 1991, hundreds of residents protested when Radiac was named one of two interim storage sites for radioactive waste in the state.


Sarah E. Burns, Glenn Johnston
Sarah Edith Burns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Burns of New York, was married yesterday to Glenn David Johnston, a son of Kathleen Johnston of Limerick, Ireland, and the late George Johnston.
The Rev.
Richard Burnett performed the ceremony at St.
James Episcopal Church in St.
James, L.I.
The bride, 30, is the manager of the Gazebo, a retail shop selling quilts and other handmade items in New York.
She graduated from Bowdoin College.


Of Steroids And Men's Bodies
To The Editor:
Curiously, steroid use was not addressed in the article on men's body consciousness ("Mirror, Mirror," May 29).
The practice is at least as widespread and inimical to health as eating disorders, and is almost exclusively a male phenomenon.
JOHN BACHER  New York


Logical Alliances
The obituaries are already being prepared for the regional purchasing alliances that are central to both the Clinton plan for health reform and Representative Jim Cooper's alternative.
But before the final verdict, the public has a right to know whether the critics have any real answers to the problems the alliances would address.


Six Smart Guys Sitting Around Talking
FROM ITS PREMISE, "A Glorious Accident" sounds not like an accident but a mistake.
Here we have more than 15 hours of public television -- more than the entire "I, Claudius" series, or Ken Burns's "Civil War" epic -- and what do we see during those vast pampas of time?
Six middle-aged academic scientists sitting around talking.
Admittedly, those talking heads contain some of the most interesting minds alive today.
There is Oliver Sacks, the neurologist, author of "Awakenings" and peerless interpreter of neuropathologies as keys to the dark pockets of human consciousness.
There is Stephen Jay Gould, the paleontologist, evolutionary theorist and inexhaustible science popularizer.
And Freeman Dyson, an eclectic mathematician-physicist-idea-factory, who has proposed that humans will someday harness the energy of black holes and design artificial life forms like the so-called astro-chicken, which could survive in the frigid and lonely vacuum of the cosmos.


June 5-10; Fingerprinting And Welfare
Following California's lead, New York State and New York City moved last week to require more welfare recipients to undergo fingerprinting to qualify for benefits.
To test whether fingeprinting will reduce fraud, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders agreed to expand a two-country pilot program to 12 counties.
They excluded New York City, where two-thirds of the state's welfare recipients live, but Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani vowed to move ahead without state authorization, a position likely to end in a court challenge.
Mr.
Giuliani had an economic incentive to act.
His budget anticipates that the city could save $60 million annually from fingerprinting.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
BASEBALL EXHIBITION
Baseball fans may pay vicarious visits to 26 stadiums nationwide and browse through a copious collection of memorabilia in an exhibition at the White Plains Library Museum Gallery through Sept. 11.
Photographs by Jim Dow, a camera artist who has taught at Princeton, Harvard and Cooper Union, captured on film 12 National League and 14 American League stadiums in an unusual and powerful manner -- when they were empty.


Backing the Wrong Tyrant
CONTESTING CASTRO The United States and the Triumph of the Cuban Revolution.
By Thomas G. Paterson.
Illustrated. 352 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $30.


Riley the Spider, Olajuwon the Fly
We have seen the look that was on Hakeem Olajuwon's face late Friday night before.
We have seen it on Kenny Anderson's face, on Scottie Pippen's, on Reggie Miller's.
It was the look of not being able to get the ball, or not being able to do anything with it.
It was the look of exasperation and disbelief.
It was the look of a man who is locked out of his car, with the motor running and the tank nearly dry.
One by one, the superstars seem to be playing on fumes in the fourth quarter against the Knicks.
Anderson couldn't penetrate.
Pippen couldn't be Jordan.
Miller, ultimately, couldn't get open.
Now Olajuwon can't get around Anthony Mason or over Patrick Ewing.


Cathleen Ess And Emilio Lamar
Cathleen C. Ess, a daughter of Richard and Carmen Ess of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Emilio J. Lamar, the son of Maria del Pilar Ortega de Lamar of Key Biscayne, Fla., and the late Raul Lamar Sanchez of Camaguey, Cuba.
The Rev.
Salvator B. Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
The bride is an account executive in the New York offices of Chantal Thomass Inc., a French clothing designer.
She graduated from Columbia University.


Ideas &amp; Trends: Good Germans; Honoring the Heroes. Hiding the Holocaust.
In the half century since Allied soldiers first stumbled upon the mass graves and gas chambers that sketched the broad, dark outlines of the Nazi annihilation of European Jewry, histories of that period have largely remained faithful to the Holocaust's overarching themes of abandonment, complicity and devastation.
But a tendency in recent years to focus on the rescue of Jews by gentiles is alarming some survivors and scholars, who complain that the enthusiasm for rescue may spill over into the distortion of history.
"Schindler's List," the Stephen Spielberg film that portrays the Holocaust through the life of a Nazi businessman-turned-savior, is but the most visible illustration of the shift in perspective.
A spate of conferences, books and films have sprung up to tell the story of Jews who survived thanks to Christian heroism.


SEPARATE IS BETTER
In his article, Lincoln Caplan avoids discussing many of Janet Reno's missteps as Attorney General.
He writes that "many believe the last time the Justice Department was great was under  [ Robert ]  Kennedy," but doesn't identify the "many." Nor does he discuss any of the known transgressions of the Kennedy Justice Department, including illegal wiretaps.


MANHATTAN MINUTE
RAT IN THE PARKS: Rats have appeared at a playground in Riverside Park at 83d Street.
Now Eleanor Stankey of the East 79th Street Neighorhood Association says she has seen rats at Carl Schurz Park five times during morning walks with her grandchildren.
"These are big rats -- jumbo size," she says.
"What if a child is bitten?" . . .
DOGS AND KIDS: Bill Lukashok, chairman of the parks committee for Community Board 5, on the dogs-without-leashes dispute in Madison Square Park: "There's just not enough space for what everyone wants to do." He favors a dog run on the perimeter, but says until then dogs should stay on leashes. . . .
IN LOVE AGAIN: The parrots at Urban Bird on West Broadway stopped mating because they were bothered by the noise from Club Renegayde, says the store's owner, Nancy Chambers.
Now, since the club disappeared, they're laying eggs again.
"We should start seeing some baby parrots in lower Manhattan," she says. . . .
T'AI CHI AT DAWN: The East River Pavilion, at 60th Street, offers T'ai Chi Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday 6:30 to 7:30 A.M.
Call Marymount Manhattan College (212-517-0564).


Mia Alfonso And Eric Stein
Mia Alfonso, a daughter of Leonor and Efrain Alfonso Morales of Bayamon, P.R., was married last evening to Eric Stein, a son of Amy and Morry Stein of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard Sobel officiated at Camp Echo Lake in Warrensburg, N.Y., a summer camp owned by the bridegroom's parents.
Mrs.
Alfonso-Stein, 33, is the faculty coordinator for the department of surgery at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


A Life-Changing Book
To the Editor:
Given Mary Gordon's remarkable and moving essay "George Eliot, Dorothea and Me: Rereading (and Rereading) 'Middlemarch' " (May 8), I feel a desire to come out of my own literary closet and share how a book can shape a life.
When I was 19 and my own life was somewhat untidy, my passions misdirected, I read "Middlemarch." I was consumed by its story, its characters, its moment in history.
Dorothea was a woman whose ardor and intellect I wished to equal, whose hunger for a companion with whom to share her gifts seemed to match my own.


The Truth About Electric Cars
To the Editor:
"The Electric Car: A Quixotic Quest" (Viewpoints, May 29), is an example that the naysayers are at it again.
Frank Wicks's article is fraught with misstatements, miscalculations and conclusions based upon false premises.


SUNDAY, June 12, 1994; Destroying a Painting
Ceremonies attending the display of art are well established.
There are unveilings, openings, reviews, retrospectives.
But what formalities attend the destruction of a painting?
In the case of the recent planned slashing of a fake Botero, the occasion was observed with both solemnity and glee.
The painting, which was thought to be Fernando Botero's "Dancers," had been consigned to Christie's auction house.
When it was discovered to be a forgery, Botero and the collector agreed to destroy it, and videotaped the action.


Westchester Feels Right For a Revived Janzen
Maybe it's biorhythms.
Or the lay of the land.
Or the nap of the grass.
Maybe Lee Janzen just needed to see the huge, old hotel that rises above Westchester Country Club like that haunted place in "The Shining" to summon his old game and start playing like his old self.
Whatever the explanation, Janzen, 29, the defending United States Open champion who has had just one top 10 finish in the year since winning at Baltusrol Golf Club, is feeling right at home again right on the course where it all began last year.
He shot 64 today for a total of 202, 11 under par, and a one-stroke lead in the Buick Classic over Ernie Els, who shot 69, and a three-stroke lead over Joe Ozaki and Dillard Pruitt.


Howard E. Buhse; Investment Broker, 88
Howard E. Buhse, an investment broker and Wall Street leader for many years, died on Thursday in the Washington Hospital Center in Washington.
Mr.
Buhse, who lived in Danbury, Conn., was 88.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter Deborah Plonski.


Saying Medicaid Experiments Cut Services to Poor, Clinics Sue U.S.
Health clinics serving seven million poor people have sued the Federal Government, contending that the Clinton Administration illegally approved experimental state programs that slashed benefits of Medicaid patients in Oregon, Tennessee and other states.
The lawsuit, filed on Thursday, is potentially embarrassing to the Administration, which has made universal health insurance a top priority.
On Feb. 1, 1993, less than two weeks after taking office, President Clinton met with governors, heard their complaints about Medicaid and directed Donna E. Shalala, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to expedite approval of experimental state programs.


Roberta Edelson And Larry Kayne
Roberta Ann Edelson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ben Edelson of Cranbury, N.J., is to be married today to Larry Edward Kayne, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Isadore Kayne of Pembroke Pines, Fla.
Rabbi Richard Thaler is to officiate at Sutton Place Synagogue in Manhattan.
The bride is an officer in New York for Banco Bamerindus do Brasil.
She graduated from American University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.


Massachusetts
To the Editor: Having graduated from the University of Massachusetts in Amherst, I was excited to read Susan Spano's article ("A Return to Amherst and the Pioneer Valley," May 8).
However, there are many more interesting things to do in the area that she did not mention.
The city of Northampton is full of eclectic bookstores and clothing shops, as well as the Academy of Music, a beautiful former concert hall now used as a movie theater, and the Pleasant Street Theater, which shows the latest in art and foreign films.
These two theaters charge only $5.50.


Group A
Colombia CUP APPEARANCES Two (1962, 1990) LAST CUP 1990 (Lost to Cameroon, 2-1, in second round.) BEST SHOWING Second round in 1990 FIRST ROUND Romania, June 18 in Pasadena, Calif; United States, June 22 in Pasadena; Switzerland, June 26 in Stanford, Calif.
COACH Francisco (Pacho) Maturana, a dentist by profession, has transformed Colombia into one of the most entertaining sides in international soccer.
A former player of the year in the Colombian domestic league, he coaches America de Cali, the team he guided to the 1992 Colombian title.
STYLE One-touch passing, always attacking.
TOP PLAYERS Forward Faustino Asprilla, forward Adolfo Valencia, midfielder Carlos Valderrama, midfielder Fredy Rincon, goalie Oscar Cordoba.
OUTLOOK A darkhorse candidate to win the World Cup.
Colombia thrashed Argentina, 5-0, in Buenos Aires during qualifying.
Before losing to Bolivia, 1-0, in an exhibition in mid-April, Colombia had run its string of unbeaten games to 28.
Valderrama injured a knee in February, and while his World Cup availability was initially uncertain, he has resumed playing impressively.
Much will depend on how his knee holds up, for his passes are the soil from which so many goals flower.
Flamboyant goalkeeper Rene Higuita, jailed last summer for accepting $50,000 to help arrange the release of a kidnap victim, was left off the team, but Cordoba has been a solid replacement, even if he doesn't stray from the goal mouth as far and as often as Higuita did.
Asprilla is a spectacular player who punctuates his goals with a backflip.
He is apparently a much better soccer player than a driver, given his penchant for auto accidents.
He once left his car parked in an intersection for two days before retrieving it.
Another time, he received nearly three dozen stitches in his leg after reportedly kicking in the window of a bus after a confrontation with the driver.
Valencia helped Bayern Munich to Germany's Bundesliga title this season.
Romania CUP APPEARANCES Five (1930, 1934, 1938, 1970, 1990) LAST CUP 1990 (lost to Ireland on penalty kicks in second round) BEST SHOWING Second round in 1990 FIRST ROUND Colombia, June 18 in Pasadena, Calif.; Switzerland, June 22 in Pontiac, Mich.; U.S.A., June 26 in Pasadena.
COACH After a 5-2 loss during qualifying to the Representation of Czechs and Slovaks, Cornel Dinu was replaced by Anghel Iordanescu.
Iordanescu had been coach of Steaua Bucharest, the army-supported team formerly run by the family of the executed dictator Nicolae Ceausescu.
STYLE Latin, combination passing, flair for the spectacular.
TOP PLAYERS Midfielder Gheorghe Hagi, forward Ilie Dumitrescu, forward Florin Raducioiu, defender Gheorghe Popescu, defender Miodrag Belodedici.
OUTLOOK Since the fall of Ceausescu, many of Romania's top players have become seasoned in Western European leagues.
The fulcrum of the team is the tempestuous Hagi, the "Maradona of the Carpathians," who has a temper to match his scoring ability.
He recently served a two-game suspension for spitting at a player from Northern Island during an exhibition.
If Hagi maintains his composure, this team could surprise a lot of people, advancing to the quarterfinals or beyond.The Romanians are concerned about their cross-country travel requirements during the eight-day first round.
They played the United States twice recently, tying, 1-1, in 1993 and winning, 2-1, earlier this year.
Dumitrescu scored all three goals for the Romanians.
Iordanescu does not believe that this team possesses the individual talent of the 1990 World Cup team.
The coach is especially concerned that Raducioiu, his one true striker, played sparingly this season with AC Milan.
Romania can't afford to have a rusty trigger finger; Raducioiu scored seven goals in five World Cup qualifying matches.
This team could give the Americans fits on the counterattack.
Switzerland CUP APPEARANCES Six (1934, 1938, 1950, 1954, 1962, 1966) LAST CUP 1966 BEST SHOWING Quarterfinals, 1934 and 1938 FIRST ROUND United States, June 18 in Pontiac, Mich.; Romania, June 22 in Pontiac; Colombia, June 26 in Stanford, Calif.
COACH Roy Hodgson, a Brit, took over a floundering national team and qualified the Swiss for the World Cup finals for the first time since 1966 with a victory and a tie against Italy.
A charming man, Hodgson took a public relations beating for instituting a teamwide sex ban.
Later, he said the celibacy requirement never existed; however wives and girlfriends will stay at a different hotel from the players and will be allowed to visit only after two of the three first-round games.
Hodgson said he was less concerned about sex than he was about finding a place that will permit him to light up a cigar in the anti-smoking United States.
As a player, Hodgson completed his career in South Africa, then spent more than a decade coaching in Sweden.
He then moved to the Swiss club Neuchatel Xamax and in 1992, swapped jobs with Uli Stielike, a German who had become unnerved by the complacency of the national team in defeat.
STYLE A 4-4-2 formation that combines individualism of Italian influence with resourcefulness and tight midfield of German approach.
TOP PLAYERS Forwards Stephane Chapuisat and Adrian Knup, midfielders Ciraco Sforza, Georges Bregy and Alain Sutter, sweeper Alain Geiger.
OUTLOOK None of the Swiss players have World Cup experience, the country's last appearance being 28 years ago.
The opener against the Americans, to be played indoors at the Silverdome, in a humid, sticky environment before a pro-U.S.A. crowd, is critical.
But Chapuisat and Knup have honed their scoring skills in Germany's Bundesliga.
This season Chapuisat scored 16 goals for Borussia Dortmund, and he has a skill that many Americans lack: the ability to finish a play.
Knup has scored 21 times in 31 appearances with the national team.
Sforza and Bregy are the point guards in midfield, distributing the ball.
Goalie Marco Pascolo suffered a knee injury three weeks before the start of the World Cup.
At the World Cup draw in December in Las Vegas, Nev., Hodgson said that if his team played a mere 5 percent below its capability, it would not advance beyond the first round.
United States CUP APPEARANCES Four (1930, 1934, 1950, 1990) LAST CUP 1990 (0-3) BEST SHOWING Semifinals in 1930 FIRST ROUND Switzerland, June 18 in Pontiac, Mich.; Colombia, June 22 in Pasadena, Calif.; Romania, June 26, in Pasadena COACH Known as the Miracle Worker, Bora Milutinovic coached Mexico to the quarterfinals in 1986 and Costa Rica to the second round in 1990.
An eccentric coach, he is famous for his shrewd evasiveness.
STYLE Latin, lateral passing, control, possession game.
TOP PLAYERS Midfielder Tab Ramos, midfielder Thomas Dooley, midfielder John Harkes, forward Ernie Stewart, forward Eric Wynalda, striker Roy Wegerle, goalkeeper Tony Meola.
OUTLOOK If the foreign-based players can be assimilated in time, the United States can avoid becoming the first host country not to advance to the second round.
Much depends on the first game against Switzerland.
At least the Silverdome audience will be supportive, which may not be the case against Colombia and Romania at the Rose Bowl.
A 1-0 victory over Mexico in the final exhibition was a confidence booster, especially since the crowd of 91,123 -- the largest ever to see the United States team play in this country -- was overwhelmingly pro-Mexico.
But there are still kinks to be worked out.
The United States built a modest 2-2-7 exhibition record against World Cup finalists, struggling to score goals and lapsing frequently on defense.
The defense appeared much more cohesive against Mexico with Dooley playing at sweeper in place of Marcelo Balboa, who has not been the same since undergoing knee surgery in April 1993.
Milutinovic has plenty of decisions to make: Start Stewart at striker, or opt for Frank Klopas, who has scored seven goals in his last nine games?
Start Wynalda, or let him continue to kick-start the attack off the bench?
Milutinovic must also find a place for John Harkes, who did not arrive until early June from the English League.


In Short/Civil War
THE PRESIDENCY OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN By Phillip Shaw Paludan.
University Press of Kansas, $29.95.


Suzanne Biemiller, James MacRae
Suzanne Raul Biemiller, a daughter of Gail H. Biemiller of Philadelphia and John B. Biemiller of Rochester, was married yesterday to James Robertson MacRae, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. MacRae Jr. of Washington.
The Rev.
Wendell Meyer officiated at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Philadelphia.
The bride, 28, graduated from Williams College.
She received a master's degree in public policy last week from Harvard University, where her husband, 25, is studying for a joint degree in law and public policy.
Her father is the chairman of the Hebert Construction Company in Rochester.
Her mother is the director of development for Episcopal Community Services in Philadelphia.


A Reservations Number For Seattle Hotels
Travelers planning to visit Seattle can make hotel reservations through a new toll-free number operated by the Seattle-King County Convention and Visitors Bureau.
The Seattle Hotel Hot Line handles bookings for about 40 hotels, including most major national chains, mainly in the downtown area.
Reservations for hotels near the airport and in the suburb of Bellevue may also be made through the hot line.
The selection of accommodations range from inexpensive inns like The Comfort Inn to deluxe hotels, like The Four Seasons.


Laying Out the Route to a Fairer Assessment System
DURING their study of how to reform the New York City tax assessment system last year, members of a commission appointed by former Mayor David N. Dinkins came upon a steep cliff.
They then proved themselves no mountaineers.
The steep cliff, to use the description of Stanley E. Grayson, chairman of the Real Property Tax Reform Commission, is the underassessment and undertaxation of Class 1 property -- 600,000 parcels most of them one- to three-family houses -- relative to other property.
Higher effective tax rates on this class of property are widely considered a prime condition of moving toward equity in the property tax system.


The Judge's Legacy
To the Editor:
As a recent graduate of the Harvard Law School in 1932, I had the benefit of observing Judge Learned Hand working at the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York.
Twenty years later, I had the temerity to argue a case before him at the same place.
Hand left deep impressions on young and old, and now it is timely that we have an excellent book on him by Gerald Gunther, once a law clerk to Hand.
Mr.
Gunther's large book, in its turn, was reviewed on May 1 by John T. Noonan Jr., himself a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.


Of Whistle-Blowers and the Status Quo
To the Editor:
Mark Jorgensen's ordeal at Prudential Securities ("He Told. He Suffered. Now He's a Hero," May 29) fully reveals the moral rot at some leading companies.
Large corporations do not seek out -- much less reward -- those who tell the truth.
Rather, the policy seems to be to kill the messenger.


Kite Making Grade At Opportune Time
Tom Kite re-established himself today as a player to be reckoned with, both in this week's Buick Classic and in next week's United States Open, by surging on to the leader board with a flawless round of 64.
Kite improved on his Friday score by 10 strokes, jumping over 35 players in the process, and he isn't exactly sure why or how.
"How you could shoot 74 one day and come back with 64 the next day is beyond me," said Kite, whose 206 total left him tied for sixth place, only four shots behind the Buick Classic leader, Lee Janzen, entering Sunday's final round.
"It's kind of the nature of this silly game we play."


SUNDAY, June 12, 1994; Couch Train
Trains are a lot more comfortable than planes or buses.
But couches are really comfortable, even if the view does get stale.
Now you can relax at home, pet the cat and take in the sights of the new Goderich Exeter short line in Canada -- a segment of Green Frog Productions' new Railroad Video Magazine.
John Koch, president of Green Frog in Marietta, Ga., says there are several big train video companies and 15 or 20 smaller ones all of which cater to railroad lovers.
The "magazine," also has a segment on "Hump Yards Past and Present." Bon voyage.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: World Cup '94/Section 8A  It's soccer, nationalism and a world of passion; it's the World Cup.
Read about favorites and sleepers, previous events, corner kicks and Baggio's ponytail.
Special Today: Second Opinions/Section 4A A collection of articles and illustrations from the Op-Ed page on the health care debate, with a new guide to the issues.


Andrea Mogil, Igor Vilensky
Andrea Mogil, the daughter of Susan Mogil and Dr.
Robert Mogil of Ardmore, Pa., is to be married today to Igor Vilensky, a son of Lina and Moisey Vilensky of Brooklyn.
Cantor Nancy Ginsberg is to officiate at Pasarelle, a restaurant in Radnor, Pa.


A Helping Hand for an Endangered Violet
THERE probably are few times in life when seeing a plant in flower can bring a tear to the eye.
This sort of emotionalism is natural for major events, but seeing a plant in bloom?
Well, this is exactly what happened.
The plant in particular is a violet, a rather pretty one at that.
It is known by the name coastal violet (Viola brittoniana) and is a large-flowered violet with a clean white throat.
The leaves are deeply divided into narrow segments, toothed, not unlike those of the birdfoot violet.


Serbs Put a Serb on Trial for War Crimes
In the first case of its kind since the war in Bosnia began more than two years ago, the district court in this tranquil Serbian provincial town has indicted a Serb on war crimes charges, including killing 16 Muslims and slicing off another's ear.
The case is the first in which Serbs, not Muslims, have prosecuted a Serb, and its potential significance is considerable.
Bombarded by the propaganda of state television and mesmerized by a mixture of history and myths portraying the Serbs as eternal victims, most people in Serbia have, until now, blinded themselves to the eviction and slaying of Muslim civilians in Bosnia.


Regina Formisano And Peter Kanter
Regina Anne Formisano, a daughter of Rita and Alexander Formisano of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Adam Kanter, a son of Selma and William Kanter of Palm Beach, Fla.
Sidney Kramer, a justice of the peace in Westport, Conn., officiated at the River Club in Wilton, Conn.


Just About Everyone Gets Into the Act
"THIS neighborhood is usually in the news for racial conflicts," said Steve Zeitlin, the executive director of City Lore, an arts organization dedicated to preserving urban culture.
"We want people to come together in Washington Heights for peaceful purposes."
That's the goal of a music, food and crafts festival that will fill the Morris-Jumel Mansion and Park today from noon to 6 P.M.
Among the performers will be a band called Asadife, which plays African-Dominican music; the greater Metro Klezmer Band, which specializes in Eastern European Jewish music; Casym, a Trinidadian steel band, and Los Pleneros de la 21, pictured at left, which plays Puerto Rican bomba y plena.


American Fare and a Gospel Brunch
MICHE MACHE, which enjoyed considerable success in South Norwalk, has recently relocated in the former Country Tavern in North Stamford.
The new place has a much larger dining room and smaller, informal Tack Room (in the bar area), each with a different menu (with some overlap).
The old barn-red building resembles a rustic tavern, with an interior of buff-yellow stucco and barn siding walls, wood floors and old barn beams.
A corner fireplace in the bar adds a cozy touch.
New American cooking dominates the new menu (as it did the old), but this time around there seems a greater emphasis on dishes with a Southwest accent.
This worked best in a starter of herb-fried calamari (a heaping portion chock-full of crispy legs) with a coriander-mayonnaise dip, and a sharply spiced jabanero relish.
Texas wild boar chili had fire and heat, with the smoky tang of moist, shredded pork, but the huge bowl of meat, with infinitesimal bits of corn, tomato and carrots simmered with it, became monotonous midway through.
Some contrasting texture -- or a smaller serving -- was sorely needed.


Sperm In a Jar
ON A BEAUTIFUL SPRING DAY IN 1988 I AM driving down the Santa Monica freeway with a jar of my 60-year-old husband's sperm in my purse, en route to the Institute for Reproductive Research at the Hospital of the Good Samaritan in downtown Los Angeles.
He is at home sleeping after having yielded up this specimen, and I am gingerly maneuvering through the heavy morning traffic with my stash, careful not to swerve or speed lest I upset my cargo or get stopped by a cop.
This is what we have come to, after 16 years of marriage: this clinical breeding.
Oh, my, how did I get here?
I ask myself as I park the car, surrender the sperm to the lab technician and take my place in the waiting room.
What quirk of fate, of timing, of biology, has brought me to this clinic, presided over by Dr.
Richard Marrs, one of the new crop of infertility experts who do the procreative bidding of those of us who cannot do it on our own.
A soft-spoken 40-year-old Texan with a specialty in reproductive endocrinology, Dr.
Marrs spouts abbreviations for all the out-of-body pregnancy procedures -- I.V.F. (in-vitro fertilization), GIFT (gamete intra-Fallopian transfer), ZIFT (zygote intra-Fallopian transfer), IUI (intrauterine insemination), ITI (intertubal insemination) -- with optimism and assurance.
His waiting room is full of anxious women from all over the country, from all over the world.


Commuting, Errands, Child Transport, on Wheels
To the Editor:
In his May 15 article, "New York on Two Wheels," I think Bruce Weber does a disservice to cycling in the city.
His premise is that biking here is doable, but just barely -- that one can eke out the occasional small pleasure within the general atmosphere of inconvenience and danger.


Shelly Wolfe, Ian Colley
Shelly Elizabeth Wolfe, a daughter of Dr.
Robert Wolfe of Upper Grandview, N.Y., and the late Ellen J. Wolfe, was married yesterday to Ian Colley, a son of Pauline and Roger Colley of Hitchin, England.
Rabbi Allen Block officiated at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Jill Wolfe.
Ms.
Wolfe Colley, 28, is a public relations consultant in New York.
She graduated from New York University, where she is studying for a master's degree in business communications.


L.I.R.R. Suggests Options In the Event of a Walkout
MANAGEMENT and the union workers at the Long Island Rail Road are preparing for a strike this week, when a 60-day "cooling off" period under the Railway Labor Act expires.
Barring last-minute breakthroughs at the negotiating table or Congressional action, both sides are expecting the strike to begin at 12:01 A.M. on Thursday.
Last week the parent of the L.I.R.R., the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, announced its emergency plans.
About 60 percent of the daily riders, or 65,000 people, are expected to switch to the subways.
People who usually ride the railroad are asked not to use the E and F trains, which are already beyond capacity, said the M.T.A., which also recommended buying tokens or Metrocards in advance.


A Farmer's Fight To Keep His Land
Re: "Farmer Fights to Keep His Piece of Earth" (May 1):
I grew up in North Brunswick and attended grammar school in the building, now the school board offices, adjacent to William Pulda's farm.
In the third grade I had a principal who took the students for nature walks behind the school's land, walking along the edge of the farm's planted field, just over the fence from the playground.
I recall the setting of my grammar school with the fondness of a child who grew up in undeveloped surroundings.
I recall, in early spring, watching the tractors plow the fields and later spring when sweet aromas from growing corn or bean crops would flow through the playground.
I even recall, though vaguely and possibly wrongly, a W.P.A. mural of a New Jersey agricultural scene inside the school.
If my memory is only fantasy in that latter aspect, it should still serve to demonstrate the power of place.
Though development had begun in North Brunswick during my childhood, the small region between the Pulda farm, Church Lane and Farrington Lake indelibly formed my understanding of and reverence for the land.
I graduated from North Brunswick Township High School in 1979 and lived for the next 12 years outside of New Jersey, until 1991, when my wife and I returned, initially residing in Princeton.
During those 12 years, upon my occasional visits home, I began to notice the sprawl of development throughout North Brunswick.
Eventually, it even began to encroach on my parents' home, where I was reared, set back in an undisturbed wooded area.
I commented how the whole central region was undergoing "Los Angelization" from Newark to Camden.
The article on the Pulda farm is but the late call of awareness to what lifetime residents of central New Jersey have lost.
It also demonstrates the perennial shortsightedness of my home township, a shortsightedness that has led to the gradual and persistent "selling off of its inheritance": the healing nature of spacious land, the nurturing influence of agrarian culture and the spiritual equanimity afforded by living in less crowded conditions.
The most crucial loss as the result of this environmental and demographic change has been the loss of a sense of belonging and contributing to a common good.
My home township always prized individual gain over community health, but perhaps a township without a historic town center was predisposed for such a world view.
Had we had vision, a view larger than ourselves oriented toward deeper values, that predisposition might not have become fate.
The covetousness of township bureaucrats must be called just that, a sin.
Nevertheless, one choice still remains: let Mr.
Pulda live out his life on his farm.
Let Edwin Otken (another local hero) continue to farm his rented land.
Let the county or the state or even Cook College consider negotiating an agreement to designate the sight historic -- which it obviously is -- and create a living, working museum about agricultural life in this portion of the Garden State.
Though the many new generations of North Brunswick residents will never know grammar school surrounded by a living, producing farm, at least they could learn of a deeper view of living, and learn how to plant a small garden of their own. (The Rev.) R. BYRON BREESE Atlantic Highlands


Official Who Approved Gettysburg Swap Is to Be Transferred
The head of the Gettysburg National Military Park, who consummated a land swap that destroyed a sliver of the Civil War battlefield in southeastern Pennsylvania, will be transferred, and the chairman of a House panel that oversees the National Park Service says he will try to undo the damage wrought by the deal.
Representative Sidney R. Yates, the Chicago Democrat who heads the Appropriations Committee's subcommittee on the interior, asked the Park Service this week to study how to restore Oak Ridge, a sloping spit of land that figured in the first day of the pivotal three-day Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863.


Sound Bytes; Master Storyteller Plugs In
James A. Michener's first collection of stories, "Tales of the South Pacific," won the Pulitzer Prize in 1947 and was the basis for the Broadway musical, "South Pacific."
Although perhaps best known for his epic historical novels like "Hawaii" and "The Source," Mr.
Michener is also proud of his scholarly nonfiction works like "Iberia" and "Japanese Prints."


Finally, It's a Dog That Does the Trick With Canada Geese
JAC, a border collie, did not hesitate when Bob Phipps called out to him one recent morning near a pond at the Shorehaven Golf Club.
Responding to a command, the small black and white bundle of energy, took off at breakneck speed.
His quarry?
Six Canada geese and about 15 goslings at the edge of a pond on the private golf course in East Norwalk.
The gaggle of geese, with the adults leading the way, quickly took refuge in the pond, whereupon Mr.
Phipps, the superintendent at Shorehaven, summoned the dog.


Pamela Scher, Peter Callahan
Pamela Stevenson Scher, a daughter of Dorothea H. Scher and Ronald J. Scher, both of New York, was married yesterday to Peter Arthur Callahan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Callahan of Groton, Conn.
The Rev.
Mark Hollingsworth officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
Anne's-in-the-Fields in Lincoln, Mass.
Mrs.
Callahan, 34, is a vice president in Boston at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, the investment bank.
She graduated from Princeton University.
Her father, who is retired, was a marketing manager for The New York Times Magazine and The New York Times Book Review.


David Wilson and Christina Storr
Christina Louise Storr, a daughter Mr. and Mrs.
Hans G. Storr of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Sanford Wilson, a son of Sanford Wilson of Portland, Ore., and Kay Douglas of Boulder, Colo.
The Rev.
Terence L. Elsberry performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Wilson, 26, graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at the University of Colorado.
Her father is an executive vice president and the chief financial officer of the Philip Morris Companies in New York.


Pupils in the Side Pocket?
Desperate to relieve overcrowding at Public School 150 in Sunnyside, officials are trying to move its kindergarten classes into a commercial building that also contains a pool hall.
The move, originally scheduled for last September, has been thwarted several times and is still not assured.
Although the site raised eyebrows for its proximity to the pool hall, that has not been a stumbling block.
Instead, officials blame the central school bureaucracy for delays in approving even makeshift solutions for soaring enrollments.
Worse, they say, is that the Mayor's recent capital budget cuts offer bleak prospects for building permanent classrooms.


Suspect Held in Shooting of Store Owner
An 18-year-old man was arrested Friday evening for shooting a Brooklyn grocery store owner who tried to shield his 18-month-old son during a robbery last Saturday, the police said.
The man, Roshawn Hyman of East Flatbush, was charged with attempted murder and robbery, the police said.


Sports of The Times; Multicultural Madness: The World Cup Belongs to Whole World
THIS is the very best ritual in all of sports, and it is coming to the United States, starting Friday.
It is the moment two national teams march onto the soccer field, side by side, to compete in the World Cup.
I've covered three World Cups, going back to 1982, and I am still in awe that over a billion people are watching in tin shacks in Rio, apartments in Seoul and bars in Athens.
The two teams are led by one lonely referee and two linesmen.
They all stand at attention, facing the tribune of honor, and the anthems are played, sometimes short, sometimes long.
Then the captains exchange national banners, presumably to be hung in some national sports den.
Gifts before shin-kicking.
The way of the world.


New Divisions in an Independent-Minded Borough
John Murphy Jr., the son of a former Congressman, recently described the borough of Staten Island, where he grew up and practices law, as "a white, upper-class community of egoistic hedonists."
Mr.
Murphy's comments, which drew a sharp rebuke from Borough President Guy V. Molinari, obscured the vast changes that have taken place in New York City's "forgotten borough" in the three decades since the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge was opened.
Before the bridge's christening in 1964, the island's population was even more overwhelmingly white, and it still had vast swaths of undeveloped land.
Today, there are areas where blacks outnumber whites, and migration, mainly from the other boroughs, has forever changed Staten Island's density and its character.


Measurement and Fit Key to Kitchen Cabinets
INSTALLING kitchen cabinets may sound intimidating, but even a full layout can generally be installed rather easily by one moderately handy person accompanied by an unskilled helper.
Buying cabinets that fit is crucial.
That can be done with careful measuring and ordering with help from a knowledgeable salesperson.
After the cabinets are delivered, proceeding methodically is the way to go.
The first step is to check the evenness of the walls and floor.
Use a carpenter's level and a long straight-edge board.
Note dips and hollows and mark the lowest and highest flaws.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SECRET GARDENS
They are called the secret gardens of New Canaan, suburban Edens less than an hour's commute from Manhattan.
Katherine Edwards, one of two chairwomen of the Fifth Annual Secret Garden Tour, benefiting the New Canaan Nature Center, called the town "the next station to heaven, its nickname."
A new theme is chosen each year.
When it was "In-Town Gardens," old-fashioned trolleys carried viewers between them.
Last year, it was "Estate Gardens," and this year, "Compact Treasures," promising do-it-yourself ideas for others to pluck.


Ms. Bangash And Mr. Meistrich
Shireen Hodgdon Bangash, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mahmud Bangash of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Lawrence Steven Meistrich, the son of Susan Nardelli and Alfred Nardelli of Riverdale, the Bronx.
The Rev.
James E. Cotten of the Interfaith Church officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
The bride, 25, is the executive director of the Shooting Gallery Foundation for the Arts and Humanities, a nonprofit organization for film-making projects in New York.
She graduated from Goucher College and received a Master of Social Work degree from Columbia University.


Business Diary: June 5-12
THE ECONOMY Health Care, Again -- but Finally It's More Than Talk  Yes, yes, you've had it with reading about health care.
Employer mandates, managed care, purchasing groups -- enough already!
But this is different: after the numbing mountains of talk, something's . . . actually . . . happening.
Last week Ted Kennedy's Senate panel adopted his plan -- a more generous one than the President's -- so the full Senate must face the issue this summer.
And Pat Moynihan's Finance Committee rolled up its sleeves and focused on his fiscally stern approach.
One way he'd make the numbers work: he proposes the highest cigarette taxes -- $2 a pack.
"Health reform is a defining issue for this Congress," Mr.
Kennedy said.
And as Mr.
Moynihan put it, "You have to begin." The Republican response?
"Tax and spend," chanted Bob Packwood.
"It doesn't look very good to me," said Bob Dole. (What did look good to Mr. Dole last week? Oliver North as a Senator. But that's another story.)


Tweed Suits? Why Not?
The idea of souffle-light tweed suits has caught on with stylish women.
While many of the 900 women at the Chanel fashion show and luncheon on Monday (a benefit for the obstetrics department at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center) wore white and shades of ivory to the event, the surprise was the acceptance of the new summer tweeds.
Mariah Carey, above, holding her jacket, was one of many who wore a pale pastel suit by Karl Lagerfeld for Chanel.
Another woman at the benefit, held under a tent in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center, wore tweed shorts with a solid-color jacket (above).
Many chose matching miniskirts, while others teamed their jackets with solid-color skirts or navy or black trousers with the familiar row of gold buttons down the side.


Amanda B. Rosen, Steven Chaikelson
Amanda Brooke Rosen, the daughter of David A. Rosen and Dr.
Andrea Penkower Rosen of New York, is to be married today to Steven E. Chaikelson, the son of Morris Chaikelson and Dr.
June Chaikelson of Montreal.
Rabbi Murry Penkower, the bride's maternal grandfather, is to perform the ceremony at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.
The bride, 25, is an assistant account executive at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide in New York.
She and the bridegroom graduated cum laude from Columbia University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


When Husbands Can't Find Jobs
Re: "Helping the Wives of the Unemployed" (April 10):
I hope now that their husbands are unemployed, these women have learned not to turn their noses up at other people.
I have dealt with some of these women, and they felt that they were better than other people because they had nice homes and mink coats.
Most of them did not vote for Bill Clinton and were against his plan for national health care.
I can bet they are singing a different tune today.
These women felt that people who could not find jobs were just lazy and wanted to stay home and collect welfare checks.
These women all had the same question: "Why did this happen to me? I did everything right."
Just think, most of these so-called affluent husbands had big corporate jobs and college degrees, and they cannot find jobs.
They have fancy cars and fancy clothes and never thought the day would come when they would have to use food stamps.
Life has a way of catching us on the blind side, and that is what happened to these women.
I hope they have learned the lesson that we need to be understanding of all people -- cashiers, busboys, gardeners, maids, etc.
And to the woman who is going to have a second child even though her husband is unemployed: I hope the next time she hears of a woman who is having a baby and neither she nor her husband has a job, she will take a look at her second child and say, "I can understand it." DEBBIE A. O'BRIEN Bernardsville


Leonetta Vernon, Charles Gulden Jr.
Leonetta Nunes Vernon and Charles Gulden Jr., travel agents in Greenwich, Conn., were married there yesterday.
Rocco Benvenuto, a justice of the peace in Greenwich, officiated at the Indian Harbor Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Gulden is the president and Mr.
Gulden is the chairman of Carlson Travel Desk of Connecticut.
The bride graduated from Finch College.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Rino Colla-Negri of Milan, Italy, and of the late George P. Nunes.


Big Screen, Bigger Flop
They sat there in the Garden for about 15 minutes after the game ended and stared in disbelief.
About 300 Ranger fans were left -- shocked into passivity -- long after Anthony Mason and John Starks of the Knicks made a third-period appearance.
Twice, Ranger fans have prepared for the ultimate celebration.
Now they have what they wanted least, even feared: a seventh game in the Stanley Cup finals.


Where's Papa
There came a moment when I realized that as a family we had reached a critical mass -- we were running out of space in our six-room apartment.
The full acceptance came when I found a missing book in the refrigerator.
I had left the book there in midsnack.
There was apparently no other place to put it; all other surfaces and shelves were already taken.
As if that wasn't bad enough, I was not shocked.
I actually looked upon it as an interesting choice and examined the top of the refrigerator as a good place for cookbooks.
It was then I knew we needed help.


The World; Facing Up to the Legacy Of an Unresolved War
In public last week, President Clinton commemorated the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landings, one of the boldest and most decisive military strokes of the 20th century.
The heroes of 1944 should prompt Americans of today, he said, to make "common cause" with other countries once again; he asked members of his own generation "not only to praise their deeds but to pursue their dreams."
In private he and his aides wrestled with a foreign-policy crisis whose solution, again against daunting odds, will require all the conviction and all the commonality of cause that the United States and its allies can muster: the possession or potential possession of nuclear bombs by a unpredictable, egomaniacal ruler in North Korea.


Students Care Far Too Much About Grades
To the Editor:
Re "Making the Grades" (editorial, June 5): Having completed my last final exam as an undergraduate at Stanford University not more than an hour ago, I believe I am in an excellent position to evaluate the media frenzy over alleged grade inflation at Stanford University.


Students Care Far Too Much About Grades; Bring Back the C
To the Editor:
"Making the Grades" (June 5) is a true and timely editorial.
Grade inflation, however, has not inflicted equal injury upon all parties.
The smartest undergraduates may now need an A+, but they still are admitted to the best graduate schools.
The "gentleman C" student may have become a gentleperson B-, but he or she still receives the treasured diploma and cares for little else.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Spotlight Also on Paradise Creek
Paradise Creek stole some of Tabasco Cat's thunder on Belmont day, turning in the most commanding performance of the afternoon in easy fashion as he ran away with the Early Times Manhattan in track-record time.
In doing so, Paradise Creek established himself as perhaps the most dominant American grass horse in training.
The 5-year-old, who is trained by Bill Mott, completed his sweep of the Early Times turf series in convincing fashion as the overwhelming favorite in the field of seven older horses.
Under a hand ride from Pat Day, he raced the mile and a quarter on a firm turf course in 1:573/5 , two-fifths of a second faster than Who's To Pay's three-year old mark.


June 5-10; Don't Panic. On the Other Hand. . .
Trying to walk a thin line between alarming the public and assuaging its fears, scientists said last week that horrifying, flesh-eating bacteria are indeed resurging across the country, but they stressed that infections are still rare.
The dangerous form of group A streptococci re-emerged about five years ago after lying quiescent for decades and infected 10,000 to 15,000 Americans last year, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Recent outbreaks have been confirmed in New York, Connecticut, California and North Carolina.


In America; Of Proms and Prisons
It was just a prom, nothing out of the ordinary, a couple hundred kids in gowns and tuxedos dancing among gold and white balloons at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Chicago.
Nothing strange, except that the kids in that serene setting were from some of the toughest of Chicago's tough neighborhoods, chaotic places where tensions are always high, life is often short, and lullabies are apt to be accompanied by the murmur of not-so-distant gunfire.
If the very same kids had poured into the hotel unannounced and in their street clothes, the cops would have been called.
But the prom, on a cool, clear Friday evening in May, caused no problems.
The kids were thrilled.
They felt glamorous and important.
They partied and they went home happy.


June 5-10: Action on Health Care; With Miles to Go, Senators Take an Important Step
National health insurance legislation moved ahead significantly last week, but one good week is nowhere near enough.
When Congress came back to work Tuesday, five committees knew that unless they could vote out health care bills this month, there would probably not be enough time this session to meld them, try to pass them in the House and Senate, then negotiate a compromise between the two.
Edward M. Kennedy's Senate Labor Committee acted first, approving a bill Thursday evening with the votes of its 10 Democrats and a lone Republican, James M. Jeffords of Vermont.
Its action on the measure, patterned on President Clinton's but more flexible and easier on small business, guaranteed the Senate the chance to take up the issue next month.


Salsa King Aims for Congress
Willie Colon, the popular salsa musician, has taken up a political beat: He is challenging an incumbent Congressman, Eliot L. Engel, in the Democratic primary for a seat representing much of the Bronx and some of Westchester.
The 44-year-old singer and bandleader, who was born and raised in the Bronx and now lives in New Rochelle, announced last week that he would seek to wrest the 17th Congressional District seat from the three-term incumbent because, he said, he had been asked to by community groups "not satisfied" with Mr.
Engel and wanting "more dynamic" leadership.


Miss Montgomery, Mr. Ix
Justine Bayard Montgomery, the daughter of Mary Montgomery of Delray Beach, Fla., and Rodman Bowne Montgomery Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Charles William Ix, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander F. Ix Jr. of Spring Lake, N.J.
Msgr.
Thomas A. Leubking performed the ceremony at St.
Catherine's Church in Spring Lake.
Mrs.
Ix, 26, is a sales representative at S &amp; S Saddlery in Whitehouse Station, N.J.
She graduated from Smith College.


Patti Levine, Cabot Marks
Patti Joy Levine and Cabot Jeffrey Marks, lawyers in New York, are to be married this evening at Shadowbrook, a restaurant in Shrewsbury, N.J.
Rabbi Gershon Friedlin is to officiate.
The couple received their law degrees from Boston University.
The bride, 26, graduated from Cornell University and is an associate at the law firm of Dewey Ballantine.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Levine of Brooklyn.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
Arms Embargo: Vote on an amendment to a Defense Department authorization bill for fiscal year 1995 that requires President Clinton to circumvent the NATO alliance and end United States participation in the arms embargo to the Bosnian Government.
Approved 244 to 178, June 9.
Connecticut  1.
Kennelly (D) . . .
Yea 2.
Gejdenson (D) . . .
Nay 3.
DeLauro (D) . . .
Yea 4.
Shays (R) . . .
Yea 5.
Franks (R) . . .
Yea 6.
Johnson (R) . . .
Nay New Jersey  1.
Andrews (D) . . .
Yea 2.
Hughes (D) . . .
Nay 3.
Saxton (R) . . .
Yea 4.
Smith (R) . . .
Yea 5.
Roukema (R) . . .
Nay 6.
Pallone (D) . . .
Yea 7.
Franks (R) . . .
Yea 8.
Klein (D) . . .
Yea 9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Yea 10.
Payne (D) . . .
Yea 11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Yea 12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Yea 13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Yea New York  1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Nay 2.
Lazio (R) . . .
Yea 3.
King (R) . . .
Yea 4.
Levy (R) . . .
Yea 5.
Ackerman (D) . . .
Yea 6.
Flake (D) . . .
Nay 7.
Manton (D) . . .
Yea 8.
Nadler (D) . . .
Yea 9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Yea 10.
Towns (D) . . .
A  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Yea 12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Nay 13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Yea 14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Yea 15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Nay 16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Yea 17.
Engel (D) . . .
Yea 18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Yea 19.
Fish (R) . . .
Yea 20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Yea 21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Yea 22.
Solomon (R) . . .
Yea 23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Yea 24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Yea 25.
Walsh (R) . . .
Yea 26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Nay 27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Yea 28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Yea 29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Yea 30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Yea 31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Nay KEY: (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Book Editor?
WOLVES FASCINATE Jack Nicholson.
"What does a lone wolf represent?" he asked with a smile.
"How's that wolf treated by the pack? The wolf pack is limited. Lone wolves are driven off by the pack. And it's hard to find a new pack."
The smile broadened enigmatically, a Nicholson smile. He lighted a cigarette.


A Fairy Tale Comes to Life, but Gets Up a Bit Stiff
Little Buddha  Keanu Reeves, Bridget Fonda, Chris Isaak Directed by Bernardo Bertolucci PG 123 minutes


Five Fateful Years
THE LAST BEST HOPE OF EARTH Abraham Lincoln and the Promise of America.
By Mark E. Neely Jr.
Illustrated. 214 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $24.95.


For the River And the Rockefellers
Scenic Hudson party at the Plaza, June 1.


Domino Effect: The Battle Comes to Union Square


Michelle Hwang, K. E. Hirschman
Michelle Hwang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Ling-Kwei Hwang of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kenneth Eric Hirschman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul L. Hirschman of Voorhees, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph Gilmore, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Hirschman, 23, is an assistant buyer at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a senior vice president at Oppenheimer Inc. in New York.


THE HIDDEN HENCHMAN
I was reluctant to read "The Hidden Henchman" because I expected to feel discouraged and cynical.
Instead, I was gratified.
Paul Touvier turned out to be more important than anyone at first thought because he was emblematic of the true nature of Vichy and its zeal to serve the Germans.
Your article highlights the fact that it was the middle-level henchmen who were indispensable to the Nazis' policies of genocide.
We are often overwhelmed by the concept of six million Jews killed by the Nazis and their collaborators, as well as the five million other victims.
Somehow, the death of these seven martyrs, arbitrarily chosen, tells the story of the horror of the Holocaust.


Dumpster-cum-Boutique Stirs Row
Nine o'clock, Tuesday night: A well-dressed woman with graying hair is interrupted while rummaging through three graffitied Dumpsters on 80th Street, just east of Second Avenue.
She identifies herself only as Jan A. and says she stops by every night on the way home to her apartment nearby.
"Look," she says in French-accented English, "I've found this nice red leather belt," and pulls it out of a brown paper bag.
"What do you think of these beige slacks? They're clean and from Nordstrom's." She returns to the Dumpsters and pulls out one beige, barely worn, Ferragamo shoe.
"We must," she says, clutching her sated shopping bag close, "find the other one."


Frances Pettinelli, Robert Galton
Dr.
Frances Pettinelli, an adjunct assistant professor of English at Baruch College in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Galton, a retired assistant regional health administrator.
The Rev.
Robert Hemstreet, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Villa Bianca restaurant in Flushing, Queens.
The Rev.
John Kamas, a Roman Catholic priest, a took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Galton, who is also a playwright, graduated from Columbia University, from which she received a master's degree in French.
She also received an M.A. in theater from Hunter College and a Ph.D. in drama from City University.
She is the daughter of Anthony Pettinelli of Somerville, Mass., and the late Antoinette Pettinelli.


SEPARATE IS BETTER
I found that being educated at an all-girls school and women's college was a disadvantage ("Separate Is Better," by Susan Estrich, May 22).
Like Estrich, I was taught that women could do anything.
It was easy to believe that, in a cocoonlike setting.
At 22, I attended graduate school, where I was shocked by the rigors of coed socialization, culture and competition.


BEST SELLERS: June 12, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
2
1
15
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
2
5
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
4
3
7
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
5
4
96
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
6
6
8
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
7
8
9
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
8
15
2
ALL GOOD THINGS ... , by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $20.) "Star Trek"'s Enterprise crew tries to quash an effort to eliminate the human race.
9
10
8
THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A young doctor stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.
10*
11
3
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $22.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, who lives in Montana.
11
9
3
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $22.95.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
12*
7
6
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
13
13
61
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
14
16
21
DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss and is accused by her of sexual harassment.
15
12
2
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $21.95.) The private eye V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
57
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
2
4
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
3
3
25
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
4
5
4
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
5
6
14
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
4
6
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
7
10
2
THE HALDEMAN DIARIES, by H.R.
Haldeman. (Putnam, $27.50.) Notes made by the man who was Richard Nixon's chief of staff from 1969 to 1973.
8
7
9
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
9
1
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) An account of the Allied invasion of Normandy 50 years ago.
10*
9
8
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) A South Carolina businessman's two near-death experiences.
11
8
15
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
12
11
22
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
13
14
28
HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.
14
13
36
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
15
40
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
7
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of duplicitous designs in color.
3
4
55
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.
4
3
21
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 28, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) THE BEAK OF THE FINCH: A Story of Evolution in Our Time, by Jonathan Weiner. (Knopf, $25.) A fascinating look over the shoulders of biologists who watched natural selection in motion over some 20 years in finch populations.
BLACK BETTY, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $19.95.) In Mr.
Mosley's fourth novel about the black Los Angeles private detective Easy Rawlins, Easy agrees to track down Black Betty, "a great shark of a woman" who figured conspicuously in his own earlier life.
BONE BY BONE: Stories, by Gary Krist. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Fictions that carry their own weight by drawing, with engaging observation, the daily activities of ordinary people learning to swim in hot water.
THE CONFIRMATION MESS: Cleaning Up the Federal Appointments Process, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $21.) A law professor argues cogently that the Federal confirmation process has become a monster, grotesquely unfair to nominees of both right and left, and destructive to the political life of the nation.
EDITH WHARTON: An Extraordinary Life, by Eleanor Dwight. (Abrams, $39.95.) This life of the novelist in whose work architecture serves virtually as a language lays special emphasis on the houses and gardens Wharton inhabited and carefully made her own; copious illustrations.
LEAN AND MEAN: The Changing Landscape of Corporate Power in the Age of Flexibility, by Bennett Harrison. (Basic Books, $25.) An economist's polemic against analysts who see small, efficient businesses as the models for social organization in a world of rapid change.
MASTERS OF AMERICAN SCULPTURE: The Figurative Tradition From the American Renaissance to the Millennium, by Donald Martin Reynolds. (Abbeville, $67.50.) A clear, readable art historian's guide, handsomely illustrated, to modern American figurative sculpture.
SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND, by Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) A deft, affecting novel whose aging protagonist retires in the vain hope that he can plan the outcome of life and decline slowly, affably toward its end.
SHOT IN THE HEART, by Mikal Gilmore. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Fifteen years after Norman Mailer's "Executioner's Song," Gary Gilmore's youngest brother reclaims his own life in this highly personal account of his family.
THANK YOU FOR SMOKING, by Christopher Buckley. (Random House, $22.) A comic novel that succeeds in enlisting the reader on the side of the devils, represented by an implausible hero: Nick Naylor, an energetic, unscrupulous lobbyist for the cigarette industry.
A WAY IN THE WORLD, by V.S.
Naipaul. (Knopf, $23.) A brilliant, probing autobiographical meditation on empire and inheritance by a mind at the peak of its powers, made of complementary narratives about characters from the author to Sir Walter Raleigh.


Group F
Belgium CUP APPEARANCES Eight (1930, 1934, 1938, 1954, 1970, 1982, 1986, 1990) LAST CUP 1990 (lost to England, 1-0, in overtime in second round) BEST SHOWING Fourth in 1986 FIRST ROUND Morocco, June 19 in Orlando, Fla.; the Netherlands, June 25 in Orlando; Saudi Arabia, June 29 in Washington.
COACH Paul Van Himst.
One of the best players in the long history of Belgian soccer, he was named to replace Guy Thys in 1991 after the Red Devils failed to qualify for the 1992 European championship.
As a star for RSC Anderlecht, he was nicknamed "the white Pele" and became Belgium's top career international scorer with 30 goals.
STYLE While midfielder Enzo Scifo, who sets the pace with his technical skill and vision, is adept at getting the ball to his teammates, the forwards are less adept at finishing.
After a quick start in World Cup qualifying with six straight victories, the Belgians struggled in their last four matches.
Even if they get more punch up front, they will continue to rely heavily on defense.
TOP PLAYERS In Scifo, the Belgians have one of the game's best playmakers.
He has already played in two World Cup finals.
They also have a fine goalkeeper in 35-year-old Michel Preud'homme and two excellent defenders in Philippe Albert and Georges Grun, who are both coming back from knee injuries.
Albert will miss the opening match because of a red card he received in the final qualifying match.
Franky Van der Elst and the attack-minded Marc Degryse are quality midfielders.
OUTLOOK This is the Belgians' fourth straight appearance in the cup finals.
They should advance to the second round thanks to Scifo, the strength of their defense and the relative weakness of their group.
How they fare after that will probably depend on whether Van Himst can find a reliable goal scorer.
One player to remember is Josip Weber, a Croat who became a naturalized Belgian in March.
Weber did not play in any of the World Cup qualifying matches, but he has led the Belgian first division in scoring for the past three seasons.
Morocco CUP APPEARANCES Two (1970, 1986) LAST CUP 1986.
BEST SHOWING Second round in 1986 FIRST ROUND Belgium, June 19 in Orlando, Fla.; Saudi Arabia, June 25 in East Rutherford, N.J.; the Netherlands, June 29 in Orlando.
COACH A former world-class team handball player, Abdellah Ajri Blinda became coach of the national soccer team in September 1993, little more than a month before the decisive qualifying match against Zambia in Casablanca.
Blinda guided the Lions of Atlas to a 1-0 victory.
STYLE Like most North African teams, the Moroccans play with a south European flair, which means lots of short, quick passes, technical excellence and creativity.
Rachid Daoudi, Mustapha el-Hadaoui and Mustapha Hadji, midfielders in the Moroccan 4-4-2, are at the heart of much of this.
Lacking is consistency and a certain physical strength.
TOP PLAYERS The star of the team, Daoudi, has played for WAC Casablanca since he was a teen-ager.
Daoudi, 28, is a left-footed artist with free kicks and an excellent passer.
The best of the expatriates are defender Nourredine Naybet, forward Mohammed Chaouch and el-Hadaoui, who all play professionally in France.
Another with a French connection is Hadji, 22, whose family immigrated to France when he was a boy.
He decided to play for Morocco even though he speaks no Arabic and was a star of the victory over Zambia.
OUTLOOK This team is solid and opportunistic with a good defense.
It is also used to hot, humid conditions, which, because it plays twice in Orlando is potentially significant.
But Morocco lacks a truly dominant player, and though it should have little problem with Saudi Arabia, the Belgians and Dutch are a different matter.
It would be a mild surprise if they reached the second round.
Netherlands CUP APPEARANCES Six (1934, 1938, 1974, 1978, 1990, 1994.) LAST CUP 1990 (lost to West Germany, 2-1, in second round) BEST SHOWING Runner-up in 1974 and 1978.
FIRST ROUND Saudi Arabia, June 20 in Washington; Belgium, June 25 in Orlando, Fla.; Morocco, June 29 in Orlando.
COACH Despite leading the Dutch through a difficult qualifying group, Dick Advocaat was not guaranteed a place on the bench for the World Cup finals.
His spot was only assured after Dutch soccer officials' negotiations with the considerably more renowned Johan Cruyff broke down.
As a player, Advocaat, 46, was a respectable defender and midfielder.
He is the former coach of the Dutch club FC Haarlem and became national team coach after the 1992 European Championship.
STYLE Unlike many top teams in the 1990's, the Dutch are committed to the attack with four men up front: two wings, a center-forward and a fourth player floating between midfield and the front line.
Opposing goaltenders will see a lot of Ronald Koeman, a dangerous sweeper.
TOP PLAYERS Striker Marco van Basten, the three-time European player of the year, first said he had recovered from his ankle injury and would play in the finals.
Last week, he said he wouldn't because his club, AC Milan, was opposed.
The more unexpected blow came May 30 when Ruud Gullit cut short his comeback with the national team and quit.
The Dutch will have to make do with the group that got them to the United States in the first place: a group led by the gifted forward Dennis Bergkamp, versatile midfielder Frank Rijkaard and sweeper Ronald Koeman.
OUTLOOK With Gullit and a healthy "Marco Golo," the Dutch arguably would have been the most talented team in the tournament.
Without them, the team's stock has dropped, but not as much as one might think.
Even with all their stars in 1990, the Dutch barely squeaked into the second round.
This time, much will depend on how quickly the team adjusts to Gullit's departure, how well Bergkamp shoulders the offensive burden.
With all its questions, this team could still go a long way.
Saudi Arabia CUP APPEARANCES This is the first.
FIRST ROUND The Netherlands, June 20 in Washington; Morocco, June 25 in East Rutherford, N.J., and Belgium, June 29 in Washington.
COACH Jorge Solari, but maybe not for long.
The Saudis have had four coaches in the last nine months.
Such turnover is difficult to comprehend when you consider that the Saudis did not lose a match during qualifying.
Solari, 52, took over in March.
STYLE The Saudis, like many Asian sides, have adopted the Brazilians' rhythmic, flowing game as a model.
They construct, create and make the extra pass, relying on the wide-ranging attacking midfielders Saeed al-Oweiran and Khalid al-Muwallid to dictate the pace.
The team used a 4-4-2 throughout qualifying and probably will not deviate because one coach was dismissed because of his desire to go with only three defenders.
TOP PLAYERS The Saudis have a reasonable amount of talent, but they have only one national icon: Majed Abdullah, a 35-year-old striker from Jeddah who first joined the Saudi team in 1977 and has been selected more than 165 times for international matches.
But Abdullah has grown fragile of late and missed most of the Asian World Cup qualifying tournament in October after injuring his knee.
Even if he returns to form, the Saudis will need to look to their two creative, attacking midfielders, al-Oweiran and al-Muwallid, and to their two useful, young strikers, Sami al-Jaber (21) and Fahad al-Mehalel (23).
With the exception of the 33-year-old captain, Mohammed Abdel Jawad, the Saudis are also young on defense.
One player to watch is midfielder Fahad al-Herafi, a former star with the national team.
OUTLOOK Saudi Arabia has succeeded in becoming a perennial soccer power in Asia.
But Asia remains one of the world's weakest soccer regions, so don't expect to see the Saudis in the second round.
An exceptionally young team, this will be the first time most of the Saudis play against world-class competition outside of a friendly.
But the Saudis won't necessarily get blown out by superior opposition.
They are skillful with the ball and unified after nearly a year of training exclusively together.


Inuit


'Shortchanged On Open Space'
To the Editor:
In his essay "Queens West: Why Not Something Great?"  [ May 22 ] , Herbert Muschamp calls for more imagination and a more contemporary and original approach to the design of the structures planned by the city and state at Queens West, across the East River from the United Nations.


New Rules Plus New Players Should Equal Goals
A soul-searching of crisis proportions swept over the power brokers of international soccer after the 1990 World Cup.
What were they going to do about the heart of the game, the missing heart: the goals?
The 14th World Cup, in Italy in 1990, had produced over 52 games an average of 2.2 goals a game, the lowest ever.
There had been five 0-0 games and 14 1-0 games leading up to the semifinals.
Both semifinals ended at 1-1 and had to be decided in penalty-kick shootouts, and the final, in which West Germany beat Argentina, 1-0, was for the most part a dull, defensive affair.


Here's Puffing at You, Kid
CIGARETTES ARE SUBLIME By Richard Klein.
Illustrated. 210 pp.
Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press. $21.95.


World Markets; Success Overseas Hurts China at Home
EVERYONE seems to agree that China is the mother of all emerging markets.
In recent months the heady prospect of gaining a share in what promises to become the world's largest purchaser of everything from shampoo to heavy industrial equipment has infected not only chief executives and bankers but also ordinary investors.
So why then have China's two domestic-share markets hit the skids?


Presumed Intimate
I don't see how I got pregnant again so fast," whispered my lunch companion, who told me she was three months pregnant with her second child. I listened, half embarrassed, as she continued: "I haven't had a period since my first baby was born, nearly two years ago.
I figured I wasn't even ovulating yet because of breast-feeding.
I guess I get pregnant if my husband just looks at me," she said with a shrug.
It wasn't the references to reproductive biology that made me self-conscious.
As is the case with most women of my generation, words like ovulation and period and breast-feeding don't make me blush.
Even talk about sex is fair game, especially sex with a husband.


Swedish Army Officer Kills 7 With Rifle


Ill Overseas
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's Practical Traveler column "Falling Ill Far From Home" (March 20) did not mention that there are travel assistance companies that have 24-hour hot lines and can provide a variety of medical assistance services to sick or injured travelers, including medical evacuation.
My company, International SOS Assistance, not only provides its customers with 24-hour multilingual assistance centers around the world, but also has worldwide medevac abilities and a referral network of 2,500 qualified medical professionals.
There are no membership restrictions or spending limits.


For Summer, Caramoor Hoists a Fabric Ceiling
AS summer approaches, music festivals pitch their tents across the land.
Musicians gear up for two months of bucolic bliss in places like Aspen, Colo., Chautauqua in western New York and the Berkshires.
In Katonah, where the Caramoor International Music Festival gets under way on June 25, audiences will begin another season of picnicking and concert going amid gardens and statuary.
Not as soothing to the senses as a summer concert program but as esthetically pleasing in its own way is the tent raising that heralds a festival's opening.
Known to the trade as "fabric ceilings" or "retractable building spaces," such tents generally spend the winter in storage and are hoisted anew with much muscle power each year.


A Galaxy of Stars Across America
In soccer as in other sports, the big scorers are usually the biggest stars.
But with most of the world's best players gathered for this tournament, eye-catching talent will be on display at almost every position.
And it's not just Germany, Brazil and the other World Cup favorites that have the best and the brightest players.
Because of its worldwide popularity, a star can come from almost anywhere in the world; maybe this month, even from the United States.


Smoking Aloft
To the Editor: As a frequent flier, I have been heartened to read that the campaign against smoking on international flights is succeeding.


90's Commentary in a Classical Medium
THE challenge of carving fluid folds of cloth in stone has fascinated sculptors for centuries.
Among the heroes, saints and mythical figures that enliven historic architecture and public spaces, their illusory garments are often as memorable as their features.
Barbara Segal, a sculptor from Yonkers, has gone a step further by eliminating the figure and allowing clothing, scaled to human dimensions, to speak for itself.
Beyond that, she has democratized the esoteric skill of marble carving by applying it to mundane apparel like a motorcyclist's jacket and a baseball uniform.
In doing so, she is also connecting with the current art world's preoccupation, evident in many recent exhibitions, in which clothing is a vehicle of social commentary.


Corrections
The headlines with the Habitats column last Sunday, and its front-page index listing, described an apartment in the Eldorado incorrectly.
It is one floor, not a duplex.


Sharon Feldman, Alan D. Eidler
Sharon Diane Feldman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Julius Feldman of Fresh Meadows, Queens, was married last evening to Alan David Eidler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Eidler of Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein officiated at Temple Beth Sholom in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
The bride, 36, is an associate with Andrew M. Lawler, a law firm in New York, and an adjunct legal research and writing professor at Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law at Yeshiva University.
She graduated from Yale University and received her law degree from New York University.


F.Y.I.
Loud Wheels
Q.
I was pleased to learn that the police are using Operation Soundtrap to monitor and punish people who blare their music on our city streets.
When will this diligence be applied to "straight-pipe" motorcycles?
These bikes are so loud they set off car alarms.
Can I please say, "THERE OUGHTA BE A LAW!"





The Crime Funnel
PEOPLE IN CALIFORNIA WILL NOT SOON FORGET Polly Klaas and Kimber Reynolds.
A man abducted 12-year-old Polly from a slumber party in her own house, as her mother slept.
He drove her away, strangled her and dumped her body at an abandoned lumber mill.
Kimber, 18, was leaving a restaurant with a friend when two men on motorcycles roared up beside them.
One grabbed her purse, and when she struggled he shot her in the head.


Central Park Was Created For Pedestrians, Not Bikers
To the Editor:
The suggestion in Roland Mullins's June 5 letter that Central Park be turned into a parking lot is the worst idea I've heard since non-alcoholic beer.
It would sharply increase traffic on overcrowded Fifth Avenue, and all for a mere $7 a car.
The only rational, profitable and politically unassailable prospect for Central Park is to turn it into a private airport.


Millie R. Taylor, David Seabrook
Millie Raymond Taylor, a daughter of Patsy Taylor of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Gray Taylor, was married yesterday to David Seabrook, a son of Frances Seabrook of London and Edward Seabrook of Brisbane, Australia.
Jill-Ellen Fuller, a marriage celebrant, officiated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Sydney, Australia.
Ms.
Taylor, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father was an architect in New Canaan, Conn.


Juveniles Who Commit Bias Crimes Confront Their Hate and 'Hot Buttons'
IN a Nassau County courtroom a rabbi sat facing two teen-agers, each accompanied by a parent.
"This is not a punishment, but a privilege," he told them.
"I'm not here to lecture you about the Holocaust. I'm here because I'm concerned about you and what you've done."


Measurement and Fit Key to Kitchen Cabinets
INSTALLING kitchen cabinets may sound intimidating, but even a full layout can generally be installed rather easily by one moderately handy person accompanied by an unskilled helper.
Buying cabinets that fit is crucial.
That can be done with careful measuring and ordering with help from a knowledgeable salesperson.
After the cabinets are delivered, proceeding methodically is the way to go.
The first step is to check the evenness of the walls and floor.
Use a carpenter's level and a long straight-edge board.
Note dips and hollows and mark the lowest and highest flaws.


Housing Plan Opens Door To New Lives
Millie Caraballo is a modern-day pioneer, trekking 25 miles with her daughter and her belongings from one of the worst neighborhoods in Yonkers to this wooded glen on Westchester's northern frontier.
Gone are the drug dealers and burglars, the shootouts and other neighborhood bedlam.
As a result of an unusual court-ordered program to integrate largely white, middle-class areas of Westchester, she and her 8-year-old daughter, Vivian, now have a backyard where songbirds twitter and friends can punch volleyballs over twine strung between evergreens.


Massachusetts
To the Editor: Referring to Susan Spano's excellent article "Meandering Along the Housatonic" (May 8), I accompanied some friends to a restaurant in Great Barrington mentioned in the article, the Castle Street Cafe.
The trip along the river had given rise to a craving for fish, and bouillabaisse was what we wanted.
Alas, we were informed that the dish was served "on occasion" only.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with a front-page article about the re design of ranch houses in Lake Success misidentified an architect.
The house on the left was redesigned by Alan J. Cooper, the house in the center by Nathan L. Laubach.


Religious Conservatives Conquer G.O.P. in Texas
Dolly Madison McKenna stepped to the rostrum at the Texas Republican Party convention here and told the crowd precisely what it did not want to hear.
"There are those people in this audience that want the Republican Party to be a church," Ms.
McKenna declared on Friday, eliciting boos and catcalls.
She persisted: "You are very welcome in the Republican Party. But the Republican Party is not a church."


Ellen McCabe, Bruce Goldfarb
Ellen Marie McCabe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. McCabe of Scranton, Pa., was married last evening to Bruce Harris Goldfarb, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Z. Goldfarb of Boynton Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Israel Wolmark and the Rev.
William D. Campbell, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Woodlands, a hotel resort in Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
The bride, 27, is a pediatric nurse practitioner at the Beth Israel Medical Center in New York and an adjunct clinical instructor at New York University.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a master's degree in nursing.


Central Park Was Created For Pedestrians, Not Bikers
To the Editor:
I am really disgusted.
On May 15 there were three articles about biking and not one expressed any concern for the safety of pedestrians.


POSTINGS: Landmarks Preservation Commission Awards; 13 Projects Win Citations for Enhancing the Urban Environment
The New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission gave 13 awards last week for excellence of design, execution and craftsmanship, commitment to preserving the city's architectural heritage and contribution to the urban environment.
The winners are:
339 East 140th Street, a late 19th-century wood-frame house in the Mott Haven Historic District in the Bronx, restored by Li/ Saltzman Architects and Robinson Contracting.


In Short/Civil War
DEAR MR.
LINCOLN Letters to the President.
Edited by Harold Holzer.
Addison-Wesley, $26.95.


Harold Einhorn and Valery Baker
Valery Baker, the chief architect for station design of the New York City Transit Authority, was married yesterday to Harold Einhorn, an architect and real-estate developer in New York.
Rabbi Judith Lewis performed the nonsectarian ceremony at the couple's weekend home in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
Mrs.
Einhorn is also a deputy vice president of the Transit Authority and a former Manhattan Commissioner of the Department of Buildings.
She graduated from City College.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Aaron S. Goldberg of New York.
The bride's father, who is retired, was a clinical chemist.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Teller Machines Open At 3 Moscow Locations
Visitors to Moscow are now able to use automated teller machines connected to the MasterCard/Cirrus A.T.M. system at three spots: Sheremetyevo International Airport, the Novoarbatsky department store and the Central Telephone and Telegraph office.
By the end of the year, an additional six machines in Moscow and two locations in St.
Petersburg are expected to be added.
For the time being the machines dispense only United States dollars, but eventually users will be able to obtain rubles.


City Assessments Affect Middle Class
To the Editor:
Alan S. Oser's May 8 article on the distortions of the city's assessment system was timely, insightful and very disheartening.
As a lawyer who represents more than 85 co-op properties in the city, I know that the increases in real estate taxation that will result prematurely from the luxury decontrol law, as Mr.
Oser explains, will have the effect of further pushing middle-class residents out of New York City.
This, of course, includes co-op and condo residents and potential apartment buyers.


The Judge's Legacy
To the Editor:
By focusing so prominently on what he calls "the most dramatic tale" in Gerald Gunther's "Learned Hand," Judge John T. Noonan Jr. has misrepresented both Mr.
Gunther's splendid and carefully balanced biography and my grandfather's memorable contribution to American law and (not least) letters.


Computer Skills, Da; Language Skills, Nyet
To the Editor:
"Software for Typing in Tongues" (Technology, May 22) discusses Linguist's Software Inc., which produces fonts and typographical programs for 260 different languages.
Judging from the accompanying photograph showing examples of fonts for five languages, the company's Russian needs brushing up.
The first word, "molitba," is misspelled; "molitva" (prayer) is what is meant.
The next item, "gotspodna," doesn't come close to being a word, although it vaguely suggests "gospodin" (lord, master, gentleman) and "gospozha" (lady, mistress).
However, Mr.
Payne is on target with "Otche nash," or, "Our Father," the first words of the Lord's Prayer.
LOUIS JAY HERMAN  Manhattan, May 23  The writer, a former translator at the United Nations, is the author of "A Dictionary of Slavic Word Families" (Columbia University Press, 1975).


When It's All Over, Let the N.H.L. Marketing War Begin
Is what's good for the Rangers best for the National Hockey League?
Will the Rangers' pursuit of their first Stanley Cup since 1940 shine down upon the league, from coast to coast and from Devils to Ducks?


SUNDAY, June 12, 1994; Believe It or Not! Man Wears 500 Cans! Rides Unicycle!
In the early 80's he grew grass on suits to raise ecological consciousness.
Then, for the sake of art, he stood on street corners in a three-piece suit studded with coins and lined with bounced checks.
One day he begged; the day after he gave money away.
Now Gene Pool (a name he did not inherit) of Brooklyn has created "Can Man" -- the mascot of the Recycling Association of Williamsburg.
Pool's 35-pound, 500-can costume is held together by 100-pound-test fishing line and stands up to Pool's movements, although cans in high-mangle areas like the knees and seat get replaced more often.
As Can Man, Pool performs on stage -- riding a unicycle -- at benefits, school assemblies (he'll remove his headpiece to avoid frightening small children) or any event that requires an arresting metal presence.
Frequently he arrives early to lie on the ground for a while, an apparently inert clump of metal, and then spring up with a cacophonous rattle.
That way, he says, he's assured of being the center of attention: "I'm a canned ham."


No Headline
"It's Louisiana. Louisiana's crooked. It's true. It's a fact. What's to be surprised about?" MARY PALMER, at a riverboat slot machine, on crime and gambling.  [ 20:4. ]


Carolyn Landis, Jeffry Mann
Carolyn Ann Landis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard R. Landis of New York, was married last evening to Jeffry Karl Mann, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Floyd Mann of Aspen, Colo.
Rabbi Ronald Sobel officiated at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
The bride, 32, owns Modern Art Interiors, a gallery in Aspen.
She graduated from Richmond College in London.


In Short/Civil War
THE VACANT CHAIR The Northern Soldier Leaves Home.
By Reid Mitchell.
Oxford University, $25.


Time Out From Bond Market Craziness
To the Editor:
As a psychiatrist and avid investor, I read with interest Thomas J. Friedman's "A Bond Market That Could Use a Psychiatrist" (Market Watch, May 22).
In the old days, a psychiatric patient would go to an analyst for many years, spending four or five hours a week on the couch.
It was expected that through extensive exploration of the unconscious mind patients would develop insight into the nature of their essence and that this process was therapeutic.
Today, however, in the age of information superhighways, "900" numbers and Prozac, the need for ever quicker, painless fixes is the mode.


Battle of the Clipper Chip
On a sunny spring day in Mountain View, Calif., 50 angry activists are plotting against the United States Government.
They may not look subversive sitting around a conference table dressed in T-shirts and jeans and eating burritos, but they are self-proclaimed saboteurs.
They are the Cypherpunks, a loose confederation of computer hackers, hardware engineers and high-tech rabble-rousers.
The precise object of their rage is the Clipper chip, offically known as the MYK-78 and not much bigger than a tooth.
Just another tiny square of plastic covering a silicon thicket.
A computer chip, from the outside indistinguishable from thousands of others.
It seems improbable that this black Chiclet is the focal point of a battle that may determine the degree to which our civil liberties survive in the next century.
But that is the shared belief in this room.


Now the Knicks Attempt to Cash In Their Home Ticket
The Knicks have returned home, where they hope to put the finishing touch on a memorable season.
Enthused by the team's impressive victory Friday night, a raucous Madison Square Garden crowd will greet the Knicks when they meet the Houston Rockets in tonight's Game 3 of the National Basketball Association finals.
It will be the first N.B.A. finals game played in New York since 1973, the last year that the Knicks won a championship.
Game 4 and Game 5 will also be played in New York, giving the Knicks, who have an 9-1 home record during the playoffs, an opportunity to end the series at home.


Walter J. Ganzi Sr.; Restaurateur, 76
Walter J. Ganzi Sr., a Manhattan restaurateur for more than 50 years and head of the group that owned the Palm chain, died on Friday at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre, L.I.
Mr.
Ganzi, who lived in Hempstead, L.I., was 76.
The cause was liver cancer, said his son Victor F. Ganzi.


Jose Jaime Pierluisi, 28, an Aide To the Governor of Puerto Rico
Jose Jaime Pierluisi, an aide to to the Governor of Puerto Rico, was killed on Tuesday night during a robbery in San Juan.
He was 28.
Mr.
Pierluisi, the brother of Puerto Rico's Justice Secretary, was shot to death just before midnight in what the police said was a carjacking outside his parents' home in the affluent Condado section of the capital.
His car, wallet and briefcase were stolen, the police said.


Suzanne Kroin And James Duffy
Suzanne Kroin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Matthew Kroin of Pleasantville, N.Y., was married last evening to James Duffy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Duffy of Venice, Fla.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated at Reid Castle on the Manhattanville College campus in Purchase, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is studying for a master's degree in marriage and family counseling at California State University at Hayward.
She graduated from Lafayette College.


The Not-So-Fine Print
For travelers reluctant to whip out a magnifying glass when they use a map, Michelin Travel Publications has created Zoom maps, a series of large-scale maps of France.
The maps use a scale of 1:200,000, compared to the conventional 1:100,000 scale.
Zoom maps, available for the regions of Toulouse, Bordeaux, Nantes and Clermont-Ferrand, include a small street map as well as a larger regional map.
Maps cost $5 at retail stores or by phone: (800) 423-0485.


Germany, Thy Name Is Consistency
West Germany no longer exists.
Pierre Littbarski is now plying his trade in Japan, and Coach Franz Beckenbauer has moved on to new challenges, as Franz Beckenbauer makes a habit of doing.
But don't think for a moment that this German World Cup team has anything to do with transition.
Americans who prefer the provincial pleasures of the National Football League and major league baseball might need a scorecard to know who's who in the German lineup, but the rest of the world assuredly will not.


Crime
Will V. I. Warshawski make it to her 40th birthday alive?
Just asking, because of course she will; but not until Sara Paretsky puts her fiercely independent detective through some very close calls in TUNNEL VISION (Delacorte, $21.95).
Before V. I. gets to blow out the candles and open her presents, she has to shoot down a plane, beat off an army of red-eyed rats and brave the rushing waters flooding the underground tunnels beneath the Chicago Loop.
But these thrilling feats of heroism are nothing compared with the war of ethics that V. I. wages against a conspiracy of bankers, elected officials and corporate brigands who have their snouts in the city's social services funding trough.
V.
I. stumbles on this cynical swindle when she tries to help a wretched family she finds living in the basement of her office building.
After getting the bum's rush from an advocacy group for the homeless and from feminist friends protecting their own grants, V. I. sticks out her jaw and goes it alone on this dirty, complicated fraud case.


Sports of The Times; Why Rockets Fear a Triple Play
ORDINARILY, I would not look for hidden meanings in the rhetoric coming from the Houston Rockets, but I am not convinced when they say they can win some games in New York.
My deeper feeling is that the Rockets believe that bad things happen in threes -- particularly in New York.
The Rockets seem to feel that New York could be one big Cockroach Motel: The cockroaches enter but do not leave.
This is not a nice thing to say about my hometown, but the Rockets are not talking the normal out-of-towner paranoia about the subways or the streets or the haughty, overpriced restaurants.
They are talking about the Garden.
And they are talking about the peculiar creature known as the 2-3-2 series.


Ms. Eilender, Mr. Shulman
Elizabeth Eilender, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Eilender of Montville, N.J., was married last evening to Jason Robert Shulman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Shulman of New York.
Rabbi David Posner officiated at the Brooklake Country Club in Florham Park, N.J.
The bride, 27, is an associate at Jaroslawicz &amp; Jaros, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and the New York Law School.


Time Out! Name-Check!
FANS of the New York Rangers, who faced the Vancouver Canucks last night with hockey's Stanley Cup on the line, recall 1940 the way fans of the Chicago Cubs hark back in fondness and frustration to 1908.
It was their last championship year.
But when was the last time anyone mentioned 1926, or thought about Tex Rickard or Red Dutton, and when was the last time anyone wondered why on earth a team called the Rangers finds its home in New York and not Texas?


THE LATINIZATION OF ALLENTOWN, PA.
Laurence R. Stains's article "The Latinization of Allentown, Pa." (May 15) tries to make a racial issue of what is essentially one of culture and behavior.
While the Germans who founded Allentown might not have been warm and fuzzy, the values they brought with them -- including privacy and personal restraint -- are considered sufficiently worthwhile to be reflected in many municipal noise ordinances and in leases providing the "right to quiet enjoyment" of one's home.
REGINA KUEHNEMUND New York, N.Y.


Hunting Supermarkets By Public Transportation
To the Editor:
Yes, as you say in your May 29 and June 5 articles, food shopping in New York is a problem.
What is really missing is a good supermarket, accessible by public transportation.


Debra Bender, Joseph Julian Jr.
Debra Bender, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Bender of Billings, Mont., was married yesterday to Joseph Julian Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian of Severna Park, Md.
The Rev.
Joseph Cosgrove performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
John the Evangelist in Severna Park.
The bride, 27, until recently was a special events planner for the Museum of Television and Radio in New York.
She graduated from the University of Montana.


JOINED AT THE HIP
As a candidate for hip-replacement surgery, I laughed out loud while reading Cathleen Schine's Endpaper "Joined at the Hip" (May 22), and her belief that she has so much in common with Elizabeth Taylor.
Cathleen, you better sit down.
I quote from an article in The New York Post: "For her recent hip-replacement surgery at Century City Hospital in L.A., Taylor paid $200,000 to make sure she was as comfortable as she could be, under the circumstances. Her $30,000-a-day hospital suite was totally redecorated before she moved in. . . .  Taylor brought along her dog, hairdresser and own embroidered sheets and pillowcases. Her meals were catered."


Skate Around but Tone It Down
The police and the Parks Department are cracking down on loud music that emanates from an asphalt area of Central Park east of Sheep Meadow.
The area, just south of 72d Street, has served for years as a makeshift roller-skating rink and volleyball court.
The music, which is played on boom boxes, has been growing louder in recent months and wafting over to Sheep Meadow, said Stewart Desmond, a spokesman for the Parks Department.
The meadow is designated a quiet zone by the department.


Irene Khaitman And Joel Fisher
Irene Khaitman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Moisey Khaitman of Rockaway, N.J., is to be married today to Joel Fisher, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Fisher of Flushing, Queens.
Rabbi Michael Strasberg is to officiate at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.
The bride, 28, is an assistant general counsel at the Triarc Companies, a conglomerate in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, from which she also received master's degrees in political science and philosophy.
She received her law degree from Harvard University.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about the planned sale of Ziff Communications referred incorrectly in some editions to the third Ziff brother, who was not pictured.
He is Daniel Ziff, not David.


Compassion Is the Best Medicine
We don't have a health care system but rather a disease cure system.
The public believes and many doctors behave as if most illnesses are curable.
We think of the body as if it were a machine with replaceable parts: defects can be identified, removed and replaced through treatments like organ transplants, drugs and gene therapy.
With a few exceptions, this is not the case.
The expectation of cure has led to an explosion of invasive, expensive and often risky interventions that have at best marginal effects on survival.
We have focused too much on diseases and too little on the people who have the diseases.


Judith Bram, Brian Murphy
Judith Lynn Bram, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Bram of New York, was married last evening to Brian Joseph Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Murphy of Westfield, Mass.
Rabbi Charles Davidson and the Rev.
Salvatore Matarazzo, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Union League Club in New York.
Mrs.
Murphy, 34, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
She received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University and a master's degree in clinical psychology from New York University, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in psychology.
In September, she is to begin an internship at the Postgraduate Center for Mental Health in New York.


Ideas &amp; Trends: The Bondholders Are Winning; Why America Won't Boom
"IT'S the economy, stupid." When James Carville coined the slogan, he meant that his client, Bill Clinton, would be well served by thumping for a stronger economy.
Mr.
Clinton did, and he won.
But now, it turns out, there are an awful lot of people out there who favor a weak economy.
Favor a weak economy?
Who would do that?
Enter that mysterious and slightly sinister entity, The Bond Market, the pre-eminent force in the economy today.
More than any other group, the bond market's members determine how many Americans will have jobs, whether the jobholders will earn enough to afford a house or a car, or whether a factory might have to lay off workers.


With the World Cup Near, Teams Pick Practice Sites in State
SOCCER'S megastars have been landing on the shores of one of the few countries in the world where the sport is not the national pastime.
Twenty-three teams have been arriving in the United States to work out at training camps in preparation for the World Cup series next week.
For the first time in the tournament's 60-year history, the Federation Internationale de Football, soccer's ruling body, allowed the host nation to choose the practice sites.
Forty-seven schools vied to be named designated sites, many of them regarding selection as a wonderful opportunity to enhance their equipment and fields.


Korean Worries Transcend the Bomb
The plot of this country's best-selling thriller seems right out of the evening news.
South Korea's longtime enemy threatens it with annihilation, and the Government in Seoul, after deceiving the White House and the C.I.A., secretly develops its own nuclear weapon in self-defense.
Overheated oratory and misguided diplomacy eventually lead to war, and to protect its factories and airfields from bombing the South launches its first nuclear missile.
But in "The Rose of Sharon Has Blossomed," the enemy invader is Japan, and the Americans prove to be useless wimps, unwilling to live up to their treaty obligations to defend South Korea.
In a triumph of Korean nationalism over ideology, the capitalist South is saved by an alliance with the Communist Government in North Korea, which contributes its own nuclear expertise to save the Korean Peninsula.


Manager's Profile
Andrew Preston
Fund: Calvert World Values, $124 million in assets; 4.5 percent sales load.
Manager since 1992 inception. (Sponsor: The Calvert Group, Bethesda, Md.)


Corrections
An article on page 6 of the Travel section today about restaurants in Maine omits a list of addresses and telephone numbers.
It will appear in that section next Sunday.


Personal Visions of Heaven and Hell
FOR Samara Talkin, heaven is a grid of red string threaded taut on a card, while hell is the grid gone slack and awry.
This pair of images is one of 22 making up "The Marriage of Heaven and Hell," at the B. Beamesderfer Gallery here.
They do not, however, hang as intended by the artists.
Thus, together, Miss Talkin's heaven goes with Pat Lambe's hell, a cryptic shape drawn in fine pen lines over a pink wash and accompanied by a holy card image.


Can Good Guys Challenge Gangster Rap?
A LOT OF PEOPLE ARE WAITING for the rap pendulum to swing.
Sooner or later, the reasoning goes, gangster rap will lose its novelty, once the market becomes saturated with songs about amoral, gun-toting, woman-hating superstuds.
And once that happens, there will be more room for rap that aspires to do more than shock and titillate; there may also be more acceptance of melody and textural variety than there is in gangster rap's rough-and-ready backup tracks.
Some rappers still want to be good guys most of the time, among them newcomers like Afro-Plane and the Fugees (Tranzlator Crew) and the better-known Arrested Development.
The self-righteous justification for gangster rap -- that it reflects ghetto reality, and the world should know -- has grown thinner in recent years, as street-level authenticity has given way to repetitive formulas.
A backlash has begun, from Congressional hearings to gangster-free radio formats to the spoof film "Fear of a Black Hat" to hip-hoppers' own anti-gun public service announcements.


June 5-10; Grand Prize Winner in Photo Competition For Second Graders


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Car Wash or Accessory?
IN East Hampton you can get your hair washed or your dog washed.
But not your car.
In a town where warm weather sprouts luxury automobiles like dandelions, there is no car wash.
Residents have to drive to Southampton for an automatic cleansing.
Victor DePietro, a vehicle visionary, would like to change that.
Mr.
DePietro and his mother, Vivian, are the V's of V &amp; V, a full-service Amoco gasoline station in Amagansett.
Well, it's not exactly full service, Mr.
DePietro said.
Because you can fill up, but you can't wash up.


Bang It, Twang It, Thump It, Price It: It's Art
MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS imaginatively made from washtubs, cigar boxes, American flags and high-heeled pumps are increasingly exhibited these days, not only in SoHo galleries but in prestigious museums as well.
Made primarily to be played in Cajun, bluegrass, folk and jug-band concerts, the wittiest of these devices can heighten a performer's impact on an audience even when silent.
One of the genre's more ambitious sale exhibitions is "Musical Instruments: Fantasy, Sculpture, Folk Art" at the American Primitive Gallery in lower Manhattan, through July 1.
Aarne Anton, the gallery owner, began buying offbeat guitars and drums a decade ago and has organized this show of 65 pieces from his holdings, adding instruments lent by musicians, dealers and other collectors.


N. Danesi Murray; Publisher Was 92
Natalia Danesi Murray, a publishing executive and book editor in New York from the 1950's through the 1970's, died on Thursday at her son's home in Del Mar, Calif.
She was 92.
The cause was heart failure, according to an announcement by the Helen Brann Agency.


Sludge Smell: Peril to a Park?
On summer weekends, hundreds of people trek across a footbridge from East Harlem to the broad expanse of grass on the southern end of Wards Island.
While the park land may appear almost idyllic at first glance, with its sweeping view over Hell Gate to Astoria Park in Queens, it has for many years coexisted uneasily with a huge city sewage treatment plant separated from it by a narrow line of trees.


Sau Yeung, Andrew Blaufox
Sau Fung Yeung, a daughter of Siu Leung Yeung and Tak Kam Yeung of Lewisburg, Pa., is to be married today to Dr.
Andrew David Blaufox, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
M.
Donald Blaufox of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Rothman is to perform the ceremony at the Community Synagogue in Rye.
The bride, 24, is a student at City College.
Her parents own Yung Tin, a restaurant in Lewisburg.


Massachusetts
To the Editor: As a long-time summer resident of Gloucester, may I point out some aspects of this "uncertain" town not mentioned in Suzanne Berne's article "Embracing Cape Ann's Contrasts" (May 8).
Gloucester is where the Massachusetts Bay Colony was founded, and it's one of New England's oldest ports, dating from 1623.
Portuguese fisherman who emigrated to these shores contributed an extraordinary church (Our Lady of Good Voyage, where the Virgin Mary cradles a ship in her arms), and the large population of Italian fisherman provides some wonderful food in the West End of town (try a St. Joseph's sandwich at Virgilio's, on their fresh-baked bread).


The Job Outlook for Current Graduates
SHOES shined and resume in hand, 21-year-old Jason S. Gardner waited on the station platform here last week for the train to Manhattan, where he would begin his job search.
Mr.
Gardner, a 1994 Cornell University graduate, recently joined the ranks of an estimated 1.1 million new bachelor's degree holders nationwide who are looking for work in what economists say is a fiercely competitive market.
The good news is that following a four-year drought on the employment scene, jobs are difficult but not impossible to find, although recent graduates like Mr.
Gardner will have to work hard to ferret them out.


A Fairy Tale Comes to Life, but Gets Up a Bit Stiff
The Crow  Brandon Lee Directed by Alex Proyas R 100 minutes


Sandra Kuttner, John Himelfarb
Dr.
Sandra Joan Kuttner, a pediatric dentist in Flushing, Queens, is to be married today to Dr.
John Himelfarb, a radiologist at South Nassau Community Hospital in Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Fabian Schonfeld is to perform the ceremony at Congregation Beth Shalom in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride graduated from St.
John's University and received a D.D.S. degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Constance Kuttner and Dr.
William Kuttner of Lawrence.


'Mr. Typewriter, New York'
HE restored the shrapnel-battered Hermes Baby that helped Margaret Bourke-White cover the Korean War, and a few months ago he fixed up an old Remington that John Hockenberry, a television journalist, took along to Somalia.
And upstairs from the swirling bazaar that is Fulton Street in lower Manhattan, Martin Tytell goes on repairing typewriters as he has for the last 65 years.
His shop is a quiet shrine to the typewriter, from the hunched turn-of-the-century Remington Standard No. 7 to the sleek and efficient-looking I.B.M.
Selectric, with plenty of variations bearing majestic names like Olympia and Corona.
In an age when most people have abandoned such low technology for the faster, more versatile personal computer, the Tytell Typewriter Company has managed to maintain its niche -- in part because most competitors have left the business or branched out, but also because there is another family business: a lucrative document-investigation service.
After all this time, typewriters remain Mr.
Tytell's passion.
For decades, the post office has delivered mail to him addressed, "Mr. Typewriter, New York."


At S.R.O.'s, Quality Varies Yet Squalor Is Common
They range from the squalid, degrading and dangerous at the bottom to the spare, poor but reasonably clean and safe at the top.
At 111th Street just off of Riverside Drive, for example, the exterior of one building housing mostly destitute single men afflicted with AIDS is so well maintained that it blends into a gracious neighborhood of co-ops and brownstones.


Whose Park Is It Anyway?
The six-mile road that loops through Central Park is popular with savvy cabbies as a shortcut past congested city streets.
But over the years, access to the bucolic bypass has steadily shrunk as the city sealed out traffic at certain hours to accommodate growing crowds of strollers, runners, bicyclists and skaters.
Now, advocates of an auto-free park are staging protests for a total ban, pitting themselves against the Automobile Club of New York, the taxi industry and businesses who argue that further restrictions would choke traffic.
The advocates even blocked traffic at a march June 3.


Even If It Is Misleading, Smoking Initiative Cannot Be Blocked
State election officials have lost their fight to block a ballot initiative on smoking sponsored by a tobacco company, despite assertions by petition signers that they had been misled.
Acting Secretary of State Tony Miller had sought to survey signers after receiving complaints that those gathering the signatures had presented the measure as a weapon in the effort to prevent smoking when it would actually weaken many local anti-smoking measures already in place.


Houston Space Center Marks Moon Landing
Space Center Houston is celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Apollo moon landing with laser light shows, documentary videos and 18 space-related exhibits created from 200,000 Lego pieces.
The laser light show uses four large screens, sound and laser effects to provide a sensory re-creation of the lunar mission, including the the first Earth rise seen from the surface of the moon.


The Growth of Islam in Westchester
THEY come from densely populated southern Yonkers with its Jordanian delis, Halal butcher shops and Middle Eastern bakeries.
They come from the leafy green, middle-class enclaves of Chappaqua, Harrison, Cortlandt Manor and Dobbs Ferry.
Men come, mostly wearing Western clothes.
Women come dressed in loose-fitting long dresses and skirts, a scarf or headdress covering all but the face.
On Fridays, they come to pray.
Muslims come to prayer quietly, just as quietly as they have come to the region.
Shoes removed at the door, in their stocking feet, they pad softly across the carpets of their Westchester mosques.
The Muslim population in Westchester is growing in number, but quietly, without dramatic confrontation, public relations efforts or missionary outreach.


Health Care Battles Are Being Won in Congress, but War Is Still in Doubt
Health care legislation is finally lurching forward in a few committees on Capitol Hill, but there has been nothing resembling a breakthrough.
With just three weeks left before the July 4 recess, Democratic leaders are still struggling to build the centrist coalition essential to pushing a bill through the full House and Senate.
In both houses, lawmakers are polarized over fundamentals: whether to guarantee health insurance to all and -- as a necessary means to that end -- whether to require employers to pay for the bulk of their workers' insurance.


The Executive Computer; In the Quest for Faster Networks, a Battle Over Standards
FORGET, if you can tune out the noise, the battle raging to supply the vaunted infrastructure for the prophesied information superhighway.
Most business users of information technology have more immediate needs.
Rewiring a local area network, or LAN, may lack the cachet of building the "infobahn." But it is a pressing concern for many companies and a huge opportunity for the purveyors of adapter cards, hubs, bridges, routers and the other paraphernalia of network, or "distributed" computing.
According to the Yankee Group, a Boston consulting firm, organizations will spend $3.7 billion on high-speed LAN equipment in 1997, up from $478 million in 1993.


Martha Pigott, James Donelan
Martha Pigott, a daughter of Joanne Pigott of Kensington, Conn., and the late James P. Pigott 3d, was married yesterday to James Hanley Donelan, a son of Ann and Charles Donelan of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The Rev.
Soon K. Ahn officiated at the Kensington United Methodist Church.
Joseph A. Goulart Sr., a Roman Catholic deacon, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Donelan, 32, is the assistant director of public relations and development for the Connecticut Humanities Council in Middletown.
She graduated cum laude from Bates College.


SEPARATE IS BETTER
Susan Estrich's brief but powerful statement on the efficacy of single-sex classes for girls reiterates what teachers in girls' schools have always known.
Girls develop particular strengths working with other girls.
They learn to trust themselves.
I regularly see girls thriving in mathematics and in the sciences.
MARY JANE YURCHAK Head of School, The Hewitt School New York, N.Y.


The Two Sides Of the Hill Country
THERE are places in the Hill Country of south-central Texas where the deer and the antelope still play, where the stars are too bright to twinkle, where weathered ranch hands sip coffee with artists in century-old cafes, and where seldom is heard the chirping of telephones or the discouragement of the evening news.
The hills are where we head when we reach the threshold of technology tolerance in Austin.
Even a weekend will do.
And then there are the places we go when we travel with our two teen-agers, for whom a weekend without sensory overload is a weekend in hell.
The allure of bed-and-breakfasts is unfathomable to our two children, Nick, 12 years old, and Laura, 16, who are astonished that anyone would want to stay some place that didn't have cable TV, a swimming pool and room service.


Group C
Bolivia CUP APPEARANCES Two (1930, 1950) LAST CUP 1950 BEST SHOWING First round in 1930 and 1950 FIRST ROUND Germany, June 17 in Chicago; South Korea, June 23 in Foxboro, Mass., and Spain, June 27 in Chicago.
COACH From his bushy mustache to his diverse resume, Xabier Azkargorta stands apart from the rest of the World Cup coaching fraternity.
A specialist in traumatic medicine, Azkargorta, a 40-year-old Basque, left his practice at the end of 1992 to take over the Bolivian team.
The result was spectacular as the Bolivians qualified for the finals on their own for the first time in history.
STYLE They often use a 5-4-1 (five defenders, four midfielders and one striker), but that does not mean they are defensive-minded.
Their midfielders and outside defenders are very quick to counterattack, which helps explain how the team scored more goals (22) than any other in South America during qualifying.
TOP PLAYERS Bolivia's strength is its midfield, which would have been considerably stronger if its star, 24-year-old Marco Etcheverry, weren't hampered by a knee injury.
The Bolivians will be forced to rely more heavily on attacking midfielder Erwin (Platini) Sanchez of the Portuguese club Boavista.
Sanchez, like his French namesake, is a remarkable passer and has a gift for free kicks.
Julio Cesar Baldivieso, another midfielder, also bears watching, as does striker William Ramallo, who led the continent in scoring during qualifying with seven goals.
OUTLOOK The bad news for the Bolivians is that Denver is not a World Cup site.
They perform best in high altitude and won all four of their matches at home in La Paz, which lies at about 13,000 feet.
But hyperventilating opponents do not explain all of Bolivia's success.
The real explanation lies in a new generation of players and the inspirational influence of Azkargorta.
The presence of Spain in the same group and uncertainty over Etcheverry mean the Bolivians are unlikely to see the second round.
Germany CUP APPEARANCES 12 (1934, 1938, 1954, 1958, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1974, 1978, 1982, 1986, 1990. East Germany in 1974) LAST CUP Champion in 1990 (beat Argentina, 1-0) BEST SHOWING Champion in 1954, 1974 and 1990 FIRST ROUND Bolivia, June 17 in Chicago; Spain, June 21 in Chicago, and South Korea, June 27 in Dallas.
COACH Hubert (Berti) Vogts played in three World Cup finals (1970, 1974, 1978) for the national team and was named German player of the year in 1975 and 1979.
He has spent his entire coaching career with the German Football Federation, working with juniors and as an assistant coach before replacing Franz Beckenbauer in 1990.
STYLE Precise, relentless and remarkably cohesive.
Lothar Matthaus should prove a more versatile sweeper than Thomas Berthold, who started against Argentina four years ago.
The continuing brilliance of Thomas Hassler and the rise of Stefan Effenberg, Matthias Sammer and Andreas Moller guarantee that the Germans will remain aggressive in midfield.
TOP PLAYERS At 33, Mat thaus is no longer the dominant creative force of 1990, but the captain remains a cut above his peers as he prepares for his fourth cup appearance.
Nine of the 11 players who started in the 1990 final are back, including Bodo Illgner, Jurgen Klinsmann, Rudi Voller, Hassler and Andreas Brehme.
The best of the new crop: Effenberg, Sammer and Moller.
OUTLOOK Germany has played more matches (68) in the cup finals than any other nation; there's no reason to believe it won't get to play 7 more this year.
Beckenbauer's inspirational qualities will be missed, but the Germans are poised and talented enough to inspire themselves.
South Korea CUP APPEARANCES Three (1954, 1986, 1990) LAST CUP 1990 (0-3) BEST SHOWING Never past the first round FIRST ROUND Spain, June 17 in Dallas; Bolivia, June 23 in Foxboro, Mass.; Germany, June 27 in Dallas.
COACH Despite seven years as a defender with the South Korean national team, Kim Ho never made it to the World Cup finals as a player.
Ho, 49, started his coaching career in 1979 as an assistant with the national under-19 team, where he helped develop many of the players on South Korea's 1986 and 1990 cup teams.
He became coach of the national team in September 1992.
STYLE South Korea is a dangerous counterattacking team that, against Asian competition, likes to penetrate up the wings, particularly the right side where Noh Jung Yoon is faster and more powerful than most who mark him.
TOP PLAYERS The attacking midfielder Kim Joo Sung, the only South Korean playing in Europe, has the biggest reputation.
A former Asian player of the year, he started for South Korea in the 1986 and 1990 World Cup finals and adopted the nickname Sampson because of his long hair that he said gave him strength and courage.
But he was overshadowed during qualifying by another attacking midfielder, Noh Jung Yoon, a compact and swift technician who usually operates on the right wing.
The South Koreans also may have the best goalkeeper in Asia in Choi In Young and a midfielder who was sensational in Qatar in Shin Hong Gi.
OUTLOOK The first Asian team to play in four World Cup finals does not have an illustrious past from which to draw confidence.
In eight previous matches against the globe's best, the South Koreans have managed only one tie and have been outscored, 29-5.
Ho's goal is the second round, and such ambition is admirable.
Spain CUP APPEARANCES Eight (1934, 1950, 1962, 1966, 1978, 1982, 1986, 1990) LAST CUP 1990 (Lost to Yugoslavia, 2-1 in second round) BEST SHOWING Quarterfinals in 1934 and 1986 FIRST ROUND South Korea, June 17 in Dallas; Germany, June 21 in Chicago, and Bolivia, June 27 in Chicago.
COACH Outspoken and combative, Javier Clemente has been directing the national team for less than two years and has reshaped it profoundly, phasing out such high-profile World Cup veterans as Michel and Emilio Butragueno and opting for youth and solidarity in the form of nine players from Spain's best club, FC Barcelona.
STYLE The Spaniards are very versatile, with many players capable of doing damage.
They are so versatile that Clemente has been criticized for not developing a true playmaker.
Unless midfielder Julen Guerrero emerges, the creating will be left largely to Jose Maria Bakero, who plays behind the front line in the 4-4-2 and, like many of the Spaniards, is extremely dangerous with his head.
TOP PLAYERS Among the best are striker Julio Salinas, midfielders Josep Guardiola and Bakero, defenders Albert Ferrer and Miguel Angel Nadal and the venerable goaltender Andoni Zubizarreta, one of the rare holdovers from the 1990 cup team.
Zubizarreta will have to miss the opening game, however, after being suspended early in the first half of Spain's decisive qualifying match against Denmark.
OUTLOOK With Spain's depth, skill and weak first-round opposition (Germany, of course, excepted), it should be a lock for the second round and just might make it go the semifinal.


Worlds Lost in Seas of Sorrow
TO PASS FROM THE 19TH century, with its stately procession of towering musical personalities, to the 20th, with its primitive melee of systems and styles, is to confront a disturbing fragility in music itself.
Decade after decade, composers have fought for a personal, lasting voice amid the whirlwind of technical possibilities.
In certain places, at certain times, they have faced a simpler and more desperate struggle to keep writing at all in the face of implacable cultural and political hostility.
Twentieth-century music cannot be seen whole; it is a damaged thing, whose wishes and dreams count as much as its tangible accomplishments.
No period of recent history illustrates these contingencies more starkly and painfully than the era between the world wars.
Music exploded in all possible directions: atonal modernism, tonal nostalgia, futurism, populism and satiric eclecticism.
Soon the possibilities hardened into orthodoxies, whether of the Serialist, Neo-Classicist or socialist-realist kind.
In the inferno of World War II, some younger composers had their confusion solved by death; most who survived spoke in distinctly less colorful tones.
Greater waves of experimentation followed in the 1950's and 60's, but no era would again feel such unbounded freedom.


Corrections
An article last Sunday, about the artists who sued the National Endowment for the Arts after their grants were denied, misstated the date of a scheduled performance by Holly Hughes.
She will perform at Dance Theater Workshop on June 25, not on June 26.


Hoping to Catch Lightning in a Bottle With Early U.S. Success
The World Cup runs feverishly for a month, but the United States is cramming all of its aspirations into the first 90 minutes.
The hopes of advancing to the second round, the future of a professional soccer league in this country, the galvanizing of public interest may rest almost entirely on the outcome of the American opener against Switzerland on Saturday at the Pontiac Silverdome.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 12, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
2
4
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
3
17
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
4
8
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
5
7
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
6
12
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Doomsday brings horrors to America.
7
6
THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) The sins of their mother haunt a boy and girl when a carnival comes to town.
8
3
INTEREST OF JUSTICE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A judge's pursuit of the murderer of her sister and brother-in-law.
9
7
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
10
1
MCNALLY'S RISK, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) Archy McNally investigates a Palm Beach woman and mysterious deaths.
11
5
SURRENDER MY LOVE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) Wrongly branded a spy, a ninth-century viking finds revenge and romance.
12
2
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Americans on holiday in Italy learn a lot about themselves.
13
8
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
14*
6
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Troubles befall a woman and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
15
1
THE RED HORSEMAN, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $6.50.) An American intelligence officer struggles to obtain control of Soviet nuclear forces.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
22
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
4
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
3*
6
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.
4*
553
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
22
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
6
5
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
7
2
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in combat in Vietnam and recently committed suicide.
8*
69
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
9
3
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
10
8
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans.
11
7
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on.
12*
32
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as seen through the A.A.
Milne character.
13*
139
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
14*
11
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
15*
54
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
169
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
2
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
3
176
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
34
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 28, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Dennis Potter's Last Interview, On 'Nowness' And His Work
IN FEBRUARY, Dennis Potter was told that he would soon die of cancer of the pancreas and liver.
Potter, who died Tuesday at the age of 59, had devoted his professional life to television, conceiving and writing a series of brilliant, quirky, sometimes bitterly controversial series for the BBC and Channel 4.
These included such triumphs as "Pennies From Heaven" (1978, remade as a Hollywood film with Steve Martin and Bernadette Peters), "The Singing Detective" (1986) and last year's "Lipstick on Your Collar."
Given his commitment not to novels or to plays but to what he considered the inherently democratic and implicitly subversive medium of television, it made perfect sense for him to make his farewell in a televised interview.


A Fairy Tale Comes to Life, but Gets Up a Bit Stiff
City Slickers II The Legend of Curly's Gold  Billy Crystal, Daniel Stern, Jack Palance, Jon Lovitz Directed by Paul Weiland PG-13 116 minutes


A Different Kind of Slave
BOND OF IRON Master and Slave at Buffalo Forge.
By Charles B. Dew.
Illustrated. 429 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $27.50.


Making Books Bloom
The New York Public Library's Spring Gala, benefiting the library's book fund, with cocktails, dinner and dancing, June 2.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Book Company Considers 2d Downtown Superstore
Barnes &amp; Noble is planning another superstore, its fifth in Manhattan.
And once again, the company is looking to lease in the neighborhood of its flagship operation on Fifth Avenue at 18th Street.


Miss Davis And Mr. Blum
Mindy-Ellen Davis, a daughter of Marvin and Judith Davis of Bloomfield, N.J., is to be married today in Short Hills, N.J., to Evan Brian Blum, a son of Norman Blum of Fair Lawn, N.J., and Barbara Glueck of Norwood, N.J.
Rabbi Gary Listokin is to perform the ceremony at the Short Hills, a catering establishment.


THE HIDDEN HENCHMAN


Like, Cool Is Back
If the philosopher Hegel was right and there really is a behind-the-scenes spirit animating the phenomenal world, it has got some explaining to do.
How to account for the emergence of 67-year-old Tony Bennett as hipness incarnate among the Lollapalooza set?


First, Surveys. Then, Plan to Change Bus Routes. Now, Protests.
After conducting detailed surveys and interviews to find out how to improve bus service in Co-op City, the Transit Authority recently announced a plan to alter several routes that serve the sprawling complex.
There is one small problem, however: It seems that no one in Co-op City wants the changes they supposedly requested.
Residents by the hundreds have called officials at Community Board 10 to complain, and about 2,000 signatures have been collected on a petition to leave the routes untouched, Co-op City officials say.


GET IN LINE FOR SUMMER JOBS
WITH an infectious smile, youthful optimism and a disarming knack for conversation, 18-year-old Shawn Thomas seemed a model candidate the other day when he walked into the Manhattan office of the New York State Department of Employment in search of a summer job.
He had done everything right.
Having checked for job listings at Julia Richman High School, where he will graduate in two weeks, he then canvassed clothing stores and restaurants in his South Bronx neighborhood.
On this day, looking sharp in a denim jacket and sport shirt, he had set out on his own for Manhattan, saying he was determined to "go where the jobs are."


Abbie Wolfson, Terence Sanger
Abbie Nachama Wolfson, the daughter of Stephen A. Wolfson of Santa Monica, Calif., and Mitzi Hoag Beggs of Sherman Oaks, Calif., is to be married today to Dr.
Terence David Sanger, the son of Dr.
Linda Sanger and Dr.
Sirgay Sanger, both of New York.
Rabbi Richard Meirowitz is to perform the ceremony at Temple Emmanuel in Newton, Mass.
The bride, 30, graduated from Wellesley College.
She expects to receive a master's degree in psychology later this month from Bridgewater State College and to begin studying for a Ph.
D. in clinical psychology at Boston University in September.
Her father is a lawyer in Culver City, Calif.
Her mother is an actress.


INSIDE
Rangers Lose Again
The 4-1 loss to the Canucks sent the Stanley Cup series to Game 7.
SportsSunday, section 8. (Some copies went to press before the game ended.) It's Tabasco Cat Again
Tabasco Cat, the Preakness winner, outran Go for Gin to take the Belmont Stakes.
SportsSunday, section 8.


SEPARATE IS BETTER
The irony has not escaped men that, at the same time Shannon Faulkner is seeking admission to the all-male Citadel, Susan Estrich writes an article praising all-female schools and colleges.


Group B
Brazil CUP APPEARANCES 14 (only country to have been in every tournament).
LAST CUP 1990 (lost to Argentina, 1-0, in second round) BEST SHOWING Champion in 1958, 1962 and 1970.
FIRST ROUND Russia, June 20 in Stanford, Calif.; Cameroon, June 24 in Stanford; Sweden, June 28 in Pontiac, Mich.
COACH Carlos Alberto Parreira, a 51-year-old Brazilian.
He never played at the World Cup level, and this is his second tenure as coach.
He was the team psychotherapist when Brazil won the World Cup in 1970.
Parreira has also coached Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.
STYLE Freewheeling and improvising from defense to midfield to attack.
Attractive to watch once it gets into a rhythm.
TOP PLAYERS Romario, a prolific scorer -- and legendary loudmouth -- who plays in Barcelona; Rai, a midfielder, who plays for Paris St.
Germain in France, and Bebeto, a forward, who plays for Deportivo La Coruna in Spain.
A reserve forward is Ronaldo, a 17-year-old sensation who works the ball equally well with his left and right foot and who scored 54 goals in Cruzeiro's first 54 games.
The front-line duo of Romario and Bebeto symbolizes what Bebeto thinks is Brazil's edge over its opponents.
"Creativity," he said.
"We are a group of players capable of deciding a game in an individual play. And the coach will give us that freedom during the cup." The lightning-footed Romario is known for his outspokenness, and his refusal to accept sitting on the bench led to his suspension from the national team last year.
Bebeto, a shy, frequently injured homebody, has great ball control around the penalty area and is known for his dangerous free kicks.
OUTLOOK One of the favorites in the tournament despite being under pressure for failing since 1970, the year it won the tournament with what is considered the best team in the history of the World Cup.
This team has no Pele or Rivelino or Zico or Gerson, but it has a plethora of talented players from defense to attack.
They are good enough to restore Brazil's traditional attacking skills.
Look for the squad to be one of the most entertaining and colorful teams.
Cameroon CUP APPEARANCES Two (1982, 1990) LAST CUP 1990 (lost to England, 3-2, in quarterfinals) BEST SHOWING Quarterfinals in 1990.
FIRST ROUND Sweden, June 19 in Pasadena, Calif.; Brazil, June 24 in Stanford, Calif., and Russia, June 28 in Stanford.
COACH Henri Michel, a likable Frenchman, in January became the fifth man to coach Cameroon since its heartwarming performance in Italy in 1990.
Michel is no stranger to the Rose Bowl, where Cameroon will open against Sweden.
It was there that the French team coached by Michel won the gold medal in the 1984 Summer Olympics.
Later, as coach of the national team, he led France to a third-place finish in the 1986 World Cup.
STYLE They used a 4-4-2 four years ago and throughout qualifying, but Michel is leaning toward a 4-3-3 here.
The system suits his open demeanor and the Indomitable Lions' surplus of talented strikers.
Michel will probably let Francois Omam-Biyick, no longer a true center-forward, operate behind the front three.
TOP PLAYERS Cameroon's best player is probably its angular forward Omam-Biyick, who has scored many important goals in nine years with the Lions.
Their best-known player is Roger Milla, the 42-year-old striker who came out of retirement four years ago and scored four goals to lead Cameroon into the quarterfinals.
Against the wishes of Michel and Omam-Biyick (but with the full support of the Cameroonian public), Milla has come out of retirement again.
It remains to be seen whether Michel will play him, particularly since the Lions have no shortage of faster running mates for Omam-Biyik, including the explosive 23-year-old forward Alphonse Tchami.
OUTLOOK Political infighting, poor management and financial difficulties turned the team's preparation into a farce.
Michel got punched in the face by Jean-Claude Pagal after he learned he was not chosen for the team.
With an unsettled mix of aging stars and inexperienced youngsters, and with a nasty group that includes Brazil, Sweden and Russia, the Indomitable Lions look incapable of making the second round.
Russia CUP APPEARANCES Seven as the Soviet Union (1958, 1962, 1966, 1970, 1982, 1986, 1990).
LAST CUP 1990 (1-2).
BEST SHOWING Semifinals in 1966 FIRST ROUND Brazil, June 20 in Stanford, Calif.; Sweden, June 24 in Pontiac, Mich., and Cameroon, June 28 in Stanford.
COACH Pavel Sadyrin, a 51-year-old Russian who took over the team after the dissolution of the Soviet Union, was successful player and coach at the club level.
But late last year, 14 of his players called him "incompetent" and refused to play in the World Cup if he remained coach.
The Russian federation backed Sadyrin and gave the players an ultimatum.
The mutiny was not the first by a team coached by Sadyrin: he was dismissed at Zenit Leningrad after a player rebellion there in spite of winning a league title.
STYLE Orthodox European style.
They take a direct route from defense to attack primarily through the flanks with minimal lateral movement.
TOP PLAYERS Sergei Yuran, a 24-year-old forward with Benfica of Portugal, is one of the finest prospects in the world and has scored seven internaional goals.
Dmitry Kharine, a goalkeeper who plays for Chelsea in England was in goal for the gold-medal winning Soviet team in 1988.
Dmitry Radchenko, a forward, who plays for Racing in Spain.
OUTLOOK This is country that has gone through perhaps more team adversity than any other in the tournament.
It would be difficult to restore harmony after the coach went as far as calling the rebelling players traitors.
Sadyrin doesn't have the service of four key players: winger Andrei Kanchelskis of Manchester United, forward Sergei Kiryakov of Karlsruhe in Germany, forward Igor Kolyvanov of Foggia in Italy and forward Igor Shalimov of Internazionale of Milan in Italy.
This is a team that still has good individual players, but they lack cohesion, preparation because of the revolt and are in a difficult group.
Don't look for them to get past the first round.
Sweden CUP APPEARANCES Eight (1934, 1938, 1950, 1958, 1970, 1974, 1978, 1990) LAST CUP 1990 (0-3) BEST SHOWING Runner-up to Brazil in 1958 FIRST ROUND Cameroon, June 19 in Pasadena, Calif.; Russia, June 24 in Pontiac, Mich., and Brazil, June 28 in Pontiac.
COACH Tommy Svensson, a 49-year-old Swede, who played for the national team 39 times, including the World Cup tournament in Mexico in 1970.
He had coached four Swedish clubs and was coaching in Norway when he was asked to restore Swedish honor after the team finished 21st in Italy in 1990.
STYLE Closer to the so-called English School that calls for long passes down the flank and crosses into the middle of the attack.
TOP PLAYERS Tomas Brolin, who plays for Parma in the Italian League, has had a stormy relationship with the Swedish team and news media, and actually told Svensson he didn't want to play for his country.
But he came back and scored three goals in the 5-0 victory in the qualifying game against Israel.
Martin Dahlin, a forward with Borussia Monchengladbach of Germany, was Sweden's leading scorer during qualifying, with eight goals in the nine games.
Another key player is Tomas Ravelli of Gothenburg, the 34-year-old goalkeeper.
Klas Ingesson, a midfielder, injured his neck in a car crash earlier this month but is expected to be all right by the time the tournament starts.
OUTLOOK Another team hampered by the fact that most players compete for clubs outside the country and don't play enough together.
Lack of cohesiveness may be evident as a result.
The presence of Brolin and Dahlin makes the Swedes dangerous offensively, and advancement past the first round is not farfetched.


Jean Kunkel, Jeffrey Wieler
Jean Ann Kunkel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Kunkel of Kensington, Md., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Scott Wieler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas N. Wieler of Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert W. Perry, a Disciples of Christ minister, officiated at North Chevy Chase (Md.) Christian Church.
Mrs.
Wieler, 43, is a freelance writer and fund-raising consultant in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University and received graduate degrees from Harvard University, she a master's in education and he an M.B.A.
The bride also received a master's degree in art history from Columbia University.


Going Way Beyond Lobster In Six Maine Restaurants
THINK of eating on the coast of Maine and you think of clam shacks, lobster-in-the-rough and covered-dish suppers at the Grange hall.
But Maine, for all its rusticated culinary charm, offers other possibilities.
Like fine cooks in the rest of the country, Maine chefs are creating and developing an innovative cuisine that combines the best of local ingredients with the kind of classy, casual elegance that is now the hallmark of the best American cooking.
Local ingredients naturally include some very fine seafood -- lobster, of course.
But there are also magnificent halibut and other deep-water fish, diver-caught scallops with their coral-colored roes attached, fresh crab, clams, mussels and oysters and briny sea urchin roes -- a burgeoning industry for local harvesters.
Put this richness together with home-grown salads and other vegetables, fine local goat's-milk cheeses and first-rate oven-baked breads from the many traditional bakers, and you have the makings of very fine meals.


BENEFITS
Dancing With the Experts MONDAY -- The New York City Ballet's annual "Dance With the Dancers" benefit will be held at the New York State Theater.
After cocktails at 8 P.M. and a buffet supper, guests will have the opportunity to try their dancing techniques with the professionals.
The party's theme will be "Havana '58," when the Tropicana and the mambo were the dance rage.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 870-5585.
Ringside Seats MONDAY -- Elizabeth Streb Ringside, a dance company noted for its feats of physical control and endurance, will hold an opening-night benefit starting with cocktails at 5:30 at Elizabeth Murray's loft, 408 West 15th Street.
The performance will follow at 8 P.M. at the Joyce Theater, Eighth Avenue at 19th Street.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 780-0700.
Evening for Spanish Theater TUESDAY -- The Repertorio Espanol, a Spanish repertory theater that performs across the United States, Latin America and Europe, will celebrate its 25th anniversary with a black-tie benefit at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment that will include the flamenco dancer Pilar Rioja and songs by the company's musical ensemble.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 889-2850.
In a Fragrant Garden TUESDAY -- The 52 acres of the Brooklyn Botantic Garden will be the setting for "A Garden of Fragrance," a benefit that will begin with cocktails at 5:30 P.M. in the Cranford Rose Garden.
A buffet supper and an auction of rare fragrant plants will follow in the Palm House.
Tickets, $200, from (718) 941-4044, extension 259.
Benefiting Y Programs TUESDAY -- The Y.M.C.A. of Greater New York will honor Richard A. Jalkut, the president and chief executive of Nynex, and Sally Jessy Raphael, the television personality, at its annual black-tie benefit for the Y's citywide programs.
Cocktails at 6 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 630-9600.
Auction of Glass Art TUESDAY -- The New York Experimental Glass Workshop in Brooklyn will hold a benefit auction called Masterworks of Contemporary Glass at Christie's from 6:30 to 8 P.M.
The evening will include a champagne reception.
Tickets, $100, from (718) 625-3685, or $125 at the door.
Children of Bellevue TUESDAY -- Children of Bellevue, founded in 1949 to offer guidance and representation for children who are patients at Bellevue Hospital Center, will hold a cruise around New York Harbor, with cocktails, a buffet, a raffle and games of chance aboard World Yacht's Princess.
Boarding at 6, sailing at 7 P.M. from Pier 81 at West 41st Street at the Hudson River; the yacht is to return at 10 P.M.
Tickets, $125, or $75 for guests younger than 35, from (212) 315-5554. 5 Awards From Channel 13 TUESDAY -- Five women in five fields will be honored by WNET, Channel 13, at a black-tie benefit at the Plaza: Brooke Astor, who will be cited for her civic responsibility, Joan Ganz Cooney for children's education, Charlayne Hunter-Gault for public affairs, Beverly Sills for the arts, and Gay Vance for community service.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 627-1000. 'Friends in Deed' Benefit TUESDAY -- Friends in Deed, founded in 1991 by Mike Nichols and Cynthia O'Neal to provide support for people with life-threatening illnesses, primarily AIDS and cancer, will benefit from the premiere screening of Mr.
Nichols's new movie, "Wolf," starring Jack Nicholson and Michelle Pfeiffer.
The 6:30 P.M showing at the Ziegfeld Theater, 141 West 54th Street, will be followed by dinner at the New York Hilton.
Tickets, $125 for the movie alone or $500 for the movie and dinner, from (800) 996-5433.
New York Citiwomen WEDNESDAY -- New York Citiwomen, a chapter of younger members of Women's American ORT, the international educational network that builds schools and finances educational programs, will hold a fund-raising party at Ten, 10 East 60th Street.
From 6:30 to 9:30 P.M., there will be dancing, hors d'oeuvres and a cash bar.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 505-9631, or $45 at the door.
Century of Service THURSDAY -- Israel's consul general in New York, Colette Avital, will be the guest of honor at the Centennial Ball of the New York branch of the National Council of Jewish Women.
Starting at 6:30 P.M., there will be cocktails, dinner, dancing, entertainment and a variety of shops offering gift items.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 535-5900, extension 25.
A Cruise for Heartshare THURSDAY The younger members of Heartshare Human Services of New York will hold a summer cruise around New York Harbor to raise money to send foster children in New York City to summer camp.
Guests can board a Circle Line boat at 42d Street and the Hudson River from 6:30 to 7 P.M.
The three-hour cruise will include dancing, pizza and an open bar.
Tickets, $42, from (718) 330-1101 or $50 at the boat.
Visiting Nurse Fund-Raiser FRIDAY -- The Manhattan Volunteer Committee of the Visiting Nurse Service of New York will hold a dinner-dance at the Racquet and Tennis Club, 370 Park Avenue (52d Street).
Cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Black tie.
Tickets, $175, from (212) 794-9200, extension 4820.
Volunteers for Boy Scouts FRIDAY -- The Harlem District Boy Scouts of America will hold its annual volunteer recognition dinner-dance at the Bell Multiple Use Center, 165 West 131st Street, from 8 P.M. to 2 A.M.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 234-3028.
Irish Fund-Raiser FRIDAY -- First Step, a nonprofit group that seeks to create inner-city jobs in Dublin and other Irish cities through construction projects and training programs, is holding its first fund-raising event in the United States.
Cocktails at 6:30 P.M. at Tavern on the Green will be followed by a buffet dinner, dancing and entertainment with Irish harpists, fiddlers and dancers.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 598-3654.
AIDS Theater Project JUNE 20 -- "Looking Back, Glancing Forward," a cabaret show of selections from plays about AIDS, will be performed at an 8 P.M. benefit at the Roundabout Theater, Broadway at 45th Street.
The show, to benefit the AIDS Theater Project, which seeks to dispel myths and fears about AIDS through theatrical presentations, will be preceded by a 7 P.M. champagne reception at the theater.
Tickets, $75 for reception and show or $35 for the show alone, from (212) 475-6200, extension 305.
Auction for City Opera JUNE 20 -- The New York City Opera will hold its annual "Night at the Auction" on the Promenade of the New York State Theater, starting with cocktails at 6 P.M.
Items to be auctioned will include cruises, other vacations, art and jewelry.
Dinner at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 870-5640.
For Special Surgery JUNE 21 -- The Hospital for Special Surgery will hold its annual tribute dinner, starting at 6:30 P.M. with cocktails, followed by dinner and dancing at the Waldorf-Astoria.
James R. Houghton, the chairman and chief executive of Corning Inc., will be honored.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 997-0100.
Benefit for Casita Maria JUNE 21 -- The junior committee of Casita Maria, New York's oldest Hispanic settlement house, with locations in the South Bronx and East Harlem, will hold a benefit party from 10 P.M. to 1 A.M. at Patria Restaurant, Park Avenue South at 20th Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 807-7535.
Sunset Cruise for Visions  JUNE 21 -- Visions, which provides services to the blind or visually impaired in New York, will hold a benefit cruise around New York Harbor aboard the World Yacht Princess.
Boarding and a cocktail party will begin at 6:30 P.M. at Pier 81, 41st Street and the Hudson River.
Departure will be at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
The yacht is to return at 11 P.M.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 425-2255.Sunset Cruise for Visions.
Aiding Glaucoma Research JUNE 22 -- The annual Singular Sensations Dinner-Dance will be held at the St.
Regis, starting with cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
The black-tie evening, at which 25 single young women will receive awards for their community service, will benefit the Glaucoma Foundation.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 757-7880.
Breathing Easier JUNE 27 -- The AIR Society will hold a benefit auction at Christie's to benefit the National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine in Denver.
A cocktail reception and an auction of items including trips and memorabilia like a tennis racquet from Gabriela Sabatini will start at 6 P.M., followed by coffee and dessert.
Tickets, $70, from (212) 382-0711, or $80 at the door.
Remembering the '69 Mets JULY 14 -- Ed Kranepool, Tug McGraw, Art Shamsky, Bud Harrelson, Tommie Agee and Ed Charles will be on hand to reminisce about their world championship Mets team of 25 years ago at a benefit for the Valerie Fund.
The fund supports health-care services for children with cancer and blood disorders.
Cocktails at 5:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing and entertainment at the Sheraton Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J.
Tickets, $150, from (201) 761-0422.


Method and Madness; HOW MEN AND WOMEN THINK
The human brain, according to an emerging new body of scientific research, comes in two different varieties, maybe as different as the accompanying physique.
Men, when they are lost, instinctually fall back on their in-built navigational skills, honed from far-off days of tracking large prey miles from home.
Women, by contrast, tend to find their way by the simpler methods of remembering local landmarks or even asking help from strangers.
Men excel on psychological tests that require the imaginary twisting in space of a three-dimensional object.
The skill seems to help with higher math, where the topmost ranks are thronged with male minds like Andrew Wiles of Princeton, who proclaimed almost a year ago that he had proved Fermat's Last Theorem and will surely get around to publishing the proof almost any day now.


Rangers Sent Staggering Back Home for Game 7
If the Rangers win the Stanley Cup for the first time since 1940, they will have to do it the hard way.
They will have to win a pressurized Game 7 of the championship round Tuesday night before their demanding and now nervous fans at Madison Square Garden.
The Vancouver Canucks forced the final series, and the season, to the limit with a rousing 4-1 victory at Pacific Coliseum tonight before a capacity crowd of joyous fans who chanted "1940! 1940!" and "We want the cup! We want the cup!"


More Than a Feeling? Mets Lose 5th Straight
In the beginning, Jeff Kent would hit a home run.
Or Bret Saberhagen would pitch a complete-game victory.
Or some member of the Mets' bullpen would surprise everyone with a clutch performance.
It doesn't happen that way anymore.


Tory Beilinson, Peter E. Johnson
Victoria Leigh Beilinson, a director of publicity at Nickelodeon, the cable television station in New York, was married on Friday to Peter Eric Johnson, the television columnist for USA Today in Arlington, Va.
Justice Phyllis B. Gangel-Jacob of State Supreme Court in Manhattan performed the ceremony at Arqua, a restaurant in New York.
Mrs.
Johnson, who is known as Tory, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Les D. Beilinson of Miami Beach.
She attended Emerson College.


Elizabeth Subin And John Crock
Elizabeth Subin, a daughter of Harry and Carolyn Subin of Bedford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John Gordon Crock, a son of John N. Crock of Southwest Harbor, Me., and Sally Crock of Bar Harbor, Me.
Judge Howard Levine of the State Court of Appeals in Albany officiated at the home of the bride's parents.


Fresh Air Fund Opens Window on Another World
There is a kind of assuredness in Arthur Anderson's voice when he talks about both his future and his past.
Even though a fire destroyed his home a month ago, he says, it did not extinguish the inspiration that made him realize a dream.
Mr.
Anderson, 32, a financial planner from Albany, reminisced recently about how, as a 7-year-old, he spent time with a family that had hosted him through the Fresh Air Fund, and how that convinced him that some day, he too would like his own home.


Beth A. Lassar, Moshe Schwartz
Beth Alexandra Lassar, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen D. Lassar of West Hempstead, L.I., was married on Tuesday to Moshe Schwartz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Schwartz of Monsey, N.Y.
Rabbi Moshe Tendler officiated at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
The bride, 21, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She expects to begin studying in August for an M.D. at New York University.


Scientists Fight Navy Plan to Shut Far-Flung Undersea Spy System
Facing increasingly tight budgets, the Navy is shutting down most of a $16 billion system that spied on enemy ships and submarines for decades by monitoring their undersea sounds.
But scientists are fighting to save as much of the network as possible for environmental research and other civilian uses.
In a post-cold-war windfall, scientists and Federal experts have been using the system to track whales, spy on illegal fishing, monitor earthquakes and volcanoes at sea, and look for shifts in ocean temperature that could portend climatic trouble.


Health Plan Gains, But Fight Goes On
With just three weeks left before the July 4 recess, Democratic leaders are still struggling to build the centrist coalition essential to pushing a health care bill through Congress, while Senator Bob Dole indicated that he would block any measure that required employers to pay for their workers' health insurance.
Articles, page 28.


AIDS Group Splits on Gala After Founder Takes a Salary
THE organization that runs one of the largest AIDS benefits on Long Island has split, and the event this year is quite likely to be the last.
A number of board members and longtime volunteers left the group, Stopping AIDS Together, last year after a dispute over two board members' taking salaries.


Corrections
An article on May 29 about Isle Royale, in Lake Superior, referred incorrectly to Michigan's state stone.
It is known as the Petoskey stone, not the "green stone."


Police Cite Gang's Expansion As 3 Are Hurt in Coney Island
In an incident at Coney Island that led the police to suspect the Latin Kings youth gang,a teen-ager was stabbed and two young people were shot Friday night when gang members went on a rampage.
Shortly before midnight, the police said, about 30 gang members were near an arcade on West 12th Street, between Bowery Street and the Boardwalk.
The police said they argued a 19-year-old man, who was stabbed once in the back.
Then four gang members fired into the air and into the crowd.


5 Years After, A Big League Of Their Own
Raymond Molina has 18 baseballs on the floor of his closet, each one proof of a home run he hit.
For Raymond, a 13-year-old Little League catcher, the stack of balls is more than a reminder of personal glory.
It is a memorial.
In April 1993, a holdup man gunned down his father at his convenience store.
A week later, Raymond hit a ball clear over the fence at Holcombe Rucker Park.
Someone retrieved the ball and gave it to Raymond, who saved it and dedicated it to his father.
"I save them because that's what my father wanted me to be, a good ballplayer," Raymond said.
"I want to be Babe Ruth Jr. I'm saving them so I can someday show my kids I hit a lot of home runs."
Five years ago, Little League baseball didn't even exist in Harlem.
Now there are so many young people like Raymond Molina showing up to play in the Harlem Little League that Iris and Dwight Raiford, the league's founders, are resorting to creative ways to find space, like using soccer fields at City College.
Every Saturday, 46 teams and more than 650 boys and girls, aged 5 to 15, in brightly colored T-shirts are sprinkled across diamonds around then neighborhood.
There has been an outpouring of support.
Private sponsors have put up the $100-per-player costs of shirts, shoes, bats, gloves and balls.
Local bankers, doctors, dentists, lawyers, teachers and political leaders are financing teams, like the Lion Insurance "Lions" or the United Doctors of Harlem "Medicos."
Parents and friends are volunteering their time as umpires, coaches and guardians, like Tony Sanchez, who roams the different fields as head umpire when he's not coaching his own team or playing himself.
Unmarked police cars often idle nearby as officers stop to watch.
And, with city help, Holcombe Rucker, a small park tucked away under the Triborough Bridge at 155th Street and Frederick Douglass Boulevard, has been transformed.
Once overgrown with weeds and covered with graffiti, the park now has lush grass, new lights, chalk lines and a silver chain fence.
"This is our gem," said Iris Raiford, her back toward Yankee Stadium looming in the background.
"This is the best."
The Raifords, a Harlem couple, began dreaming of the league eight years ago, when their son Josh begged them for a place to play baseball.
They got a charter from the Little League Foundation and successfully lobbied Mayor Dinkins to dig up a few asphalt-covered parks and provide money for Holcombe Rucker.
Mr.
Raiford, a Citicorp vice president, and Ms.
Raiford, a domestic violence coordinator for the Manhattan District Attorney, also got the word out in Harlem.
Tehya Roberson, a 13-year-old third basewoman for the Stylists, plays on one of two new softball teams in the league started by her mother, Cecelia.
And Tehya plans to stay with Harlem Little League, even into high school, "seeing as my mom is the coach, and I have a lot of friends on the team."
"Most of these children come from single-parent families," Dwight Raiford said.
"There's an African saying, 'It takes a village to raise a child."' LORI NICKEL


Political Notes; D'Amato: Boss or Friendly Unifier?
Even after a two-day Democratic state convention where one speaker after another portrayed him as a manipulative Republican Party boss, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato is, his opponents say, unrepentant.
On Monday, he called Richard M. Rosenbaum, who wants to wage a primary fight against Mr.
D'Amato's gubernatorial candidate, State Senator George E. Pataki, and urged him to get out of the race.


Bermuda Race Ignites an Old Fire Between Pro and Amateur Sailors
It is a smoldering problem in sport, that unhappy mingling of amateur and professional.
But in the coming Newport-Bermuda Race, a premier regatta for offshore sailors, claims of unfair play have reignited the issue.
More than 160 sailboats, ranging from 34 to 126 feet, are scheduled to leave Newport, R.I., Friday for the 635-mile ocean passage to St.
David's Light off the east coast of Bermuda.
But for at least six of the fastest teams, a disagreement over which trophy they are competing for has brought in a storm cloud already.


The Nation; Perot Drops From Sight But Leaves A Message
Even in the bad times, Ross Perot's most faithful believers would get a quick morale booster by calling an unlisted tape-recorded message from their leader.
"This is Ross," he said, reassuringly, on the eve of the vote last November on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
"I'm available to you day and night."
On the other end of the Perot line nowadays is a synthesized female voice that curtly thanks people for calling, then clicks off.


Amy Anderson, Jeffrey R. Glass
Amy Hart Anderson, the daughter of David C. Anderson and Catherine B. Anderson, both of St.
Louis, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Robert Glass, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Gordon Glass of Brooklyn.
Associate Justice Kathleen A. Voccola of State Family Court in Providence, R.I., officiated at the Rosecliff Mansion in Newport, R.I.


Israel Fears A.N.C. Backlash on Support for Old South Africa
For years the two countries were partners in isolation, bonded by economic and military ties but also by the fact that both were often treated as outcasts.
Now, South Africa has a black President who once hugged Yasir Arafat, and the white Government that Israel used to work closely with is gone.
And Israel itself has come to accept and negotiate with Mr.
Arafat, albeit with a correct handshake and not Nelson Mandela's joyous embrace.


Waterbury Symphony Gets New Conductor
THE Waterbury Symphony's search for a conductor ended recently with the appointment of Leif Bjaland as music director.
"It was not an easy choice," said the symphony's president, Dirck Barhydt.
"The four other guest conductors who participated in the 1993-94 concert season were top grade, but we believe that Mr. Bjaland has the background and experience to meet our needs and lead our orchestra to new successes in the future."
The 39-year old maestro, who was born in Michigan, studied at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor and began his podium career as conductor in residence of the Flint Symphony.
He later served as assistant conductor of the San Francisco Symphony, artistic coordinator of the New World Symphony and music director of the Yale Symphony.
In 1988 Leonard Bernstein selected Mr.
Bjaland as one of three young artists to participate in the Chicago Symphony's American conductors program, and the music director of the Chicago at the time, Sir Georg Solti, called him "a most musical young conductor with great future possibilities."


Habitats/Something for a Rainy Day; Finding the Right House
JOAN AND GARY SCHUMACHER go house hunting only on rainy days.
"Do you want to know why?" asks Mr.
Schumacher.
"Because there aren't that many other people looking, so we won't have competition for the best brokers."
"Rainy days," added Mrs.
Schumacher, "are the days the agency owners send all the employees home and figure they'll man the shop just in case anybody comes in."


Ms. Donohue, Mr. Peters Jr.
Maureen Donohue, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Donohue of Hampton Bays, L.I., was married yesterday to Richard A. Peters Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peters of Cranford, N.J.
The Rev.
Frederick Hoesli performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Ms.
Donohue, 32, is keeping her name.
She owns Donohue's Steak House in New York.
She graduated from Pace University.


Laughter, With Dividends
To the Editor:
Margo Jefferson's essay "Seducified by a Minstrel Show"  [ May 22 ]  addresses two fundamental problems in American popular culture: First, by setting comedy programs like "Amos 'n' Andy" in their context of cultural politics and their historical tradition of racist stereotype, she shows how we laugh differently at "Amos 'n' Andy" depending on who we are and how we see ourselves in relation to the sitcom's characters.


Carol A. Evans, C. A. Fleischman
Carol Ann Evans, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Robert Evans of Gilford, N.H., is to be married today to Charles Andrew Fleischman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Fleischman of Port Washington, L.I.
Rabbi David Kudan is to officiate at the chapel of Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass.
The bride, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Harvard University.
She is to become a law clerk for Judge Cornelia G. Kennedy of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in Detroit.
Her father owns the Bob Evans Tree Farm in Londonderry, N.H.


Edward Kienholz, 65, Sculptor Known for Elaborate Art, Dies
Edward Kienholz, whose elaborate, often macabre sculptural tableaux were savage indictments of American life, died on Friday at the Bonner General Hospital in Hope, Idaho.
He was 65 and had homes and studios in Hope as well as Berlin and Houston.
The cause was heart failure, said Peter Gould, whose gallery, L. A. Louver, has represented Mr.
Kienholz since 1981.


Q and A
Europe for Vegetarians
Q.
Are there any guides to vegetarian eating in Europe? -- Abigail Schade, New York, N.Y.


Mutual Funds; A Social Responsibility Shake-Up
BIG changes are afoot in the "socially responsible" mutual fund industry.
Funds have realized that investing in companies with strong environmental or equal-employment records isn't enough -- they have to make money for their shareholders, too.
Or at least not lose money.
The Calvert Group in Bethesda, Md., the biggest socially responsible group -- eight funds with $1.2 billion in assets -- announced extensive changes last month.
Working Assets in Portsmouth, N.H., shuffled managers on some of its funds and recently hired managers to start new ones.
And six new socially responsible funds have begun in 1994.


Critic's Notebook; Broadway Reaches Across the Hudson To Give a Tony to the McCarter Theater
YOU don't have to be theater-wise to know that the Tony Awards, the stage counterpart of the screen's Critic's  Notebook Oscars, reflect the exclusivity of Broadway, not the wholeness of theater.
According to the eligibility rules for the accolades that will be bestowed tonight at the Gershwin Theater on Broadway and broadcast live at 9 o'clock on CBS, theater is defined by 19 blocks in midtown Manhattan.


Nava Y. Fried, Daniel J. Sheer
Nava Y. Fried, the daughter of Sharon Thon and Donald Fried, both of Cherry Hill, N.J., is to be married today to Daniel J. Sheer, a son of Rabbi Charles Sheer of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Gloria Sheer.
The bridegroom's father is to officiate at the Skylands, a catering hall in Randolph, N.J.
The couple graduated from Yeshiva University.
The bride, 23, is a candidate for a master's degree in urban planning at Hunter College.
She is the director of the summer youth program at the Hudson River Park Conservancy in New York.
Her father is the office manager at Richard Fried &amp; Associates, an insurance company in Bensalem, Pa.
Her mother is an occupational therapist at Garden State Therapy Associates in Cherry Hill.


When a Star Is Torn Between 2 Countries
Last October, a young soccer player named Mustapha Hadji came to a cultural crossroads.
He could either join the French under-23 national team and, if all went well, represent the country he was raised in at the 1998 World Cup finals in France.
Or he could join the Moroccan senior national team and, if all went well, represent the country of his birth at the 1994 World Cup.
Four years was too long to wait.


Topics of The Times; Metropolitan Magic
The opera was "Tosca." The venue was the Great Lawn in Central Park.
The occasion was the opening of the Metropolitan Opera's 28th summer season outdoors.
And the audience was an awesome 50,000 New Yorkers -- in a single night, one-third the number who hear the company in its entire indoor season.
By the end of its three weeks outdoors, the Met will play to more than a quarter million.
For many, it is a first brush with live opera.
For all, it is free.


Knicks' Style Is Simply Shocking. Culture Shocking.
The buzz is back, that hot current of sportschat that crackles like a live wire.
But unless the Knicks win, it will fade quickly and we will never know if the buzz could have reached the glad roar of 24 years ago, when the city seemed to think that a No. 1 team meant hope for all.
Nothing in recent memory has matched those electric days and nights of the 1969 and 1970 sports seasons.
Broadway Joe Namath's guaranteed Jets victory in the Super Bowl was a prelude to the Mets' 1969 World Series victory before the Knicks won Game 7 in Madison Square Garden.


Measurement and Fit Key to Kitchen Cabinets
INSTALLING kitchen cabinets may sound intimidating, but even a full layout can generally be installed rather easily by one moderately handy person accompanied by an unskilled helper.
Buying cabinets that fit is crucial.
That can be done with careful measuring and ordering with help from a knowledgeable salesperson.
After the cabinets are delivered, proceeding methodically is the way to go.
The first step is to check the evenness of the walls and floor.
Use a carpenter's level and a long straight-edge board.
Note dips and hollows and mark the lowest and highest flaws.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about a collection of Victorian buildings for sale in East Haddam, Conn., misidentified the house shown.
It is the Emory Johnson Homestead, not the home of the village's owner, Raymond Schmitt.


Caroline Lamson, David M. Arend
Caroline Tidd Lamson, a daughter Carole A. Lamson of New York and Newton W. Lamson 2d of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to David Michael Arend, the son of Dr.
Carolyn Bruse of Arlington, Mass., and Dr.
Lawrence E. Arend Jr. of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
L.
Denver Hart performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Arend, 25, graduated from Boston University and the Culinary Institute of America.
Her father is the president of the Donley Communications Corporation, a public relations company in New York.
Her mother is a partner in Lamson &amp; Petroff, a New York law firm.


Sports of The Times; Do You Believe In Curses?
NOW the Rangers are coming home.
Either like champions, to win the Stanley Cup, or like the elephants they often resembled last night, to die.
Poised for posterity again, the Rangers lost to the Vancouver Canucks, 4-1, thereby creating a rare and decisive seventh game for the Stanley Cup in the steaming cauldron of Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night.


The World: Democracy Without the Democratic Spirit; Mexicans Bring Fear to the Ballot Box
Buried in the many changes that Mexico recently passed to insure that the upcoming presidential election is free and fair lies one law never mentioned by officials who travel through Mexico and the United States touting the reforms.
It says 10 percent of private campaign contributions can be anonymous, a concession to opposition parties that feared donors would hold back their money if they had to be identified as disloyal to the government.
Even in a modern Mexico already enjoying sharply increased trade from the North American Free Trade Agreement with the United States and Canada, fear of reprisal for resisting the single-party Government that has ruled for 65 years remains a fact of daily life and, some say, an impediment to the realization of true democracy.


New Birth-Rate Projections Have to Please Baby-Food Makers
To the Editor:
That Sandoz Ltd., the Swiss drug and chemicals company, is buying Gerber Products Company is perfectly logical to a demographer.


Yeats Transcendent
Uptown -- Backstage at the Booth Theater last Monday, Mia Farrow was clutching a script to her chest as if it were a Bible and she were a St.
Teresa in training.
She was about to walk onstage with 16 other actors for the Irish Repertory Theater's benefit reading, "Yeats: A Celebration!"
"It's impossible not to love Yeats," Ms.
Farrow said.
" 'When you are old and gray and full of sleep,' " she recited, calling up a beloved line with the dreamy voice of a novice who has discovered a key to transcending the ordinary through art.


Lisa C. Nadel, Paul G. Thomas
Lisa Claire Nadel, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin S. Nadel of Chester, Conn., was married yesterday to Paul Gordon Thomas, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Thomas of Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Douglas Sagal officiated at the Old Meeting House in Chester.
The bride, 28, is an assistant print specialist at Christie's Auction House in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.


In Love With Clothes of the 30's and 40's
SOCIAL notes from all over: The bride wore white satin, a copy of a 1930's wedding dress.
The bridesmaids wore original 1930's bias-cut long velvet gowns.
The ceremony took place under a canopy fashioned from an antique white lace bedspread.
The bridal table was decorated with well-preserved old bride-and-groom wedding cake tops from the bride's extensive collection.
"I will be living out my fantasy: I love the 30's look," said Stacey Winnick, describing the scene of her wedding later this year to Robert Pushkin.
Ms.
Winnick, a 34-year-old who started out as a collector of vintage clothing, has managed to turn her extensive collection into a business.
Four years ago, she started her company, Vintage by Stacey Lee.
It sells clothing, shoes and accessories from the 1880's through the 1950's to designers who then copy the pieces or use them as an inspiration to create new lines.


A Fairy Tale Comes to Life, but Gets Up a Bit Stiff
The Princess and the Goblin  Animated Directed by Jozsef Gemes G 82 minutes


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
MARTYRS' DAY: Chronicle of a Small War By Michael Kelly.
Vintage, $12.
The "small war" took place in 1991 in the Persian Gulf, where the author, now a Washington correspondent for The New York Times Magazine, was a freelance reporter.
He records his own impressions and the feelings of participants on both sides.
"Honesty is the outstanding quality of Michael Kelly's book," Edward Mortimer said here last year.
The causes and consequences of the fighting are examined in CRUELTY AND SILENCE: War, Tyranny, Uprising, and the Arab World, by Kanan Makiya (Norton, $10.95).
This Iraqi dissident reveals the horrors of Saddam Hussein's regime while criticizing Arab intellectuals for failing to speak out against repression.
Last year our reviewer, Stanley Reed, said he gives "almost cinematic glimpses of cruelty and suffering."


Big Goals, Exuberantly Scored
Faustino Asprilla turns his trademark acrobatic cartwheel each time he scores a goal.
He has been turning it often for the Colombian national team.
"Asprilla is our Diego Maradona," said Giorgio Pedraneschi, president of Asprilla's AC Parma club.
"He is the player who can turn a match around at any moment."


On the Trail Of the Muggletonians
To the Editor:
Your review of E. P. Thompson's "Witness Against the Beast: William Blake and the Moral Law" (May 8) contains only the second reference to a sect known as the Muggletonians encountered in a lifetime of fairly omnivorous reading, the first occurring in my all-time favorite novel, "Anthony Adverse," by Hervey Allen (1933).


Beloved Park Gets a Facelift And a Name
For more than a half-century, the tiny playground with no name sat tucked away at the intersection of Kings Highway, Avenue H and East 49th Street in the Flatlands.
And the generations of neighborhood children who came to play finally wore out its swings and benches.
But about a year ago the city's Department of Parks and Recreation began a $190,000 renovation project.
Last week the playground reopened with new brightly colored infant and junior swings, two colorfully stenciled areas for "street games," new wooden benches, a new water fountain, three big shade trees, and a name, William Sunners Playground.


Navigating the Health Swamp: A Primer
Nearly everyone agrees that the U.S. health care system needs fixing.
But how much, and how to do it?
This guide to the problems and the main proposals before Congress was prepared by Diane Rowland and Peter Long of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, a national health care philanthropy.
PROBLEMS The Uninsured: 37 Million
Millions of Americans become uninsured each year, most of them because they do not get insurance on the job and cannot afford to buy it.
In 1992, 37 million Americans -- 15 percent of the non-elderly population -- were uninsured on any given day.
Because the elderly have Medicare coverage and the very poor and disabled generally have Medicaid, the overwhelming majority of the uninsured (84 percent) are full- or part-time workers and their families.
The high cost of insurance limits coverage.
Seven in 10 uninsured Americans make less than $30,000 a year.
Although the uninsured do get care, they get less, get it later and end up sicker than people with insurance.
The Vulnerable
While most Americans have insurance, changing jobs can often mean losing coverage: two-thirds of companies with fewer than 25 employees do not offer coverage.
In the course of a year, one in five Americans -- more than 50 million people -- will be uninsured at least temporarily and one-third will be without insurance for at least a year.
Only 7 percent of uninsured adults say they are uninsured by choice.
Six in 10 say they cannot afford coverage and 22 percent cite loss of a job or lack of on-the-job insurance.
Three percent can't get coverage because of health problems.
The Cost of Care
The U.S. is the only major industrial nation that does not provide universal health coverage, yet it spends far more than any other country on health -- more than $800 billion a year, 14 percent of the gross domestic product.
And the portion is growing: without cost-containment measures, it is expected to top 18 percent by the year 2000.
From 1988 to 1993, the average family premium for employer-based group health insurance doubled, from $2,500 to $5,200.
Families wanting to buy health insurance directly from an insurer can spend as much as $10,000 a year.
CHOICES Single-Payer
The single-payer plan would create a universal public system of health insurance coverage with comprehensive benefits financed by income and payroll taxes instead of premiums.
All Americans would be covered, in much the same way the elderly are now covered by Medicare.
Employerbased coverage, private insurance, Medicare and Medicaid would be replaced by a single plan.
Costs would be controlled through administrative simplification and by a national budget with Government-regulated payment rates for doctors and hospitals. (Example: McDermott-/Wellstone bill.) Employer Mandate
Employer-based approaches build on the already extensive system that provides private insurance to two-thirds of the non-elderly population.
To achieve universal coverage, all employers would have to offer insurance to employees and help pay the premiums.
The Government would provide coverage or help pay for private insurance for nonworkers; Medicare would be kept for the elderly.
To contain costs, some plans would regulate prices and set spending limits; others would expand use of managed care, and promote increased competition among health insurance plans.
Some plans call for regional alliances, which would spool the purchasing power of small business and promote price competition among plans. (Examples: Clinton plan, House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee bill.) Individual Mandate
This approach places the responsibility for obtaining coverage on individuals and families, rather than employers or the Government.
To achieve universal coverage, people would be required to obtain insurance either through their employers or by buying it on the private market.
The Government would subsidize premium costs for low-income individuals and families.
Employers could cover some of the premium costs, but would not be required to.
Costs would be controlled by promoting increased consumer consciousness, greater use of managed care and greater competition among health plans. (Examples: Thomas-Chafee bill, Stearns-Nickles bill).
No Mandate
Voluntary plans build on the existing system by providing incentives to expand coverage and control costs, but do not mandate coverage.
Expanded coverage would be encouraged through reforms in the private health insurance market (Like eliminating ineligibility for those with pre-existing conditions), subsidies for low-income people and alliances to help small companies and individuals buy insurance.
This approach would control costs and make coverage more affordable by increasing competition among proivate insurance plans and cost consciousness among consumers. (Examples: Cooper-Breaux bill, Michel-Lott bill.) ASSESSING THE PLANS Single-Payer
All Americans would have comprehensive health benefits through a single system, regardless of income or employment.
This approach would reduce much of the complexity of the present system, but it would shift most of the financing from employers and the private sector to the tax system.
It would virtually eliminate a role for private insurance and would concentrate control of the health care system under the Federal Government.
It would greatly expand the role of the Government in health, but also provide Government with greater purchasing power to control costs.
Employer Mandate
Employer-based approaches expand insurance coverage with the least disruption to current arrangements and would minimize change for most Americans.
They rely on employers to cover workers and on the Government to provide coverage for nonworkers.
Employers and their employees, rather than the Government, pay most of the cost for insuring all workers and their families.
Employer mandates would mean higher health insurance costs for some businesses, especially small companies that do not offer insurance today.
Government assistance to businesses could help avoid wage cuts, job losses and other potential effects.
The mobility of the work force makes this approach administratively complex and requires explicit mechanisms to assure continuous coverage.
Cost control based on greater use of managed care and competition among health plans would require much restructuring of the market, without assured effectiveness.
Individual Mandate
Making individuals responsible for insurance would break the link between employment and insurance coverage -- easing the mobility of the labor force, but also potentially removing business as a source of financing and a force in controlling costs.
Government subsidies could be directed to low-wage workers and low-income families rather than more broadly applied to businesses, but the loss of employer contributions would mean substantial tax increases for Federal subsidies to make insurance affordable, without adequate subsidies, coverage could remain beyond the reach of many Americans.
An individual-based program would substantially alter current insurance arrangements, and would be complicated to administer and hard to enforce.
Increasing consumer awareness could help restain costs, but unless they join alliances, consumers would lack the purchasing power that big employers have now.
No Mandate
Voluntary approaches provide incentives for cost control and for reaching the uninsured and the vulnerable, but no assurances that these problems will be fully addressed.
Market reforms and expanded coverage for low-income people would reduce the number of uninsured but not assure universal coverage.
Expanded coverage of low-income people would require additional Federal revenue.
Cost containment would depend largely on the success of free-market competition in restraining premium increases.


A Friend of Morningside Park Is Recalled by Those He Inspired
Over a quarter century ago, Robert McKay, an otherwise quiet and gentle man, laid down in the bucket of an earthmover, and was arrested.
He was engaged in a last-ditch protest against Columbia University's plan to build a gymnasium in Morningside Park.
On May 27, he died of leukemia at the age of 57.
Yesterday, a group of his friends and admirers remembered him, at the park he helped to preserve.
They faced a jagged cliff, which was to be the rear entrance of the gym, and watched the picturesque waterfall the community created in its place.


A Closer Look on Wiretapping
The Government's ability to tap private phone calls is under siege.
Newly developed encryption systems allow callers to mathematically scramble their messages so that no one, including the Government, can eavesdrop.
And digital technology -- from cellular phones to call-forwarding -- makes wiretapping increasingly difficult.
The Clinton Administration is running scared and proposes two fixes, neither satisfactory.
Government needs to wiretap under legally restricted circumstances.
Though used sparingly during the 1980's (1,000 a year), taps helped convict more than 20,000 felons.
But before tampering with existing arrangements, the Administration must show that its proposals are workable and will not trample on existing rights to conduct private phone conversations.
So far it has cleared neither hurdle.


In Short/Civil War
TAINTED BREEZE The Great Hanging at Gainesville, Texas, 1862.
By Richard B. McCaslin.
Louisiana State University, $29.95.


Italy's Final Exhibition Unsettles the Faithful
The marquee game between Italy and Ireland in the first round of the World Cup is just a week away at Giants Stadium, but the Italians seem far from being ready in their quest for a fourth world championship.
Italy, playing in its last preparatory match before its opener with Ireland, managed a narrow 1-0 victory over Costa Rica before a crowd of 23,547 at the Yale Bowl this afternoon.


SUNDAY, June 12, 1994; Multimedia = Multipayments
The new multimedia universe gives the enterprising software maker endless chances to recycle old entertainment products, but adding a film or television clip to CD-ROM software can be more trouble than actually producing something new.
Jill Alofs runs Total Clearance in Mill Valley, Calif., which does permissions work.
In a typical job, for a five-second clip from "Star Wars" for an unspecified product, she had to pursue permission from nine sources: actors, Screen Actors Guild, stunt performers, stunt coordinators, music publisher, musician's union, director, scriptwriters, holders of rights to the film as a whole.


Streetscapes/1050 Fifth Avenue; A Building Ennobled by the Company It Keeps
THERE'S not much to see at the southwest corner of the new Carnegie Hill Historic District, where 1050 Fifth Avenue stands.
It's just the kind of building preservationists have been battling against for the last three decades.
Still, the plain brick 1950's box at 86th Street and Fifth Avenue is regulated and protected by the landmarks law because it is part of the district, which was ratified by the City Council in April.
The tale of its construction and then of its protection under the landmarks law offers a dual study text in the history of popular -- and unpopular -- taste.


Spain Upgrades Trail From Roman Era
Since the medieval Santiago Pilgrim Trail, which crosses northern Spain from east to west, attracted so many tourists last year, Spain's General Secretariat of Tourism has decided to upgrade an even older trail known as the Plata Route that goes back 2,000 years to Roman days.
The 496-mile Plata road, which runs from Seville in the south to Gijon in the north, is strewn with Roman ruins and medieval monuments.
The road, which intersects the Santiago Trail at Astorga, was built in the first century A.D. to transport minerals and other resources from Spain's western mountains to the northern port city of Gijon or to Seville where the products were then shipped to Rome.


A WRINKLE IN TIME
How ironic that the only female wrinkle we see is that in the stomach of a naked, headless woman, crouching in a most uncomfortable position.


Julie Benjamin, David Stonberg
Julie Benjamin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Benjamin of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to David Stonberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Stonberg of Miami Beach.
Rabbi Gary Glickstein performed the ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.


Confronted by the Homeless Domino Effect, Another Park Cracks Down
The latest additions to Union Square Park are not flowers, shrubs or trees.
They are waist-high metal barricades and police enforcement of a midnight curfew, intended to keep out the homeless and vandals at night.
The measures were imposed last week to stem an influx of homeless people produced by the domino effect of similar enforcement moves at Washington Square, Tompkins Square and Stuyvesant Parks.


Assessing Ships For the Disabled
THE Americans With Disabilities Act was signed into law almost four years ago, but to date the question of whether it can be enforced on foreign-registered cruise ships remains unanswered.
The cruise lines, with their eyes on the 80 percent of their passengers who are Americans, may beat the law to the punch, which would suit wheelchair users and probably the Department of Justice, too.
Expert examination of vessels shows increasing awareness of what makes a cabin accessible.
A.D.A., the far-reaching civil rights act enacted in July 1990, will in time encompass all components of travel: airports, trains, places of accommodation and entertainment and even long-distance buses.
The Department of Justice has determined that it applies to passenger vessels with "places of public accommodation," including sightseeing boats, ferries, riverboats and floating restaurants.
The Departments of Justice and Transportation are emphatic that the law also applies to cruise ships, "a hybrid of a transportation service and a public accommodation." But applying it to ocean-going cruise vessels is more complex, because virtually all the 140 ships that call at United States ports are registered in foreign countries, and Government agencies point out that enforcement steps might conflict with treaties with the countries of registry.


SEPARATE IS BETTER
The facts on women's achievements support Susan Estrich's belief that girls should attend all-girls schools.
However, single-sex schools and programs for boys are a different matter.
Facts show that these tend to support the male bonding and "male only" team mentality that have limited women's full participation in American life.
EVE ELLIS ANNETTE NIEMTZOW New York, N.Y.


Versatile and User-Friendly Bow Tie Pasta
THERE is an art to matching pasta and sauce.
The shape of the pasta and the texture and ingredients in the sauce should all be taken into account.
And the number of people being served is another consideration.
Some kinds of pasta, like long, thin strands of angel hair, are best prepared in small quantities and served immediately.
Other varieties, especially short, tubular pastas like penne are more suitable for large quantities on a buffet table, as are baked pasta dishes, including lasagna.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18  U.S.
SHAPES NORTH KOREA PLAN  American officials have developed a plan, yet to be approved by the President, to put pressure on North Korea's nuclear program without initially imposing the strictest of economic sanctions.  1  South Korea is ambivalent about the hard line toward the North.  16


Apostles and Celibacy
To the Editor:
The May 30 article in your series on the Roman Catholic Church states: "Conservatives maintain that ordaining married men would be too drastic a departure from the tradition of the Roman church."


June 5-10: A Feast of Knowledge; An Ancient Meal Tells Much About Early Man in the U.S.
On a spring day more than 12,000 years ago, hunters killed and butchered a mastodon near what is now Tallahasse, Fla.
Using flint knives, they cut flesh to eat and hacked a seven-and-a-half-foot tusk from the animal's jaw, probably intending to turn the ivory into tools and spear points.
Such was the life of the earliest big-game hunters in eastern North America.
Scientists who found the mastodon remains in the Aucilla River examined growth rings in the tusk, showing that the animal was killed in the spring.
But the big surprise came from radiocarbon tests on gourd seeds found next to the tusk.


Some Enchanted Evening
The Plaza turns tropical to benefit Just One Break, May 31.


Profile; An Accountant in Ad-Land: A Survivor at the Top
FOR a change, Charles Scott had something to smile about.
The chief executive of the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Company, the world's fourth-largest advertising company, had just gotten word that its London office had won one of the biggest accounts up for grabs in Britain for years, a $68 million campaign to introduce a new national lottery.
"It's exciting news, wonderful," Mr.
Scott said.
"For whatever reason, new business wins seem to be what send morale sky high." After four and a half grueling years at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, first as finance director and for the last 14 months as chief executive, Mr.
Scott is only now finding sporadic cause for celebration.


Raising Stock Fees Is Just a Bigger Mole Hill
To the Editor:
In "Stock Fees Stifle Growth. Lower Them" (Viewpoints, May 22) Senator Phil Gramm, , Republican of Texas, argues that President Clinton's proposed increases in security registration and transaction fees will raise the cost of equity capital and thereby lower investment in new issues, discourage people from playing the stock market and generate $814 million in revenue, allowing the Securities and Exchange Commission to expand its budget and "inflict great harm on the economy."


Fingerprinting as Political Posturing
YOU have to know something special is in the air when both our Democratic Governor and our Republican Mayor agree on a policy.
In fact, what's going on is an effort to pander to voters' prejudices while harassing those people in our society least able to fight back.
The Governor wants to expand a two-county pilot program that fingerprints welfare recipients.
The Mayor wants to do the same thing in New York City.
Both claim that fingerprinting would greatly reduce welfare fraud.
In fact, the evidence thus far indicates that it would do no such thing.


A Bridge Too Far?; Benjamin Chavis
AS THE Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. finishes his fiery address at William Paterson College in Wayne, N.J., he readies himself for the inevitable Farrakhan question.
A middle-aged white man leans into a microphone set up for the audience.
Does he, Chavis, refute the anti-Semitism of the Nation of Islam minister?
Doesn't Chavis think it unusual that he, the leader of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization, would invite Farrakhan to a conference of national black leaders?
Chavis (pronounced CHAY-vis) moves stiffly away from the podium, his arms folded across his chest.
He reminds the questioner that in a speech at the Smithsonian Institution in January -- just weeks after a senior Farrakhan aide had delivered a hate-filled speech at Kean College in Union, N.J. -- he had denounced anti-Semitism as a "hideous form of racial hatred and bigotry." The N.A.A.C.P., Chavis continues, does not condone bigotry of any kind.
Then, with his right arm slashing the air, he asserts, "The N.A.A.C.P. will not be dictated to." The blacks in the auditorium, most of whom are middle-aged and middle-class, pepper their applause with shouts of "Amen."


Tangible Guarantees Of Salvation
BOOKS ARE POTENT OBJECTS.
Usually small, always portable, from ancient times they have moved from country to country, hand to hand, the mass media of their day.
Through them, scientific data, religious ideas and historical views were shared.
In certain cases, as with Judaism and Islam, books were the primary means by which a culture presented itself to the world.
This was also true of the oldest Christian nation, Armenia, whose religious practices were based on a devotion to the Gospels so complete as to embrace not only their message but their physical presence as well.
Illuminated Gospels, written in Armenia in the Armenian vernacular, were the country's primary art form.
With their exotic, visionary paintings and bindings fitted with jeweled silver plaques, they were carried in procession, used as talismans against illness and regarded as living things to be ransomed at any price if captured in battle.
And to the patrons who commissioned them and the artists who made them, they were "treasures in heaven" -- tangible guarantees of salvation.


Looking Ahead at Headlights: Improvements Down the Road
MY first car was a well-used 1936 Ford, and I loved it dearly, although it did have some problems, particularly in its electrical system.
For a while, when I stepped on the brakes the horn would blow, a difficulty I remedied by yanking out the horn.
But the headlights were something else.
The lenses were hinged, and inside were little incandescent bulbs that emitted almost no light.
Their failure was abetted by reflectors that had dulled with time.


Shira Levine, Justin McCarthy
Shira Zimmerman Levine, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frederick H. Levine of Penn Valley, Pa., was married last evening to Justin Perry McCarthy, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
Thomas McCarthy of Evanston, Ill.
Rabbi Beverly Lerner officiated in the Johnson Chapel at Amherst College in Amherst, Mass.
The Rev.
Norman Bolton, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
McCarthy, 24, is a marketing communications editor with the Baxter Healthcare Corporation, a hospital supplies company, in McGaw Park, Ill..
She graduated cum laude from Amherst and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father, a cardiovascular surgeon, is a professor of surgery at Temple University in Philadelphia.


Post-Prom Activities Worrying Schools
A GROWING number of school districts and P.T.A.'s are planning and organizing post-prom festivities in attempts to keep students off the roads and closer to home.
Although there is no gauge of the effectiveness of the activities in reducing alcohol and drug use or consequent accidents, educators say they are important in trying to prevent prom-night tragedies.


Down to Cases
It did not take a psychic to know that the time was ripe for health care reform.
For one thing, major social welfare legislation seems to run in a three-decade cycle.
Medicare was created 30 years ago, Social Security 30 years before that.
Then in 1991, a long-shot candidate, Harris Wofford, won a Senate election in Pennsylvania by running on health care.
Republicans got the hint.
At the start of the 1992 campaign year, President George Bush promised a "comprehensive health reform program."
But then Mr.
Bush's natural passivity kicked in.
White House interest faded, handing Bill Clinton the issue that became the centerpiece of his campaign.
It is also the issue that may well determine whether Mr.
Clinton's is remembered as a notable Presidency.
One reasons is that universal health care has been both a crying national need and a potently divisive social and legislative issue for a long time.
The American Medical Association used the specter of "Socialized medicine" to defeat Harry S. Truman's plan for national health insurance in 1945.
The same demagoguery still works, but that does not change the agreed facts.
Health care consumes one-seventh of the gross national product, far more than what other industrialized democracies spend to extend health care to all their citizens.
Even so, the U.S. system leaves 37 million people without health insurance.
And while American who can afford it get the best care in the world, the current system makes little sense in terms of economic competitiveness or social equity.
It is possible to study the problem and come up with a number of solutions, including, for example, a Government financed, or single-payer, system like Canada's.
The Times's editorial page has advocated the managed competition model, which borrows the mandatory participation feature of government programs -- guaranteeing that everyone is covered -- but relies on carefully structured competition between private plans to deliver health care.
Mr.
Clinton deserves credit for specifying universal coverage with private insurance as the anchors of his plan.
By so doing, he set the boundaries for the ideological debate.
The legislative struggle now under way has to do with how much of the Clinton ideology will survive and also with the architecture and mechanics of the new system.
Although Mr.
Clinton has shaped the debate in a positive way, the White House team has made tactical mistakes.
The most serious was its decision to draft its health care proposal in secret sessions presided over by Hillary Rodham Clinton and Ira Magaziner.
The lack of public hearings wasted a opportunity to build public support and increase the pressure on Congress to respond to public need rather than the health care lobbyists.
The task force wound up alienating many of the experts that Mrs.
Clinton gathered in the White House to create policy.
They saw virtually no imprint of their work on the bill that the First Lady's inner circle put together.
Another tactical misstep was to send to Capitol Hill a 1,300-page mega-bill that purports to solve every medical problem the country has ever experienced.
A tighter bill would have been a tougher target for critics to hit.
Political necessity also warped the Clinton plan when the task force decided to propose only those reforms that would not require a broad-based tax.
That single decision shaped virtually every feature of the reform, from the controversial purchasing alliances to cost controls, and produced a bill that many in Congress have declared unworkable.
These missteps made the job of the Democratic Congressional leaders immeasurably harder.
They weren't helped by Republicans like the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, who characterized the Clinton effort as "A massive overdose of Government control." But other Republicans, like Senators John Chafee and John Danfoth, have struggled to find a consensus plan.
Until the past few weeks, the White House vacillated between trying to ram a bill through Congress with a slim majority of Democratic votes and reaching for a bipartisan compromise.
When Senator Edward M. Kennedy received President and Mrs.
Clinton's blessing for his modified version of their plan, that was an important signal.
It meant that the season of bipartisan bargaining had begun.
June is the critical month.
If the committees do not finish most of their work this month, Congress will run out of time before the lawmakers break for the November elections and the entire effort could collapse.
Whatever the flaws in the process of writing the bill or in the bill itself, the Clinton health reform has now created a sene of urgency on the Hill.
And by assigning his wife to lead the effort, Mr.
Clinton made a pact not to ditch health care reform no matter how tought the fight.
For him, the real test of success will be coming away with some viable form of universal coverage.
Then he can take credit for a landmark achievement in social policy that will earn him a place in history no matter what else occurs in his tenure.


Elizabeth Schachne, Marc A. Safran
Dr.
Elizabeth Hilton Schachne and Dr.
Marc Andrew Safran, physicians in Atlanta, are to be married today at the Clay Hill Farm in York, Me.
Judge Gerald Nason, a retired Municipal Court judge in Biddeford, Me., is to officiate.
Dr.
Schachne, 31, is a resident in preventive medicine at Morehouse Medical School and is a candidate for a master's degree in public health at Emory University, both in Atlanta.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University and received her medical degree from George Washington University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lewis Schachne of New York.


Measurement and Fit Key to Kitchen Cabinets
INSTALLING kitchen cabinets may sound intimidating, but even a full layout can generally be installed rather easily by one moderately handy person accompanied by an unskilled helper.
Buying cabinets that fit is crucial.
That can be done with careful measuring and ordering with help from a knowledgeable salesperson.
After the cabinets are delivered, proceeding methodically is the way to go.
The first step is to check the evenness of the walls and floor.
Use a carpenter's level and a long straight-edge board.
Note dips and hollows and mark the lowest and highest flaws.


Bruce Mailman, 55, Owner of Businesses In the East Village
Bruce Mailman, an East Village entrepreneur who developed a discotheque and a bathhouse catering to a homosexual clientele, as well as two Off Broadway theaters, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 55.
The cause was AIDS, said John Sugg, his companion of 29 years.


Soccer On Its Own Terms
It seems so easy: just kick the ball into the goal.
Yet goals are rather rare, so it must be more complicated than that.
Perhaps soccer's appeal lies in that contradiction: it is "The Simplest Game," as the title of Paul Gardner's classic book puts it, but a simple game that is difficult to play well.
Goals are treasured because they are so tantalizingly difficult to score.
The craftiest and fleetest forward may be stripped of the ball by a slow but wise defender who has perfectly anticipated the forward's next move; the wisest defender may be fooled by an attacker who can glide one way, then dart the other.
The game's beauty lies in the artistry and power of its players, more than in the tactics of coaches or the machinations of rules.


In Rwanda, Catholics In Crossfire
The killings of three Roman Catholic bishops in Rwanda this week evoked a subplot of many African tragedies: The story of missionaries and priests caught in a crossfire sometimes of their own making, sometimes forced upon them by their own quest for peace on earth.
Over the many decades of colonialism and independence, the missionaries and the often competing churches they have implanted in Africa have been cast in equal degrees as agents of division, tools of colonial intrusion and supporters of the oppressed.


Chicago Music
To the Editor: The opening paragraph of "What's Doing in Chicago" (May 1) reports that Brahms and the blues will waft through Grant Park this summer.
The fifth paragraph then discusses the blues festival and a gospel festival at the James Caesar Petrillo Music Shell in the Park.
But Brahms was mentioned no more, although the Grant Park festival, also at the Petrillo Music Shell, is the largest and oldest program of free outdoor summer symphony concerts in the United States.


Queens Woman Dies Saving Son From Car
A 38-year-old Queens woman was killed last night when a car driven by a drunken motorist struck her at an intersection in Jamaica, Queens, as she pushed her 4-year-old son out of the way, the police said.
The incident happened shortly before 9 P.M. as the woman and her son -- neither was identified -- walked east on 130th Avenue, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.


Deborah Holmes, Sasha Frere-Jones
Deborah Kim Holmes, a daughter of Drs.
Monica and Douglas Holmes of Weston, Mass., and New York, was married last evening to Alexander Roger Wallace Frere-Jones, the son of Elizabeth Frere Jones and Robin C. Jones of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Charles Lippman performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents in Weston.
Ms.
Holmes, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received a law degree.
The bride and the bridegroom work in New York at the Families and Work Institute, a nonprofit research organization where she is a senior research associate and he is the graphics production coordinator.


Lucy Mullen, David Ball
Lucy Marie Mullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter P. Mullen of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Firestone Ball, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Ball of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
David Ball, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Warren Church in Warren, Conn.
Mrs.
Ball is the executive director at the Starlight Foundation of New York, a nonprofit organization benefitting critically ill children.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father is a partner in Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, the New York law firm.


Corrections
An article on May 29 about the future of the Actors Studio gave an incomplete list of those who ran a fund-raising auction for the studio last September.
Along with Jacqueline Knapp, the chief organizers were Marilyn Fried and Sylvia Miles.


U.S. IS CONSIDERING MILDER SANCTIONS FOR NORTH KOREA
Senior Clinton Administration officials have agreed on a plan for North Korea that would put off strict economic sanctions while proceeding with lesser measures intended to deepen the country's diplomatic isolation, Administration officials said today.
They say that by withholding stricter sanctions, the plan is intended to deter North Korea from taking further steps to make nuclear weapons.
But the plan is likely to draw criticism from some in Congress who charge that Washington has failed to turn its tough talk of punishing North Korea for its nuclear program into action and has backed down in the face of resistance from Japan and other allies.


Groundbreaking Subliminal Message
To the Editor:
Margo Jefferson's focus on the buffoonery of the "Amos 'n' Andy" television show overlooks a groundbreaking aspect of the program.
While the lead characters had a tendency toward nonsensical behavior, which is true of any television comedy show, the supporting characters provided radical (for the era) portrayals of black abilities and potentials.


In the Region/Westchester; A Long-Stalled Mount Pleasant Project Is Restarted
A PENT-UP demand for luxury homes and the deep pockets of a Wall Street financier have combined to restart construction on a 94-unit project in the Town of Mount Pleasant, near Chappaqua, that had been stalled for almost a decade.
The development, Hardscrabble Lake, will be mostly colonial and Provincial-style homes, on lots of one to two acres.
The homes, of 3,500 to 4,800 square feet, will have four or five bedrooms and cost $650,000 to $850,000, said Jeffrey S. Doynow, managing partner of Glickenhaus-Doynow, a partnership created for the project.


Field of Whines
Whatever its rewards to owners and players, television has in vital ways served baseball badly.
It offers only a peep through a video knothole, and shrinks a vast and animated panorama into sight bites.
What a difference to see the ballpark whole, to hear the roar of a thousand throats, to smell the mustard and Cracker Jacks, and to ponder the entire infield when bases are loaded and the crack of a bat transforms idling players into a frenzied corps de ballet.
And nowhere is this spectacle more dramatic and enticing than in Yankee Stadium.
Yet fans stay away in droves, and every spring the same sour litany can be heard.
Yankee management claims the stadium's South Bronx neighborhood is not safe, or that people believe it is not safe.
The lament is then given a threatening turn by George Steinbrenner, the team's principal owner, who keeps talking about moving to New Jersey.
Paradoxically, it seems to make no difference, as The Times's John Kifner reported the other day, that the current Yankees are hitting and pitching like the Bronx Bombers of old, and have been leading the American League.


Cheroxie Marks, James R. King
Cheroxie Angela Marks, a detective with the Nassau County Police Department in Mineola, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
James Richard King, an oral surgeon in New York.
The Rev.
Laura Sinclair, a Baptist minister, is to perform the ceremony at Milleridge Cottage in Jericho, L.I.
The bride, 35, graduated from Virginia Commonwealth University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Marks of North Babylon, L.I.
Her father is a member of the purchasing department at The New York Times.
Her mother, Sandra Marks, is a pharmacy technician at Sagamore Children's Center in Melville, L.I.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Sutton Place; A Riverside Enclave for the Well-to-Do
BREEZES off the East River cool the gentry on Sutton Place and push the heat waves from the clean, nearly empty street that runs south from the Queensboro Bridge to the exit of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive that curves into 53d Street toward First Avenue.
Propriety and understatement characterize the quiet enclave bordering midtown.
Said Richard Eyens, a resident since 1963: "There's a certain ambiance, a harmony you can definitely feel." Unlike Park or Fifth Avenues, he added, there aren't "10,000 cabs and cars going through it every day, on their way to someplace else; because of its geography, it has its own corner."


Miss O'Connor, Mr. Carrafiell
Catherine Holland O'Connor, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael J. O'Connor of Ardmore, Pa., was married yesterday to John Anthony Carrafiell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Carrafiell of Broomall, Pa.
The Rev.
Edward Norris performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Matthias Church in Bala-Cynwyd, Pa.
Mrs.
Carrafiell, 24, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree from the London School of Economics.
Her father is the chief of neurosurgery at the Graduate Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania and is an assistant professor of neurosurgery at Penn's school of medicine.
Her great-grandfather W. M. Armistead was the chairman of N. W. Ayer, the advertising agency in New York.


June 5-10: Saying Goodbye to Caviar?; Pity the Sturgeon, Battling Caspian Filth and Poachers
They were around in the days of the dinosaurs and are at least as ugly.
Until now, however, sturgeon have proved far more durable.
But living, as 90 percent of them do, in the Caspian Sea is no picnic these days.
Unless something changes fast, the fish, and the glorious caviar within them, may soon disappear.
The former Soviet Union used the Volga River, which runs into the Caspian, as a giant chemical toilet for many decades.
That, and years of oil drilling near Baku, have left the Caspian Sea a polluted and rancid mess.


A Helping Hand for an Endangered Violet
THERE probably are few times in life when seeing a plant in flower can bring a tear to the eye.
This sort of emotionalism is natural for major events, but seeing a plant in bloom?
Well, this is exactly what happened.
The plant in particular is a violet, a rather pretty one at that.
It is known by the name coastal violet (Viola brittoniana) and is a large-flowered violet with a clean white throat.
The leaves are deeply divided into narrow segments, toothed, not unlike those of the birdfoot violet.


Decisions on Budget Stalled Despite Money From State
The battle over New York City's budget stalled yesterday as the City Council and the Mayor's office tried to agree on how much money the state would give the city's schools.
Officials from both sides of City Hall held a flurry of meetings to try to settle the issue and determine the impact of the state aid on the city's budget gap for the fiscal year that begins on July 1.


Janet Levine, James Nahirny
Janet Lynn Levine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jay L. Levine of Atlanta, was married last evening to James Jacob Nahirny, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacob Nahirny Jr. of Fresh Meadows, Queens.
Rabbi Alvin Sugarman performed the ceremony at the Temple in Atlanta.


Shari Berman, Robert Pulcini
Shari Springer Berman, the daughter of Herbert and Frances Berman of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Robert John Pulcini, a son of Grace and Dino Pulcini of Cherry Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Lee Smith, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Lotos Club in Manhattan.
Rabbi Allen Block took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Berman, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a screenwriter and a freelance film-production coordinator in New York.
She graduated from Wesleyan University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bride and bridegroom received master's degrees in film from Columbia University.


Players And Payers
The President and First Lady have achieved remarkable consensus on a truly revolutionary principle: All Americans must be entitled to adequate medical services without regard to ability to pay or risk of ill health.
Now it's up to Congress to embody that principle in law, a historic opportunity comparable to the enactments of Social Security in 1935 and Medicare in 1965.
Unfortunately, excessive solicitude for existing institutions and interests, and the difficulties of reconciling them with the Clintons' fundamental principles, have made their proposal a bureaucratic and legalistic morass.


The World: Next Move Is Clinton's; North Korea: America's Unresolved War
Kim Il Sung's presumed efforts to build a nuclear arsenal are only the latest chapter in America's last unresolved war, one suspended by an armistice 41 years ago but still ticking away lethally.
Even so, there has been a remarkable level of complacency in America and the rest of the world -- in part because it is so hard to think of how to restrain North Korea at a cost acceptable to everyone else.
Fresh from recalling the challenges and costs that Allied forces faced at Normandy, President Clinton and his advisers find themselves facing their own crisis of resolve, complicated by their own past vacillations.
Once again, American talents for building a coalition in the face of a determined foe will be tested.


Accommodations for World Cup
WHILE schools competed to be selected as World Cup training sites, hotels close by prepared for scouting visits by World Cup officials.
Unlike the training areas, where many of the offerings were similar, the ambiance of the hotels varied widely from a 670-acre resort set on coastal woodland to a 67-room hotel nestled in Somerset's rolling hills.
"Choosing a practice facility was driven by what hotel accommodations were available nearby," said Bob Reasso, Rutgers University's soccer coach, who had a hand in the selection of World Cup training fields.


Robin Rice, Christopher Mohr
Robin Elizabeth Rice and Christopher Richard Mohr, volunteers for the Fourth World Movement, an international antipoverty and human rights organization in Landover, Md., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
George Robinson presided over the Quaker ceremony at the Fifteenth Street Meeting House in New York.


Jessica Rubenstein, Thomas Jenen
Jessica Michele Rubenstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward N. Rubenstein of Melville, L.I., is to be married today to Thomas E. C. Jenen, a son of Kathryn Jenen of Somers, Conn., and Donald Jenen of Vernon, Conn.
Cantor David Benedict is to officiate at Oheka Castle, the Otto Kahn estate in Cold Spring Hills, L.I.
The bride, 26, and bridegroom, 25, graduated cum laude from Brandeis University, and she received a master's degree in theater management from Columbia University.
She is the assistant to Alexander H. Cohen, the theatrical producer, in New York.


Brown and Princeton Win Men's and Women's National Titles
It was little more than another day at the office for the Brown men's varsity crew today.
The Bears were pushed by Harvard in their closest race of the season but they came away with their 17th victory in a row and a couple of other embellishments.
The prize was the national intercollegiate championship and the time, 5 minutes 24.53 seconds, was a record for this 2,000-meter course on Harsha Lake outside Cincinnati.


Stephanie Mott, William Simmons
Stephanie Thatcher Mott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul B. Mott Jr. of Lawrenceville, N.J., was married on Monday to William Scott Simmons, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth D. Simmons of Riegelsville, Pa.
The Rev.
Thomas Farrell, an Anglican priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Margaret Lothbury in London.
The bride, 32, graduated from Wheaton College.
She is a vice president at William E. Simon &amp; Sons Inc., an investment company in Morristown, N.J.


Presumed Intimate
I don't see how I got pregnant again so fast," whispered my lunch companion, who told me she was three months pregnant with her second child. I listened, half embarrassed, as she continued: "I haven't had a period since my first baby was born, nearly two years ago.
I figured I wasn't even ovulating yet because of breast-feeding.
I guess I get pregnant if my husband just looks at me," she said with a shrug.
It wasn't the references to reproductive biology that made me self-conscious.
As is the case with most women of my generation, words like ovulation and period and breast-feeding don't make me blush.
Even talk about sex is fair game, especially sex with a husband.


The Spotlight Turns and Leetch Becomes a Soldier of Misfortune
The ballots had Brian Leetch's name on them. But the polls are not yet closed.
The Rangers, trailing by a goal tonight with 12 minutes to play, were attempting, unsuccessfully, to win a Stanley Cup for the second consecutive game.
They had cut Vancouver's 2-0 lead in half.
They had created enough of a possibility that the season would end tonight that the ballots for the Conn Smythe Trophy, awarded to the most valuable player in the playoffs, were being collected.


A Crowd Under the National's Umbrella
THE MAN IN THE ANORAK, carrying a backpack, was nearly speechless with rage as he strode through the lobby of the Royal National Theater the other night during the overlapping intervals for "Pericles," at the Olivier, and "The Birthday Party," at the Lyttelton.
He was tall, rail thin and red of face.
His gray hair stood up in spikes, as if charged with electricity.
" 'Pericles'?" he thundered as he approached me.
It was an accusation as well as a question.
"No," I said, "Pinter." "Appalling," he groaned and passed by, calling back as he headed into the night, "The chorus is pushed onto the stage inside a grand piano!"
The professional critics were not much kinder to Phyllida Lloyd's extravagantly re-thought new production of "Pericles," in which the character of John Gower, who functions as the chorus, does indeed enter hidden in what appears to be a gleaming white Steinway.
A number of reviewers seemed to heave a sigh of the same lofty despair: "Only at the National."


Tweaking the Beard of the Maximum Leader
MOST OF THE ART ON VIEW at the Fifth Havana Biennial would not have been out of place at last year's Whitney Biennial: it is both uneven in quality and highly political in content.
Pride of place, filling the entry hall of Cuba's Museo Nacional, goes to a 100-foot-long photomontage by the New York artist Michael Lebron lambasting the owners of Coors beer for supporting right-wing causes.
The work was conceived for a billboard at Pennsylvania Station in New York, but after Amtrak officials refused to display it made its debut here in a wholly different context.
Salsa bands, rum-based drinks and the presence of the Nobel Laureate Gabriel Garcia Marquez lent a festive air to the opening last month.
But with the Cuban capital crumbling into ruin and its residents suffering severe shortages of food, electricity and transportation, this extravaganza, involving 738 works by 171 artists from 41 countries, is taking place against an anomalous backdrop.


The Unwanted Neighbor
WHEN Richard Salyer thinks of the program he operates on West 97th Street, he sees success: His agency has rehabilitated a derelict building and now houses mentally ill people there who might otherwise have nowhere to live.
When some of Mr.
Salyer's critics think of the program, they think of the most infamous incident that occurred there: A resident ran into the street with a knife, attempted to cut off his penis and jumped into the Hudson.


SEPARATE IS BETTER
Like Susan Estrich, I applied to colleges just as many of them began to open their doors to women.
But unlike her, I chose to attend a previously all-male school, in the belief that its prior exclusivity somehow meant that it had to be "better." I arrived an eager and confident freshman, with a high-school record of outstanding accomplishment in math and science.
It took less than two semesters to undo what, until then, had been a lifetime of academic excellence.
When professors made clear to "the girls" that we were not as competent in inorganic chemistry, I compliantly rose -- or fell -- to their expectations.
When women bailed out of the pre-med curriculum in record numbers, it served only to reinforce preconceptions of the trustees that women would fill the humanities classes.


Playing Cowboy in the Smokies
"WHO won the Derby?" I asked.
Though they were avid horsemen, the two men chatting in the front sitting room of the ranch house just shrugged affably.
"Guess we won't know unless somebody brings in a newspaper tomorrow," one said.
We were on our way to dinner at a ranch high in the Great Smokies of western North Carolina, just a couple of mountain ranges from Louisville, where the race had been run that afternoon.
But nobody seemed concerned about the events of the day.
The television had one channel, when it was on.
I didn't see any radios.
And the only newspaper we found was a weekly with the front page headline "Wildflower Glory Hits Its Height in May."


U.S. Blacks Find Study in Brazil a Bittersweet Experience
Last winter, Kelli Moore left Spelman College in Atlanta for Brazil, thinking that she was going to visit "the Africa of the Western Hemisphere."
Instead, Ms.
Moore, a political science major, finds that she is the only black student in her classes at the University of Sao Paulo.


When a Label Doesn't Fit
To The Editor:
How is it that Douglas Coupland associates himself with his Generation X stereotype when his philosophies quite contradict it ("No More McJobs for Mr. X," May 29)?
He says he has to remind himself, "X, right, that's me." Later in the article, he states that he has never taken a holiday, finding it "sinful."


New York Area Climbs Out of Recession
After its worst downturn since the Depression, the economy in and around New York City is once again generating more jobs and higher incomes for a wide array of residents throughout the region.
Initially propelled by Wall Street's prosperity, which has spilled over into other sectors of the economy, the recovery is now being driven by entertainment businesses and the news media, culture and tourism, health services and a resurgence of consumer spending on cars, home furnishings and other big-ticket items.


Old Southern Documents Give Lie to Theory of Happy Slaves
For the past three years a history professor has been unearthing thousands of court documents that he says debunk a popular theory about slavery: that wealthy slave owners were a paternalistic lot who treated slaves like children and that enslaved families stayed together while making the most of their lives by singing and telling stories.
The professor, Loren Schweninger of the University of North Carolina at Greensboro, says the long-forgotten records of court petitions and pleadings from slaves and their owners tell of lost loves (slaves were forbidden to marry), broken promises and the selling of babies.


U.N. Can Also Point To a Success in Africa
To the Editor:
Without getting into whether or not the United Nations is shamed by the horrific events in Rwanda, I would like to call attention to the important role the United Nations played in the second chance the people of Malawi have gained by their just-completed democratic multiparty elections.


Charlene C. Ying And Jon P. Wade
Charlene Cecilia Ying, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Ying of Boca Raton, Fla., was married yesterday to Jon Patrick Wade, a son of Betty Connolly of Hastings, Neb., and Jack Wade of Smithfield, Va.
The Rev.
William H. Pindar officiated at the Central Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Wade is an architect at Gensler &amp; Associates in Boston.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in architecture from Harvard University.
Her father retired as the chairman of the Kendall Group, an investment company in Miami.


The Patton Family: An Intimate Portrait
ROBERT H. PATTON writes of the day in 1970 that he and his family sat inconspicuously inside a Times Square movie theater to view the Academy Award-winning film about his grandfather, Gen.
George S. Patton.
To the 12-year-old, the moment marked the first time his grandfather emerged as more than just a maze of snapshots, stories and facsimiles of medals won in battle.
Even at such a young age, Mr.
Patton writes, he felt ambivalent about being a descendent of one of the the century's greatest military figures, particularly at a time when the antiwar movement had captured much of the nation's sentiment.


Miss Hightower, Mr. Redling
Amanda Bradley Hightower, the daughter of Caroline Warner Hightower of New York and John Brantley Hightower of Hampton, Va., was married yesterday to Carl Edward Redling, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Redling of Fair Lawn, N.J.
The Rev.
Beth Glover officiated at Christ Church United Methodist in New York.
Mrs.
Redling, 28, is a paralegal at the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges in New York.
She graduated from Pitzer College.
Her father, a former director of the Museum of Modern Art in New York and a former president of the South Street Seaport Museum, is the director of the Mariners' Museum in Newport News, Va.
Her mother is the director of the American Institute of Graphic Arts in New York.


Wall Street; When Sweet Promise Turns to Sour Performance
DON'T say Pepsico, please.
The company said last week that it was having trouble raising the price of its soft drinks and trouble with the profits in its restaurants, prompting an investor bail out that knocked 8.7 percent off Pepsico's market value in a day: on Thursday, Pepsico lost $3, to close at $31.50.
Competitors also suffered in the market, with Coca-Cola falling $1.25, to $40.625, Snapple Beverage losing $1.75, to $24.25, and Cott dropping $1.25, to $18.125 .
Wall Street analysts, who frequently turn out to be too cheerful in their outlooks, did not deviate from their norm on Pepsico.
The 17 analysts who follow the company had been expecting it to earn between 57 cents and 62 cents for the second quarter, according to Institutional Brokers Estimate System.
But Pepsico is now signaling earnings of about 53 cents.


Hudson River Event Hails 25th Cleanup Year
FIVE years ago Pete Seeger wrote the following lyrics to celebrate the launching 20 years earlier of the environmental sloop Clearwater:
Well, you know it was 20 years ago,


SEPARATE IS BETTER
I envied students attending coed high schools.
They seemed so free.
I was being sent to an all-girls school.
There was to be no discussion with my parents in regard to this; I was going.


Sara Levine, Karan Bhatia
Sara Levine, a daughter of Drs.
Leslie and Marsha Levine of Bethesda, Md., was married last evening to Karan Bhatia, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Samir Bhatia of Bethesda.
Rabbi Roger Herst performed a Jewish ceremony, and Dr.
Anand Mohan a Hindu ceremony, at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Washington.
The bride, 26, is a Ph.D. candidate in American history at Columbia University.
She graduated from Princeton University.


June 5-10: An Adieu in Louisiana; Exit Edwards, in Style, From the Political Stage
When Gov.
Edwin W. Edwards stunned Louisiana state legislators Monday by declaring he would not run for re-election, one would-be successor compared the announcement to the fall of the Berlin Wall.


The Mixed Reputation Of Sullivan St.'s Namesake
To the Editor:
Some might say that John B. Sullivan, after whom Sullivan Street was named, was a "malefactor," as suggested in the June 5 F.Y.I. column, though he was surely not a "gangster" as one of your readers said.


Versatile and User-Friendly Bow Tie Pasta
THERE is an art to matching pasta and sauce.
The shape of the pasta and the texture and ingredients in the sauce should all be taken into account.
And the number of people being served is another consideration.
Some kinds of pasta, like long, thin strands of angel hair, are best prepared in small quantities and served immediately.
Other varieties, especially short, tubular pastas like penne are more suitable for large quantities on a buffet table, as are baked pasta dishes, including lasagna.


Navigating the Health Swamp: A Primer
Nearly everyone agrees that the U.S. health care system needs fixing.
But how much, and how to do it?
This guide to the problems and the main proposals before Congress was prepared by Diane Rowland and Peter Long of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, a national health care philanthropy.
PROBLEMS The Uninsured: 37 Million
Millions of Americans become uninsured each year, most of them because they do not get insurance on the job and cannot afford to buy it.
In 1992, 37 million Americans -- 15 percent of the non-elderly population -- were uninsured on any given day.
Because the elderly have Medicare coverage and the very poor and disabled generally have Medicaid, the overwhelming majority of the uninsured (84 percent) are full- or part-time workers and their families.
The high cost of insurance limits coverage.
Seven in 10 uninsured Americans make less than $30,000 a year.
Although the uninsured do get care, they get less, get it later and end up sicker than people with insurance.
The Vulnerable
While most Americans have insurance, changing jobs can often mean losing coverage: two-thirds of companies with fewer than 25 employees do not offer coverage.
In the course of a year, one in five Americans -- more than 50 million people -- will be uninsured at least temporarily and one-third will be without insurance for at least a year.
Only 7 percent of uninsured adults say they are uninsured by choice.
Six in 10 say they cannot afford coverage and 22 percent cite loss of a job or lack of on-the-job insurance.
Three percent can't get coverage because of health problems.
The Cost of Care
The U.S. is the only major industrial nation that does not provide universal health coverage, yet it spends far more than any other country on health -- more than $800 billion a year, 14 percent of the gross domestic product.
And the portion is growing: without cost-containment measures, it is expected to top 18 percent by the year 2000.
From 1988 to 1993, the average family premium for employer-based group health insurance doubled, from $2,500 to $5,200.
Families wanting to buy health insurance directly from an insurer can spend as much as $10,000 a year.
CHOICES Single-Payer
The single-payer plan would create a universal public system of health insurance coverage with comprehensive benefits financed by income and payroll taxes instead of premiums.
All Americans would be covered, in much the same way the elderly are now covered by Medicare.
Employerbased coverage, private insurance, Medicare and Medicaid would be replaced by a single plan.
Costs would be controlled through administrative simplification and by a national budget with Government-regulated payment rates for doctors and hospitals. (Example: McDermott-/Wellstone bill.) Employer Mandate
Employer-based approaches build on the already extensive system that provides private insurance to two-thirds of the non-elderly population.
To achieve universal coverage, all employers would have to offer insurance to employees and help pay the premiums.
The Government would provide coverage or help pay for private insurance for nonworkers; Medicare would be kept for the elderly.
To contain costs, some plans would regulate prices and set spending limits; others would expand use of managed care, and promote increased competition among health insurance plans.
Some plans call for regional alliances, which would spool the purchasing power of small business and promote price competition among plans. (Examples: Clinton plan, House Ways and Means Health Subcommittee bill.) Individual Mandate
This approach places the responsibility for obtaining coverage on individuals and families, rather than employers or the Government.
To achieve universal coverage, people would be required to obtain insurance either through their employers or by buying it on the private market.
The Government would subsidize premium costs for low-income individuals and families.
Employers could cover some of the premium costs, but would not be required to.
Costs would be controlled by promoting increased consumer consciousness, greater use of managed care and greater competition among health plans. (Examples: Thomas-Chafee bill, Stearns-Nickles bill).
No Mandate
Voluntary plans build on the existing system by providing incentives to expand coverage and control costs, but do not mandate coverage.
Expanded coverage would be encouraged through reforms in the private health insurance market (Like eliminating ineligibility for those with pre-existing conditions), subsidies for low-income people and alliances to help small companies and individuals buy insurance.
This approach would control costs and make coverage more affordable by increasing competition among proivate insurance plans and cost consciousness among consumers. (Examples: Cooper-Breaux bill, Michel-Lott bill.) ASSESSING THE PLANS Single-Payer
All Americans would have comprehensive health benefits through a single system, regardless of income or employment.
This approach would reduce much of the complexity of the present system, but it would shift most of the financing from employers and the private sector to the tax system.
It would virtually eliminate a role for private insurance and would concentrate control of the health care system under the Federal Government.
It would greatly expand the role of the Government in health, but also provide Government with greater purchasing power to control costs.
Employer Mandate
Employer-based approaches expand insurance coverage with the least disruption to current arrangements and would minimize change for most Americans.
They rely on employers to cover workers and on the Government to provide coverage for nonworkers.
Employers and their employees, rather than the Government, pay most of the cost for insuring all workers and their families.
Employer mandates would mean higher health insurance costs for some businesses, especially small companies that do not offer insurance today.
Government assistance to businesses could help avoid wage cuts, job losses and other potential effects.
The mobility of the work force makes this approach administratively complex and requires explicit mechanisms to assure continuous coverage.
Cost control based on greater use of managed care and competition among health plans would require much restructuring of the market, without assured effectiveness.
Individual Mandate
Making individuals responsible for insurance would break the link between employment and insurance coverage -- easing the mobility of the labor force, but also potentially removing business as a source of financing and a force in controlling costs.
Government subsidies could be directed to low-wage workers and low-income families rather than more broadly applied to businesses, but the loss of employer contributions would mean substantial tax increases for Federal subsidies to make insurance affordable, without adequate subsidies, coverage could remain beyond the reach of many Americans.
An individual-based program would substantially alter current insurance arrangements, and would be complicated to administer and hard to enforce.
Increasing consumer awareness could help restain costs, but unless they join alliances, consumers would lack the purchasing power that big employers have now.
No Mandate
Voluntary approaches provide incentives for cost control and for reaching the uninsured and the vulnerable, but no assurances that these problems will be fully addressed.
Market reforms and expanded coverage for low-income people would reduce the number of uninsured but not assure universal coverage.
Expanded coverage of low-income people would require additional Federal revenue.
Cost containment would depend largely on the success of free-market competition in restraining premium increases.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $499,000
147 West 15th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 2,150-sq.-ft. co-op in loft building; elevator, 12-ft. beamed ceilings; maintenance $1,402, 50% tax deductible, listed at $535,000, 48 weeks on market (Brokers: Sinvin-Fields; Ambrose Mar-Elia)


Melissa Moy, Brian M. Wick
Melissa Moy, a daughter of Fee Yee Moy and Suk Yee Wong, both of New York, was married yesterday to Brian Michael Wick, the son of Allan and Louise Wick of Monroe, N.Y.
The Rev.
Carl Johnson performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Sacred Heart Parish in Monroe.


Some of the Mentally Ill Must Be Reinstitutionalized
To the Editor:
Now that you have published the Manhattan-based Social Service facilities map on April 24, perhaps we in Manhattan will be able to engage in an honest discussion of the burdens that social service facilities for the "mentally ill homeless" impose on the residents of this borough.


Awash in Theater, Sybil Christopher Feels 'Blessed'
WARMTH is a strange and a magical thing, the capacity to enclose and embrace.
"Something about being in Sag Harbor," Sybil Christopher said to me, as we sat in the green room of the Bay Street Theater that she founded along with Emma Walton and Stephen Hamilton two years ago, which has already become an integral part of the cultural community of the eastern end of Long Island.
"We like to think of our theater as a little harbor," she said softly.
"We are protected. We protect our plays.We all have been actors, and we know how much actors can be hurt. We know how much playwrights can be hurt." Eyes That 'Listen'


On Pell Street, Only Memories Of a Violent Past
One afternoon last week, when most of Chinatown bustled with City Hall workers on lunch breaks and street vendors hawking jojoba dates and jasmine plants, an eerie calm loomed over Pell Street.
Pell Street was at peace, which has not always been the case.
More an alley than a street, the narrow, shadowy link between Mott Street and the Bowery has always had an air of mystery and danger.


Something Old Plus Something New
WHEN the restaurant opened at the Crescent Beach Club in Bayville two years ago, diners were thrilled to discover that rarest of Long Island finds, a waterfront restaurant with spectacular views and food to match.
By the end of the first summer, however, Richard Allen, the talented chef who had opened the restaurant, had left.
Shortly afterward, I received a flood of letters from disgruntled diners wondering what had happened.
This spring the club hired Drew Nieporent, the experienced restaurateur from Montrachet and the TriBeCa Grill in Manhattan, to revitalize the Bayville restaurant.


Mall's Future in Doubt Amid Many Questions
Nearly a decade ago, the developers of the Palisades Center promised to turn two former landfills into the Cadillac of shopping malls, bringing a Lord &amp; Taylor store, a skating rink and an indoor amphitheater to this Rockland County town.
But all that is left of the Palisades Center plan now is a barren landscape of blasted rock and felled trees.
The Pyramid Companies, the Syracuse-based mall-building giant, stopped construction in April, nine years after it proposed the mall and six months after breaking ground.


Technology; Cinema Sound Gets a Digital Lift
WITH its new animated film "The Lion King," featuring songs by the lyricist Tim Rice and the rock singer-composer Elton John, Walt Disney Pictures is counting on the soundtrack to help propel the movie to the financial heights of its 1992 hit, "Aladdin."
And yet, in "The Lion King," which opens on Wednesday at Radio City Music Hall in Manhattan and the El Capitan Theater in Los Angeles, the most striking use of its Dolby Digital Stereo soundtrack may not be the score.
The five audio channels and the rumbling sub-woofer band achieve their best effect in a scene in which thousands of wildebeest stampede toward -- and, from the sound of things, through -- the audience.


A Fairy Tale Comes to Life, but Gets Up a Bit Stiff
Beverly Hills Cop III  Eddie Murphy, Judge Reinhold, Hector Elizondo Directed by John Landis R 103 minutes


On Sunday Safeguarding Mayors' Places In History
LET us now celebrate the self-centered me anderings of Edward I. Koch.
No mayor before Mr.
Koch, immensely popular in his day, has ever spoken so often in the first person imperious, or gazed so appreciatively into his particular sliver of mirror here in the parakeet cage of life.
Entitled to his narcissism when he was the people's choice, Mr.
Koch is no less fascinating for his self-fascination these days as, each month, he sends off to the historical archives a thick packet of his current doings: his newspaper columns and movie reviews, his ratings of restaurants and world leaders, his bearding of fresh villains and nipping of old enemies, his every letter, gracious and rich with rococo certitude, to all the ordinary people who write to him.


Now, Come Fly the Frenzied Skies
FRANCINE MARSALONA, a Continental Airlines flight attendant, lives in Houston but banters like a New Yorker as she carries a tray laden with peanuts and pretzels down the aisle of a recent Houston-to-Atlanta flight.
"Peanut butter sandwich? Steak dinner?" she asks, as she passes out the closest thing to lunch that passengers will get on the two-hour trip.


A Gift, A Birthday, A Benefit
Celebrating spring and worthy causes.


The World Made Easy
THE COLLAPSE OF CHAOS Discovering Simplicity in a Complex World.
By Jack Cohen and Ian Stewart.
Illustrated. 495 pp.
New York:  Viking. $23.95.


The Angel of the Battlefield
A WOMAN OF VALOR Clara Barton and the Civil War.
By Stephen B. Oates.
Illustrated. 527 pp.
New York:  The Free Press. $27.95.


ED RENDELL, MAYOR ON A ROLL
When municipal workers in Philadelphia sought new contracts in 1992, Mayor Ed Rendell "stared down the unions" and forced them to accept givebacks ("Ed Rendell, Mayor on a Roll," by Ben Yagoda, May 22).
But when a businessman threatens to move his company's Philadelphia plant to Miami, the Mayor urges him to submit a "wish list" of tax credits and regulatory breaks.


Horses and Life
To the Sports Editor:
I have always loved horses.
I lived in Romania for seven years before I came to the United States.
Over there, shaggy horses, owned by the gypsies, pulled wagons across the streets.
They were worn-out nags, but to me, they were beautiful and almost human, intelligent yet fragile.


JANET RENO'S CHOICE
First it was Saint Hillary; now it is Reverend Reno.
What's next?
Father Bill ("Janet Reno's Choice," by Lincoln Caplan, May 15)?


Data Bank/June 12, 199
Data Bank/June 12, 199
Consumer Borrowing
April
March
Feb.
Annual rate of growth
13.2
12.6
6.0
Producer Prices
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
-0.1
-0.1
.2
Steel Production
June 4
May 28
May 21
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,838
1,973
1,903
Cash Wheat Price
June 10
June 3
May 27
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.80
$3.61
$3.53
Weekly Jobless Claims
June 3
May 27
May 20
In thousands
358
358
366
3-Month Treasury Bills
June 10
June 3
May 27
Rate in percent
4.10
4.09
4.12
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.51
4.48
4.49
30 Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.31
7.27
7.27


Melanie Frager, Jason D. Griffith
Melanie Frager, the daughter of Morag M. Frager of Sarasota, Fla., and the late Malcolm Frager, is to be married today to Jason Daniel Griffith, a son of Karen Griffith of Dublin, Ohio, and Daniel Griffith of Poland, Ohio.
John Stuart Smith, a friend of the couple, was appointed by Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts to perform the ceremony at Blantyre in Lenox, Mass.
Mrs.
Griffith, 24, is a candidate for a law degree at Fordham University.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Columbia University.
Her father was the concert pianist.
Her mother is a writer.


At Work; Growing Up? Absurd!
WHEN Dan Zevin graduated from New York University a few years ago, he took his new journalism degree uptown to Rolling Stone magazine and put it to use as an intern.
He figured he would soon be kicking around story ideas with Jann Wenner, interviewing Tom Petty and lunching with Springsteen.
Reality intruded.
His duties were just a shade more prosaic than expected.
"I was not the hole puncher, but the person who puts the brass tacks in the previously punched holes," he remembers.
"And Xeroxing. I learned a whole lot about the Xerox machine."
In every generation idealism must bite the dust.
But it rarely does so with as much good humor as in Mr.
Zevin's new book, "Entry- Level Life: A Complete Guide to Masquerading as a Member of the Real World." The book, released by Bantam Books in time for graduation season, is a compendium of cheerfully cynical advice on making the transition from the amniotic sac that is college to the Real World, wherein people who once spent their junior year tracking down all the surviving members of the Brady Bunch suddenly acquire morning routines and new colanders.


At Goodspeed, a Revival of 'Kiss Me, Kate'
IS there any point in asking: Who was the sliest lyricist in the American musical theater?
Or the most scintillating of melodists?
Only if you've just heard "Kiss Me, Kate" again and you know you have the answers: Cole Porter and Cole Porter.
And there's no point in rebutting with Hart on the first question or Kern on the second or Sondheim on both.
Or countering with Gershwin and Gershwin, for George and Ira were two and Cole was one.


Corrections
A listing on May 8 with an article about Cape Ann, Mass., misstated the date of the Ninth Annual Gloucester New-Fish Festival.
It is June 22, not July 22.


Sand in His Face? Doesn't Bother Tabasco Cat
Before the Belmont Stakes was a few hundred feet old yesterday, Go for Gin kicked sand in Tabasco Cat's face.
But that was no problem for Tabasco Cat, despite his reputation as a high-strung animal.


Divorce Settlements: Can We Talk?
To the Editor:
"The High Price of Divorce Duels" (Your Own Account, May 8) presents a convincing argument for avoiding fights over settlements.
It is puzzling, however, that the article focuses on giving up rather than on suggesting alternatives to settlement.
Why was there no mention of mediation?
Nobody wants to toss in the towel, to be in word and deed, a loser.
Lawyers should encourage their difficult clients or clients with difficult spouses to focus on designing an agreement that responds to each one's needs, rather than accept defeat.
In mediation, giving up is reshaped into compromising and trading.
The words and the process are acceptable, reasonable and, indeed, workable.
Let's talk more about dignified divorces without victims and victors.
LYNNE CAROL HALEM  Wellesley, Mass., May 23  The writer is the director of the Centre for Mediation and Dispute Resolution.


Salary Cap to Be Gradual
For the past few years, major league baseball club owners have emphasized their need for a salary cap and the players have expressed their opposition to the idea.
Now that they finally have a proposal prepared to present to the players, the owners have come up with a wrinkle that they hope will be appealing.
Rather than institute the salary cap for next season and have it take effect on players' salaries immediately, the clubs would phase it in over the next several seasons, a member of management said yesterday.
The person declined to give other details, but acknowledged that the cap wouldn't take full effect until somewhere around the 1998 season.


SUNDAY, June 12, 1994; Remembrance of Things Lost
A California man was recently awarded half a million dollars for what might be called a "false memory" suit.
He sued therapists who helped his daughter recover memories of abuse that he said never happened.
That's the problem with memory and therapists -- it's hard to tell whether either of them are for real.
If only there were a quick and efficient licensing test for recovered-memory therapists.
Impossible?
Not at all.
The average person has many easily verifiable buried memories -- of lost objects.


Adriane M. Shaw, Edward J. Shovar
Adriane Macbeth Shaw, the daughter of Margaret and Alan Shaw of Basking Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Joseph Shovar, the son of John Shovar of Lincoln, R.I., and Beverly Shovar of Tampa, Fla.
The Rev.
Alfred M. Niese Jr. officiated at the Episcopal Church of St.
John on the Mountain in Bernardsville, N.J.
Ms.
Shaw, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a social worker at Ohio State University Medical Center in Columbus.
She graduated from Hood College and received her master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.


Topics of The Times; Ellis Island, N.J.?
If the good citizens of New Jersey thought they could seize Coney Island, they would probably try.
As it is, they want Ellis Island, and have persuaded the Supreme Court to hear their case.
The legal point may be close, but symbolism and history clearly favor New York.
An 1834 compact put the New Jersey-New York boundary in the middle of the Hudson River but gave New York jurisdiction over Ellis Island, despite its proximity to the Jersey City waterfront.
At the time, it was only three acres and not yet the port of entry for waves of immigrants.
Today it is 27 acres, enlarged by landfill from New York City's first subway tunnels.
New Jersey claims the added acreage is not covered by the compact.


June 5-10: New Atrocities in Africa; Three Bishops and 10 Priests Are Slaughtered in Rwanda As Tribal Killings Go On
For the past two months the world has watched horror being piled upon horror in Rwanda as rival Hutus and Tutsis continue their fratricidal tribal war.
But Rwanda's horrors seemed to cross a new frontier last week with the news that the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kigali, two other bishops and 10 priests, all of them Hutus, had been slaughtered by the Tutsi soldiers guarding them at the Kabgayi church center in southwestern Rwanda.
At the same time, the United Nations reported that seven priests were among 70 civilians (most presumed to be Tutsis) killed in a separate massacre in a suburb of Kigali controlled by Hutu forces.
Pope John Paul II deplored the prelates' "cruel death" and called again for peace.


Reading the Giuliani Spending Blueprint
WHILE Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's first capital budget has drawn the most attention for what it doesn't finance, like a new Police Academy in the Bronx, the $5.294 billion spending plan does include dozens of significant real estate projects.
These range from the enhancement of neighborhood institutions (a new Flushing branch of the Queens Borough Public Library) to the creation of entirely new neighborhoods (the first streets, sewers and parkland in the Queens West development on the Hunters Point waterfront).


Pick-Me-Ups for Park's Fallen
At 3:24 on a recent Sunday afternoon, the Central Park Medical Unit ambulance was cruising leisurely back to the park after dropping off an injured Rollerblade skater at Roosevelt Hospital.
Suddenly, a call came through the radio:


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  For Richard Salyer, social-service advance man, the reception often starts off chilly and only gets worse.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Computer revolution notwithstanding, Martin Tytell, "Mr. Typewriter," remains passionately low-tech.


'Boss' Design: A Los Angeles Sketchbook
LOS ANGELES IS A WORK IN PROG- ress, and the excitement is that the design is still evolving.
Just now, the Getty Center is the Acropolis in reverse, a lofty urban landmark on the rise instead of one in ruin.
Brentwood's hilltop city of the arts, a symbol of the surging cultural ambition of Los Angeles, will not be completed for two years.
But if construction were halted tomorrow, it would still be worth climbing the hill just to see the sublimely beautiful stone veneer that now clads the Getty's base.


After the Noise: Blowing Off a Little Steam
MY PLAN for last weekend, the most beautiful of the year, had been simple: On Saturday, unpack the outdoor furniture kits and assemble two chairs and a table.
On Sunday, we would sit outside.
We ended up gritting our teeth and lurching off to movies and restaurants.
I thought you'd never ask why.


Museum Documents Ireland's Potato Famine
AFTER a century and a half of ignoring it, Ireland is finally giving official recognition to one of the defining events of its history -- the Great Potato Famine of the 1840's.
Within five years, the famine, which was brought on by a potato blight fungus that virtually destroyed Ireland's main subsistence crop, reduced a population of 8.1 million by nearly 3 million through death and the mass emigration that produced the Irish diaspora to Britain, Australia and, particularly, to North America.
On May 14 President Mary Robinson opened the Famine Museum at Strokestown Park, in County Roscommon.
It is housed in the stableyards of the sprawling mansion of a landlord who was killed during the famine by hungry tenants he was forcing off the land.


Key and a Losing Streak by Yankees Just Don't Mix
When Manager Buck Showalter and his band of sluggish Yankees woke up today, they realized they were sputtering and knew their advantage in the American League East was shrinking.
Still, they sipped coffee without being very grumpy because they anticipated some solace with Jimmy Key starting.
The Yankees received it.
Pitching against his former team, in a stadium where he won a World Series game and during the most critical juncture of the season for his new first-place team, Key was strong into the sixth inning in taming the Blue Jays.
He helped calm the hysteria inherent in any losing stretch, ushering the Yankees to a 9-2 victory.
Wade Boggs rocked a three-run homer and Danny Tartabull also homered off Dave Stewart in a six-run sixth that sparked New York at the Skydome.


Group D
Argentina CUP APPEARANCES 10 (1930, 1934, 1958, 1962, 1966, 1974, 1978, 1982, 1986, 1990).
LAST CUP 1990 finalist (lost to Germany, 1-0) BEST SHOWING Champion in 1978 and 1986 FIRST ROUND Greece, June 21 in Foxboro, Mass.; Nigeria, June 25 in Foxboro; Bulgaria, June 30 in Dallas.
COACH Alfio Basile, a 50-year-old Argentine nicknamed Coco.
Unlike a great number of Argentines past and present, he has done all his playing and coaching in his native country.
He coached his first game for the national team on Feb. 19, 1992.
STYLE Typically Latin, with short passes and plenty of lateral movement.
TOP PLAYERS Diego Maradona, the man without a team, who is gradually getting into the shape necessary to meet the rigors of the tournament.
Gabriel Batistuta, a striker who plays for Fiorentina, has the potential to be a high scorer in the tournament.
Diego Simeone, a midfielder who plays fo Seville in Spain.
Claudio Caniggia, who is returning after a year's ban for drug abuse, can also be a key to the attack.
OUTLOOK The strength of Diego Maradona's legs will decide how far the team goes beyond the first round.
No one argues with Basile that Argentina is in a fairly easy group in the opening round and its advancement is virtually assured.
Unfavorable results in warmup matches should not be taken seriously.
Playing two first-round games in the Boston area, where the temperature is not expected to be as hot, is also to Argentina's advantage besides the relatively weak opponents.
Bulgaria CUP APPEARANCES Five (1962, 1966, 1970, 1974, 1986) LAST CUP 1986 BEST SHOWING Second round in 1986 FIRST ROUND Nigeria, June 21 in Dallas; Greece, June 26 in Chicago, and Argentina, June 30 in Dallas.
COACH Dimitar Penev, a 48-year-old Bulgarian.
He played 90 times for the national team, including in three World Cup tournaments, in 1966, 1970 and 1974.
He took over as coach of the national team in the summer of 1990 and went without a defeat in his first six games.
He is a man of few rounds and a master of tactics, as he proved in the elimination of France in the qualifying round.
STYLE With most players competing for clubs in different countries, there is no concrete style.
TOP PLAYERS Hristo Stoichkov, a forward with Barcelona and a fixture in the Spanish League for years, is the heart and soul of the team.
Others to watch include Krasimir Balakov, a midfielder and the leading scorer for Sporting Lisbon, and Emil Kostadinov, a forward with Porto of Portugal who scored both goals on the final day of qualifying.
Yordan Lechkov is Hamburg's rising star and the Bulgarians' key playmaker.
Of the three goalkeepers, Borislav Mikhailov is considered the strongest.
He had five shutouts in qualifying.
The defensive unit is led by players from the home champion Levski Sofia -- Tsanko Tsvetanov, Emil Kremenliev, Zlatko Yankov and Petar Hubchev, who was sold recently by Levski to Hamburg SV.
OUTLOOK They have trouble handling a skillful team that plays with speed.
With Argentina and Nigeria, they have two of those types of teams in their group.
What they have on their side is some experienced players and a coach who can make the right tactical move to win a game.
A victory over Greece in their second game is a must if they are to advance.
Greece CUP APPEARANCES This is the first.
FIRST ROUND Argentina, June 21 in Foxboro, Mass.; Bulgaria, June 26 in Chicago; Nigeria, June 30 in Foxboro COACH Alketas (Alkis) Panagoulias, a 60-year-old Greek and a naturalized American citizen who has lived in the United States for 25 years.
He originally came to the United States in 1962 to study for degrees in international relations and United Nations relations at the New York School for Social Studies.
An accomplished player with Aris of Salonica, he is in his second stint as coach of the Greeks.
He was the coach of the United States from 1983 to 1985.
STYLE Direct up and down with little lateral movement and plenty of reliance on counterattacks.
TOP PLAYERS Stelios Manolas, who is the captain of AEK in Athens, where he has played for 14 seasons, is the key to the defense.
Tasos Mitropoulos of AEK, who at 36 is the Greeks' oldest player, is national team captain and the playmaker in midfield.
He scored the tying goal, a header, against Russia in Moscow to give Greece its first-ever World Cup bid.
Dimitris Saravakos of Panathinaikos is the most well-known forward.
OUTLOOK Greece is the only nation in the tournament without a player competing for a club outside the country.
The team has had some poor results in warm-up matches.
Although Greece has the oldest team in the tournament in average age, lack of World Cup experience and mental toughness for the rigors of such a tournament is not on its side.
What it does have on its side is strong fan support from the large Greek community and the fact the Greeks trained in the United States longer than any other team except Saudi Arabia.
Nigeria CUP APPEARANCES This is the first.
FIRST ROUND Bulgaria, June 21 in Dallas; Argentina, June 25 in Foxboro, Mass.; Greece, June 30 in Foxboro COACH In five years with the Super Eagles, Clemens Westerhof of the Netherlands has never lost an international match at home, and his coaching and organizational skills have unquestionably been a major factor in the team's rise.
STYLE With their athleticism, strength and attacking bent, the Nigerians should be one of the most entertaining teams in the tournament.
Their base 4-4-2 often becomes a 4-2-4 with four forwards: usually Emmanuel Amunike or Samson Siasia on the left wing, Rashidi Yekini and Daniel Amokachi in the center and George Finidi on the right wing.
This works, in part, because Sunday Oliseh and others further back are capable of covering a lot of ground.
The Super Eagles under Westerhof now rely less on the long ball and more on the short passing game, well-orchestrated by the playmaker Okocha.
TOP PLAYERS Yekini is Nigeria's and Africa's star, a muscular striker with speed and power who has been the leading scorer in three different countries: Nigeria, Ivory Coast and Portugal.
On defense, Westerhof has captain Stephen Keshi, Benedict Iroha and an imposing, experienced goalkeeper in Peter Rufai, who has competition in Wilfred Agbonavbare.
OUTLOOK Westerhof says his team "will be the surprise of the World Cup," but the truth is that Nigeria will not surprise any soccer buff by succeeding.
The Eagles lost only one match in qualifying and have remarkable depth.
The only question is defense, where the Nigerians suffered occasional lapses during the African Nation's Cup.
If the Nigerians can play defense worthy of their offense, the quarterfinals just might not be the limit.


Sandra Nichols, Peter Nash 2d
Sandra Baldwin Nichols, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Walter Nichols 3d of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to Peter Whitney Nash 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nash of Dedham, Mass.
The Rev.
Thomas Pike performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Nash, 31, is an associate at Nussbaum, Ware &amp; Company, a human resources consulting firm in Boston.
She graduated from Lake Forest college.
Her father is a first vice president of Republic National Bank in New York.


Ms. Wetenhall And Mr. O'Hara
Jacqueline Rinaud Wetenhall, a daughter of Mrs.
Pierson Keating of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mr.
John Huber Wetenhall Jr., was married yesterday to Edward James O'Hara, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis M. O'Hara of Boston.
The Rev.
Terence Elsberry performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Greenwich.
The bride, 33, is an assistant vice president at the Sentinel Real Estate Corporation, a real estate investment advisory concern in New York.
She graduated from Hobart William Smith College and received a master's degree in real estate investment and development from New York University.


A Helping Hand for an Endangered Violet
THERE probably are few times in life when seeing a plant in flower can bring a tear to the eye.
This sort of emotionalism is natural for major events, but seeing a plant in bloom?
Well, this is exactly what happened.
The plant in particular is a violet, a rather pretty one at that.
It is known by the name coastal violet (Viola brittoniana) and is a large-flowered violet with a clean white throat.
The leaves are deeply divided into narrow segments, toothed, not unlike those of the birdfoot violet.


Legal Gambling Bedevils Louisiana
Asked about the indictments and accusations lurking like buzzards around Louisiana's gambling industry, Mary Palmer looked up from her 25-cent Double Dollars slot machine at the Showboat Star Casino recently and gave her best "Does-a-crawfish-love-mud?" shrug.
"It's Louisiana," said Ms.
Palmer, a 45-year-old hairdresser from the New Orleans suburb of Harvey.
"Louisiana's crooked. It's true. It's a fact. What's to be surprised about?"


The Judge's Legacy
To the Editor:
While your review examined many of Learned Hand's accomplishments and gave the reader a sense of his judicial reputation, it left out one of Hand's most fundamental legacies.
Toward the end of his life and at the height of his reputation, he led the intellectual opposition to Brown v.
Board of Education, the 1954 case that resulted in the integration of the South.
Indeed, he used the prestigious Holmes Lectures at Harvard Law School specifically to assert that Brown was inconsistent with his image of the proper role of the Supreme Court.


A Castle Weekend
Castle Ashby, the late-16th-century ancestral home of Spencer Compton, the Seventh Marquess of Northampton, is normally not open to the public.
But on the weekend of July 1 to 3, the Marquess will be host at a house party there, with a Champagne reception and black-tie buffet supper.
Billeted in 26 bedrooms, where Queen Elizabeth I and other royals have stayed, guests will attend the annual Castle Ashby County Fair, featuring entertainments like a sheep shearing competition.
The weekend costs $420 a person, subject to exchange-rate fluctuations.
Information: (800) 357-3884.
TERRY TRUCCO


By Icebreaker to North Pole
Two Russian icebreakers have been converted into luxury liners and are taking passengers to the North Pole next month.
The icebreakers, the Yamal and the Kapitan Dranitsyn, can make their way relatively easily through the Arctic waters by riding onto the 10- to 12-foot lid of ice, forcing it to collapse.
The trip aboard the 465-foot nuclear-powered Yamal is sponsored by the alumni associations of the University of Michigan, Northwestern University, Indiana University and University of California at Los Angeles and at Berkeley.


'We Wear The Mask'
To the Editor:
Margo Jefferson makes reference to "ethic and social masks" and "the joke that always lies between appearance and reality" as the root of minstrel humor.
Paul Laurance Dunbar, the black poet and pioneer of minstrel shows, would have agreed with her.


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday with an article about Dr.
John Sundin, a surgeon whose journal faxed from Rwanda is widely read at a New Haven cafe, reversed two identifications.
Catherine Gudis (in sunglasses) was at the top; Lulu DeCarrone was at the lower right.
The caption also misspelled the surname of the journal's compiler. He is Tom Mikita.


Corrections
A list of Moscow's best-selling fiction books, compiled by the Russian publication "Book Review" and reprinted in this section last Sunday, included one work erroneously.
"The Road to Tara," by Anne Edwards, is a biography of Margaret Mitchell, the author of "Gone With the Wind," not a work of fiction.


Academic Questions
Monday.
I have just signed a contract that states: "Author irrevocably and unconditionally waives all moral rights throughout the universe," and I am saddened.
It involves a low four-figure sum, modest enough payment for a movie option on a book, not to mention one's moral rights throughout the universe.
And so final a bargain, so Faustian.
Tuesday A.M.
My malaise regarding the universe has deepened.
I have discovered that Americans have forsaken spring cleaning.
The Wall Street Journal says so: the traditional springtime surge in the purchase of cleansing products is no more.
Spring has come and gone.
Everywhere, rugs lie unbeaten.


Journal; The Other Agenda
Bob Woodward is the reporter who helped bring down a criminal Presidency.
Mike Wallace is the television muckraker who nailed a thousand malefactors.
Put them together on "60 Minutes" to lift the lid on Mr.
Woodward's new book, "The Agenda: Inside the Clinton White House," and a vast audience has every reason to believe that a scandal of Watergate proportions is about to explode.
The two men did all they could to further that perception last Sunday.
Both looked solemn, and Mr.
Woodward was seen in such tight close-ups that even his mildest innuendos about the Clintons ("The American taxpayer has gotten two for the price of one") took on the gravity of an impeachable offense.
The viewer was also tantalized by shots of Mr.
Woodward's vast cache of seemingly incriminating tapes -- containing "deep background" interviews with confidential sources reaching "up to the very top" -- and a replay of Gennifer Flowers.
"Are Bill and Hillary Clinton going to like this book?" asked Mr.
Wallace, who then answered, "I don't think so."


As Accounting Enters Politics, Watch Out
THERE is a sad tradition of politicians trying to impose bad accounting in order to make rich constituents happy.
The worst example of that came in the 1980's, when repeated political intervention let savings and loan executives keep obviously phony assets on their books.
Regulators who might have opted for more truth in accounting were intimidated.
To have done otherwise, the politicians asserted, would have been to endanger institutions that were making mortgage loans, thus hurting consumers.


Legacy in Disarray -- A special report.; Egos, Art and Big Money: Warhol Riches Fade Away
As a provocateur who turned soup cans into art, Andy Warhol was not always taken seriously.
But as a philanthropist whose fortune was well above $100 million when he died, his legacy seemed assured.
Now the foundation that bears his name is mired in a financial mess that threatens its ability to carry on the mission of using Warhol's millions to benefit the visual arts.
An institution that once had a $25 million cash cushion, and that was trumpeted as a major new force in the art world, is down to $6 million of cash and securities -- barely enough to cover this year's operating expenses.


A Rap T-Shirt's Depiction of Women Provokes an Angry Campaign
Last month, a young boy walked into an after-school program at the local Y.W.C.A. wearing an oversized black T-shirt with pictures of the rap musicians Snoop Doggy Dog and Dr.
Dre on its front.
It was not until Lynda D. Gray, the branch director, got a look at the back of the shirt, however, that she exploded.
Ms.
Gray called Councilwoman C. Virginia Fields and wrote letters to officials at Community Board 10.
"It's time to draw a line in the sand!" she wrote.
"Enough is enough."


Melting Pot Still Bubbles at I.S. 237; Myriad Accents Fill the Halls at Diverse School in Flushing
In parts of her India, it would not have been proper, this friendship between a young man and a young woman, says Nitu Singh.
But here, in the United States, she believes it is necessary.
She is 16, and in less than two years has graduated quickly from one level to the next in the school's English-as-a-second-language program.
He, Jatinder Singh, 15, has been here two months, and speaks no English.
Their bond is the Punjabi language , and their shared understanding of what it is like to be new in a foreign country.


Death is Hard . . . Reincarnation Is Easy
Since its release six years ago, "Die Hard" has spawned a batch of blatant imitators.
Among the essentials for a "Die Hard" clone: a tightly confined setting, a lone-gun-type hero and a game of cat-and-mouse.
Not to mention considerable gunplay and pyrotechnics.
These movies also have another common thread: they have revived actors' stalled careers.
Bruce Willis was considered a turn-off to audiences when "Die Hard" was released in 1988.
Sylvester Stallone's career was on the ropes when he starred in "Cliffhanger." Steven Seagal didn't click with mainstream moviegoers until "Under Siege." And now Keanu Reeves's career may get a lift out of "Speed" (which opened on Friday) because the role finds him prancing about in a tight T-shirt showing off his new physique (a "Die Hard" essential).


Laura Rubenstein, B. L. Friedman
Laura Hope Rubenstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Rubenstein of Tappan, N.Y., was married last evening to Benjamin Louis Friedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Friedman of Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Rabbi Abraham Krantz performed the ceremony at the Marriott Hotel in Park Ridge, N.J.
The bride, 27, is a senior consultant in the financial services division of Andersen Consulting, the management consulting firm in New York.
She graduated from Bucknell University.


Amy S. Greer, Lloyd K. Klausner
Amy Sue Greer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton A. Greer of Roslyn, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Lloyd Kenneth Klausner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Klausner of Merrick, L.I.
Cantor Tyrone Bauer is to officiate at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride, 26, is a staff director for business sales at the Nynex Corporation in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.


A Nuclear Plant's Expansion Raises Neighbors' Concerns About Safety
Several hundred yards from the giant concrete cube that houses the nuclear reactor of the Oyster Creek electric generating station, Scott Hook, 32 years old, whipped a baited fishing line into the middle of the plant's wide discharge canal and waited for a bite.
Water used to cool the reactor and tons of nuclear waste stored inside the plant is about 10 degrees warmer in the canal than in Barnegat Bay, where it is headed, a condition that attracts baitfish and larger fish like striped bass that feed on them.


Growing Up Colonial
OLEANDER, JACARANDA A Childhood Perceived: A Memoir.
By Penelope Lively.
Illustrated. 133 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers. $20.


Word for Word/The Balkan War-Crimes Report; If There Ever Were a Nuremburg For the Former Yugoslavia. . .
INTERNATIONAL war crimes investigations have been few in number and their results so far somewhat less than glorious, in large part because it is usually the winning side in a war that decides whether and how to mete out punishment.
The war crimes panel established by the Versailles Treaty in 1919 recommended prosecuting 896 suspected World War I criminals before a special tribunal.
But mindful of the war reparations and other burdens already imposed on the Germans, the Allies never created it.
Only a few suspects were tried in German courts.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


On Stage, Survival Of the Fizziest
IT'S LONG BEEN KNOWN AS THE fabulous invalid and the Great White Way, but we may have to start calling it Six Flags Over Broadway.
While there has always been a raffish, thrill-seeking side to theatergoing, the distinction between Broadway and a theme park grew decidedly narrower during the 1993-94 season.


Earning Their Stripes
Like a patch of sky peeking through a canopy of trees, the silver-blue flash of the season's first striped bass is as hopeful as it is a tease.
The fish arrive off the backwaters of Provincetown at the first full moon every June.
But each year their appearance comes as a shock.
Sport fishermen get crazy hunting eels for bait, commercial fishermen get crazy casting lines and everyone gets strident about the best way to cook a striper.


Allison Mallin, Sharone Stern
Allison Hope Mallin, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert P. Geary of Ronkonkoma, L.I., and Dr.
Robert Mallin of Santa Fe, N.M., was married last evening to Dr.
Sharone Stern, a son of Aviva Stern of Plainview, L.I.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein at the Woodbury Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
Mrs.
Stern, 24, is a personal shopping consultant at Saks Fifth Avenue in Troy, Mich.
She is a graduate of Johnson &amp; Wales University.


Grandmasters Play Youths in Grand Central


Suzanne Reder, Harry A. Delano
Suzanne Mae Reder, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jason A. Reder of Pittsfield, Mass., was married yesterday to Harry Arthur Delano, a son of Pamela Famiglieti of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Joseph Delano.
Edward McGovern, the First Warden of Block Island, R.I., performed the ceremony at Dr. and Mrs.
Reder's house there.


72 Hours of Iceland (On New York Time)
Hmm. . . .
Where to go this weekend?
The Robertsons invited us to the Berkshires.
But their furniture is covered with cat hair, and all they ever want to do is ransack the flea markets for Fiestaware.
Some guy in accounting was talking up a new bed-and-breakfast near Brattleboro.
But the last time we tried one of those, the towels smelled of mildew and the syrup on the pancakes was strictly Log Cabin.


Students Care Far Too Much About Grades; Love of Knowledge
To the Editor:
"Making the Grades" (editorial, June 5) makes professors like me who opposed the change in Stanford's grading -- to restore the failing grade and to award C's and D's -- seem obstacles to intellectual life, opponents of excellence by students, lazy and dishonest, "pandering to consumers." A fine tribute, in my case, to 33 years of teaching at Stanford!


Versatile and User-Friendly Bow Tie Pasta
THERE is an art to matching pasta and sauce.
The shape of the pasta and the texture and ingredients in the sauce should all be taken into account.
And the number of people being served is another consideration.
Some kinds of pasta, like long, thin strands of angel hair, are best prepared in small quantities and served immediately.
Other varieties, especially short, tubular pastas like penne are more suitable for large quantities on a buffet table, as are baked pasta dishes, including lasagna.


Ms. Schirmeister and Mr. Seymour
Pamela Joy Schirmeister, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles F. Schirmeister of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Everett Hedden Seymour Jr., a son of Deborah Robinson Seymour of Morristown, N.J. and the late Mr.
Seymour.
The Rev.
J.
Barrie Shepherd performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in New York.
Ms.
Schirmeister, 36, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant professor of English at New York University.
She graduated from Yale University, where she also received a Ph.D.


Remembering Roald
To the Editor:
To provide the review of Jeremy Treglown's book "Roald Dahl: A Biography" (May 1) with the loaded headline " 'Roald the Rotten' " and a subhead that describes Dahl as "a bullying, manipulative man" is irresponsible and unjust.


Amulets for Anxiety
FOR years, whenever my parents traveled to Europe, a close friend of the family gave them two shiny quarters to take on their trip.
The first was meant to be given to the first beggar they encountered when they reached their destination, the second to the first beggar they met when they got off the plane that brought them home.
This, said their friend, was an old Jewish custom meant to insure the safety of the traveler by transforming the pleasure-seeking tourist into the dutiful messenger of not just one, but two, good deeds.
This family ritual continued long after it was agreed that the price of safety (and of virtue) should rise to 50 cents and then a dollar -- and as beggars became disturbingly easier to find, both here and abroad.
Leaving home, nervous travelers anxiously tell themselves that danger and misfortune lurk everywhere; the chances that our plane will crash are not much greater -- we hope -- than the likelihood of our getting hit by a bus as we cross the street in front of our house.
Yet few are really persuaded or comforted by this particular tune we go on bravely whistling in the dark.
For we can't help feeling that Nemesis has a particular attraction to the unknown, to exotic locales and rapid transportation.


Winners and Losers, From Uruguay to Italy
In 1904, FIFA, the world governing body for soccer, held its first meeting in Paris and reserved the right to hold a world championship.
Not that the Federation Internationale de Football Association wanted to rush into anything.
It would be 26 more years before the World Cup was born.
By 1930, soccer had grown uncomfortable with the Olympic insistence on amateurism.
The sport needed a worldwide showcase for its best professional players.
And since Uruguay was willing to pay for the three-week boat rides from Europe and build a 100,000-seat stadium, it was awarded the inaugural World Cup on the 100th anniversary of its independence.


Making Real the Memories of Summer
WHEN she was a young girl, Emily Frantzis Anderson would run barefoot around Quassy Amusement Park, which her family owned.
At sunset her grandmother would use the public address system to call her and her two younger sisters to the house for bed.
"I would go to sleep every night listening to carousel music," Mrs. Anderson recalled.


Picking The Best Broker
THE classic mistake too many sellers make when placing their homes on the market is to use a neighbor or friend as their real estate agent.
Instead they should be scouring the brokerage community for the very best talent.
In the introduction to a chapter on choosing a real estate agent in the book "How to Sell Your House in a Buyer's Market" (Wiley, 1993, $14.95), the authors, Martin Shenkman and Warren Boroson, specifically warn against the temptation to hire a friend as an agent.


Rockets Steel Themselves for the Big City
The Houston Rockets spent nearly two hours at Second Baptist Church gymnasium this afternoon.
It was not a religious retreat designed to rejuvenate the Rockets after a 91-83 loss to the Knicks in Game 2 of the National Basketball Association finals.
This sprawling church compound, with its self-contained grade school, high school and a 8,000-seat sanctuary has actually been the Rockets' training facility for several years.


One Remarkable Upset Is Only Highlight for U.S. Team
So far, the history of the United States in the World Cup begins and ends with a game in the Brazilian mining town of Belo Horizonte on June 29, 1950.
On that day, the Americans shocked the soccer world with a 1-0 victory over a powerful team from England, the birthplace of the sport.
The triumph over England remains one of the biggest upsets -- if not the biggest -- in World Cup history.
It also remains the last American victory in the tournament.


Jessica Ettinger, R. Z. Steinhaus Jr.
Jessica Ruth Ettinger, the daughter of Joan M. Fulbright of Syracuse and John W. Ettinger of Lansing, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard Zeke Steinhaus Jr., a son of Joan Goodman Blinder of New York and the late Mr.
Steinhaus.
Judge Albert A. Blinder of the New York State Court of Claims, the bridegroom's stepfather, performed the ceremony in New York Harbor aboard the Honey Fitz, the former Presidential yacht.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name professionally.
She is a morning news anchor at WBBR-AM, Bloomberg News Radio's all-news station, and a morning news anchor at Bloomberg Direct, a satellite television channel, both in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.


Baggio: An Italian Hero Known for What He Is Not
Before the 1990 World Cup, Fiorentina of Florence sold its young star Roberto Baggio to rival Juventus of Turin, and jilted fans showed their appreciation by pelting the Florentine club headquarters with rocks and fireworks.
As if to help clear his mind of wrongheaded thinking, the club's general manager was conked on the head with a bottle.
When the Italian national team, the Azzurri, came to train outside Florence, enraged fans so disrupted the preparations that then-coach Azeglio Vicini banned spectators, saying they deserved the "World Cup of stupidity."


Two in a Row: Tabasco Cat Roars Home
Tabasco Cat gave a dynamite encore to his victory in the Preakness when he won the Belmont Stakes yesterday by two lengths over Go for Gin and took giant strides toward the front of this year's talented class of Triple Crown colts.
The frisky, frolicking chestnut from California, who likes to roll in sand and kick his heels in the yard behind the barn, spent most of the mile and one-half stalking Go for Gin, the winner of the Kentucky Derby five weeks ago, then caught him in the homestretch and roared past.


After the Draft, This Agent Had Clients' Best Interests at Heart
For Tom and Kathy Grieve, Friday was a wild and emotional day.
It was as if they were sending their children off to summer camp for the first time, except their two sons weren't headed for the Poconos or the backwoods of Maine.
Eighteen-year-old Ben and 22-year-old Tim were off to play professional baseball for the first time.
"We took Ben to the airport in the morning," Grieve, the Texas Rangers' general manager, said.
"Then in the afternoon we took Tim to the airport."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
103.60
105.35
110.40
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6665
1.6705
1.5860
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3750
1.3773
1.2685
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5095
1.5048
1.5690
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$383.50
$380.60
$356.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Explosives Detector Installed at Heathrow
A screening system to automatically check airline luggage for explosives has been installed at Heathrow Airport in London.
The system is the first of its kind and can screen up to 20 bags a minute, according to the BAA, the operator of Heathrow and six airports in Britain.


Relief Seen for First Avenue Headache
The 48th Street entrance to the northbound Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive may be the only highway ramp in New York with its own fan club.
Ever since city officials closed the entrance in 1987, neighbors have been clamoring to have it reopened.
They say its closing has caused constant traffic congestion, accidents, noise and fumes by diverting an estimated 10,000 vehicles a day onto First Avenue, headed for the next F.D.R. entrance, at 62d Street.


How a Community Board Can Help Defuse Problems
To the Editor:
I found your June 5 article about Gracie Square Hospital, "Hospital Owns It, but Pigeons Rule," somewhat troubling.
It refers to complaints by neighbors on East 75th Street about conditions in an apartment building owned by the hospital and also about patients at the psychiatric hospital who stand around outside a meeting space in the building.


7 Victims Identify Suspect As the 'Gentleman Bandit'
Seven victims have identified a man arrested on Thursday night as the so-called Gentleman Bandit, suspected of committing more than 40 robberies in the neighborhoods surrounding Manhattan's Central Park over the last three months, the police said yesterday.
The suspect will be placed in more police lineups for other victims to view in the next several days, officers said.


RESULTS PLUS
BASEBALL  Oklahoma Wins College World Series  Oklahoma center fielder Chip Glass was named the series' most valuable player on the heels of the Sooners' 13-5 victory over Georgia Tech yesterday in the College World Series championship game in Omaha.
Glass, who finished with a .389 average and three homers, also had several key defensive plays.
The Sooners hit .327 over four games in the series, with Rick Gutierrez hitting .563 in the series and knocking in six runs.
"The lack of respect motivated us quite a bit," shortstop Rich Hills said.
"But really, it was just a case of us being mentally tough. We've just been real aggressive through the regionals and the series, attacking the ball on offense and defense." (AP)


Rache Simmons, John DeCorato
Dr.
Rache Michele Simmons, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stacy E. Simmons of Charlotte, N.C., was married there yesterday to Dr.
John William DeCorato, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. DeCorato of Grasmere, S.I.
The Rev.
Brian S. Suntken performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Dr.
Simmons, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a breast surgeon at the Strang Cancer Prevention Center and the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, both in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University, from which she also received her M.D.
Her parents own Omnia Design, interior design consultants, at which her father is the architect and her mother, Sara Simmons, is the office manager.


SURFACING
FASHION Gothic nails: Natural-looking nails are competing with the ghoulish on runways, as many designers are having their models use shockingly bloody or gloomily dark nail polish.
COLLEGES Alma Mater.net: Many colleges, including New York University, Harvard and Yale, are rewiring dormitories so that students can plug into computer networks directly, without modems.
MUSIC The new new sound: The latest style of dance music emerging at clubs like the Tunnel and the Sound Factory is "un-synch." One deejay described it as a mesh of "house music melodies and aggressive techno tempos."


Melora Myslik, Andrew Balson
Melora Wolpert Myslik, the daughter of Robert J. Myslik of Princeton, N.J., and Barbara Hauter Woodward of Skillman, N.J., was married last evening to Andrew Brett Balson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John B. Balson of Jupiter, Fla.
Rabbi Irwin Fishbein officiated at the Hun School in Princeton.
The Rev.
Jean Smith, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Balson, 28, is the program coordinator for the Massachusetts Youth Service Alliance, a nonprofit community-service organization in Boston.
The bride and the bridegroom graduated from Princeton University, where her father is the director of athletics.
Her mother is the owner of Harlingen Associates, real estate consultants in Skillman.
The bride is the stepdaughter of J. Taylor Woodward 3d.


Melissa Hood, Patrick Adams
Melissa Louise Hood, the daughter of Lillian and Alfred Hood of New York, was married last Tuesday to Patrick Junius Adams, the son Abigail Westlake of New York and the late Junius Adams, and the stepson of Donald E. Westlake.
Cantor Oreen Innez Zeitlin officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Mrs.
Adams attended Sarah Lawrence College and Berklee College of Music.
She is a singer with the Michael Carney Orchestra.


SEPARATE IS BETTER
While Susan Estrich certainly raises several key ways in which single-sex schools can help girls, she neglects to address other vital issues.
First, since public schools will most likely not be permitted to separate the genders, only families who can afford private-school tuition will be able to provide the sort of education Estrich promulgates -- burdening girls from middle- and lower-socioeconomic classes with sexism and elitism.
Moreover, single-sexism does not last forever.
Women must join men in the work force and must learn to work with them.
And men must see women as able competitors.
If capable women hide themselves at all-women's schools, how will men learn that women are their intellectual and social equals?
Our efforts would be better spent updating teacher attitudes and upgrading adolescent self-esteem.


Awake, America! Let Soccer Ring
During the inaugural World Cup, played in Uruguay in 1930, the United States was suffering through a vicious 6-1 loss to Argentina in the semifinals when the American trainer, John Coll, stormed onto the field to argue a foul.
He carried with him a bag of medicines, which spilled during his vehement protest.
A vial of chloroform broke open, and Coll was overcome by the fumes.
It can be argued that America has never awakened to soccer since.


Facing A Survival Dilemma
MORE a tough workout for three actors than a sustaining play, "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me" is an unfit choice for the Logodaedaly Company at the Schoolhouse here.
It runs through next Sunday.
The Irish author Frank McGuinness's examination of survival under oppression turns, unintentionally, into an encounter with oppressiveness.
Patly, Mr.
McGuinness has Edward, an Irish journalist; Adam, an American doctor, and Michael, an English academic, held hostage, each with one leg chained to the wall, in a dank room "somewhere in the Middle East."


Egypt Begins Crackdown on Strongest Opposition Group
After a series of raids and arrests that have weakened Islamic groups trying to topple the Government by force, Egyptian security forces have begun a crackdown against the country's most powerful opposition organization, the Muslim Brotherhood, which rejects violence.
The campaign, which includes the detention and interrogation of scores of Muslim Brotherhood leaders, signals a drive by the Government to curtail not only those movements that have carried out violent attacks, but also one that has come to dominate many municipalities, professional and labor associations and university faculties.


Vote in House Primary May Signal End of Era
THE Kean era in New Jersey Republican politics appeared to some Republicans to have ended last week in a bitterly fought primary for Congress in southern New Jersey, in which Assemblyman Frank A. LoBiondo of Vineland, a conservative, defeated a better-known moderate, State Senator Bill Gormley of Margate.
Former Gov.
Thomas H. Kean, the longtime leader of the party's moderate wing, had endorsed Mr.
Gormley and campaigned for him over the final weekend of the campaign, but Mr.
LoBiondo's strong opposition to taxes and big government carried the day.
Mr.
LoBiondo was able to tap into these core Republican issues after Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman made them the hallmark of her victory last November.


Dublin Growing Worried by Protestant Guerrilla Attacks
Guerrilla actions by Protestants from Northern Ireland operating here in the overwhelmingly Roman Catholic Irish Republic have begun to worry the Irish Government, senior officials say.
Life here is normal, with no evidence of increased police or army patrols to improve confidence in public safety.
People seem more concerned about the prospects of the national soccer team in the World Cup in America than in the unnerving but relatively minor spurts of Protestant violence.


Latest Wave of Immigrants Is Splitting Chinatown
For more than 100 years, Chinatown has absorbed the different waves of Chinese immigrants, from the Taishanese earlier this century to the ethnic Chinese from Vietnam in the 1980's.
But now, there are growing strains between the established Cantonese community and the latest group of immigrants, the Fujianese, who have poured in from mainland China in the last four years.
Many businessmen and longtime residents are expressing resentment of the new Fujianese, saying they are overwhelming Chinatown, causing an increase in crime and a major unemployment problem.
Non-Fujianese workers complain that the sheer number of these immigrants, many of whom have been smuggled in, creates unfair competition by flooding the market and driving down wages.
There is also concern over image.


Donald Ragas Jr. And Meg Cohen
Margaret Nancy Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Richard Cohen of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Donald John Ragas Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ragas of Lake Charles, La.
Judge Flora Barth Wolf of the Court of Common Pleas of Philadelphia performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 27 and known as Meg, is an associate features editor at Harper's Bazaar magazine in New York.
She graduated from Pomona College and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: Time Out! Name-Check!; And Smile When You Say 'Canuck'
IN the week when St.
John's University teams dropped the name Redmen in deference to Native American sensibilities, it strikes some as odd that the Vancouver hockey team is known as the Canucks, a term many Americans might consider a derogatory putdown of our neighbors to the north.
Indeed, the term helped to shift the course of the 1972 Presidential race when Nixon dirty tricksters conspired to publish an apparently forged letter in a New Hampshire newspaper in which an aide to Senator Edmund S. Muskie was quoted as saying, "We don't have blacks but we have Cannocks (sic)," an apparent reference to Canadian-Americans.
It was the beginning of the end for Mr.
Muskie's campaign.


Dole Plans to Fight Health Bills Calling for Employer Mandates
Senator Bob Dole, the minority leader, today raised the specter of filibustering and killing any health care legislation requiring employers to insure their workers.
He said in Boston that he would be happy to make the issue a focus of the general election in November.
Later, in a telephone interview, Mr.
Dole said, "I didn't use the words 'filibuster' or 'block.' " Referring to the insurance requirement, he said, "I would certainly oppose it."


5 Years After, A Big League Of Their Own
Raymond Molina has 18 baseballs on the floor of his closet, each one proof of a home run he hit.
For Raymond, a 13-year-old Little League catcher, the stack of balls is more than a reminder of personal glory.
It is a memorial.
In April 1993, a holdup man gunned down his father at his convenience store.
A week later, Raymond hit a ball clear over the fence at Holcombe Rucker Park.
Someone retrieved the ball and gave it to Raymond, who saved it and dedicated it to his father.
"I save them because that's what my father wanted me to be, a good ballplayer," Raymond said.
"I want to be Babe Ruth Jr. I'm saving them so I can someday show my kids I hit a lot of home runs."
Five years ago, Little League baseball didn't even exist in Harlem.
Now there are so many young people like Raymond Molina showing up to play in the Harlem Little League that Iris and Dwight Raiford, the league's founders, are resorting to creative ways to find space, like using soccer fields at City College.
Every Saturday, 46 teams and more than 650 boys and girls, aged 5 to 15, in brightly colored T-shirts are sprinkled across diamonds around then neighborhood.
There has been an outpouring of support.
Private sponsors have put up the $100-per-player costs of shirts, shoes, bats, gloves and balls.
Local bankers, doctors, dentists, lawyers, teachers and political leaders are financing teams, like the Lion Insurance "Lions" or the United Doctors of Harlem "Medicos."
Parents and friends are volunteering their time as umpires, coaches and guardians, like Tony Sanchez, who roams the different fields as head umpire when he's not coaching his own team or playing himself.
Unmarked police cars often idle nearby as officers stop to watch.
And, with city help, Holcombe Rucker, a small park tucked away under the Triborough Bridge at 155th Street and Frederick Douglass Boulevard, has been transformed.
Once overgrown with weeds and covered with graffiti, the park now has lush grass, new lights, chalk lines and a silver chain fence.
"This is our gem," said Iris Raiford, her back toward Yankee Stadium looming in the background.
"This is the best."
The Raifords, a Harlem couple, began dreaming of the league eight years ago, when their son Josh begged them for a place to play baseball.
They got a charter from the Little League Foundation and successfully lobbied Mayor Dinkins to dig up a few asphalt-covered parks and provide money for Holcombe Rucker.
Mr.
Raiford, a Citicorp vice president, and Ms.
Raiford, a domestic violence coordinator for the Manhattan District Attorney, also got the word out in Harlem.
Tehya Roberson, a 13-year-old third basewoman for the Stylists, plays on one of two new softball teams in the league started by her mother, Cecelia.
And Tehya plans to stay with Harlem Little League, even into high school, "seeing as my mom is the coach, and I have a lot of friends on the team."
"Most of these children come from single-parent families," Dwight Raiford said.
"There's an African saying, 'It takes a village to raise a child."' LORI NICKEL


A New Diner That's More Than a New Diner
FINDING a new restaurant with terrific food and bargain prices is always exciting, and that is especially so in the high-priced Hamptons.
That is the case at Doobies, a diner with a difference, in Southampton.
Despite its classic 1950's decor and unmistakable diner look and feel, Doobies is a Northern Italian restaurant, and a good one in disguise.


Corrections
An article on May 22 about the Chewton Glen Hotel near New Milton, England, misstated a reservation telephone number.
It is (800) 344 5087.


Susan O'Rourke, Beau B. Ryan
Susan Elizabeth O'Rourke, the daughter of Marilyn and Paul O'Rourke of Lincoln, Mass., was married yesterday to Beau Barry Ryan, a son of Dorinda D. Ryan and John B. Ryan 3d, both of New York.
The Rev.
Ted Anderson performed the ceremony at the Unitarian Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Ryan graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father owns an import-export company in Wellesley, Mass., that bears his name.


We're Losing Ground To the Kitsch Culture
To the Editor:
Herbert Muschamp's June 5 article, "On West 57th, a Confederacy of Kitsch," was frustrating.
For one thing, it failed to identify the pioneer of kitsch on 57th: Donald Trump.
As a licensed tour guide, I find that one of the top-priority sites for visitors is Trump Tower.
I guide them past the fake trees down to the pricey cafe surrounded by pink granite.


German Postal Union Is Resisting Benefit-Cutting Plans
Workers' benefits have to be cut to improve Germany's economic competitiveness, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Government and its big business allies keep saying.
But determined resistance by labor unions this week against plans to slim down postal and telecommunications services before privatization showed this is easier said than done.


Q. &amp; A.
10-Year Battle Over Rent Q On Aug. 1, 1984, my wife and I took out a lease on a one-bedroom apartment in the West Village at $1,100 a month.
We then received apartment registration showing that the apartment was rent-stabilized.
The previous (controlled) tenant had paid $184 a month.
We filed a fair market rent appeal that Dec. 11.


Terri Cousar and Ed Shockley
Ten years ago, Terri Cousar met Ed Shockley when they were platonic roommates in a large old apartment across the street from the Brooklyn Museum.
Although he had a crush on her from the moment he moved in, he never let it show.
"Having an affair with a roommate is like being married," said Mr.
Shockley, a playwright and now 37.
"It's very complicated. And also, if it breaks up, you have to move."


Stopping to Eat the Roses, and Other Blooms
IT'S an interesting experience, eating a flower.
I remember my first nasturtium.
I put the whole luminous orange blossom in my mouth and it sat on my tongue like a motionless butterfly.
Biting down on it was like eating velvet air, with a touch of horseradish (nasturtiums are as peppery as arugula without the bitter edge), and I let those cool crumpled colors slide down my throat as unchewed as oysters.
But nasturtiums in salads are child's play compared to what Cathy Wilkinson Barash describes in "Edible Flowers: From Garden to Palate" (Fulcrum, 1993; $29.95), which is illustrated with her own photographs.
I've grown pansies, violas, day lilies, roses, dianthus and calendula for years, but I never thought of them as food.
And though I often pick fresh herbs to flavor my dinner, I'm not in the habit of eating the blossoms.


Mussina Captures No. 9 And Keeps Red Sox Reeling
Orioles 5, Red Sox 2
Mike Mussina became the American League's second nine-game winner and Harold Baines homered as Baltimore beat slumping Boston, 5-2, yesterday at Fenway Park


A Pump From the Past


Honoring Commodore Vanderbilt
Descendants toast the founder of the family fortune, Racquet and Tennis Club, May 27.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MIDTOWN Spinning Off Through the Stars
The Museum of Television and Radio has embarked on a Starship Enterprise.
The museum is offering a gallery exhibition and a series of screenings of the two successors to television's "Star Trek" that will continue through Nov. 20.


Wall Street; Wanna Buy a Bridge to Brooklyn?
THE day Wilbur L. Ross, Jr., a very busy investment banker, has time to go to lunch with a reporter is a day when the bankruptcy business must be slow.
But when Mr.
Ross wants to go to dinner something more must be afoot.
"I thought you'd like to know what my next gig will be," he said.
Career changes are seldom big news.
But among Wall Street honchos, Mr.
Ross is a bellwether banker who has always had an exceptional nose for where the money is.
So dinner was called for.


Teamsters To Shut Down Four Offices
A major shake-up of the teamsters' union will take effect on Monday, when its four regional offices around the country will be shut down to save as much as $15 million a year in expenses for union executives already earning full-time salaries as leaders of state and local union operations.
Officials who run the regional centers attacked the closings as a brazen act of retaliation by Ron Carey, the president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, to consolidate power and remove his opponents.


The False Promise of Development by Casino
ONCE a forbidden pleasure confined to a few oases of sin, legal gambling is on a roll: From Oregon to Mississippi to Connecticut, communities are betting that betting is the ticket to economic resurrection.
And no wonder.
Building a gambling industry is widely viewed as the painless route to development -- prosperity, just around the corner, without the cost and effort of retraining workers, negotiating tax breaks for businesses or luring executives with good schools, efficient transportation and low crime rates.
But even as the $30 billion-a-year gambling juggernaut gains momentum, economists and regional planners are predicting that it will chew up more income than it creates.
"If we end up with gambling within 100 miles of where virtually every American lives," warns William Thompson of the University of Nevada at Las Vegas, "it will be worse than a zero-sum game," leaving most towns with added social problems and nothing in compensation.


June 5-10; If It's a Question of Breeding, Please Stop
Like many of the upper class He liked the sound of broken glass. Hilaire Belloc
Decadence among the upper class, they say in Britain, is as old as the upper class itself.
But it's nice to have the aphorism confirmed from time to time.
It also sells newspapers.


Keep Your Eye Upon The Bagel
As you ramble on through life, brother," goes the profound poem in the Mayflower coffee shops, "whatever be your goal, keep your eye upon the doughnut, and not upon the hole."
Sage advice, lightly sugared; however, it now appears that doughnuts may be what worried marketers call "a mature product." And the notion of dunking a doughnut into a cup of coffee is so mature as to be decrepit.


Stowaway Policy Punishes the Seafarers
To the Editor:
Social and economic conditions in many developing areas of the world have created a problem of increasing concern to the maritime community -- stowaways, people who seek refuge in more prosperous ports by illegally boarding merchant ships and hiding in such spaces as cargo containers, lifeboats and between decks.


As Military Pay Slips Behind, Poverty Invades the Ranks
Like other airmen at Hickam Air Force Base in Honolulu, 21-year-old Jason Edwards worries about tensions far away in North Korea that could erupt into fighting and involve his supply base.
But Airman Edwards has more immediate concerns, too.
He is worried about how to feed his 22-year-old wife, Beth, and their two small children on his total pay and allowances of $1,330 a month.
In desperation, the Edwardses last month began drawing $228 a month in food stamps to get by.


Seek and Ye Shall Find
To the Editor:
In his article "The Eccentrics Who Declared Independence for America"  [ May 22 ] , Alex Ross writes that the critical edition of Charles Ives's "Unanswered Question" contains "crucially wrong" alterations to the trumpet tone row.


Ms. Weathers, Mr. Morris
Mariann Neidert Weathers, a daughter of Mary Eleanor Weathers of Loretto, Tenn., and the late Dr.
Malcolm H. Weathers, was married yesterday to John Joseph Morris, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Morris of Rochester.
The Rev.
Ignatius Eckelkamp performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Cathedral of the Incarnation in Nashville.


SUNDAY, June 12, 1994; Tattoo Anarchy
In the former Soviet Union, jailhouse tattoos are neatly codified: thieves, murderers and even those who pleaded guilty have their own distinctive marks -- a skull for a murderer, card suits on the fingers for a gambler -- with rigidly defined meanings.
Not in America.
A Boise, Idaho, exhibit of jailhouse tattoo art suggests that convicts in this country have no respect for convention.
They use tattoo iconography any which way they like.


Two New York Neophytes Take a Cue From Pirandello
SITTING OVER TEA AND oatmeal at the back of a decidedly untrendy diner on the Upper West Side, Eric Schaeffer and Donal Lardner Ward don't look much like movie directors, and this is no power breakfast.
The two men might be mistaken for a taxi driver and a bartender, which in fact they were, before they wrote, directed, produced and starred in "My Life's in Turnaround" -- a film about a taxi driver and a bartender making their first film.
If there's a certain Pirandello absurdity to this movie about movie makers trying to make a movie, it's in keeping with the playful self-consciousness of the film.


From Street Fighter to Stalinist
FORGING AMERICAN COMMUNISM The Life of William Z. Foster.
By Edward P. Johanningsmeier.
Illustrated. 433 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.


Ricki Morell and John Hechinger
Ricki Alexandra Morell, the daughter of Nan and Murray Morell of Syosset, L.I., is to be married today to John Edward Hechinger, a son of Grace and Fred M. Hechinger of New York.
Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I.
The bride and bridegroom are reporters for The Charlotte (N.C.) Observer.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her parents, who are retired, owned Morell Packaging Products, a manufacturing company in New York.


Museum of the Giglio: In Celebration of a Century-Old Rite
Each July since the turn of the century, thousands of people have flocked to the streets around Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church for its annual 12-day festival, highlighted by the "dance of the giglio" through the Williamsburg streets, But this year, festival organizers are hoping to attract just as much interest in their plans to establish an archive and museum of the giglio -- a year-round testament to the religious and cultural rite brought to Brooklyn from Nola, Italy.
"This is about sharing our culture and our religious beliefs with other people," said Vincent Patuto, a member of the executive board of Our Lady of Mount Carmel, St.
Paulinus Cooperative Feast, who have been collecting artifacts, photographs and other memorabilia.
"People can see the past, the present and get an idea of how strong we're going in the future."


SUNDAY, June 12, 1994; Listenin' Doughnuts
A widely circulated electronic version of a National Security Agency employee handbook states "Your home, car pool, and public places are not authorized areas to conduct classified discussions -- even if everyone involved in the discussion possesses a proper clearance and 'need to know.' "


Jacqueline Korman and Nick Urgo
Jacqueline Ellen Korman, the daughter of Betty Ann Korman and William Korman, both of New York, is to be married today to Nick Urgo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodolfo Urgo of Astoria, Queens.
Rabbi Judith Lewis is to officiate at the Metropolitan Club in Glen Cove, L.I.
The bride, 31, is the senior projects manager at Marketing Directors, a real estate marketing and sales firm in New York.
She graduated cum laude from New York University.


Down to Cases
It did not take a psychic to know that the time was ripe for health care reform.
For one thing, major social welfare legislation seems to run in a three-decade cycle.
Medicare was created 30 years ago, Social Security 30 years before that.
Then in 1991, a long-shot candidate, Harris Wofford, won a Senate election in Pennsylvania by running on health care.
Republicans got the hint.
At the start of the 1992 campaign year, President George Bush promised a "comprehensive health reform program."
But then Mr.
Bush's natural passivity kicked in.
White House interest faded, handing Bill Clinton the issue that became the centerpiece of his campaign.
It is also the issue that may well determine whether Mr.
Clinton's is remembered as a notable Presidency.
One reasons is that universal health care has been both a crying national need and a potently divisive social and legislative issue for a long time.
The American Medical Association used the specter of "Socialized medicine" to defeat Harry S. Truman's plan for national health insurance in 1945.
The same demagoguery still works, but that does not change the agreed facts.
Health care consumes one-seventh of the gross national product, far more than what other industrialized democracies spend to extend health care to all their citizens.
Even so, the U.S. system leaves 37 million people without health insurance.
And while American who can afford it get the best care in the world, the current system makes little sense in terms of economic competitiveness or social equity.
It is possible to study the problem and come up with a number of solutions, including, for example, a Government financed, or single-payer, system like Canada's.
The Times's editorial page has advocated the managed competition model, which borrows the mandatory participation feature of government programs -- guaranteeing that everyone is covered -- but relies on carefully structured competition between private plans to deliver health care.
Mr.
Clinton deserves credit for specifying universal coverage with private insurance as the anchors of his plan.
By so doing, he set the boundaries for the ideological debate.
The legislative struggle now under way has to do with how much of the Clinton ideology will survive and also with the architecture and mechanics of the new system.
Although Mr.
Clinton has shaped the debate in a positive way, the White House team has made tactical mistakes.
The most serious was its decision to draft its health care proposal in secret sessions presided over by Hillary Rodham Clinton and Ira Magaziner.
The lack of public hearings wasted a opportunity to build public support and increase the pressure on Congress to respond to public need rather than the health care lobbyists.
The task force wound up alienating many of the experts that Mrs.
Clinton gathered in the White House to create policy.
They saw virtually no imprint of their work on the bill that the First Lady's inner circle put together.
Another tactical misstep was to send to Capitol Hill a 1,300-page mega-bill that purports to solve every medical problem the country has ever experienced.
A tighter bill would have been a tougher target for critics to hit.
Political necessity also warped the Clinton plan when the task force decided to propose only those reforms that would not require a broad-based tax.
That single decision shaped virtually every feature of the reform, from the controversial purchasing alliances to cost controls, and produced a bill that many in Congress have declared unworkable.
These missteps made the job of the Democratic Congressional leaders immeasurably harder.
They weren't helped by Republicans like the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, who characterized the Clinton effort as "A massive overdose of Government control." But other Republicans, like Senators John Chafee and John Danfoth, have struggled to find a consensus plan.
Until the past few weeks, the White House vacillated between trying to ram a bill through Congress with a slim majority of Democratic votes and reaching for a bipartisan compromise.
When Senator Edward M. Kennedy received President and Mrs.
Clinton's blessing for his modified version of their plan, that was an important signal.
It meant that the season of bipartisan bargaining had begun.
June is the critical month.
If the committees do not finish most of their work this month, Congress will run out of time before the lawmakers break for the November elections and the entire effort could collapse.
Whatever the flaws in the process of writing the bill or in the bill itself, the Clinton health reform has now created a sene of urgency on the Hill.
And by assigning his wife to lead the effort, Mr.
Clinton made a pact not to ditch health care reform no matter how tought the fight.
For him, the real test of success will be coming away with some viable form of universal coverage.
Then he can take credit for a landmark achievement in social policy that will earn him a place in history no matter what else occurs in his tenure.


Versatile and User-Friendly Bow Tie Pasta
THERE is an art to matching pasta and sauce.
The shape of the pasta and the texture and ingredients in the sauce should all be taken into account.
And the number of people being served is another consideration.
Some kinds of pasta, like long, thin strands of angel hair, are best prepared in small quantities and served immediately.
Other varieties, especially short, tubular pastas like penne are more suitable for large quantities on a buffet table, as are baked pasta dishes, including lasagna.


Love at the End of Its Tether
MOSES SUPPOSES By Ellen Currie. 219 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.


Quality Time


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


City Opera Selects Sixth Grader to Travel
HINTS of a voice change were premature for Matthew Butler, the Bronxville boy soprano who performed with the Westchester Philharmonic, then called the New Orchestra of Westchester, at the Performing Arts Center of Purchase College last December.
It was reported at the time that 12-year-old Matthew's voice had dropped a notch, just before he was to sing several high-pitched solos with the orchestra.
Not so, said Matthew, who was recently tapped by the New York City Opera to sing the role of the First Spirit, sometimes known as the First Boy, in Mozart's opera "The Magic Flute."


Manhattan South: Stylish Precincts
CASCABEL **  (212) 431-7300; 218 Lafayette Street, near Spring Street; $$; all major cards
The stylish setting here is a composition of deep red walls adorned with modern art, strategically set tiny lights and a slick little bar near the entrance.
The chef is the talented Tom Valenti, who recently came in as a partner from Alison on Dominick Street, where he spent the last five years turning out his beguiling southwestern French fare.
At Cascabel, Mr.
Valenti's cooking is even more imaginative than before, and his food remains as flavorful as ever.
For starters there is a ragout of mussels with white beans and artichokes; tender octopus salad in a red wine vinaigrette with roasted tomato and cucumbers, and strudel of goat cheese and roasted portobello mushrooms.
Main courses include a gutsy dish of slowly cooked tripe tossed with penne, tomatoes and chili oil; roasted guinea hen with soft polenta and mushroom canneloni, and grilled halibut in a tarragon- and shallot-infused tomato broth with lemon pasta. (Review: 5/13/94)


Its Lessons Learned, Ballet Theater Rebounds
AMERICAN BALLET THEATER, which refused to lie down and die last year after sundry crises, rebounded artistically this season.
There is no better symbol of this spirit of rebirth and hope for the future than the picture on this page of 18-year-old Paloma Herrera in her dazzling debut as the ballerina in "Theme and Variations."
Anyone who has followed the beautifully schooled Argentine prodigy since she joined the company in 1991 would not be surprised by her polished first try at this neo-classic Balanchine masterpiece.
When she followed it up with an even more phenomenal and mature performance the next evening, all the promise of youth and exceptional talent seemed on display.


Oregon's High Desert
SOUTHEAST Oregon's remote high-desert country is a little-known and remarkably diverse region that covers nearly one-quarter of the state.
Wind-seared desert and lush wetlands border stunning geologic formations; pelicans and trumpeter swans fly over pockmarked lava beds, and dry winds sweep through ghost towns where sheepherders used to spend the winter months.
Most of Oregon's high desert, with an average altitude of 4,000 feet, is in Harney and Malheur Counties.
Only 34,500 residents live in the counties' 20,125 square miles, an area larger than Vermont plus New Hampshire.
Seventy-five percent of the land is owned or managed by Federal or state agencies, primarily the Bureau of Land Management.


Bucks County
Bucks County began to garner its fame as a tranquil hideaway for urbanites nearly a century ago, when artists, writers, musicians and theatrical greats discovered its untouched colonial Delaware River towns, dense woodlands and miles of rolling green farmland.
Eventually, the Algonquin set and assorted kindred spirits did for Bucks what London's Bloomsbury group did for Sussex: The county became the place to play at rural life.
But every idyll can outgrow an image, and so did Bucks County, a piece of Pennsylvania countryside along the Delaware River Valleywithin two hours of New York.
It is a little more crowded now, at least in parts, but also a lot more egalitarian in sharing its pleasures.
Dozens of bed-and-breakfasts have brought fine country homes within reach of visitors.
And expensive antiques shops and galleries have been joined by fairs and flea markets where one can feel relaxed about browsing.


A WRINKLE IN TIME
I read with interest, and some amusement, that wrinkles in unironed clothes and elderly faces have become assets.
I am 78 and have my share of those assets.
Your feature made me think of a phrase from my childhood: no matter how you slice it, it's still baloney.
RUTH J. MEFFERD Palm City, Fla.


Remembering Roald
To the Editor:
In 1968, I had the opportunity to visit Roald Dahl at his home in Great Missenden.
He and his son, Theo, picked me up at the train station, and we drove in an old station wagon to his farmhouse.
Here we gathered around a long kitchen table with the rest of the family -- his wife, Patricia Neal, their three other children, the nanny and his sister -- for a smorgasbord of tinned fish, salads, Pat's homemade mayonnaise and a dessert of various chocolate bars.


In Short/Civil War
THE CLASS OF 1846 From West Point to Appomattox: Stonewall Jackson, George McClellan and Their Brothers.
By John C. Waugh.
Warner, $29.95.


A Helping Hand for an Endangered Violet
THERE probably are few times in life when seeing a plant in flower can bring a tear to the eye.
This sort of emotionalism is natural for major events, but seeing a plant in bloom?
Well, this is exactly what happened.
The plant in particular is a violet, a rather pretty one at that.
It is known by the name coastal violet (Viola brittoniana) and is a large-flowered violet with a clean white throat.
The leaves are deeply divided into narrow segments, toothed, not unlike those of the birdfoot violet.


What Grade Inflation?
An avalanche of public attention has been loosed by the decision of Stanford's Academic Senate to revive the failing grade and make it once again a permanent part of the student's transcript.
The tone is interesting: though the decision is usually praised, the news accounts and editorials are often stridently critical of the previous practice -- which was a sincere effort, like it or not, to encourage students to take academic risks and experiment with courses outside their comfort zone.
We are told that Stanford (and, by extension, other universities) "pandered" to students, fostering a climate of rampant "grade inflation."
I happen to think my colleagues probably made the right decision.
But I am struck by the degree to which both the problem and Stanford's so-called solution are being misunderstood.


Why a Haiti Invasion Still Makes Sense
To the Editor:
"Invade Haiti? A Sure Way to Make a Bad Policy Worse" (Op-Ed, June 1), the provocative article by Brent Scowcroft and Eric D. K. Melby, is also wrongheaded in at least three respects:


Don't Make Me Choose Between Life and Death
To the Editor:
"Mercy for the Dying" (editorial, May 28) envisions "a new frontier of freedom of choice" in legal physician-assisted suicide, but does not address, much less answer, these questions:


Macy Lets Federated Offer a Plan
Despite their vow to remain independent in the face of a merger proposal from Federated Department Stores Inc., executives of R. H. Macy &amp; Company met with Federated executives Friday to consider for the first time their competitor's pitch.
People familiar with the Friday meetings said Macy had at least signaled its willingness to contemplate a merger, which it previously had rejected out of hand.
At the meetings, Federated went through its plans for merging the two companies, describing how it would combine them and explaining what the merits of a combination would be.


A Message in the Meadows


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
The Hill-Thomas Hearings And Other New Works  Merkin Concert Hall
The Friends and Enemies of New Music struck a curious balance between whimsy and grim assertion on Thursday night.
Arthur Kampela's "Percussion Study No. 1" mixed stringent guitar virtuosity with percussion effects made by the hand.
"Shadow Traffic," by John Link, shared Mr.
Kampela's basically atonal world; it is kind of an extended rhapsody, often lyrical in its horizontal movement but hard-bitten in mood and color.


Fox Deal Is Adding Luster to the Investment Value of Television Stations
Television stations have become valuable investment properties again, and nothing illustrates that better than the Fox network's raid on its competitors' affiliates.
Only three or four years ago, most television stations that were decorated with "for sale" signs sat on the market like big, overimproved condominiums in declining neighborhoods.
They faced heavy debt loads because their owners tended to have overpaid for them, and they faced an uncertain future because the coming revolution of video choices made them look antique.


Editorial Notebook; Human Rights Diplomacy, R.I.P.
President Clinton was seeking to solve a political problem when he snapped the link between China's human rights practices and its U.S. trading privileges.
Yet by rewarding rather than punishing China's rejection of reasonable American human rights demands, Mr.
Clinton damaged the credibility of American human rights diplomacy everywhere.
That is no small loss.
Two decades of intermittent and occasionally successful American human rights pressure on behalf of, among others, East European dissidents, South African blacks and victims of Latin American juntas made a difference to thousands of individual lives and made it easier for democrats in those societies to fight for political change.


Edward Kienholz, 66, Sculptor Known for Elaborate Art, Dies
Edward Kienholz, whose elaborate, often macabre sculptural tableaux were savage indictments of American life, died on Friday at the Bonner General Hospital in Hope, Idaho.
He was 66 and had homes and studios in Hope as well as Berlin and Houston.
The cause was heart failure, said Peter Gould, whose gallery, L. A. Louver, has represented Mr.
Kienholz since 1981.


Don't Make Me Choose Between Life and Death; Time to Move Ahead
To the Editor:
Bravo for "Mercy for the Dying" (editorial, May 29), which suggests that the time has come when one or more states could start down the road of assisted suicide and monitor whether or not it leads to abuse or a new frontier of freedom of choice for the desperately ill.


South African Prison Riot
One inmate was killed and 25 were injured today at Victor Verster Prison near Cape Town in the fourth day of disturbances in South Africa's prisons.
A spokesman for the Department of Correctional Services said that 270 prison guards regained control of the prison around noon from 665 inmates, some of whom were heavily armed with homemade weapons.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
American Eagle Tankers, Singapore, an initial public offering of eight million shares.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.


Immunization
Cyclical outbreaks of diseases like measles and whooping cough are still common, although health officials say widespread immunization of infants could prevent them.
While children must be immunized to enter school, health officials say they should get all their required shots in the first 24 months, when childhood diseases are more common and more dangerous.
Low immunization rates are attributed, to varying degrees, to the high cost of vaccines, the lack of access to health care, poor record-keeping and families not placing a high priority on immunization.
The cost of a full set of vaccines, not including doctors' fees for giving the shots, rose to $244 in 1992, from $23 in 1982.


Rockets' Smith Finds the Bench an Uncomfortable Seat
For Kenny Smith, one of the personal turning points of the National Basketball Association finals came with 5 minutes 6 seconds left to play last night, the game tied at 77-77 and the Knicks in the midst of a run that had brought them back from a 71-65 deficit.
Smith's Rockets were back on their heels and 19,000-plus fans at the Garden were going crazy creating the sort of frenzied sports environment that has given Madison Square Garden its reputation.
For Smith, who grew up in New York and was an all-American at Archbishop Molloy High School in Queens, this was a moment you live your athletic life for.


Green Urges Bill to Shield Investigations From Politics
Public Advocate Mark J. Green, suggesting that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had given the appearance of using the Department of Investigation for political purposes, proposed legislation yesterday that would give the Commissioner of Investigation more independence from the Mayor.
Mr.
Green's recommendation came three weeks after the Giuliani administration accused the Commissioner of Youth Services under the Dinkins administration, Richard L. Murphy, of overspending the agency's budget by $11 million and called for the Department of Investigation to look into the matter.


No Headline
"We all feel as though we lost a father. We feel orphaned, and I think you should give us a chance to wrestle with that, each in our own way." -- RABBI YEHUDA KRINSKY, spokesman for Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson.  [ B2:3. ]


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  EUROPE VOTE AIDS KOHL
Residents throughout Europe voted for the European Parliament, with the votes testing the popularity of each Government, and in Germany, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's party got surprisingly strong support.
A1


Senate Leader Backs Unions Protesting Whitman's Budget
A cutback in pension contributions that is a major element in Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's proposed budget appeared in jeopardy today, as tens of thousands of teachers and other union members rallied to pressure legislators against it and the President of the State Senate unexpectedly took their side.
The showdown with the unions, who the state police said brought 25,000 to 30,000 protesters into the block outside the State House and legislative complex, represents the toughest political fight Mrs.
Whitman has faced since she took office in January.


A Haiti Invasion Wins Hemisphere Support
A majority of Western Hemisphere countries have quietly told United States officials that they are prepared to support military intervention in Haiti if sanctions fail to oust its military rulers, senior Administration officials say.
Although the leaders of several countries have publicly attacked the idea of intervention, United States diplomats have received quite a different message in private meetings over the last two weeks with officials from about 30 Caribbean and Latin American countries: most support intervention, although often with strings attached.


CHRONICLE
TOM CRUISE isn't on trial, just his image: that of the lady-killing bartender he played in the 1988 movie "Cocktail."
Mr.
Cruise gave a sworn statement last week in a sexual-harassment case against two T.G.I.
Friday's restaurants about how he learned flashy bartender moves from the chain's employees to prepare for his role.


Brooklyn Hall Inducts a Poet
The late poet Marianne Moore, who saluted the 1955 Brooklyn Dodger World Series winners in verse, was inducted yesterday into the Flatbush version of Cooperstown's Hall of Fame.
Moore, who paid tribute to Brooklyn's only championship club in the poem "Hometown Piece for Messrs. Alston and Reese," was cited by the Brooklyn Dodger Hall of Fame in ceremonies at the Brooklyn Museum.


First Decision of Exxon Valdez Trial Is Expected in Days
Five years after the tanker Exxon Valdez ran aground in Prince William Sound, a Federal jury hearing a $16.5 billion lawsuit against the Exxon Corporation is weighing evidence, much of it never before disclosed, on whether the disaster was the result of reckless behavior by senior company executives and the tanker captain or was simply an accident.
Since the trial began on May 2, a string of Exxon shipping employees, testifying for the 10,000 Alaskans who brought the case, have described incidents, from the Gulf of Mexico to San Francisco, in which the captain of the Exxon Valdez, Joseph J. Hazelwood, had alcohol on his breath while aboard ship.
But, they said, their concerns were largely ignored when they reported the incidents to their superiors.


Review/Dance; A Fluid New Company In Its First Get-Together
Dancers are crazy.
Give them some time off and they go back to work to put on a show.
That was the genesis of Complexions, a new company created by the Alvin Ailey dancers Dwight Rhoden and Desmond Richardson, which performed on Friday night at Symphony Space.
The company is intended to be a fluid group of dancers and choreographers interested in participating.
This first group consisted of 22 dancers from Ailey, Dance Theater of Harlem and other groups, with Mr.
Rhoden contributing the choreography for the five pieces.
The effect was for the most part a big, happy party, onstage and in the audience.


A Cheaper Times of London Wins Readers
In the rough and tumble of the British newspaper business, the decision by The Times of London last September to lower its newsstand price by a third, to the equivalent of 45 cents, was greeted with jeers from competitors who predicted the move would win over few new readers and decimate the paper's profits.
Nine months later, the jeering has stopped, and newspaper publishers and analysts in Britain and around the world are wondering whether The Times is on to something.
The Times's circulation, which had been declining steadily for years, has surged beyond even the wildest dreams of its owner, Rupert Murdoch, and its other executives.
According to figures released on Friday by the Audit Bureau of Circulations, the paper's circulation in May was 517,575, a record high, and 46 percent higher than in August, just before the price cut.


No Matter What, Let's Stay Together
So here I am, in Donald Trump's seat in Madison Square Garden, first row, mid-rink, best in the house, the empty ice at my feet, surrounded by 10,000 of my closest friends.
The picture on the overhead video monitors is not sharp; it seems as though we are watching the game through an old porch screen.
But it doesn't matter.
If we wanted clear reception we would have stayed home alone.
This is about all of us being together when the Rangers win the Stanley Cup.
This is also about not wanting to be alone when they don't.


Four to Six Agencies In Seagram Review
The Seagram Company is in discussions with four to six agencies in the review of its estimated $41 million worldwide account for brands like Chivas Regal Scotch whisky, according to executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
The account had been handled by DDB Needham Worldwide in New York for the last 32 years until that agency was dismissed earlier this month and excluded from the review.
The executives said the participants included BBDO Worldwide in New York, with perhaps its Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO unit in London; Grey Advertising in London; Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, and TBWA Advertising in New York.
Ogilvy and TBWA work for Seagram on brands like Martell cognac and Absolut vodka, while Grey's London office was recently awarded a Seagram assignment in Europe.


Janzen's Return to Form Coming at the Right Time
Lee Janzen is not so much a student of history as he is a maker of it.
Throughout his career, when he has had an opportunity to win a golf tournament, his history has been to close it out.
In college at Florida Southern, on the mini-tours that meander through the South, whenever he was in the hunt, his reputation was that he was the man to finish the job.
He did it once again today in the Buick Classic at the Westchester Country Club, shooting a final round 66 to beat the South African Ernie Els by three strokes and to break out of a yearlong slump that began shortly after his victory at last year's United States Open.


'Passion' Wins Tony As Best New Musical; 'Angels' Wins Again
In a ceremony that otherwise seemed to celebrate the past more than the present, "Passion," the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine collaboration, swept the three top awards for new musicals at the 48th annual Tony Awards last night, winning for best musical, best original score (Mr. Sondheim) and best book (Mr. Lapine).
The show also won a fourth award, for best actress in a musical: Donna Murphy as Fosca, a sickly, homely woman who wins the love of a handsome army officer simply by the force of her single-minded ardor.
And "Perestroika," Part 2 of Tony Kushner's AIDS epic, "Angels in America," completed the work that Part 1 had begun last year, winning Mr.
Kushner the best-play award for the second year in a row and adding two performers' awards for good measure.
One, for best leading actor, went to Stephen Spinella, who plays an AIDS-afflicted, reluctant prophet, Prior Walter.
Last year, Mr.
Spinella was named best featured actor for playing the same character in Part 1 of the play, "Millennium Approaches." Jeffrey Wright, as the homosexual nurse who cares for the dying, homophobic, homosexual lawyer Roy M. Cohn, succeeded Mr.
Spinella as best featured actor.


An Unlikely Rocket Does In the Knicks
While the basketball world unravels another end-game referee's mystery, let us ask the question all of New York is pondering on this sobering morning after, and another it might consider if the Knicks lose two more games this season.
Who is Sam Cassell, and has he ever heard of Bucky Dent?


IN PERFORMANCE: RECORDINGS
. . . and Propulsive Guitars With a Ranting Voice  'Yank Crime' Drive Like Jehu Interscope 92363, CD and cassette
Drive Like Jehu plunges into "Yank Crime," its second album, with a jumpy, odd-meter bass line, two clashing guitars and Eric Froberg's enraged yammer of a voice, shouting, "Sad to say it's over now/ Don't know how." Whatever has ended, the guitar frenzy is just beginning.
Drive Like Jehu, a four-man band from San Diego, creates a precisely latticed squall by layering on the guitars: hard-strummed chords, stop-start bass riffs, seesawing lines, discordant zigzags, eruptive feedback.
Drums interlock with the grappling guitars, pounding the dissonances home and propelling the music from one abrasive matrix to the next.


A Wary Congress Retreats From Bank-Rate Legislation
When the most populist panel of the House Banking Committee -- the subcommittee on consumer credit -- met on Thursday, the most remarkable development lay in what was not said.
Democrats criticized the Federal Reserve for raising interest rates, and assailed commercial banks for passing along the increase to borrowers, but not to depositors.
But nobody suggested that solutions lay in legislation.


INSIDE
Economy Doesn't Pay Off
The good news for the President: the economy, the big issue of his campaign, seems to be bouncing back.
The bad news: it's not helping him much.
Washington Memo, page A13.
Opposition to Whitman Cuts
Thousands of union members protested the New Jersey Governor's plan to reduce pension contributions, and opposition from the Senate President threatened the proposal.
Page B1.
Support on Haiti Intervention
Most nations in the hemisphere have said that if sanctions fail to force out Haiti's leaders, they will support military intervention.
Page A10.
A Boy's Decision to Die
A Florida teen-ager with a failing liver has refused to take his medicine, saying he had rather die than endure the side effects.
Page A12.


Critic's Notebook; 'Cyrano' and 'Pirates' With Opposite Results
"Cyrano de Bergerac" and "The Pirates of Penzance" are both meant to be big guns in the 42d Stratford Festival.
And indeed, the former, Edmond Rostand's epic drama about a man with a long nose and a deep soul, charges the atmosphere with volleys of resounding verse.
But the latter, Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta about pirates with overdeveloped consciences, sputters and fizzles like a damp wick.
If you want to know what has gone so right in one case and so wrong in the other, you have only to look to the actor Colm Feore, who is playing the leads in both productions.
Bold and compelling as Cyrano, he is silly and inconsequential as the Pirate King.


Over There
To the Editor:
During the D-Day observances, a number of commentators (including Tom Brokaw on NBC on June 3) referred to the putdown by the Brits of American G.I.'s in England as "overfed, oversexed -- and over here." However, nobody to my knowledge cited the rebuttal of the Yanks: "The British soldiers are underfed, undersexed -- and under Eisenhower."  LESTER DAVID  Woodmere, L.I., June 4, 1994 The writer is former managing editor of the Stars and Stripes Paris edition.


Woman Abandons Infant
After striking up a conversation, a young woman left a baby with two strangers in Queens yesterday, then disappeared, the police said.
The woman, carrying an infant boy, met two men at 7 A.M. on the sidewalk outside an apartment building at 37-10 37th Avenue in Jackson Heights, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
He said they talked for about half an hour.


Don't Make Me Choose Between Life and Death; Slayer's Rule
To the Editor:
A May 28 editorial discusses the disappointing report by the New York State Task Force on Life and the Law, appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, which recommended unanimously that New York resist attempts to legalize physician-assisted suicide for the terminally ill who suffer intractable pain.


Algae Kills Fish in Central Park Lake


Small Foundation Flexes Its Muscle
They are curiously matched adversaries.
One is Intel Corporation, which is building the world's largest computer-chip plant at Rio Rancho, N.M.
The other is the Jessie Smith Noyes Foundation, a small family philanthropy based in Manhattan, which owns 3,000 share of Intel stock.


China Tells Why It Opposes Korea Sanctions
China said today that it still believed that United Nations sanctions against North Korea would be "ineffective" and warned against using "violence" in trying to end North Korea's nuclear weapons program, a Japanese spokesman said after a meeting between the Chinese and Japanese Foreign Ministers.
At the same time, the Chinese Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen, told his Japanese counterpart that Beijing would play a "positive" and "constructive" role in the coming Security Council debate over punitive measures aimed at forcing North Korea to give up its nuclear program, the spokesman said.


Once again, the strong become stronger as an industry behemoth acquires a mid-sized rival.
A FRIENDLY rivalry between two agencies sharing an important client is ending as one acquires the other in an agreement typifying the significant forces reshaping the advertising industry.
Griffin Bacal Inc., the nation's 67th-largest agency, is being acquired by DDB Needham Worldwide, the world's 5th-largest agency.
Griffin Bacal has offices in six countries, 300 employees and billings of more than $250 million, while DDB Needham has offices in 59 countries, 6,000 employees and billings of $6.1 billion.
Both have their headquarters in New York.


A Muddled Policy on Food Vendors
A City Council committee has just approved a bill to protect New York's food vendors that is nothing more than a face-saving compromise.
If the committee does not go back to the drawing board, the full Council has a duty to vote no when it considers the measure later this month.
Troubled by the Giuliani administration's recent crackdown on food vendors in midtown Manhattan, some Council members wanted to rescue the vendors.
But a stronger bill gave way to a weaker one after merchants, who find the vendors a nuisance, objected.
The consumer affairs committee then passed a stopgap bill that would allow vending on some streets where it is now prohibited.


The Beauty of Nature Has but One Fault: Fore!
William M. Becker, a sculptor and former golfer, said he always had considered golf "a more or less gentle pursuit" with an etiquette that set it apart from rougher sports.
He can recall a time when golfers in country settings took pains not to hit the cows grazing in nearby fields.
Now, Mr.
Becker, who lives next to the sixth hole of the Ridgeway Country Club here, would like the same consideration.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
Adventures in Improvisation With Paul Motian and Friends  Village Vanguard
In the early 1980's, the drummer Paul Motian put together a trio with the saxophonist Joe Lovano and the guitarist Bill Frisell that has become one of more empathetic, subtle groups working on the jazz circuit.
On Wednesday night, Mr.
Motian and his band turned in a nearly perfect set.


American Elm Stands at a Crossroads
To the Editor:
Your May 30 report that New York City's street trees are dying for lack of care is a compelling call for attention to the effects of the city's budget cuts.
Although you discuss Norway maples and Callery pear trees, and make note of other trees in an accompanying field guide, you make no mention of the American elm.


Lawmakers Wary of Intervening in L.I.R.R. Negotiations
Even though there has been little progress in talks to avert a strike by Long Island Rail Road workers, lawmakers said they would hesitate to intervene before any walkout for fear of upsetting the negotiations.
The last walkout by Long Island Rail Road workers, in 1987, ended after 11 days when Congress imposed a 60-day cooling off period during which agreements were reached.


Digital Technology, Rotary Laws
For raw capitalistic rambunctiousness, nothing matches America's telecommunications industry.
But these dynamic companies are hogtied by regulations written for a Jurassic era of party lines and black rotary-dial telephones.
A comprehensive overhaul of our 60-year-old laws is long overdue.
So Senator John Danforth, Republican of Missouri, Senator Daniel Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, and I are sponsoring the Communications Act of 1994.
The bill, which we intend to bring before the Senate this summer, would allow greater competition by ending legal monopolies in local telephone and cable TV services, while insuring that in building the information superhighway we will not pave over the public interest.


Let's Trim Some Police Dept. Fat, Like Helicopter Flyovers
To the Editor:
The cost of operating helicopters, learned by a White House aide who lost his job over unauthorized use of the Presidential helicopter (news article, May 27), is a lesson Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Police Commissioner William J. Bratton might well apply to the New York Police Department's Aviation Unit at Floyd Bennett Field, a part of the Gateway National Recreation Area.


IN PERFORMANCE: RECORDINGS
A Classicist's Guitar In a Contemporary Vein  'Nightshade Rounds' Sharon Isbin, guitarist Virgin Classics CDC 5 45024 2, CD
Guitarists, more than most other instrumentalists, rely heavily on contemporary works, and when good pieces come along, they quickly become repertory staples.
Britten's "Nocturnal" (1963) and Walton's "Bagatelles" (1972), both composed for Julian Bream, were immediately taken up by other guitarists and are now plentifully available on disk.
Sharon Isbin's performances of them here are remarkably fluent; one of the disk's most magical moments comes near the end of the Britten, when the Dowland song on which the variations are based ("Come Heavy Sleep") is foreshadowed briefly before appearing in full.


Knicks Take a Tumble, Right Back Into the Pressure Cooker
A clutch shot by Sam Cassell and a controversial foul call against Patrick Ewing led to a deflating loss for the Knicks last night.
Taking a lead of 2 games to 1 in the National Basketball Association finals, the Houston Rockets walked into Madison Square Garden and beat the Knicks, 93-89, in Game 3 of their four-of-seven-game series.
By winning, the Rockets regained the home-court advantage they lost in Game 2, and they made it impossible for the Knicks to win a championship without another victory in Houston.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Sampras Falls to Martin in Queen's Club  In a match with no service breaks, Todd Martin upset top-ranked Pete Sampras, 7-6 (7-4), 7-6 (7-4), in the Queen's Club final in London yesterday.
The fifth-seeded Martin, who served 15 aces, defeated Sampras for the first time in four matches and avenged a loss in this year's Australian Open final. (AP) BASKETBALL  Brazilian Women Rout China for Gold  Hortencia scored 27 points in her final international game as Brazil beat China, 96-87, yesterday in Sidney, Australia, for the women's world basketball championship.
Teresa Edwards scored 18 of her 20 points in the second half as the Americans rallied to defeat Australia, 100-95, for the bronze medal. (AP) SOCCER  Brazil Thoroughly Outclasses El Salvador  Bebeto scored on a penalty kick and set up two other goals as Brazil beat El Salvador, 4-0, yesterday at Fresno, Calif., in its final World Cup warmup.
Schumacher, driving a Benetton Ford, covered the 190.832 miles in 1 hour 44 minutes 31.887 seconds, averaging 109.536 miles an hour. (AP) CYCLING  Russia's Berzin Wins Tour of Italy  Yevgeny Berzin, who took the lead in the fourth stage and held it the rest of the way, became the first Russian to win the Tour of Italy cycling race yesterday in Milan.
Berzin finished 2 minutes 51 seconds ahead of the runner-up, Marco Pantani of Italy. (AP)


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Consumer Price Index . . .
May  Retail Sales . . .
May  Wednesday  Industrial Production . . .
May  Business Inventories . . .
April  Thursday  Housing Starts and Permits . . .
May  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Graves Will Take Aim At the Net in Game 7
Near the end of Game 6 on Saturday night, as he skated toward the Vancouver bench, Trevor Linden was surprised by an unexpected collision with Adam Graves of the Rangers.
Perhaps Graves was trying to give the Canucks' captain something to think about in the two days before Game 7 of the Stanley Cup finals.
Because Vancouver won by 4-1 Saturday, the four-of-seven-game championship round is tied at three victories each, and Tuesday's game at Madison Square Garden will be for the big silver trophy.


N. Danesi Murray; Publisher Was 92
Natalia Danesi Murray, a publishing executive and book editor in New York from the 1950's through the 1970's, died on Thursday at her son's home in Del Mar, Calif.
She was 92.
The cause was heart failure, according to an announcement by the Helen Brann Agency.


Rabbi Schneerson Led A Small Hasidic Sect To World Prominence
Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson was a Russian-born, Sorbonne-educated scholar who took an insular Hasidic group that almost came to an end with the Holocaust and turned it into one of the most influential and controversial forces in world Jewry.
Rabbi Schneerson was the undisputed leader of the Lubavitch Hasidim for 44 years as he battled assimilation, a trend of modern Jewish life that his followers consider "a spiritual holocaust."
But his leadership transcended the monastic world of philosophical debates and book-lined studies like his own, penetrating the secular world with toll-free telephone numbers, satellite television hookups and faxes of Talmudic disquisitions.
Fusing the 18th century with the 20th, he presided over a religious empire that reached from the back streets of Brooklyn to the main streets of Israel and by 1990 was taking in an estimated $100 million a year in contributions.
His "mitzvah tanks" -- converted campers that are rolling recruiting stations whose purpose is to draw Jews to the Lubavitch way -- roamed streets from midtown Manhattan to Crown Heights.
And the Lubavitchers' Brooklyn-based publishing house claimed to be the world's largest distributor of Jewish books.


Books of The Times; Vietnam War as Link To Battles of Antiquity
Achilles in Vietnam  Combat Trauma and the Undoing of Character  By Jonathan Shay  246 pages.
Atheneum. $20.
"Achilles in Vietnam" appears more than three thousand years after the Achaeans' spears have rusted and two decades after the mortars of Vietnam have fallen silent.
The author, Dr.
Jonathan Shay, begins by noting, "I am the psychiatrist for a group of American combat veterans of the Vietnam War who have severe, chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)." If this remarkable book covered only that little-understood ailment, it would still be a vital contribution to our knowledge about the most divisive foreign war in American history.


Behind a Boy's Decision to Forgo Treatment
For 15-year-old Benito Agrelo, the logic of his decision was simple: his transplanted liver will probably fail even if he takes his medicine, and the drug, which could give him a few extra months to live, has such painful side effects that he would rather die sooner, and without the discomfort.
The drug that helps his body accept the transplanted organ is toxic, and before he stopped taking it in October he was in so much pain that he could not walk.
"I couldn't play with any of my friends," said Benny, who was born with an enlarged liver and has had two transplants, the second in June 1992.
That's why, he said, he decided to let nature take its course.


Forecasts Are Gloomy for Fall TV
Attention television fans: the predictions for the fall season are in, and they are not promising.
Advertising executives are forecasting that not a single new series will be a hit.
"Unfortunately, the main thing that stands out on the network schedules is that not much stands out," wrote Steve Sternberg, senior vice president for broadcast research at BJK&amp;E Media Group, in his recent analysis of the fall lineup.
"We don't recall a blander new series lineup in years."


Review/Rock; Pink Floyd's Own Brand of Spectacle
Of all the Brontosaurus rock acts out roaming this summer, Pink Floyd is the one most likely to graze the best on the world's capital.
Where the Grateful Dead are limited by their fidelity to an American Beat ideal, and where the Eagles tap into local myths, Pink Floyd is willing to embrace narratives about aging and love and greed that are transnational, and to do it in a pop-rock style that listeners, male and female, can understand.
But it has limitations: at Yankee Stadium on Friday night, the audience, estimated by various officials to number anywhere between 55,000 and 100,000 people, was almost exclusively white.
The band, now nearing its 30th year, has figured out how to make a show more than your standard stadium rock concert, neither an amplified opera nor a sports event set to music.
With a stage set high above the audience and lined with flat, black or silver panels and an unceasing, watt-sucking light show that only in part was emitted from the stage and filled up the entire stadium with neonlike lasers, fireworks, and strobe lights, along with falling inflated pigs, and a wraparound sound system, the band was working in part with Albert Speer-like architecture and a Spielbergian reproduction of wonder.
Smoke filtered from the stage for the whole show.
It was a spectacle.


Colombia Evacuates Victims of a Quake
Rescue workers and the army today began to evacuate about 2,000 Indians who were trapped on a plateau in an area devastated last Monday by an earthquake and avalanche.
More than 850 Indians were flown by helicopter from the remote mountainous area about 180 miles southwest of the capital to the city of La Plata, in the Huila region.


N.A.A.C.P. Shows Split As Leaders Hold Meeting
When civil rights leaders gathered for strategy sessions in the 1960's, it was often to map the next step up the mountaintop.
The promise of America seemed almost as close as tomorrow in those hard but hopeful times.
But today, more than 50 prominent blacks gathered here to begin a three-day conference on how to stop the free fall of so many of their brethren into a valley of drugs, poverty and a bitterness that can turn love to rage in an instant.


Longtime Rivals Get Even
Second-seeded Kunj Majmudar of New Dorp High School coasted to a 6-1, 6-4 triumph over top-seeded Scott Watnick of Bronx Science yesterday in the boys' tennis final of the Mayor's Cup All-Scholastic Championships of New York.
With the score tied at one set apiece, the girls' final between top-seeded Brooke Herman of the Dwight School and Vania Yui of St.
Francis Prep was interrupted by rain at the National Tennis Center.
In the end, Yui beat Herman, 6-4, 2-6, 6-3.


U.S. to Offer Only T-Bills This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
At the close of the New York cash market on Friday, traders said the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.10 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 4.51 percent.


Misplaced Changeup Changes Everything
Scott Kamieniecki never turned his back, stared at the right-field seats or peeked at the scoreboard for an update.
The poor location on his changeup, the sound of Devon White making contact and the sudden explosion of noise inside the Skydome provided Kamieniecki with the information he dreaded.
Yes, it was a homer.
Yes, the Yankees were about to succumb to the Blue Jays.
After throwing 109 mostly stellar pitches in waging a taut duel with Pat Hentgen into the eighth inning, Kamieniecki misplaced a changeup and White did not miss the mistake.
Instead of locating the 2-1 pitch low and outside, Kamieniecki put it high and inside and White popped it off the facade of the second deck in right field for a two-out, two-run homer that elevated Toronto to a 3-1 victory today.
In the mistake category, this was a monumental blunder.


Dividend Meetings


Vermont Workers Win Health Benefits
Vermont will extend health and dental coverage to the unmarried heterosexual and homosexual partners of its state workers, becoming the first state in the nation to do so, officials say.
Under an agreement reached on Friday between the state and the Vermont State Employees Association, the union that represents the state's 6,500 employees, state workers who sign affidavits affirming that they are in an "exclusive, enduring domestic relationship of at least six months" can obtain health benefits for their partners.


Review/Opera: Orpheus Descending; The Orpheus Legend Puts On a Modern Face
Although the 20th century is all but dead and gone, its musical achievements remain daydreams of the distant future for most major opera companies.
The Chicago Lyric Opera is valiantly swimming against the tide with its ambitious projects in contemporary opera, which have included one recent or new American opera each year as part of its Center for American Artists series.
On Friday night, the Lyric Opera presented the world premiere of Bruce Saylor's "Orpheus Descending," with a libretto adapted from the Tennessee Williams play by J. D. McClatchy; the work was not entirely convincing in dramatic terms, and Mr.
Saylor's music was sometimes derivative, but the score earned its ovation and will be worth repeating.


In Latin America, a Free Trade Rush
Creating a huge building block for a Western Hemisphere free trade zone, the presidents of Colombia, Mexico, and Venezuela will meet in Colombia on Monday to place their nations' 150 million people under a duty-free umbrella.
"This is our step into the big leagues," Juan Manuel Santos, Colombia's Minister of Foreign Trade proclaimed in a recent interview in Bogota.
"This is a step toward the U.S. market."


Californians Strike Gold As Belmont Week Ends
Belmont Week came to a record-setting close yesterday when the California filly Lakeway won the Mother Goose Stakes by more than four lengths over Cinnamon Sugar and by 10 lengths over Inside Information, and pranced to the head of the class of 3-year-old fillies.
It was one day after the California colt Tabasco Cat won the Belmont Stakes and moved to the head of the class of 3-year-old colts, and Lakeway gave an even more powerful performance.


Estonia Savors Economic Success, But the Reformers May Be in Trouble
To anyone accustomed to traveling the nations of the former Soviet Union and watching their messy transitions to market economies, the Tallinn Department Store is drop-dead riveting, simply because it is normal.
There are no guards in camouflage uniforms at the entrances, no dirt, not even a faint whiff of urine.
The building is renovated, well-lighted and contemporary.
The floors are stocked with a range of goods, local and imported, from an exhaustive selection of Duracell batteries and Nike footwear to Philips light bulbs, 25 watts to the latest halogen.
There are decent kitchen knives for sale, and Swedish suits for men.
There is even a Western-style supermarket, with bar-code scanners, and all goods are available for the Estonian currency, the crown.


McReynolds Does the Job He Is Paid to Do
Kevin McReynolds can't remember the last time he had a game like this.
It certainly hadn't happened this season, which marks the start of his second stint with the Mets.
And it probably hadn't in Kansas City either, his days with the Royals being the disappointment that they were.
It must have come, then, during the first years he wore a Met uniform, when he produced the kind of power numbers that enticed the Mets to reacquire him for Vince Coleman last January.


For Merrill Lynch Traders, No Free Lunch
In a sure sign that Wall Street is nervous about lean times to come, Merrill Lynch has decided that its army of stock and bond traders no longer deserve a free lunch.
The company confirmed last week that after July 5 it would no longer pick up the $5.45 tab for each of the lunches the hundreds of its traders eat at their desks while moving billions of dollars around the globe.


Lillehammer Journal; Snug Future Sought in the Snows of Yesteryear
The only snow is on the highest mountain plateaus, far above the pitched roofs and pastel houses of Lillehammer, the site of the 1994 Winter Olympics.
But all through the town and the greening countryside, the glow of the Games still lingers like the long northern twilight.
At City Hall, clerks have been keeping the world's love letters to Lillehammer on public display, neatly arranged in loose-leaf binders.
A note from Charlotte, N.C., asks for an autographed picture of Audun Tron, the town's Mayor.
A letter from a Minnesota woman says she is determined to visit Norway.


Ukraine Hints It Won't Close Nuclear Plants at Chernobyl
Two months ago Ukraine pledged to shut down its nuclear power plant at Chernobyl, but American officials are concerned that Ukrainian leaders are having second thoughts, and the Americans are at odds over what to do about it.
New evidence, including a secret directive by President Leonid Kravchuk, suggests that Ukraine may not close the two reactors still operating at Chernobyl because it needs the energy.


Orioles Sweep in Fenway, Trail Yankees by 1 Game
Orioles 8, Red Sox 4
Ben McDonald won his ninth game as Baltimore completed a Fenway Park sweep with an 8-4 triumph over the Boston Red Sox yesterday.
Cal Ripken, Rafael Palmeiro and Leo Gomez homered for the Orioles, who moved within a game of the Yankees in the American League East.


Market Place; Analysts say Abbott should outshine most health care stocks.
DESPITE the uncertainties in Washington that are clouding the outlook for health care industries, Abbott Laboratories, a century-old company best known for its Similac infant formula, is still a favorite stock for many analysts.
After five years of double-digit earnings growth, Abbott's net income rose only 6 percent in the first quarter of 1994.
But that did not stop some analysts from recommending buying the stock on the ground that Abbott will still outshine most health care companies.


Lessons in Survival: Robeson High, '94 -- A special report; Graduation: Where 500 Began, 150 Remain
Very soon now, what is left of the senior class at Paul Robeson High School will walk up the narrow steps and across the stage at the Third Baptist Church on the South Side for the 1994 commencement.
The boys will wear red caps and gowns.
The girls will wear gold.
An alumna who is an engineer will give the commencement address.
"Pomp and Circumstance" will play.
The seniors who managed to avoid being swallowed by the streets will finally touch a diploma, some becoming the first in their families to do so.
The teachers expect it to be an exuberant occasion when their pleas for silence are likely be ignored by overjoyed aunts and foster parents.


Abroad at Home; On Korea, Resolve
If Kim Il Sung has heard about Western criticism of Clinton foreign policy as wavering and thinks he can bluff or threaten the United States out of firm action against his nuclear weapons program, he is making a mistake.
On this issue the Administration's watchword is resolution.
So I believe after conversations here.
I do not sense the tentativeness that has marked the search for effective policies in Bosnia and Haiti.


Review/Pop; Patinkin Closes His Eyes And Sets the Songs Free
Mandy Patinkin belongs to the special breed of popular singer who is not content simply to dramatize the material he is handed.
Like an obsessive Method actor, he incorporates a song into his being and then releases it in an emotional eruption fraught with tension and personal catharsis.
Depending on one's tolerance for an involvement this fierce, his performances can seem mawkish or transcendent.
And on Friday evening at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, where he gave the last of three concerts of songs from his new album, "Experiment" (Elektra Nonesuch), his singing was as starkly compelling as it was restrained.
On "Experiment," which is in some ways the best of his three solo albums, Mr.
Patinkin has arranged 18 popular standards into an extended suite that describes one man's troubled psychic journey.


Bridge
The world's biggest competitive event, bridge or otherwise, was played Friday and Saturday with a registered entry of about 100,000 players around the world.
The ninth Worldwide Bridge Contest, now sponsored jointly by Epson and France Telecom, was played in some 2,500 clubs, using the same deals and the same scoring schedule.
The highest game was probably that played on Friday evening on the 80th floor of the Empire State Building, where invited celebrity players included Representative Jim Leach of Iowa and three prominent financiers, Warren Buffett, Larry Tisch and Alan Greenberg.


From Twilight Zone to Strike Zone, It's Wild
A conversation took place the other day between friends that was enough to suggest baseball has entered the Twilight Zone.
"What do you think of the Phillies?" one friend asked.


CHRONICLE
The hottest tickets in town aren't just the Knicks and the Rangers.
Add the gala black-tie benefit for WNET Channel 13 to the list.
Seats for the star-studded event at the Plaza Hotel tomorrow night sold for $1,000 to $100,000.
Tickets went on sale two months ago and sold out in six weeks, said BILL BAKER , president of Channel 13.


Italy's Fashion Industry Turned on Its Head, Again
Italy's fanciful designers and apparel makers, the Medicis and the Borgias of contemporary taste, are approaching the fashion business as if almost everything they did right in the 1980's has to be done differently today.
"There's an epochal change going on now, and the climate of the 90's is making people reflect," said Santo Versace, the 49-year-old chief financial officer of Gianni Versace S.R.L.
"After 15 years of continuous growth, they're no longer leaping like grasshoppers, but crawling cautiously like ants."


As Life's Questions Get Harder, Magic Casts a Wider Spell
Like the lady who vanished and then reappeared at the wave of a wand, magic is back.
And not just on the nightclub and Off Broadway circuits.
Americans are increasingly enchanted with products and notions that promise a simple route to transformation, salvation or cure.
More and more marketers are imbuing some foods, cosmetics, folk cures and forms of exercise with magical powers to fight aging and disease.
And magical themes abound in plays, movies, books and music.


Experts Doubt Tax Cuts Will Create Job Growth
Although the business tax cuts signed into law last week by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have been promoted as an important stimulus to the state's slowly improving economy, many economists and fiscal analysts are skeptical that the cuts will generate significant job growth.
The experts agree that the tax-cut package sends a strong message that New York State wants to become a better, less costly place to do business -- an important message when dozens of states are cutting taxes.
But business executives are unlikely to base decisions about hiring or relocating on such a signal alone, the experts said.
And for the vast majority of companies, the cuts will not provide enough savings to justify much hiring.


World Economies


Livery-Cab Driver Is Held In Fatal Queens Accident
As a livery cab driven by a drunken motorist sped toward them, a homeless woman walking across a Queens street Saturday night pushed her 4-year-old son out of the way, only to be struck herself by the car, the police said yesterday.
The woman, Castelli Ellison, 38, whom the police said had lived at a shelter for homeless families near Kennedy International Airport, died later of internal injuries at Mary Immaculate Hospital.
Her son, Germar Ellison, who was taken to Queens General Hospital for observation, was not injured.


Mr. Moynihan's Gambit
Of the five Congressional committees handling heath care reform, Senate Finance may well be the one with the best chance of putting together a bill with enough Republican support to carry the full Senate.
Its makeup of 11 Democrats and 9 Republicans encourages bipartisan bargaining.
That is why the odd bill proposed last week by its chairman, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, is important.
Viewed as a health care plan, the bill disappoints.
It borrows in modified form the President's idea of requiring employers to pay for workers' insurance.
But unlike the President, Mr.
Moynihan would allow individuals to buy outside regional purchasing cooperatives; that invites the healthy to peel away and leave the chronically ill.


REBELS IN MEXICO SPURN PEACE PLAN FROM GOVERNMENT
After three months of consideration, peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas have flatly rejected the peace settlement offered by the Government and have called for new negotiations.
The decision, announced late Saturday night in sharply worded communiques, appeared to dash Mexico's hopes for a final agreement ending the Chiapas uprising, which is now suspended under a cease-fire, before national elections on Aug. 21.
Tensions immediately rose throughout the state.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Viacom has stepped up efforts to sell the New York Rangers and the New York Knicks even as the teams press for league championships.
The company, which acquired the teams when it bought Paramount Communications, also wants to sell a cable television network and the teams' famous arena, Madison Square Garden.
Detailed financial information about the properties was mailed last week to a small group of potential bidders.  [ Page A1. ]


Dole Seeks to Clarify Health Bill Strategy
The Senate's Republican leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, moved today to soften reports that he planned to filibuster health care legislation in the Senate this fall if it included any requirement that employers buy insurance for their workers.
In an interview on the Cable News Network program "Late Edition," Mr.
Dole said that the reports, based on a speech he had delivered on Saturday in Boston, were mixed up and that he actually intended to remove the employer mandate from the legislation, not kill the legislation altogether.


Sports of The Times; Keenan's Future Plans Shrouded in Smoke
WHERE there's smoke there's fire.
While the Rangers wait for the smoke to thicken in tomorrow night's Stanley Cup showdown with the Vancouver Canucks at Madison Square Garden, they are waiting for the smoke to clear in Coach Mike Keenan's future.
Whispers surfaced last week that Keenan soon would jump to the Detroit Red Wings as their general manager and coach.


President Would Not Limit Welfare Plan's Public Jobs
President Clinton has resolved a central question about his welfare plan by deciding to let recipients placed in government work programs remain there indefinitely, as long as they are genuinely seeking private jobs, officials said.
The decision places the Administration at odds with Congressional proposals sponsored by both Democrats and Republicans.
Those plans would let states end all assistance, both cash payments and subsidized jobs, to welfare recipients whether they could find private work or not.


Reform Jews Reject a Temple Without God
In an overwhelming vote on Saturday, the Union of American Hebrew Congregations rejected the membership application of a Cincinnati synagogue that has removed all references to God from its liturgy.
The vote was 115 to 13.
"Reform allows for a wide spectrum of belief," said Rabbi Alexander M. Schindler, the president of the union, a national Reform Jewish organization.
"Yet some common understanding is necessary."


Critic's Notebook; Viewing an Execution From the Sofa
So as matters now stand, David Lawson will be executed on Wednesday off camera, to be precise, off Phil Donahue's camera.
The talk showman and the murderer have so far failed in their collaborative attempt to persuade the North Carolina courts that they have a constitutional right to videotape the final minutes of Mr.
Lawson's life.
This is not the first time television producers have been denied the claimed right to broadcast an execution.
In 1991 the San Francisco public station KQED was blocked by a Federal court from showing one at San Quentin.
Opponents warned that if public television were to succeed, tabloid television would not be far behind, with gruesome consequences.


Washington Memo; It's Still the Economy, but It's Not Helping Clinton
The good news for Bill Clinton is that the economy, the issue that defined his Presidential campaign, is bouncing back.
The bad news is that it is not doing him much good.
While Americans give the President reasonably good marks for his handling of pocketbook issues, and increasingly believe that the national economy is improving, there has been no corresponding increase in their enthusiasm for Mr.
Clinton himself.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Cross-Dresser Looks Back On Gay Life and Lost Loves  Performance Space 122
Bette Bourne, the English transvestite actor who stars in Paul Hallam's play "The Dish," is one of the more subtle and multi-layered drag personalities in the growing field of cross-dressed theatrical performance.
Ms.
Bourne, who suggests the middle-aged Tallulah Bankhead as a contemporary Londoner, likes to affect an attitude of imperious gentility.


Old Story or New Ending for the Rangers?
The Stanley Cup finals are one game from being completed, and already there have been two premature celebrations.
The first came in New York last week before Game 5, when Rangers fans and the local news media spent the day anticipating a clinching victory.
The Vancouver Canucks said later that they were inspired to win that night by the swaggering overconfidence of the New Yorkers.


Publishing
EVERY year, roughly 5,000 new children's book titles are introduced in the United States -- picture books, alphabet books, hardcovers, paperbacks, books for teen-agers, new installments in old series, books about birds and beasts and all manner of wild things.
But at a time when the children's market is going through major convulsions after a period of rapid expansion, publishers are finding more than ever that it's the rare new title that manages to break out of the pack.
In fact, year after year, publishers say, it's still the perennials -- The Cats in the Hat, the Charlotte's Webs, the Pat the Bunnies -- that sell the most copies, hands down.


As Rangers Regress, The Pendulum Swings
The change began in the fourth game, even as the Rangers were taking what seemed to be complete control of the Stanley Cup finals.
As the Vancouver Canucks fell behind by three games to one last Tuesday, they began executing an altered approach that would eventually change the series.
Vancouver's forwards were committing fewer turnovers and creating occasional problems for the Ranger attack.
The Canuck defensemen, now allowed to play with more confidence, could become more involved in the offense.
The Canucks were imposing a more forceful mind-set in the New York end of the ice, an approach that created the kinds of possibilities that the Rangers have sought throughout this season.


Patents
TO halt hemorrhaging in the lower esophagus, doctors resort to a life-saving but rather primitive method: snaking a balloon down the patient's throat, inflating it and anchoring it to a helmet on the patient's head.
As the balloon is inflated, it creates pressure on the interior of the esophagus and thereby stops the bleeding.
"For the last 40 years, it's basically been a big balloon on a long tube that you just jam into people," said Dr.
David S. Zimmon, a professor of medicine at New York University.
"The tube sits in the esophagus so the patient has difficulty breathing. It's incredibly uncomfortable, and it's usually there for 48 hours."


PARLIAMENT VOTE IN EUROPE SHOWS RIGHTWARD TREND
Millions of voters across the 12-nation European Union chose a new European Parliament today in elections that reflected recent trends toward the right and that voters saw as a chance to deliver a message on the popularity of their national governments.
The vote also produced a surprise boost for Chancellor Helmut Kohl in Germany.
Generally speaking, centrist conservative parties -- more than right-wing extremists -- seemed to be the winners, except in England, where Prime Minister John Major's Conservatives have been losing popularity.


Puerto Ricans Get a Chance to Show Their Colors


11 Awards for Doyle At Clio Ceremonies
Doyle Advertising and Design of Boston took top honors, winning 11 awards, at the 35th annual Clio Awards ceremony, sponsored by Clio Awards Ltd. of Chicago and New York.
Doyle won nine gold Clios for a print public service campaign for the National Association of Atomic Veterans of Salem, Mass., a nonprofit organization seeking Government help for veterans exposed to atomic tests.
The organization was also awarded $10,000 by Jim Smyth, the executive director of Clio.


Thousands Gather in Crown Hts. To Grieve for Their Grand Rabbi
Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, whose charismatic leadership built the Lubavitch Hasidic movement into an enormously powerful and sometimes divisive force among the world's Jews, died yesterday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan, three months after a severe stroke.
He was 92.
Within hours of his death at 1:50 A.M., thousands of his followers began gathering on the streets around Lubavitch World Headquarters in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, to mourn a teacher and scholar who most of them had hoped would reveal himself to be the Messiah before he died.
Many took hastily arranged charter flights from Israel, Europe and elsewhere around the world, rushing to New York in the frequently expressed hope that they could be present when Rabbi Schneerson would somehow proclaim his kingship before being buried.


Waiting on a Train, for 30 Years; Scientists' Hope for a Levitating Vehicle on an Uphill Climb
More than thirty years ago, an ambitious young scientist stuck in a traffic jam on the Throgs Neck Bridge imagined a vehicle liberated forever from highway congestion.
"I thought there must be a better way than driving," recalled the scientist, Dr.
James R. Powell of Brookhaven National Laboratory, who was trapped for hours one evening in 1960.
"I get my ideas in two places: cars and bathtubs."


4 Agencies Compete In Digital Review
The Digital Equipment Corporation has selected four finalists to compete in a review for the sales promotion and direct marketing portion of its account.
Digital is estimated to spend $90 million annually on advertising worldwide.


Bronxville Residents Oppose Plan for Another Metro-North Track
Railroad tracks already cut through this leafy, affluent community in Westchester County, and many residents depend on the trains to get to work in Manhattan every day.
But a plan to add a third track to the Harlem line of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad here has upset residents, who see it as a threat to the beauty of their village and the the serenity of their homes.


For All That It's Worth, Bonner Puts 2 Points In
For the first time in the finals, Anthony Bonner did not have these initials next to his name in the box score: DNP-CD, or "did not play; coach's decision."
"I got a chance to get out there tonight and give a couple of guys who play heavy time a breather," Bonner said last night after playing 5 minutes, scoring 2 points on 1-for-1 shooting and adding one offensive rebound.
While they rallied in the second half, the Knicks fell to the Rockets, 93-89, at the Garden.


METRO DIGEST
LUBAVITCH GRAND RABBI DIES
Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, whose charismatic leadership built the Lubavitch Hasidic movement into an enormously powerful and sometimes divisive force among the world's Jews, died at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan after a long illness.
He was 92.
Within hours of his death, thousands of his followers began gathering on the streets around Lubavitch World Headquarters in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, to mourn a teacher and scholar that most of them had hoped would reveal himself to be the Messiah before he died.
Many took hastily arranged charter flights from Israel, Europe and elsewhere around the world.
A1.


Sports of The Times; Mood Swings Downward at Garden
HOW much emotion can one joint tolerate?
There was a vicious riptide of emotion going on in Madison Square Garden last night -- buoyant anticipation for the Knicks crashing against bitter foreboding for the Rangers.
But then a quiet rookie named Sam Cassell stunned the home crowd with a poised fourth quarter as the Houston Rockets defeated the Knicks, 98-89, and suddenly the tide is running against both teams that dwell in the Garden.


Essay; If I Forget Thee, O Jerusalem
Speaking to Muslims in South Africa, Yasir Arafat blurted out the truth about secret assurances he received in a letter from Israel's Government, granting a Palestinian foothold in Jerusalem.
Israeli spokesmen told the Knesset "there is no letter on the subject of Jerusalem." Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin declared "there was no letter from me, or the Israeli side, following the Cairo agreement, which concerns Jerusalem."


A Stanley Cup Of Comfort: Is It This Year?
It seems strange, perhaps, to care so deeply about a game in which men in stockings and shorts chase something resembling a coffee-table coaster around a frozen pond, a sport in which the players seem to score about once a month, and throw down their sticks before they fight.
But hockey fans are different, say the fans themselves, and if the New York Rangers knew how deep is the misery and the loyalty of the people who still hold out hope for a Stanley Cup after 54 years, they would skate to hell and back to bring it home.


Review/Rock; Biohazard: Noisy Child Of the Streets
Beyond heavy metal and hardcore music, there is a style of rock that superimposes both.
The result is a fast, heavy rumble and grind that's both assaultive and energizing.
In the wake of the Texas post-metal band Pantera's rise to No. 1 on the pop album charts in March, this music has been rising off the streets like steam.
Biohazard, which performed on Saturday night at Roseland, is one of the first bands to outgrow the raucous scene at L'Amours, a club in Brooklyn.
The entire dance floor on Saturday was a typhoon of slamming bodies, colorful tattoos and airborne leaflets for future concerts by local bands.
Audience members dove off the stage four at a time as Biohazard flailed at its guitars.
Billy Graziadei, the singer and guitarist, yelled rhythmically, as if he were punching lyrics out of his diaphragm.
He kept perfect time with Danny Schuler's rapid drumbeat.
Evan Seinfeld, the bassist, and Bobby Hambel, the guitarist, growled back-up vocals during each song's chorus, joined at the microphone by whatever members of the audience happened to be onstage.


From Race Tracks to Reunions, Greyhounds Have Their Day


Rockets Get Edge
Houston defeated the Knicks, 93-89, last night to take a lead of 2 games to 1 in their N.B.A. championship series.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Even as Fans Pack Playoffs, Viacom Peddles Sports Empire
As the New York Rangers and the New York Knicks press on for league championships, the teams' new owner, Viacom Inc., has quietly accelerated its efforts to sell them, along with the cable television network that carries their games and Madison Square Garden, their home arena.
Last week Allen &amp; Company, an investment bank representing Viacom, mailed detailed packets of financial data about the properties to a small group of potential bidders.


CHRONICLE
A few years ago, DR.
BARBARA BARLOW , chief of pediatric surgery and director of the injury-prevention program at Harlem Hospital Center, began noticing a pattern in children's injuries in Harlem.
"At least 80 percent of the injuries took place outside the home, because children didn't have safe places to play," she said.


Los Angeles Journal; 'Retired' and Regretting the Gang Life
Gregory Davis has about had it with the younger generation, marking up his neighborhood with gang graffiti, gunning one another down in drive-by shootings.
"If we'd known it would come to this, we never would have started things," said Mr.
Davis, better known in his South Central neighborhood as Batman, one of the young toughs who founded the Crips street gang in 1969.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Exploring the Raw Side With Winds and Strings  The Kitchen
Dogs of Desire, an Albany-based new-music chamber orchestra conducted by David Alan Miller, hankers vainly after a rock sensibility.
On Saturday night, its players dressed down -- Mr.
Miller wore a leather vest with a Harley-Davidson patch -- and the instruments were amplified.
And in addition to some new pop-influenced works, the group played Led Zeppelin's "Black Dog," Bruce Springsteen's "Fire" and Jimi Hendrix's "Fire."


Pairing a Gray Fedora With a 3-Point Jumper
The Rocket in Matt Bullard believes his team can wrap the Knicks up in New York, in five games, then party all the way back home and on through Houston's sweltering summer.
The journalist in Bullard tells him something else.
"It's been a battle and it hasn't even escalated to where it's going to," Bullard reported from courtside yesterday at Madison Square Garden.
"I think Game 6 and 7 will be unbelievably physical."


In Bosnia, the Age of Europe Truly Ends
To the Editor:
Fakhruddin Ahmed makes two mistakes in "Fear of Muslims in Bosnia Raises Its Head" (letter, May 27).
(1) Europe already has a Muslim-dominated state in Albania, so his argument that the fear of seeing such a state emerge in Europe keeps France and Britain from agreeing to lift the arms embargo make no sense.


Virtual Reality Plans To Grow More Real
VIRTUAL reality is an experience many people associate with bizarre bug-eye helmets, electrode-studded gloves and powerful workstation computers.
But two new software inventions shown last week at the Digital World conference in Los Angeles hold the promise of bringing a tame form of virtual reality to the technologically timid, without requiring them to dress as if they were going to a class reunion at the University of Mars.
But first, it's time for a reality check on virtual reality.


So Few Stars of David In D-Day Cemeteries
To the Editor:
The 50th anniversary of D-Day has brought extensive coverage of American military cemeteries in France and England.
The number of Stars of David in these cemeteries marking the resting places of fallen Jewish servicemen are very few.
There is a reason for this.
After the war, our Government offered the families of those who were killed the return of the remains to the United States for reburial in a civilian cemetery close to their homes.
Most of the families of the Jewish servicemen chose to do so.


Wild Cards Making Virginia Senate Race Even More Unruly
The Virginia Senate race was already an explosive contest with Oliver L. North as the Republican candidate and Senator Charles S. Robb favored to win the Democratic primary on Tuesday.
But with two more candidates jumping in this week, the political season has earned a special place in state history and makes predicting a winner in November virtually impossible.
The vulnerability of Mr.
North for his role in the Iran-contra affair has left the door open for a former Republican state attorney general, J. Marshall Coleman, who today filed a petition in Richmond to run as an independent, backed by supporters of Ross Perot.


Christopher and Lake Shuffle Their Staffs
Under continuing criticism for their performance as makers and articulators of foreign policy, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the President's national security adviser, Anthony Lake, are shaking up their own departments.
Traveling in Istanbul last week, Mr.
Christopher informed Stephen A. Oxman, the Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs and a close friend of President and Mrs.
Clinton, that he would soon be relieved of his post, senior Administration officials said today.


Franco Nearly Dulls Saberhagen's Shine
The performance was almost wasted.
Bret Saberhagen, with mastery over the curve, fastball and change, wound up with the victory at Shea Stadium last night, but his seven-inning stint was nearly spoiled by John Franco's poor closing effort in the ninth.


Nadia Gray, Actress And Singer, 70, Dies
Nadia Gray, an actress best known for her performance in Federico Fellini's 1961 film "La Dolce Vita," in which she did a striptease to entertain a roomful of bored party guests, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
She was 70 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a stroke, said Henry R. Silverman, her stepson.


Chess
At the midpoint in the quarterfinals sponsored by the Professional Chess Association and Intel to determine a world title challenger for Gary Kasparov, two of the matches are one-sided and two are even.
On Sunday evening, at Trump Tower in Manhattan, where the games are being staged, Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn led Vladimir Kramnik by 3 to 1 and Viswanathan Anand of India also led Oleg Romanishin of Ukraine by 3 to 1.
Sergei Tiviakov of Russia was tied 2 to 2 with Michael Adams of England and Boris Gulko of Fair Lawn, N.J., was also tied 2 to 2 with Nigel Short of England.
The victors will go on to the semifinals in September in Barcelona, Spain.


Wausau Paper Mills Co.(WSAU,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Luby's Cafeterias Inc.(LUB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
Given a chance, a talented, motivated minority youth from the inner city can become the Justice Department's Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, as DEVAL L. PATRICK did; or a folk-pop singer and songwriter, as TRACY CHAPMAN did, or a managing director of Morgan Stanley, the investment bank, as WILLIAM M. LEWIS JR. did.
The three are among the 7,800 alumni of A Better Chance, a national organization that places youngsters in 176 private preparatory schools and suburban public schools around the country.
And the three were honored last night at a benefit dinner at the New York Hilton to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the program.


5 New Yorkers Among MacArthur Recipients
Jazz musicians, choreographers, a poet and other artists won half the 20 fellowships awarded yesterday, 5 of them to New Yorkers, by the Mac Arthur Foundation of Chicago.
Proportionately, it was the largest group of winners in the arts since the program began 14 years ago.
The fellowships have traditionally been dominated by academics and researchers.
Coincidence, not a policy shift from science to culture, decided the choices, said Catharine R. Stimpson, director of the foundation.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
A Minimum of Movement On a Crowded Stage  St. Mark's Church
"The Kiss and Other Rites," a program of dance presented on Saturday night, included just about everything but a kiss.
At one point, there were tables, chairs, reading lamps, feathers and flowers on the stage.
There were a pair of rival siblings and what seemed to be a devouring mother.
The only piece in which movement was an inevitable or even compelling element was the concluding section of "Bees of the Invisible (in Three Parts)," in which a woman's body and a curving tree branch provided a context for each other's shape.
The solo was choreographed and performed by Leah Stein to music by Mark Weber, played by the Atlantic String Quartet and the pianist Alan Johnson.
The evening's other choreographers were Rachael Milder and Lisa Marielle Bleyer.
The dances were performed by Ms.
Milder, Ms.
Bleyer, Jennifer Cooper, Daniela Ubide, Louise Ann Coles, Debbie Stone and Kun-Yang Lin.
There was also a piano improvisation by Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson.
JENNIFER DUNNING


Circuit City Stores Inc.(CC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Cuomo Meets Leader Of L.I.R.R. Union
Stepping into the Long Island Rail Road labor dispute for the first time, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo met today with Edward J. Yule, whose union is threatening to strike the commuter line on Thursday unless agreement is reached on a new contract.
"We had a chance to discuss all the issues at the Governor's office in Manhattan," Mr.
Yule said.
"It was a very productive meeting."


Corange Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Prestige Motoring Is Not Cheap


Payless Cashways Inc.(PCS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Sports of The Times; Seventh Heaven Or Hell
NOT since Peter Minuet cross-checked the Manhattan Indians with $24 worth of trinkets in 1626 has New York's sporting psyche been on the couch as it will be tonight at Madison Square Garden.
When the seventh game between the Rangers and the Vancouver Canucks ends tonight, the Stanley Cup will be presented to the winning team.
It's as simple as that.
Whatever happens, neither team will practice tomorrow.
Neither team will have an opportunity to retape their sticks or their psyches.


Shooting Stars and Big Dreams; The Garden Is Not the Only Place for Thinking of Titles
In badly tattered sneakers with untied laces, 10-year-old Anthony Bonilla made a strong move to the hoop, stopped and then cocked the ball over his right shoulder as if he were about to hurl a boulder.
Launching the basketball, which seemed twice its size in his tiny hands, it flew in a great, yawning arc before finding its mark.
Two points!
The third-grader beamed.
He had earned some bragging rights: "I can hit all nets from the 3-point line any time I want to." Then he dribbled off to demonstrate.


H.M.O.'s Feel Growing Pains As More Poor Patients Join
When a salesman for Managed Healthcare System of New York knocked on Heroina Irizarry's apartment door offering to enroll her in a health maintenance organization for Medicaid patients, it sounded good: he promised easy access to her local hospital, a nearby private pediatrician for her children, a regular doctor for her.
No more long waits in emergency rooms.
"I liked what I heard so I signed up," said Ms.
Irizarry, a Medicaid recipient.
"But when my card came, then started the problems."


Capriati Agrees to Counseling To Get Rid of Marijuana Charge
JENNIFER CAPRIATI has agreed to enter a drug-counseling program to settle a misdemeanor marijuana possession charge, a prosecutor in Miami said yesterday.
A memorandum for deferred prosecution has been filed to admit the 18-year-old tennis star, who left the women's tour last year, to a program run by The Advocate, a nonprofit agency used by Dade County courts to dispose of minor criminal cases.


Bramalea Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


The Dan and Dave Show, Act II
Dan and Dave are back -- but with a difference.
As the Mobil/USA track and field championships begin a five-day run today in Knoxville, Tenn., DAN O'BRIEN and DAVE JOHNSON will face each other in the decathlon for the first time since the 1992 Olympic Trials in New Orleans.
Then, "Dan and Dave," as a Reebok promotion billed them, starred as the world's two top decathletes in a $25 million advertising campaign.
"To be settled in Barcelona," the commercials said.


Met Life, Travelers In Venture
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and Travelers Inc. are expected to announce as soon as today agreements to merge their health care businesses and for Met Life to buy Travelers' group life and related businesses, people close to the negotiations said yesterday.
The companies expect that the merger of their health care businesses into a new joint venture will create the country's largest health care company, with about 13 million customers.
Although that business currently is spread thinly across the country, the companies hope that by combining their customers they can begin approaching in many markets the 15 percent share that other managed health care companies have needed to earn a good profit. 'A Strong Player'
"This would create an entity that by its sheer size will be a strong player in many different markets," said Larry Mayewski, a senior vice president for A. M. Best &amp; Company, the insurance rating firm.
"With this new company as a platform, they can get on with the job of attracting customers to their managed care networks."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  NORTH KOREA REJECTS INSPECTION  North Korea pulled out of the international nuclear inspection agency, after mild sanctions were imposed, deepening its confrontation with the United States and the United Nations over the inspection issue.
A1


Reform Student Aid -- Carefully
After years of ripoffs and high default rates, the Federal Government is trying to squeeze fraud and abuse from student aid programs.
Using a 1992 higher education law, the Department of Education is about to enforce new rules that aim to make institutions more accountable for the student aid funds they receive.
The new rules are making some institutions nervous, especially colleges that fear intrusive regulation even though their students have a solid history of prompt repayment.
The Government is right to protect its investment more aggressively, but it must be careful not to impose undue burdens on schools with good track records -- or on schools that take calculated risks on poor students.
Both the Administration and Congress need to monitor this reform closely and, if it starts to harm worthy institutions, step in to refine it.


Florida Insurer Settles Charges on Trades With Merrill
The parent company of a Florida insurer and two of its executives settled charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday that they had misrepresented the insurer's deteriorating financial condition through a multiyear scheme that involved a complex trading strategy with Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The settlement by the parent, Transmark USA, and the two of its principals, Mark C. Sanford and William B. Blackburn, came after nearly three years of scrutiny by the S.E.C. into a series of transactions at the Florida insurer, the Guaranty Security Life Insurance Company, which went into receivership in 1991.
The defendants, none of whom admitted or denied guilt in their settlements, consented to an injunction barring them from any future violations of certain securities law.


New Airline Is Planned For Midwest
The people behind People Express are back.
Three former officers and an original investor in People Express -- the experiment in the early 1980's that offered air travelers cheap fares and stripped-down service -- filed an application with the Transportation Department yesterday to start air service in the Midwest this fall.


Pressure, Like Series, Is Even to Canucks
While the Rangers had the curse of 1940 to deal with on the eve of their most important hockey game in the last 54 years, the Vancouver Canucks -- at least the four players and a coach present at yesterday's mid-Manattan news conference -- seemed calm, cool and composed.
"Well, we haven't won in 24 years," said the Vancouver captain Trevor Linden, referring to the Canucks' oh-fer as far as Stanley Cups go.
"That's a long time, too. We're not worried about history. We're worried about tomorrow night. We're worried about one game."


Hurtling to the Top: A Director Is Born
The phone keeps ringing in the cramped office of Jan De Bont, the director of "Speed," the first sleeper hit of the summer season.
Executives at 20th Century Fox, which produced the taut action thriller, keep calling the first-time director to read him flattering newspaper and magazine reviews that leave him amazed.
Close friends, like the film maker Paul Verhoeven, who warned Mr.
De Bont early on that "Speed" seemed too technically difficult and ambitious, call to express delight that he ignored their advice to forget the project.


Critical of His Government, Saudi Diplomat Seeks Asylum in U.S.
A Saudi diplomat who served until recently with his country's United Nations mission is seeking political asylum in the United States after accusing officials of his country of corruption, terrorism and human rights violations.
The diplomat, Mohammed A. al-Khilewi, wrote in an affidavit that he had about 14,000 documents showing "a history, pattern and practice of terrorism and violations of human rights which would terribly embarrass my country and might cause the current regime to seek personal retaliation against me."


More Prisons Haven't Yet Reduced Crime; Two Midwest States
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's "Prisons Save Lives" (column, June 3) draws on the partial data of Prof.
John DiIulio, whose writings are far outside the mainstream of American criminology.
Professor DiIulio's research has been criticized by scores of researchers, including the current and three past presidents of the American Society of Criminology.
Our prison population has tripled since 1980, yet states with the highest rates of imprisonment typically have the highest crime rates.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Activated Omar Vizquel, shortstop, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Bill Wertz, pitcher, to Charlotte of the International League.


Koreans in Japan, in Buttressing the North, Could Be Embarrassing Tokyo
As the 400-foot liner pulled out of the harbor here today and headed for North Korea, its passengers stood on the deck waving North Korean flags and cheering as the anthem "Marshal Kim Il Sung" blared across the piers.
They had an audience: dozens of Japanese police and intelligence officers, watching through binoculars and training video cameras on the scene, but warily keeping their distance.
For several years the glistening white ship, the Mangyongbong-92, built with donations from Koreans loyal to the North who have made their fortunes in Japan, has plied the Sea of Japan three times a month, in the most direct link between North Korea and the industrialized world.
Now it is also the symbolic centerpiece of the debate about how to bring Mr.
Kim and his Communist Government in Pyongyang to heel for its defiance of nuclear inspectors, a defiance that continued today when North Korea announced that it was withdrawing from the International Atomic Energy Agency.


Stellar Nursery May Spawn Planets
PEERING into the depths of the Orion Nebula, among the glowing gases of a stellar nursery, the Hubble Space Telescope has detected the strongest evidence yet that many newly evolving stars bear the seeds of future planets, suggesting that planets may be a common occurrence in the universe.
In the photographic survey of young stars in Orion, astronomers determined that at least half of them were surrounded by the raw material for planetary formation.
The material swirls about the stars in flattened disks of spreading dust, glowing from the reflected light of stars all about the region.
Closer analysis showed that the disks contain enough mass to produce Earth-size planets, but no planets have been sighted there.


New York Sees Tax Winfall In Indian Sales
The Supreme Court handed a major victory to New York today, validating the state's effort to curb widespread tax evasion in the sale of cigarettes to non-Indian customers at stores on Indian reservations.
The Justices unanimously overturned a decision by the New York Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, which ruled a year ago that state regulations aimed at restricting the number of untaxed cigarettes available for sale on the reservations conflicted with Federal laws governing Indian commerce.


Zapruder Film Contradicts the Warren Report
To the Editor:
In "What the Film Shows" (letter, May 27), William L. O'Neill's fanciful view that Jacqueline Kennedy was risking her life to help Clint Hill, a Secret Service officer, when she was seen on the trunk of the limousine just after the shots were fired that killed President Kennedy in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963, is quite mistaken.
Instead of correcting Anna Quindlen's May 21 column in which she merely wrote that Mrs.
Kennedy's maneuver was "never fully understood," it would have been better to turn to Mrs.
Kennedy's testimony.
Just after the fatal shot to the President's head, according to her interview published in William Manchester's "Death of a President" (New York, 1967), the only authorized Kennedy family account of the assassination, she said that she crawled onto the limousine trunk to retrieve a portion of her husband's skull.


Rangers Face the Pressure On a Night for Forever
Hockey training camp begins around Labor Day and the final game of the Stanley Cup playoffs is played sometime between Memorial Day and the Fourth of July, a season that coincides roughly with the school year.
What a final exam the Rangers and the Vancouver Canucks will take Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden.
Their seventh and conclusive game of the final round won't be a multiple choice or an essay test.
It lasts 60 minutes or more and will be graded strictly on a pass/fail basis.
These teams, who have played more than eight months and in more than 100 games that count, will lace up their skates one final time on a warm, muggy June evening before a capacity crowd and an international television audience.


Crown Books Corp.(CRWN,NMS) reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 30


Holding On to Faith in the Face of Unexpected Loss
A flurry of paper scraps blanketed the grave of Lubavitch Grand Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the Hebrew letters on each ragged-edged square seeking a blessing from the man many of them had believed was the Messiah.
Shoeless mourners with red eyes and torn clothing filed past, and with each note they left behind, they took with them some hope for meaning in a death they never expected.
"I don't believe the Rebbe has forsaken us yet," said Rabbi Zalmen Marozov, who came with his family from Montreal to visit the grave at Old Montefiore Cemetery in Queens.
"Once he is out of the body, it is the soul and you have no more limitations. Hopefully he can accomplish everything he wanted to now."


Trak Auto Corp.(TRKA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Corrections
A profile of the Romanian soccer team on Sunday in the special World Cup '94 preview section displayed an outdated Romanian flag.
The Communist symbol was removed in late 1989 by the government that succeeded the Communists.
The current flag, with blue, yellow and red bars, looks like this:


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Daphne and Apollo Partnered By Feats of Stagecraft  LaMama Annex Theater
Alice Farley puts her dancers into fantastic costumes and sets them off in search of magic.
They found it in "Daphne of the Dunes," which the Alice Farley Dance Theater presented on Friday night.


Special Prosecutor Questions Clintons, Setting a Precedent
In extraordinary sessions at the White House, President Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, provided sworn testimony on Sunday to the special prosecutor about the death of a White House lawyer and Administration discussions of the Whitewater affair, the White House said today.
The back-to-back questioning of the President and Mrs.
Clinton represented the first time that a sitting President has given a deposition about his official conduct.
It was apparently the first time a sitting First Lady has ever been interviewed by law-enforcement officials about her conduct while in the White House.


Wife and Lover Held in Murder Of Executive
It was not, the authorities said, a conventional suburban marriage and it ended in murder.
He was a wealthy 54-year-old senior vice president for merchandising at the Grand Union supermarket chain.
She was a 23-year-old former topless dancer with a history of arrests in petty crimes.
Brooke D. Lennon and his wife, Michelle, shared what the authorities said was was a craving for liquor and their relationship was so fractious they spent much of their one year of marriage living apart, he in a condominium in Edgewater, N.J., and she in a tumbledown bungalow in Monsey, N.Y., rented by her lover.


Exide Corp.(EX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Workout for the von Beckerath Before It Is Worked On  St. Michael's Episcopal Church
The 27-year-old von Beckerath organ in St.
Michael's Church has a wonderfully bright, clear sound, and in the hope of keeping it that way, the church is about to disassemble it and ship it to Hamburg, Germany, for preventative maintenance and refurbishing.
There are a few recitals scheduled before the organ's departure, however, and on Sunday evening the von Beckerath was given a strenuous road test by Harald Vogel, a specialist in North German Baroque music.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.18
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.16
4.10
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.55
4.51
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.05
7.01
5.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.31
6.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.18
8.14
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.20
6.16
5.86
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Inacom
Shares of the Inacom Corporation, a distributor of computer and telecommunications systems, fell yesterday, trading at their lowest level since 1991.
On Friday, after the market had closed, Inacom said it expected to report a quarterly deficit because of losses on a Defense Department contract and a shift to lower-margin sales.


Heinz (H.J.) Co.(HNJ,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 27


Igor Youskevitch, Master of Classical Ballet Style, Dies at 82
Igor Youskevitch, one of 20th-century ballet's greatest dancers and a master of classical style at its noblest when he starred with American Ballet Theater and the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, said Ilona Copen, co-director with Mr.
Youskevitch of the New York International Ballet Competition.


Judgment Against G.M. Thrown Out on Appeal
The Georgia Court of Appeals, handing the General Motors Corporation a victory yesterday, threw out the verdict of a jury that had awarded $105 million to the family of a teen-ager killed when his G.M.C. pickup truck was struck by another vehicle and exploded into flame.
As a result of the ruling, the case will be sent back to a lower state court for retrial.
The $105 million jury award against General Motors last year was one of the highest ever in a product liability case.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Austin Loses at Eastbourne Tracy Austin -- returning to the scene of her 1983 back injury -- was beaten yesterday in the first round of the Eastbourne women's tournament in England.
Austin, attempting a comeback at 31, was eliminated, 6-3, 6-4, by 73d-ranked Kristine Radford of Australia in the Wimbledon warm-up.
The grass-court specialist Brenda Schultz, seeded 12th, was upset, 6-2, 6-0, by Gigi Fernandez, and ninth-seeded Amy Frazier of the United States was beaten, 6-3, 6-3, by the Australian qualifier Danielle Jones.
On her last visit to Eastbourne, 11 years ago, Austin defaulted at the end of the second set of a semifinal match with Australian Wendy Turnbull because of a stress fracture in her back. (AP) Ferreira Advances: Despite taking just 64 minutes to win his first-round match yesterday at the Manchester Open in England, Wayne Ferreira, seeded No. 1, said he could have done better.
Ferreira posted a 6-3, 6-4 victory over the Argentine qualifier Javier Frana.
Ferreira broke Frana in the sixth game of the first set and needed just 1 set point to take a 6-3 lead. (AP) Stich Wins in Germany: Although Michael Stich didn't enter the Halle Grand Prix tournament in Germany with victory as his only goal, it took the German only 73 minutes yesterday to dispose of his first-round opponent.
"I came here to win and get optimally prepared for Wimbledon," said Stich.
Stich needed only one break in each set to beat Venezuela's Nicolas Pereira, 6-3, 6-4.
American Jim Courier, seeded third, defeated France's Rodolphe Gilbert, 6-4, 6-4. (AP)


Jim Brock, 57, Baseball Coach Who Led Collegiate Champions
Jim Brock, the Arizona State baseball coach who turned an interim assignment as a fill-in with a championship team into a 23-year career as one of the nation's most successful college coaches, died Sunday night at Desert Samaritan Hospital in Mesa, Ariz.
He was 57.
An Arizona State spokesman said the cause of death was liver and colon cancer, the disease Brock had been fighting for 11 months, most spectacularly during the early rounds of this year's College World Series in Omaha.


Observer; Talking The Talk
The car radio was saying, "Public awareness is building." I had to deal with an orange traffic light just then, so missed the rest of the bulletin and by the time I'd finished the decision- making process the schmoozemeister had moved on to "dysfunctional families."
"Public awareness is building." "Decision-making process." "Dysfunctional families." Why do people talk like this, especially on radio and television, though also in newspapers, magazines and my very own house, to be honest.


Red Carpet and White Tie for Japanese Royalty


O. J. Simpson's Ex-Wife Slain At Her Condo in Los Angeles
The former wife of O. J. Simpson was found dead outside the doorway of her home early today, and the police said they had interviewed Mr.
Simpson, the football Hall of Fame running back, as "a possible witness."
The bodies of Mr.
Simpson's ex-wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, 35, and Ronald Goldman, 25, were found near midnight slumped in an entryway of Mrs.
Simpson's condominium complex in the city's West Los Angeles section, the Los Angeles County Coroner's Office said.


Critic's Notebook; Can Period Instruments Be Passe?
Of all the impolitic questions to raise at an early-music festival!
"Why use period instruments?" Michelle Dulak, a graduate student at the University of California here and a panelist in a symposium, asked on Saturday morning at the third Berkeley Festival and Exhibition: Music in History, jolting listeners out of a residual slumber.
The embrace of period instruments, and of the lessons to be learned from them, has been a seemingly self-evident tenet of the modern early-music movement virtually from the start.
What's more, the many superb performances on old instruments during the final weekend of the eight-day festival, which ended on Sunday, made the question seem impertinent.


Investing in a Temporary Bargain
WITH Apple Computer Inc. switching to a new family of processors, the reduced instruction set chips (RISC) of the Power Macs, this seems an odd time to buy one of the older Macintoshes.
If everything goes according to plan, the machines will be obsolete in a year or two.
But the geriatric Macs are plunging in price, and the higher-level ones can get a central processing unit transplant when a sufficient range of software has been rewritten for the new computers.
Adrian Mello, the editor in chief of Macworld, writes in the July issue: "For the time being, I recommend the Quadra 650 for those who want to have their cake and eat it too. I've seen this model priced at $2,300, and it's still the best price/ performance value among the 680X0-based Macintoshes. When the native Power Mac applications you need are ready, you should be able to purchase Apple's PowerPC upgrade card and get 66MHz PowerPC performance."


More Prisons Haven't Yet Reduced Crime; Keep the Pell Grants
To the Editor:
In opposing elimination of Pell grants to prisoners, a provision of the crime bill, I speak as a former professional educator, incarcerated for the last seven years in Federal and state institutions.
I have learned education's value to the incarcerated.
My responsibilities have included preparing men to qualify for the high school equivalency diploma, training them in the skills to succeed in college work and tutoring them in college courses.
I witnessed men growing from functional illiterates to college-degree recipients.
These men will not return to prison after release.


GAY GAMES: Competing for Acceptance; 10,000 Athletes, 31 Sports, Varied Skill Levels in Gay Games
The way Eloy Escarcida tells it, he was minding his own business watching Gay Games III in Vancouver, British Columbia, in 1990 when he had one of life's little epiphanies.
He was so impressed by the athletes, he said, "I figured if they could do it, I could do it."


No Headline
"Look, I'm selling ice cream. That sounds like a small thing. A dessert. A treat. Do you need it? But look at the smiles on the faces of those children. Is that a small thing?" -- NICK POUBOURIDIS, "Mister Softee" to the children of Whitestone, Queens.  [ A1:2. ]


Deadly Bacteria
To the Editor:
Your June 8 Health Page article on the deadly, flesh-eating streptococcal bacteria reports that medical experts "emphasize that the disease is rare" because it "struck just 10,000 to 15,000 Americans last year," according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
You also report that five years ago the disease was almost nonexistent.
The undeniable statistical implication is that incidence of the disease is increasing at the rate of at least three times annually.


Final Analysis: It's the Rangers
Do you believe in curses?
Jim Loehr doesn't.
That's why the sports psychologist is picking the Rangers to beat the Vancouver Canucks in tonight's decisive game of the Stanley Cup finals.


More Prisons Haven't Yet Reduced Crime; Folly and Shame
To the Editor:
Re A. M. Rosenthal's June 3 column, "Prisons Save Lives":
Most people sent to prison are not violent, predatory criminals.
Each year, for example, 60 percent of prison commitments in New York State are for nonviolent offenses.


Game 7 Negotiations Collapse
Game 7 of the Stanley Cup finals between the Rangers and Canucks will not appear tonight on broadcast television.
Hours of negotiations yesterday between the MSG Network and WNYW-TV/Channel 5 failed to produce an agreement for the cable network to buy time on the station, which would have assured viewership of those cable homes who don't get MSG.
About 3.3 million TV households in the local market receive MSG, out of about 6.7 million homes in the area.


Guest List for White House Dinner for the Emperor and Empress of Japan
Following is the guest list for tonight's dinner for the Emperor and Empress of Japan, as provided by the White House:
President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton.


Books of The Times; A Feminist Eye Studies Portrayals of Women
Where the Girls Are  Growing Up Female With the Mass Media  By Susan J. Douglas  Illustrated. 340 pages.
Times Books. $23.
Alice Kramden, Lucy Ricardo and Gracie Allen as feminist archetypes, as "transgressive women, trespassers who delighted in violating the boundaries of femininity"?
Samantha the nose-twitching witch of "Bewitched" as a "new female mutant," an avatar of "unleashed female sexuality"?
Charlie's three hair-tossing angels as both cheesecake objects of male lust and flamboyant new symbols of female solidarity and power?
These are just a few of the provocative observations found in Susan J. Douglas's rollicking new book "Where the Girls Are: Growing Up Female With the Mass Media."


High Stakes For Mexicans
Since the January morning when the Zapatista National Liberation Army emerged from the highlands and rain forests of Chiapas State to declare war against the Government, Mexico and the world have wondered what gods the rebels really worship.
Are they socialists, as a few described themselves?
Are they Catholic radicals, inspired by the liberation theology of their Bishop, Samuel Ruiz Garcia?
Or are they rebels of a post-modern, pragmatic sort, fighting for reform and willing to settle for the best deal they might get?


Song Remains the Same: Another Day, Another Must-Win Game
The Knicks have overcome many obstacles this season.
And to win a championship, they must overcome another.
Trailing, 2-1, in the four-of-seven-game National Basketball Association finals, the Knicks face an almost must-win situation in Game 4 tomorrow night at Madison Square Garden.
No team in league history has overcome a 3-1 deficit to win the finals.
With that in mind, the Knicks had two days of practice to prepare for Game 4, and to correct the problems that have cost them so far in the series.
They include:


From Prom to Wake, Students Mourn the Death of a Friend


North Korea Courts Confrontation
North Korea moved a step closer to disastrous confrontation with the rest of the world yesterday by announcing its withdrawal from the International Atomic Energy Agency and by banning I.A.E.A. inspectors from its territory.
Pyongyang has not yet carried out its threat.
Two I.A.E.A. inspectors, along with monitoring cameras, remain at its reactor site, watching recently removed spent fuel that could be transformed into as many as five nuclear bombs.
If North Korea does expel the inspectors, it could fatally compromise the Clinton Administration's efforts to resolve the nuclear dispute peacefully.


Oil-Patch Congressmen Seek Deal With Clinton
With a Congressional vote on a health care bill still months away, some of the 119 members from the oil patch who plan to meet with President Clinton on Thursday say that breaks for oil producers could sweeten the odds of success in health care.
Some Administration officials have little appetite for any measures that would widen the deficit or raise energy costs, especially since Congress balked at most of the President's energy plans.
But the meeting at the White House might offer a preview of the trade-offs members of Congress will demand for their health care votes.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMSTRAD P.L.C., a British electronics company, said it planned to buy Viglen Ltd., a British personal computer maker, for as much as $91 million.
H &amp; R BLOCK INC., Kansas City, Mo., said its Compuserve unit had acquired a minority equity position in closely held Techsmith Corp.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


Lebanon Indicts Former Warlord In Church Bombing
In a move that could infuriate the Christian followers of Samir Geagea, Lebanon indicted the former Christian warlord today for his supposed role in the bombing of a church on Feb. 27 in which 11 people were killed and more than 50 others wounded.
Seven other members of Mr.
Geagea's outlawed Lebanese Forces militia, including his top aide, Fuad Malek, were also indicted.
The two men and a third suspect are in police custody, and the others are at large.


Goodby, Silverstein Gets 6 Addy Awards
Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners of San Francisco took top honors, winning six awards including the Best of Show, at the 25th annual National Addy Awards ceremony sponsored by the American Advertising Federation.
At a presentation last night during the organization's national advertising conference in Houston, Goodby, Silverstein won the Best of Show award in the regional/national television travel and entertainment category for Norwegian Cruise Line.
The agency won two other Addy awards for Norwegian, two for work for the UNUM Corporation and one for Specialized Bicycle Components.


LEGAL AID IS GIVEN BIGGER COURT ROLE
New York City court officials have agreed to significantly cut the number of cases assigned to private defense lawyers, and will instead rely more heavily on Legal Aid to represent indigent defendants, officials said yesterday.
The action comes at the urging of the Giuliani administration and is intended to cut the soaring cost to the city of the private lawyers, whose bills are expected to total more than $50 million this year.
But the shift could also mean better monitoring of legal work: the private lawyers work on their own, while Legal Aid lawyers are overseen by layers of supervisors.


INSIDE
Vowing No More Reprisals
The Air Force Secretary tried to repair relations with a sergeant who says she was punished for testifying before Congress about sexual harassment.
Page A16.
Planetary Nursery?
Peering into the depths of the Orion Nebula, the Hubble telescope has discovered a trove of evolving stars that may contain the seeds of future planets.
Science Times, page C1.
Retrial in G.M.
Case
A court threw out a $105 million judgment in the case of a teen-ager killed when his General Motors truck exploded in a collision.
Page D5.
Ben &amp; Jerry's Without Ben
Ben Cohen, who helped build Ben &amp; Jerry's into a $140 million ice cream company, plans to resign as it chief executive.
Page D1.


CHRONICLE
The concert by PAUL SIMON at the Meyerson Symphony Center in Dallas on Friday night raised more than $1 million for the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
From Mr.
Simon's point of view, there was only one problem: his dressing room did not have a television, and his beloved New York Knicks were playing the Houston Rockets in the second game of the National Basketball Association finals.


Janet G. Woititz, 55, Author Who Studied Alcoholics' Children
Dr.
Janet G. Woititz, a best-selling author, lecturer and counselor to the troubled offspring of alcoholics, died last Thursday at her home in Roseland, N.J.
She was 55.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


National Pastime Goes Unplugged
Baseball is humming along, despite our New York obsession with the Knicks and Rangers.
Baseball hums along on local television.
Network television?
The first evidence of baseball on the networks will be the July 12 All-Star Game on NBC.
Did you know that?
NBC and ABC now have baseball, not CBS.
Did you know that?
After the All-Star Game, ABC will run six weeks of baseball, NBC will have the next six weeks and they will share the post-season.
ABC, NBC and major league baseball are partners in The Baseball Network.


Rightist Trend in European Vote Claims Party Leader
The leader of Italy's former Communists resigned in humiliation today after voters in the European parliamentary elections, seemingly untroubled by the neo-Fascist presence in Italy's coalition Government, flocked to Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi.
The resignation of the Italian politician, Achille Occhetto, was the strongest reverberation from the vote on Sunday.


Corrections
The Beliefs column on Saturday, about a book by John Boswell on the history of rituals celebrating same-sex unions, included scrambled paragraphs in some copies.
The affected passage should have read:


AIDS Patients Seek Solace in Suicide But Many Risk Added Pain in Failure
AMONG people with AIDS, it is an open secret.
When the time comes, many say, they are going to take control of their death.
They are going to enlist the help of friends, family, lovers and sympathetic doctors, and they are going to take an overdose of pills or put a plastic bag over their heads or add a little too much morphine to an intravenous drip, and they are going to kill themselves.
People with AIDS and their advocates say that virtually everyone with the disease at least thinks about suicide when the end is near and wonders how it might be done.
Several studies in New York, California and Texas have consistently shown that people with AIDS kill themselves at a much higher rate than people with other chronic diseases and that the suicide rate among people with AIDS is from 10 to 20 times that of the general population.


An Original Canuck, Quinn Is Vancouver's Benevolent Despot
You cannot count on anything in the hockey business.
Not as long as fortunes and reputations hinge on a frozen rubber disk that rolls, wobbles and ricochets off sticks, sharp edges and people's faces.
You count on nothing.
Pat Quinn felt that way once, long before he returned to this city and took advantage of a sense of security and control to develop a team that has come within a game of winning the Stanley Cup.
Soon after the Vancouver Canucks conducted their final practice of the season at Pacific Coliseum today, their coach, general manager and president remembered all the championships he had shared in, and the one he hasn't won.
The Memorial Cup.
The Western League, Central League and American League.
He recalled the last one, as a member of the Tulsa Oilers.


Keenan Playing With Fire and Ice
Mike Keenan must feel like the little boy who played with matches one time too many.
Nothing caught fire and nobody knew until one day, when the flames jumped and the little boy ran scared and fast as sirens sounded in the distance.
It is sort of what happened last week when rumors began to spread that Keenan would leave his job as coach of the Rangers and move to Detroit next year to become general manager and coach of the Red Wings.


Critic's Notebook; TV and Movies Mingle; Picture Is Still Fuzzy
Visitors to this year's Cannes International Film Festival couldn't help noticing that many of the entries had some sort of financial connection to television.
In this country, the words "television" and "movie" together tend to bring to mind those instantly disposable, based-on-fact network concoctions obsessed with an Amy and Joey or an Erik and Lyle.
But the television-movie picture, and the tightening bond between television and theatrical-film production, is considerably more complicated and occasionally more promising.
Most American buyers of movie tickets probably don't pay too much attention to the fact that imported hits like "The Crying Game" and "Four Weddings and a Funeral" were produced by Britain's Channel Four.
But then British television has long been at the forefront of producing quality films, everything from "My Beautiful Laundrette" to "Enchanted April," for assorted forms of distribution.


Market Place; Crime-related investing may prove to be a winner for some.
SINCE June 14, 1993, some crime has not only paid, but also paid better than the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 -- about 35 times better.
If one year ago Monday an investor had tucked away $1,000 in the Corrections Corporation of America, he would now have about $1,880 worth of stock, a handsome growth rate of some 88 percent.


Ben Leaving as Ben &amp; Jerry's Chief
Ben Cohen, the Ben who helped build Ben &amp; Jerry's into a $140 million company without ever abandoning his blue-jean image, plans to resign as the ice cream company's chief executive.
With the kind of marketing flair that made a household name out of a business begun in an abandoned gas station 16 years ago, the company announced a contest inviting its customers to explain why they should succeed Mr.
Cohen.


Air Force Tries to Mend Harassment Rift
The Air Force sought to patch up relations today with an Air Force sergeant who says her command retaliated against her after she returned from testifying before Congress in March about sexual harassment.
In an extraordinary 75-minute meeting at the Pentagon, Air Force Secretary Sheila E. Widnall told the sergeant, Zenaida Martinez, that a criminal investigation into her travel expenses to Washington had been dropped and that abrupt orders to transfer her to New Jersey from England had been rescinded.


North Korea Quits Atom Agency In Wider Rift With U.S. and U.N.
North Korea deepened its confrontation with the United Nations and the Clinton Administration late Monday, announcing that it would immediately withdraw from the International Atomic Energy Agency and that the agency's inspectors would no longer be allowed in the country.
The declaration would appear to mean that the two inspectors in North Korea will be expelled, but the statement did not explicitly refer to them.
Without inspectors present, the spent fuel rods extracted from North Korea's largest nuclear reactor during the last month could be converted into weapons fuel without detection.


New Jersey Senators Vote To Kill Education Agency
The New Jersey Senate endorsed Governor Christine Todd Whitman's philosophy of reducing the reach of government today by agreeing that the Department of Higher Education has outlived its usefulness.
The agency's abolition will realize only $4.6 million in savings, but the Governor's allies said the measure was the forerunner of other attempts to reduce state government.
The bill to eliminate the department passed readily, 24 to 13, with only one Democratic vote, and was sent to the Assembly, where it is expected to receive easy passage.


JURY FINDS EXXON ACTED RECKLESSLY IN VALDEZ OIL SPILL
In a verdict that could have striking economic implications for the world's largest oil company, a Federal jury said today that the Exxon Corporation was reckless when it permitted a captain with a history of alcohol abuse to command a supertanker.
The jury also determined that the captain, Joseph J. Hazelwood, was himself negligent and reckless when he drank heavily on the afternoon before the Exxon Valdez strayed off course in the dangerous waters of Alaska's Prince William Sound and ran aground on March 24, 1989, causing North America's worst oil tanker spill.


Holyfield 'Healed' for Return
EVANDER HOLYFIELD, the former heavyweight champion who retired in April because of a heart condition, said he had "a warm feeling" go through his chest after a faith healer touched him in a Christian healing session and proclaimed himself ready to resume his career.
"I was searching for a reason to come back, but the right reason," Holyfield said after the session in Philadelphia on Friday.
"I know I can go back and win, but win for the Lord. I'm healed."


Marinovich Back in California
The former Los Angeles Raiders quarterback TODD MARINOVICH, who suffered a serious knee injury Friday in Canada, has returned to California to be examined and will likely undergo surgery, his agent, TOM CONDON, said yesterday.
Marinovich, 25, was injured on his first day of training camp with the Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the Canadian Football League.
Condon expressed surprise at a report out of Brandon, Manitoba, that said the Bombers expected Marinovich to undergo surgery yesterday but couldn't find him.


Tribes See Jobs Hardship In Tax Ruling
Indian leaders in New York State said today that a United States Supreme Court decision allowing the state to tax some sales transactions on reservations could devastate Indian-owned smoke shops and gas stations that have become the backbone of some tribal economies.
"I don't think there is any doubt it will cause economic hardship for the Mohawk people," said Joseph D. Gray, a spokesman for the tribal council of the St.
Regis Mohawks.
"People who in the past have been on public assistance found they could open small smoke shops and make some money."


Bells Ring in a Sweet Ritual of Summer
First comes that familiar, repetitive hurdy-gurdy music that, octave by octave, reverberates in your mind all summer long.
Then comes the actual sighting of the lumbering, boxy white truck.
And then the kids dig out the dollar and a quarter and start the "Oooooh" and "Yeaaaaah."
The man in the truck had the windows open, the way he always does, and the chatter was incessant: "Hey, there, hon." "Hiya, kids." "Look at those blue eyes. They kill me."


Heilig-Meyers Co.(HMY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


IN PERFORMANCE: RECORDINGS
Flip Side of Gangsta Rap: Doo-Wop for the 1990's  'All-4-One' Blitzz/Atlantic 82588
In the age of gangsta rap, it makes sense that there is a movement to counter its nastiness with music resurrecting the melodious pop innocence of an earlier era.
Along with Boyz II Men and Color Me Badd, the Los Angeles quartet All-4-One is leading a modest resurgence of post-doo-wop harmony-group singing.


Special Prosecutor Questions Clintons, Setting a Precedent
In extraordinary sessions at the White House, President Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, provided sworn testimony on Sunday to the special prosecutor about the death of a White House lawyer and Administration discussions of the Whitewater affair, the White House said today.
The back-to-back questioning of the President and Mrs.
Clinton represented the first time that a sitting President has given a deposition about his official conduct.
It was apparently the first time a sitting First Lady has ever been interviewed by law-enforcement officials about her conduct while in the White House.


CHRONICLE
In 1981, Dr.
BARRY DOUGLAS, who was then a physician at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, treated JENNIFER LAREDO, an 11-year-old girl with a severe cut on a finger.
He noticed that his patient's mother was RUTH LAREDO, his favorite concert pianist.
Ms.
Laredo gave the doctor a recording of her complete works of Rachmaninoff as a token of appreciation.
On Saturday, Dr.
Douglas celebrated his 40th birthday and his wife, Kim, gave a party for him in Great Neck, L.I.
There was a surprise guest: Ms.
Laredo, who performed for nearly an hour.


By Design; Beyond the Flip-Flop
Some women are content wearing little rubber flip-flops with their swimsuits, but there is more fashionable footwear that's just as practical.
Flat thongs with bands of suede or leather across the instep are just as easy to slide into and look a lot dressier when you toss on a coverup and head for lunch.


Dart Group Corp.(DARTA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Shoppers! Mass Today On Level 1
WHEN the Rev.
Brice Riordan deftly winds through the fluorescent corridors of the Bergen Mall, sidestepping the potted palms, cutting around the rows of geraniums, it's as if he's in his own back yard.
Which he kind of is.
Father Brice just celebrated his 50th anniversary as a priest with a Mass in the mall's main corridor, upper level.
It was fitting.
For 11 years, he has spent most of his days here, directing St.
Therese's Chapel, the chapel at the mall.


Corrections
An obituary in some copies on Sunday about the sculptor Edward Kienholz misstated his age.
He was 66, not 65.


Eagle-Picher Industries(EPIH,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


U.S. Seeks Law on Foreign Cartels
Contending that United States antitrust laws are no longer adequate for an increasingly global economy, the Justice Department is seeking legislative authority to move against as many as 20 international cartels that are outside the reach of American prosecutors.
Attorney General Janet Reno proposed legislation today that would allow the Justice Department to conduct joint investigations with foreign governments of international price-fixing cartels.
United States law already allows joint investigations with foreign governments of criminal and securities cases.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A new campaign focused on the utility of milk does the product a lot of good.
HOW do you convince consumers to drink more milk?
Standard marketing strategies have tended to go sour on this one.
Building product awareness and better penetration clearly will not work because everyone knows what milk is, and almost everyone already has some in the refrigerator.


Pathmark Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Pacific Physician Services Inc.(PPSI,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Perez For Change Provides A Breather
Melido Perez was buried in a pitching slump.
He blamed his ailing back, he blamed his aching toe, he blamed poor control and he blamed his misfortune during the past seven weeks.
Basically, Perez could have pointed 10 fingers at himself because he was mostly to blame.
Tonight, Perez could point at himself to dispense credit because he was mostly responsible for carrying the Yankees to an important 3-1 victory over the Orioles at Camden Yards.
With their 35-day grasp on first place in jeopardy as they began a four-game series with Baltimore, Perez provided the Yankees with a temporary answer to their road-trip troubles by tossing eight scoreless innings and outpitching a plodding Sid Fernandez.


Woodstock '94 to Span the Generations
Two months before the Woodstock silver-anniversary festival in Saugerties, N.Y., the concert's promoters yesterday announced their lineup of performers.
The eclectic list runs from the Woodstock alumnus Joe Cocker to the heavy-metal band Metallica, from 62-year-old Johnny Cash to the rap group Cypress Hill, whose lead singer wasn't even born when the original festival took place.
The promoters also said that Bob Dylan, who epitomized the Woodstock generation to many even though he missed the first festival, was planning to be there this time around.
Mr.
Dylan's generation is represented elsewhere on the roster of Woodstock '94: the Latin-rock group Santana and the rock-folk trio Crosby, Stills and Nash, both at the first Woodstock, are also scheduled to perform.
But this Woodstock is being heavily marketed toward teen-agers and 20-somethings.
The two-day show, scheduled for Aug. 13 and 14, will be dominated by acts who came of age long after 1969, including Nine Inch Nails, Arrested Development, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Porno for Pyros and Spin Doctors.
Other performers will include Aerosmith, Peter Gabriel, Melissa Etheridge, the Allman Brothers Band, the Neville Brothers and Jimmy Cliff.


A Slipping Sandberg Retires
In the most stunning retirement of baseball's era of stratospheric salaries, Ryne Sandberg said yesterday he was leaving baseball and the Chicago Cubs because he was not satisfied with his performance and did not feel he could again raise it to his standards.
Sandberg, delivered his announcement at a news conference at Wrigley Field, where he became the best all-round second baseman of his generation and, for nine months in 1992, the highest-paid player in baseball.
By retiring not even midway through the second season of the four-year contract -- the fourth most lucrative in baseball -- the 34-year-old Sandberg walks away from nearly $16 million guaranteed.


SOCCER
Group A
The United States's 1-0 victory over Mexico earlier this month was a rare example of a preparatory game in which a team played to its potential.


Lockheed Narrows Review to 3 Agencies
The Lockheed Corporation, the high-technology company that is a leading military contractor, said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its estimated $10 million account to three agencies from four.
The account has been handled by McCann-Erickson Los Angeles for the last 29 years.


Benefits Spending: Panel Sees Storm Brewing
The chairman of a new Federal commission studying benefit programs like Medicare and Social Security said today that he saw "a serious fiscal storm on the horizon" unless Congress and President Clinton took swift action to control the growth of such spending.
The chairman of the panel, Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, and the vice chairman, Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri, found a surprising degree of bipartisan agreement on the nature of the problem as the commission met today for the first time.


Vancouver AIDS Suicides Botched
IN one of the rare studies of assisted suicides in a terminally ill population, a young Canadian researcher has described repeated examples of back-alley euthanasia among people with AIDS in Vancouver.
Many of these acts were badly bungled.
Russel D. Ogden, whose study was submitted for a master's degree in criminal law at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, found that half of 34 assisted suicides he was able to get details on were botched, increasing suffering when the aim was to alleviate it.
The suicide attempts were made from 1980 to 1993, and the study was submitted earlier this year.


3 Agencies Compete In Ameritech Review
The Ameritech Corporation, the Midwest regional Baby Bell telephone company based in Chicago, said yesterday that it had placed in review its pay-phone advertising account, with billings estimated to be $20 million.
The account has been handled by Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago and Stranger &amp; Associates in Los Angeles.


Perfect Violin: Does Artistry Or Physics Hold Secret?
RENOWNED acoustic physicists, master violin makers and the Tokyo String Quartet gathered here last week, ostensibly to seek agreement on how to go about making a great fiddle.
To no one's surprise they failed utterly, but in so doing they produced magnificent music and some modest but intriguing scientific insights.
The eclectic science of acoustics investigates the atmospheres of stars, the mysteries of hearing, the technology of detecting secret nuclear tests, the extent of global climate change, the architecture of boiler factories and concert halls, the quantum-mechanical behavior of ultracold liquids and countless other weighty subjects.
But whatever its focus, acoustic science is about sound.
Perhaps for that reason, its practitioners tend to be music lovers, many of them amateur musicians.
Meetings of the Acoustical Society of America generally offer some great music to leaven the avalanche of technical and scientific papers that sometimes threatens to bury participants.


On My Mind; Supping With the Bigot
The offense of the Rev.
Benjamin F. Chavis Jr. was not simply to invite Louis Farrakhan to a conference of black leaders but to treat Americans as total fools.
Every important argument he makes to defend the invitation, to justify the damage he did to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, is grounded in obvious intellectual, political and moral distortion or demagoguery.


METRO DIGEST
H.M.O.'S FEEL GROWTH PAINS AS POOR JOIN
Tens of thousands of New York's Medicaid recipients have enrolled in health maintenance organizations -- some nonprofit organizations with a long record of assisting the poor, others offshoots of commercial insurers drawn in by the promise of profits.
But the spurt has also come with growing pains, particularly among the commercial companies.
Critics say there are wide variations in quality and that some plans have put more effort into developing their marketing skills than their networks of doctors and medical services.
A1.


No Deal for Rams, at Least Yet
PETER ANGELOS, the attorney who led a partnership in buying the Baltimore Orioles last year for $173 million, yesterday denied speculation that he has concluded a deal for the Los Angeles Rams and plans to move them to Baltimore.
"I've talked to them and expect further talks," he said, from his office in Baltimore, "but there's no credence to this report. We'd like to buy the Rams."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Aames Financial Corp., Los Angeles, is selling $40 million of certificates backed by home equity loans in two classes.
One issue of $20 million of class A-1 certificates with an average life of 3.2 years is priced to yield 7.332 percent; the other issue of $20 million of floating-rate class A-2 certificates with an average life of 4.5 years is priced at 100 to pay 60 basis points more than the one-month London interbank offered rate, which was quoted at about 4.31 percent late in the day yesterday.
The financing is rated AAA by both Moody's Investors Service and Standard &amp; Poor's because of a 100 percent guarantee by Financial Guaranty Insurance Corp.


Queens Lawyer Disbarred For Neglecting His Clients
A Queens lawyer who was accused of neglecting the cases of indigent defendants he was assigned by the court to defend has been barred from practicing law for repeatedly failing to appear in court and ignoring complaints about his work.
In a decision made public last week, a panel of appellate judges in Brooklyn said that the lawyer, J. Edward Cardoso, had established a "egregious pattern of neglect" and had shown a "brazen disregard" for the court's grievance committee reviewing complaints against him.
When he was informed of complaints by clients he failed to respond.


President and Emperor Talk, Ever Politely
President Clinton and Emperor Akihito of Japan softened the edges of history today to draw a picture of shared interests, destinies and technologies with nary a brush stroke for recent trade and political frictions and only a minimalist approach to the toll and turmoil of World War II.
The ceremonial day began on a steamy morning that sent a half-dozen guests seeking the shade of a towering magnolia tree on the South Lawn.
After a 21-gun salute and an honor guard representing all the branches of the American military, the President and the Emperor found themselves talking vaguely about cooperation and friendship without any serious mention of the severe trade imbalance that has defined Japanese-American dialogue for more than a decade.


I.B.M. Cuts Prices on Servers by 22%
I.B.M. reduced prices on many of its personal computer-based servers yesterday, just two weeks after a similar action by its rival, the Compaq Computer Corporation.
The cuts, which could be the start of a new computer price war, reduce the price of I.B.M.'s Intel-based Server 85 and Server 95 lines as much as 22 percent, to about $4,200 for the lowest priced model.
On June 1, Compaq cut the price of its low-end ProSigna and mid-range ProLiant servers by as much as 18 percent, putting Compaq's lowest priced server at $4,400.


In Broad Ruling, Court Prohibits Banning of Homeowners' Signs
In a broadly worded First Amendment decision, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that cities may not bar residents from posting signs on their own property.
The display of political slogans and other types of signs on residential property is "a venerable means of communication that is both unique and important," the Court said in striking down an ordinance that the wealthy St.
Louis suburb of Ladue, Mo., enacted in 1991 to prevent "ugliness, visual blight and clutter."


Hurley to Play Summer Ball
The Sacramento Kings' BOBBY HURLEY has recovered enough from his auto injuries to play basketball three times a week.
The Kings' vice president, GEOFF PETRIE, who met with Hurley last week, said the playmaking guard had been checked by team physicians and passed his tests.
"Basically, he's been released to do everything he wants," Petrie said Sunday.
"He's really excited obviously about the prospect of playing again, and he looks great."


AT&amp;T Quits Ogilvy, Seeing I.B.M. Conflict
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide's stunning victory last month in landing an I.B.M. account valued at up to $500 million lost a little of its sweetness yesterday, as the AT&amp;T Corporation acknowledged that it was dropping Ogilvy from its roster of advertising agencies because it sees a conflict of interest.
Advertising Age, which first reported AT&amp;T's move, valued the lost billings to Ogilvy at more than $100 million.
AT&amp;T will gradually shift all advertising and direct mail assignments to other agencies.


U.S. Asserts Resolve but Dollar Falls
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said today that the dollar's recent recovery against the Japanese yen demonstrated the Clinton Administration's resolve to uphold the value of the American currency.
But shortly after the Secretary spoke currency traders appeared to test that resolve as they pushed the dollar down sharply against the yen and the German mark.
Traders said that the fall in the dollar, which has been eroding slightly over the last week, was not set off by Mr.
Bentsen's remarks; they should have strengthened the American currency, if anything.
Rather, Mr.
Bentsen's remarks seemed to have been overshadowed by changing perceptions among some investors about the relative strengths of the American, Japanese and Germany economies.
Changes in Economies
The mood that is taking hold, some traders said, is that the American economy is slowing down, and therefore no more interest rate increases are likely now by the Federal Reserve, while both the German and Japanese economies are clearly picking up, meaning no more interest rate declines in those countries are likely for now.
Since, among other things, currency traders chase the best interest rates and the growing economy, some have clearly concluded that the best opportunities will be in Japan and Europe.


Special Prosecutor Questions Clintons, Setting a Precedent
In extraordinary sessions at the White House, President Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, provided sworn testimony on Sunday to the special prosecutor about the death of a White House lawyer and Administration discussions of the Whitewater affair, the White House said today.
The back-to-back questioning of the President and Mrs.
Clinton represented the first time that a sitting President has given a deposition about his official conduct.
It was apparently the first time a sitting First Lady has ever been interviewed by law-enforcement officials about her conduct while in the White House.


Jan Tinbergen, Dutch Economist and Nobel Laureate, Dies at 91
Jan Tinbergen, the Dutch economist and Nobel laureate whose technical accomplishments and passion for effective public policy have led some to compare him with John Maynard Keynes, died last Thursday at the age of 91.
News of his death was withheld by his family until yesterday to allow his funeral to take place without publicity.
Mr.
Tinbergen was trained as a physicist (he received a doctoral degree in the subject from the University of Leyden) but switched to economics in the late 1920's.
During the early 1930's he was a professor of development planning at the University of Rotterdam and staff member of the Dutch Central Bureau of Statistics, where he applied mathematical techniques from the sciences to the question of why industrial output fluctuated in nonrandom ways -- the classic puzzle of the business cycle.


Review/City Ballet; 'The Concert' Is Part of an All-Robbins Evening
Jerome Robbins's ballets were naturally absent from the New York City Ballet's 1993 spring season, which was devoted to the company's huge Balanchine Celebration.
But this spring, the company has made amends, scattering Mr.
Robbins's works throughout the current engagement at the New York State Theater.
There was even an all-Robbins program on Saturday night that made for a selective overview of the choreographer's esthetic.
The season's first performance of "The Concert," Mr.
Robbins's comic masterpiece, shared the evening with the 1981 duet "Andantino" and repeats of the 1945 "Interplay" and the 1959 "Moves."


The 1994 Tony Winners
These are this year's winners of the Antoinette Perry Awards, administered by the American Theater Wing and given at the Gershwin Theater in Manhattan on Sunday night:
Play: "Angels in America: Perestroika," by Tony Kushner


New Design Could Make Solar Cells Competitive
A LEADING laboratory for photovoltaic cells has developed a new design that appears to allow the use of cheap, low-quality materials in the devices, which make electricity directly from sunlight.
The laboratory, at the University of New South Wales, near Sydney, Australia, says the innovation will eventually cut costs by 80 percent, which would make the cells competitive with conventional power sources.
The laboratory, the Center for Photovoltaic Devices and Systems, already holds the world record for efficiency in a major type of cells, those made of crystalline silicon.
But existing designs require crystals of very high quality, or the electrons that are knocked loose by sunlight are diverted by impurities or flaws in the crystal before they can be gathered into current.
The new design leads the electrons along a much shorter path, so the cell should be able to tolerate flaws and impurities 100 times to 1,000 times greater.


State Dinner Showcases Tradition Even as New Cuisine Breaks With It
The White House chef, Walter Scheib 3d, was nervous.
It was the Clintons' first state dinner, and the first one he had ever had to cook.
For that matter, tonight's state dinner for Emperor Akihito of Japan and his wife, Empress Michiko, was the first white-tie event since the Reagan Administration.
And Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is determined to put her stamp on White House entertaining, made it a showcase for American food, wine, service and entertaining.


Defeat of Deadly Form of Strep May Lie Within Its Own Clock
INVASIVE streptococcus infections, which in their most virulent form are caused by deadly "flesh eating" bacteria, as they are frequently described, have seldom been seen in past decades.
Many in the medical profession had assumed that antibiotics and improved hygiene had essentially got rid of them for good.
But now, although these infections are still rare, they seem to be experiencing a comeback, without any noticeable deterioration in social conditions and with their susceptibility to penicillin intact.
Researchers suggest that the ebb and flow of streptococcal strains may be part of a general waxing and waning of bacterial populations.


More Prisons Haven't Yet Reduced Crime
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal's June 3 column holds that the "public stomach is right" that violent crime is rising fast and, "prisons save lives." But the serious crime rate has actually stayed flat since 1980 (at 6,000 per 100,000 people).
Yet imprisonment has tripled in that time.
Prisons tripled, crime the same: it has cost billions, but where's the beef?
And not all the inmates are violent predators.
In California, with six times as many prison inmates today as in 1977, only about 40 percent are violent offenders (1991), down from almost 60 percent in 1983.
Sixty percent are nonviolent, and at least a quarter of the total are classified by the Department of Corrections as "minimum security" risks.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Seems to Have Changed, But Transformation Isn't Enough
IN his best days, Mike Tyson showed up attired in boxing gloves.
Yesterday, he arrived in handcuffs.
Once the garment of choice was a pair of black shorts, suitable for the violent activity that he relished as he entered the ring.
Yesterday, he appeared in an open-collared blue prison work shirt over a white T-shirt, and wore blue jeans and brown work boots as he entered the Marion County Courthouse.
The former heavyweight champion of the world, the man who once proclaimed he was the baddest man on the planet, came to plead for his freedom.


Belgrade Journal; In Warring Balkans, His Is a Peaceable Kingdom
The Serbian Defense Dog that prowls a prominent cage at the Belgrade zoo is a big beast.
Take a wolf, add a part or two of Nepalese mastiff, mix in some Doberman and a touch of Bosnian sheep dog, and this is what you get.
It has the flanks of a horse and weighs more than 130 pounds.
"We call the dog Gari," said Vukosav Bojovic, the director of the zoo and by all accounts the most popular man in this city.
"He's well suited to Bosnia."


Trade Bait No More: Horry Stars
Even though he opened up with 10 points in the first quarter, igniting Houston's 9-0 run in the first two minutes of the game, and finished with 16 points, Robert Horry was not the hero of Houston's 93-89 victory over the Knicks in Game 3 of the National Basketball Association finals Sunday night.
Most of the tribute went to his rookie teammate, Sam Cassell, who scored 15 points, including the winning 3-pointer in the final minute.


Editorial Notebook; The End of Solitude
Short on mass transit, sprawling wildly over its landscape for 465 square miles, Los Angeles is and will always be the city of the car.
Vast chunks of every Los Angeles day are spent driving, mainly by oneself, down endless freeways and boulevards.
This is not quite the solitude that Thoreau prescribed in "Walden." To properly renew the soul, Thoreau said, what you need is a cabin on a pond, at least a mile from the nearest neighbor.
These days, the only solitude most people get comes with commuting.
In this, Angelenos are beyond compare.
The time they spend alone, cruising in their cars, would seem ample space for introspection, if not for all of Tolstoy, via books on tape.
Ample, but for their pocket telephones, pocket pagers, glove compartment fax machines and all the rest.
On the Santa Monica Freeway, bronzed men in Porsches hurtle by at 90 m.p.h, yapping on the fly.
On the Harbor Freeway not long ago, I watched as a woman rifled for a pager, checked it for the number, then bolted three lanes right for the exit, presumably to get to a phone.
An emergency?
Somehow I doubt it.


Judge v. I.B.M.: Long, Bitter Clash
In 1953, a young Federal judge named David N. Edelstein had his first brush with I.B.M. and its lawyers in his Manhattan courtroom.
A year earlier, the Justice Department had charged the company with antitrust violations.
By 1956, after overseeing a series of pretrial motions, Judge Edelstein approved and signed a settlement reached by the Government and the company.
Under the settlement agreement, known as a consent decree, I.B.M. agreed to segregate services operations from hardware and other businesses.
By all accounts, the signing was uneventful.
But it marked the beginning of what has become one of the most rancorous -- and one of the longest-running -- relationships between a judge and a corporate defendant in the history of Manhattan's Federal court.
Personalizing the Issues?
While I.B.M. has accused Judge Edelstein of waging a personal crusade against it, some legal experts say that the company and its lawyers have attacked the judge as way of winning their case.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A Federal jury ruled that Exxon was negligent and reckless in a trial stemming from the 1989 grounding of the Exxon Valdez in Alaska's Prince William Sound that caused the worst oil spill in the continent's history.
The findings open Exxon to huge damage awards in a civil suit brought by some 10,000 Alaskans.  [ Page A1. ]


Owners' Admission Might Clear a Logjam
At the news conference following his election as commissioner in September 1988, A. Bartlett Giamatti was asked what he thought about the owners' collusion against free agents the previous three winters.
"I'm no happier than anyone else about what Mr. Roberts and Mr. Nicolau ruled," Giamatti, then the National League president, said, referring to the arbitrators, Thomas Roberts and George Nicolau.
"With all due respect to them, I happen to have a view of my own that wouldn't necessarily be shared by the arbitrators. I myself, for the last two years, have seen what they seem to have seen from a somewhat different angle."


Avia Group Chooses Carmichael Lynch
Avia Group International in Beaverton, Ore., said yesterday that it had selected Carmichael Lynch in Minneapolis to handle its account, with billings estimated to be $6 million to $12 million.
The account had been handled for the last two and a half years by Citron Haligman Bedecarre in San Francisco, which was excluded from the review.
Carmichael Lynch was awarded the account after a two-month review that was narrowed to two other finalists: Butler, Shine &amp; Stern in Sausalito, Calif., and DDB Needham Chicago.
A campaign is expected to begin in a year.


Fassero Costs Himself No-Hitter With 2 Out in 9th
Expos 10, Pirates 2
Jeff Fassero lost his no-hitter with two outs in the ninth inning when he failed to catch Carlos Garcia's line drive last night in the Montreal Expos' 10-2 victory over the Pittsburgh Pirates at Montreal.


Q&amp;A
Safe Diving for Whales
Q.  Why don't whales get the bends?
A.
Luckily for deep-diving whales, they have an entirely different system from that of humans for handling the air they breathe before diving and their oxygen needs while diving, said Kevin M. Walsh, director of marine mammal training at the Aquarium for Wildlife Conservation in Coney Island, Brooklyn.


Sight and Save Picks Saatchi &amp; Saatchi
Sight and Save Optical, a division of Lenscrafters in Cincinnati, said yesterday that it had selected Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York to handle its account, which had been handled in-house.
Although billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them to be $5 million to $10 million.


Allan Albert, 48, Documentary Maker
Allan Albert, who wrote, produced and directed television documentaries, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 48 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was lymphoma, said Gary Feinstein, a longtime friend.


National Semiconductor Corp.(NSM,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Patterns
Call It Reconstruction
"Do not bother me with your politics," the German painter Otto Dix once said when asked to join the Communist Party.
"I would rather go to a whorehouse."


Fluke Corp.(FLK,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 29


Treasury-Issue Prices Hit by Selling Pressure
Prices of Treasury securities came under selling pressure yesterday as the dollar dropped in currency markets.
The bond market was also buffetted by the reappearance of trade tensions with Japan, increased unrest in Mexico ahead of the presidential elections there, and the general malaise in the Eurobond market.
For some traders it was all too reminscent of the spring bear market in Treasuries when there was fear of a trade war with Japan and a Mexican presidential candidate was assassinated.


High Court Backs Closing Tax Loophole Retroactively
The United States Supreme Court ruled today that Congress did not violate the Constitution when it closed a tax loophole retroactively in 1987 and collected back taxes from those who had relied on the original provision.
The 9-to-0 decision involving an estate tax provision overturned a 1992 ruling by a Federal appeals court in California, which held that the retroactive application of the amended provision violated the constitutional guarantee of due process of law.


Solectron Corp.(SLR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Devtek Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Board Is Deadlocked on Plan for Legislature
Facing a court order to vote itself out of existence, the Nassau County Board of Supervisors deadlocked today along party lines over a plan to form a new county legislature.
Democrats say the plan, recommended by a Republican-controlled charter revision panel, would give Republicans overwhelming control of the proposed 19-member legislature.
Today, they offered two alternative maps for legislative districts.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on May 31, about companies that specialize in electronic fingerprinting, misidentified the fingerprinting system to be used by National Registry Inc. in its joint venture with Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Newark.
National Registry will use its own system, not that of Identix Inc.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
The Box-Office Window As a 2-Way Mirror of Life  CSC Theater
Talk about biting the hand that feeds you.


Vicorp Restaurants Inc.(VRES,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 15


Cortines Proposes Cutting Staff of Facilities Agency
The Schools Chancellor wants to drastically cut the staff and overhaul the management of the troubled agency responsible for maintaining New York City's schools, officials said yesterday.
Already shaken this school year by an asbestos crisis and a Federal racketeering investigation, the agency, the Division of School Facilities, would lose nearly a third of its central administrators under the proposal by Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, said a school spokesman, John Beckman.
In addition, both the director, Amy Linden, and her second-in-command, J. Kirby Coughlin, may leave soon.


Choices Aplenty In Swimsuits
What are most women thinking about buying this time of year?
Swimsuits, of course.
Sixty percent of the 40 million swimsuits sold in this country every year are bought in May, June and July, with June the biggest month.
And this year, with most of the country's beaches and swimming pools barely opened for the season, stores have already started marking down swimsuit prices.
That tactic should attract even more shoppers.


Tartikoff Signs On at TV Upstart
Three weeks after it announced that it was switching 12 of its stations to the Fox network, the New World Communications Group surprised the television industry again yesterday by naming the prominent programming executive Brandon Tartikoff head of its production division.
Mr.
Tartikoff is expected to bolster New World's efforts to become a leading producer of television programming.


Corrections
An entry in the calendar of events in the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday about a Fairfield Orchestra concert in Stamford, on Saturday at 8 P.M. at the First Congregational Church, misstated the ticket price range.
It is $15 to $50, not $35 to $100.


Corrections
The Company Index in Business Day on June 4 carried an incorrect parent-company listing for a manufacturer of gaming machines that the authorities said was a victim of fraud in an organized crime scheme in Louisiana.
That company is Bally Gaming International Inc., a separately traded public corporation.
It was formerly part of Bally Manufacturing Inc., which completely divested itself of Bally Gaming Inc. last year.
Bally Manufacturing then changed its name to the Bally Entertainment Corporation.


Philips Seeks Market Share For Its Technological Power
Having pioneered such products as the videocassette recorder, the compact disk and high-definition television, Philips Electronics N.V., Europe's largest electronics maker, has a deserved reputation for technological prowess.
But when it comes to turning that technology into market share and profits, Philips, best known in the United States for its Magnavox, Norelco and Sylvania brand names, has often fallen on its face.
Its VCR format never caught on.
Its video laser disk was one of the great flops in consumer electronics.
Its latest hope, the digital compact cassette, an audio tape with CD-quality sound, is off to a slow start.


The True Believers Get Their Reward
At long last, it was the combined force of nearly 20,000 true believers, screaming, pleading, scratching at their own skin, praying out loud, that won the Stanley Cup for the Rangers.
There can be no doubt about this, not in the minds of any of the team's aching fans who finally found redemption last night at Madison Square Garden with their team.
So many hungry eyes concentrated onto one plain of ice could not fail.


Woman Brain-Dead In a Subway Mishap
A 60-year-old woman was left brain-dead yesterday by a fall on a subway platform after her shopping bag -- and perhaps her cane, as well -- were caught in the doors of a train as it pulled away from her, the authorities said.
The woman, whose name was not released, was attempting to board the Manhattan-bound No. 7 train at 4:20 P.M. in the Junction Boulevard station in Queens, said Termaine Garden, a Transit Authority spokesman.
He said a plastic bag and possibly a metal cane she was carrying were caught in the closing doors before she could enter.


No More 1940! Rangers Are Champs!
They hoisted the big silver trophy high, passed it around, shook it over their heads.
Sometimes they kissed it.
Slowly, they skated a ceremonial victory lap around the crowded, littered ice surface of Madison Square Garden.
The Rangers, led by their captain, Mark Messier, were cheered mightily and repeatedly by a capacity crowd of 18,200 fans and watched by an international television audience, including President Clinton, who held the phone long enough to offer them his congratulations when they finally came inside.


Review/Television; A Sainted Journalist, Blushing In the Grave
Agreeable though it always is to be reminded of Edward R. Murrow, tonight's edition of "CBS Reports" leaves one wondering how that serious-minded journalist might have felt about the iconizing he has been subject to since his death in 1965.
In particular, the conferring of sainthood by an industry that rarely met his standards and by a network that in effect buried his career (while publicly praising it) might have awakened his cynical side.
"When America Trembled: Murrow/McCarthy," at 10 P.M. (on Channel 2 in New York), focuses on the famous 1954 "See It Now" program that helped do in Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.
It's a white hat-black hat story that has been told many times but bears retelling.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 10
June 3
June 11
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.5
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.3
3.4
3.0
Gasoline stocks
219.2
216.8
224.7
Distillate stocks
113.8
114.5
103.5
Crude imports, daily
7.2
7.5
7.6
Product imports, daily
2.1
1.7
1.5
Crude stocks
326.6
328.8
343.4
Crude production, daily
-
6.6
-
Refinery utilization (%)
96.2
95.1
92.6
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Go Ahead, Picture This: It's a Title for Keenan
Mike Keenan treats the Stanley Cup as if it were a familiar object.
When he moved into his office at Playland, the Rangers' practice facility, last September, he hung a picture of the cup on his wall, where other coaches might have hung photos of players, or even members of their families.
The way he spoke of it, too, made it seem as if Keenan and the cup were old friends, well-acquainted, a duo that had met time and again in the past.


Centrist Presidential Hopeful in Brazil Trips on Racial Remark
Wearing a monogrammed shirt that recalled his days teaching at the Sorbonne, the Brazilian presidential candidate gamely posed for photos astride a peasant's donkey.
Responding to a Brazilian reporter who asked if he was the country's "great white hope," Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who seems white to most observers, responded hotly, "I really am mulatto."


Owners Unveil Salary Cap Proposal To a Chilly Reception From Players
In their effort to gain the salary cap they say they need to restore "economic sanity" to their game, major league baseball club owners yesterday offered to give the players 50 percent of their revenue and conditionally guarantee them $1 billion a year.
In the long-awaited proposal, the owners also called for a payroll floor as well as a ceiling and said they would give the clubs four years as a transition period to come into compliance with the cap.


Knicks Often Best When It Seems Worst
Two days from a disappointing loss on Sunday and trailing two games to one, the Knicks find themselves in the familiar position of having to struggle up a steep hill as they resume the National Basketball Association finals against the Houston Rockets tonight at Madison Square Garden.
But the Knicks seem to take pride and a perverse pleasure from overcoming odds.
"When we get our backs to the wall, that's when we play our best," Anthony Mason, a Knick forward, said yesterday before practice in Purchase, N.Y.
"But we're not going to get down 3-1 just to see how good we can play."


Senate Will Hold Hearings on Whitewater
The Senate intends to hold public hearings into the Whitewater affair next month, but the sessions will be limited to three elements that are not likely to embarrass President Clinton.
After days of partisan wrangling that kept the Senate from other work, the lawmakers voted today along straight party lines, 56 Democrats against 43 Republicans, to begin hearings no later than July 30 on the parts of the case that are to be covered in a preliminary report expected this month from the special prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr.
One Republican, Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, was absent.


In Massachusetts, High-Tech Industry Offers Schools a How-To
The United States spends more than $2.5 billion a year on electronic technology from kindergarten through the 12th grade, but public school districts do very little planning before plugging in the computers.
"No other industry would allow that type of expenditure without a plan," said John R. Phillipo, executive director of the Center for Educational Leadership and Technology, a Marlborough, Mass., consulting firm.


Review/Television; One Year to Disarm A Killer in the Brain
Young people today can be forgiven a dab or two of paranoia.
Shriveling job opportunities and paychecks threaten to put a sizable crimp in their futures.
On a more impersonal level, sporadic reports about secret Government experiments in the past with radiation and other sinister things do not inspire unbridled positive thinking.
Anxiety, even if only a smidgin, would seem perfectly understandable.
MTV, though, is not interested in smidgins.
Its new action-adventure series "Dead at 21" heads straight for rampant paranoia, skillfully escalating a general uneasiness into full-fledged terror.
This is a United States, whirling out of the highways of fearfully sunny California, in which the Federal Government has been implanting chips in certain babies' brains to see if intelligence can be amplified.
"The idea," we are told, "was to improve the human race." Snicker, snicker.


Council Votes First Override For Giuliani
In a partisan rebuke to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the City Council voted overwhelmingly yesterday to override the Mayor's veto of legislation that would allow the Council to hold public hearings on any efforts to turn over municipal services to private companies.
The override, which passed the Democratic-controlled Council on a strict party-line vote of 43 to 7, was the first of the Giuliani administration and only the third in the last 25 years.


Braves Continue Their Grip On Top
Braves 3, Rockies 1
Kent Mercker struck out nine and allowed only three hits in seven innings last night, leading the Braves, playing at home, past the Colorado Rockies, 3-1.


L.I. Commuters Prepare for a Nightmare
Bill Spitalnick sat on the crowded platform of the Great Neck train station today, imagining what his life might be like on the morning the trains stop.
In one scenario, he is languishing in a car on an endless crawl to the Queens-Midtown Tunnel.
In another, he is still in bed with the covers over his head.
"I'm just going to wake up every morning and see how I feel," Mr.
Spitalnick, who runs his own import clothing business in the garment district, said as he waited for the 8:55 to the city.
"I'll decide if I go in early, if I go in later, or if I just go to the beach."


Handel's 'Amadigi' Staged
Manhattan Opera is to present four staged performances of Handel's opera "Amadigi," tonight, Friday, next Wednesday June 24 at 8 P.M. at the Church of the Resurrection, 119 East 74th Street.
The opera, written in 1715, has a libretto by Nicola Haym and was scored for four female voices, a small chorus and several dancers.
The singers are Rosemary Barenz, Keren Bernbaum, Marion Capriotti and Erin Langston.
Tickets, at $20 and $28, will be available at the door or may be ordered by telephone: (212) 279-4200.
All proceeds go to the Community Research Initiative on AIDS.


3 Mob Figures Draw 15-Year Terms in Drug Case
Three men, including two brothers described by prosecutors as chief heroin smugglers for the Gambino crime family, were sentenced yesterday to 15 years in prison for racketeering and conspiring to violate Federal racketeering charges.
Without a trace of irony, Judge Peter K. Leisure of the United States District Court in lower Manhattan described the men, John and Joseph Gambino and Lorenzo Mannino, as "strong family people" with commendable family backgrounds and friendships.
Because of that, he said, he would grant their request to be imprisoned in facilities close to relatives or medical care.


Gooden Loses, but Also Scores a Victory
As the Rangers re-created 1940 last night, the Mets' Doc Gooden reached back to 1984.
In this troubled season, Gooden became the rookie flame-thrower once again, tossing at 93 miles an hour.
And that was seemingly as important to the Mets' long-range plans as the fact they dropped a 3-2 decision to the Phillies at Shea Stadium.


A Long-Suffering Fan Begins Pondering an Unreal Reality
"The rest of my hockey life will be different," said Michael Forester moments after the game.
"Not necessarily better or worse, but different. I can barely speak right now. I think I'm very happy. I think I'm a little sad."
Forester, of Westbrook, Conn., is hardly the stereotypical Ranger fan -- he doesn't belch as an affectionate greeting -- but his feelings before and after the seventh game may be closer to the typical than one might think.
For much of the past 54 years, following the Rangers has been an expression of loyalty bordering on cultishness that has made their fans feel exclusive.


As Union Negotiations Continue, L.I. Braces for a Railroad Strike
With the Long Island Rail Road's biggest union threatening to strike at midnight tonight, the region prepared yesterday for a commuting nightmare as negotiations continued on a contract that could influence deals to come for New York City subway and bus workers.
The United Transportation Union, which represents 2,300 workers, from conductors and bartenders to mechanics and track workers, wants raises of more than 18 percent during four years, about double what management is offering.
The railroad is insisting on work-rule changes that it says would improve productivity and cut costs.


U.S. Will Seek Voluntary Curbs on North Korean Arms Deals
The Clinton Administration decided today to seek a voluntary embargo on North Korean arms purchases and sales as part of its initial set of sanctions, American officials said today.
The effectiveness of a voluntary arms embargo against North Korea, which has become a worrisome exporter of weapons in recent years, has been vigorously debated within the Administration.
But with the North continuing to defy international monitors and the Clinton Administration under fire from Congressional critics for its handling of North Korean issues, top Administration officials agreed at a White House meeting today to propose the arms trade ban.


Off the Menu
West Side Steakhouse
Some surprising appurtenances are embellishing the sober-looking Empire Hotel at 63d Street and Broadway.
First came the swooping copper roof lines of the restaurant Iridium.
Now an exterior glass elevator is being installed, leading to a restaurant on the second floor.
And because it seems that New York has not had its fill of steak, the new restaurant, which replaces some meeting rooms, will be called the West 63d Street Steakhouse.
It is owned by John Kluge, the billionaire entrepreneur, and Stuart Subotnick, who also own the hotel and several low- and mid-priced restaurant chains, including Ponderosa, Bonanza and Bennigan's.


Vatican Fights U.N. Draft on Women's Rights
The cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church voted today to oppose what they portrayed as a pervasive feminist influence at a forthcoming United Nations population conference, saying measures on abortion and women's rights sponsored by the United States reflected "cultural imperialism."
An extraordinary gathering of 114 of the 139 cardinals warned that the measures would legitimize "abortion on demand, sexual promiscuity and distorted notions of the family."


Northwestern U. Chooses a Princetonian
Henry S. Bienen, dean of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University and a political scientist with wide experience as a Government consultant, was named the 15th president of Northwestern University yesterday.
Mr.
Bienen, 55, will succeed Arnold R. Weber, 64, president since 1985, at the end of the year.


Metropolitan Diary
GENERATIONS  My grandfather (who I  called Popsy)  was a Bricklayer from Bayonne and  wore spats and smoked stogies  and at five foot four  could expand any room with grins
and goodness.  And my father (who I
called Pops)  was a C.P.A. in Suburbia,  wore pleated pants and smoked Camels  and at five foot nine  could stretch any house with smiles  and sincerity.  And my kids' father (who they  call Pop)  is a Shrink in the City and  wears well-worn memories and chews gum  and at six foot one  hopes for the same wide warmth that Pops  and Popsy had to fill his family's hearts. ROGER GRANET
. . .
It was one of the city's more enchanted evenings, with some 6,000 music lovers, including a tot or two, filling the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine and spilling out on the lawn, to hear Kurt Masur conduct the New York Philharmonic in a free performance of Mahler's Symphony No. 9.
It was one of those all-too-infrequent occasions when one would not have lived in any other town.
But even the most diehard Mahler-ites allowed themselves to be pleasantly distracted by the pajama-clad lad of 2 or so sitting attentively alongside his young dad who conducted silently from his seat, a smile on his face, an occasional whisper-finger to his lips.
When he conducted gently, his son did likewise.
When he used more aggressive movements, the youngster was equally enthusiastic.
Such shared delight between father and son did not go unnoticed by their neighbors.
When at the conclusion of the second movement, the youngster left with a young woman, all nearby eyes were on Dad, who realized an explanation was in order.
"Oh," he said. "He really only likes the first two movements."
. . .
Place: Corner of Bank and Greenwich Streets, Manhattan.
Dramatis personae: Man walking a large black Rottweiler; woman walking small black French poodle; Elisa DeCarlo, just listening.
Woman, with nod toward big black Rottweiler: Does he get enough exercise?
Man: I walk him twice a day; we have a yard and stairs. He gets plenty of exercise.
Woman: But does he get enough exercise emotionally?
Dear Diary:
I recently performed my stand-up comedy act at a center for the elderly in Chelsea.
I'm in my 20's and it was no small task to gear my routine to a group with an average age of, say, 85.
They seemed to like me; only a few fell asleep.
After my act, a woman -- probably in her 90's -- approached me.
"You, come here," she demanded, much as my grandmother does when she wants attention.
Who was I to argue? A fan's a fan.
"You're the comic, right?"
I nodded proudly.
"Well, I want you to know that I saw Milton Berle when he was your age."
"Yeah . . . wow!" I gasped in mock sincerity.
"Yes," she snapped. "And he was no good either. So stick with it."
There are no easy gigs in New York. BILL GORDON
. . .
Dear Diary:
A balmy close-to-summer night.
Jeanne T. Rhee and her boyfriend are strolling along Broadway.
On the block between 73d and 74th Streets, Ms.
Rhee sees a father carrying his daughter, about 4, atop his shoulders.
The girl is adorable, with white-blond hair and a silliness that reminds Ms.
Rhee of herself when she was young.
Unbeknownst to her father, the girl is forming rabbit ears with her fingers on top of his head.
When she sees that Ms.
Rhee has discovered her secret, she gestures "shhh" with her other hand.
Both cover their mouths to suppress laughter.
. . .
THE EGG CREAM  There were ten stools  Covered in red vinyl  That always felt loose  As you twirled around  Waiting for the owner  To begin the process  That was as near to heaven
As you could get  From the contents of a 10-ounce glass;  A practiced sleight of hand; some syrup;  A dash of milk; a spritz of seltzer;  And once upon a time  Some part of an egg.
ELLEN FUCHS


Ed Rollins Offers Apology To Black Ministers, in Person
Like a sinner to the altar, Ed Rollins returned to New Jersey today, seeking forgiveness from the same black ministers he once boasted that he had bought.
The Republican campaign consultant stood before the Black Ministers Council in a church basement here and apologized for claiming last November that he had helped Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman win election by suppressing black voter turnout.


Roy Allen, 74, CBS-TV Executive
Roy Allen, one of the first black television producers and directors, died on May 30 at his home in Clinton, Mass.
He was 74.
The cause was cancer, said William Greaves, a friend.


Market Place; Wrongly perhaps, traders find soft drinks less than refreshing.
INVESTORS willing to buck the stock market's current inclination to look no farther than the end of its own nose might consider shares in beverage companies, a long-term growth segment that has fallen badly out of fashion lately.
The beverage group was shaken last week when Pepsico Inc. disappointed Wall Street by disclosing that second-quarter profits would be flat, rather than ahead of last year, as had been expected.


E. F. O'Rourke, 58, Investment Adviser
Edward F. O'Rourke, an investment consultant, died on Sunday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
A Greenwich resident since 1969, he was 58.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Angels Trade Smith
The California Angels granted the wish of outfielder DWIGHT SMITH yesterday, trading him to the Baltimore Orioles in exchange for a player to be named later.
Smith hit .262 with 5 homers and 18 runs batted in for the Angels.
In his final at-bat with the team, as a pinch-hitter, he homered during the 12-7 loss to the Kansas City Royals on Monday night.
To fill Smith's spot on their roster, the Angels activated infielder REX HUDLER from the 15-day disabled list.


METRO DIGEST
TALKS CONTINUE AS L.I.R.R. STRIKE LOOMS
With the Long Island Rail Road's biggest union threatening to strike, the region prepared for a commuting nightmare as negotiations continued on a contract that could influence future deals for subway and bus workers.
A1.
Many of the railroad's 110,000 daily riders anxiously fretted over their options. B2.


Green Card Lottery Would Foil Einstein
To the Editor:
Politicians and others of good intentions are giving out the message that there is no need for any alien applying for the Diversity Immigrant Visa Lottery, the new "green card" lottery, to pay any money to enter or to employ the services of a competent immigration lawyer.


As Police Pursue Clues, O. J. Simpson Seeks Seclusion
O.
J.
Simpson, who usually packs his schedule with public appearances around the nation, was closeted today in his house here, as the police investigated the slaying of his former wife and a friend of hers.
Although officials refused to discuss the details, interviews with neighbors and co-workers of Mr.
Simpson and the victims -- his second wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, 35, and Ronald Lyle Goldman, a 25-year-old waiter at a restaurant near Mrs.
Simpson's home in the Brentwood section -- provided more complete versions of events before and after the killings.


Iran Aids Foes of P.L.O.
Iran is providing financial aid to Palestinian refugees in Lebanon who oppose the peace agreement between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel, a dissident P.L.O. leader said today.
The aid is being provided to the refugee district of Ain Hilwe, near Sidon, and includes money for educational, medical and social welfare projects once financed by the P.L.O.
The aid has been provided during the last year, but was not made public until today.
Iran provides an estimated $60 million a year to such groups in Lebanon.


Start Up, Car
To the Editor:
I found Benjamin Kelley's proposal (Op-Ed, June 2) for Breathalyzers on dashboards to prevent drunks from driving intriguing.
I wonder why we don't go a step further.


Landlords Protest a Proposed 2 Percent Increase in Rents
A recommendation to allow an annual rent increase of no more than 2 percent for one-year leases on rent-stabilized apartments in New York City drew sharp criticism yesterday from landlords, who said the proposal would not allow them to keep up with cost increases in their buildings.
In what has become an annual ritual before the Rent Guidelines Board, tenants at a hearing on the increases also criticized the proposed ceilings, saying that allowing rents to rise 2 percent would impose too harsh a burden on many tenants, particularly those on public assistance.


Review/Dance; Flips, Leaps, Somersaults and Thuds
Elizabeth Streb Ringside has turned the Joyce Theater into a circus for the company's two-week season, which opened on Tuesday night.
The stage is filled with gaudy lights and brightly colored girders, platforms and a high, luminous-yellow wooden wall.
In what seems like a few seconds after the house lights dim, the stage is flooded with brilliant light and out of nowhere come flying bodies dressed in bright red body-stockings, hurtling into a blue pad on a yellow cloth laid on a red floor.
Bodies race across and crash onto the pad, whose attached microphones amplify every thud.
They soar through the air, flipping, somersaulting and leaping, narrowly avoiding collisions by what looks like inches, yet somehow managing to make shapes and patterns with other bodies, both in midair and on the ground.
Suddenly, more bodies appear in midair at the sides, diving off girders by the hundreds, or so it seems.


Rostenkowski's Focused New Lawyer
Dan K. Webb, the former Government prosecutor hired to defend Representative Dan Rostenkowski in a high-stakes corruption trial, was long a star around the Federal courthouse in Chicago.
But it was not until March 12, 1990, that Mr.
Webb, then working for the special prosecutor in the Iran-contra case, displayed his prowess to a wider audience.
That was his second day of questioning Oliver L. North in a Washington courtroom during the Iran-contra trial of Adm.
John M. Poindexter, a former national security adviser.


Food Notes
A Caterer Buys Cookware
The enterprising Chip Fisher has just bought Charles Lamalle of New York, at 36 West 25th Street, an importer and wholesaler of French cookware since 1927.
Mr.
Fisher is the owner of Fisher &amp; Levy, caterers and pizza-cafe at 875 Third Avenue (53d Street), and in the fall, he plans to open Mr.
Chips, an ice cream parlor, on the Upper East Side.
Mr.
Fisher's purchase of Charles Lamalle, for a price he wouldn't disclose, included the large, dusty inventory of French copper and white porcelain cookware and knickknacks, like thousands of Eiffel Towers.


Playing the Percentages: New Plan, Old Gripes
Yesterday was the day that -- in the owners' most optimistic scenario -- pleasant surprises were supposed to rain down on major league ballplayers across the land.
It was the day when players were to be apprised of the proposal from owners that was supposed to deflate hostilities and promote partnership to such an extent that all talk of a strike would cease.


Apartheid's Reminders Quickly Fade
On a bustling downtown street in these early days of color-blind democracy, black South Africans are having their hair cut beneath a faded sign that reads "Native Shop" and cites an ordinance prohibiting the barber from serving whites.
The sign is dated 1923, and the law that required its presence was long ago repealed, but Sathi Pillay, who has owned Empire Hairdressing for 46 years, is committed to preserving the anachronism.


Real Culprit in Weight Gain? Look Beyond Pregnancy to Age
CONVENTIONAL wisdom says that women gain weight with every baby they have and that their post-pregnancy weight stubbornly remains, a silent reminder of the price they paid for having children.
But a new study has found that pregnancy's effects are fairly modest and that most women gain large amounts of weight simply with the passage of years.


Bright Lights, Big City, Live Cameras; For NBC, an Old Idea Is New Again: 'Today' Will Use Manhattan Streets as a Backdrop
Suddenly, the sidewalks of New York are getting a lot of air time.
David Letterman has been using an old-fashioned push-to-talk microphone and a tinny speaker to chat with the crowd outside his Ed Sullivan Theater.
And next Monday, "Today" will move to a new studio with a wraparound view of Rockefeller Plaza and standing-room-only sidewalk space in front of the cameras.


Some Simply Belong at the U.S. Open
The crowds parted and he walked through to a standing ovation, grinning, waving and flashing a thumbs-up.
Arnold Palmer, 64 years old, was about to tee off in a practice round yesterday, and the warm reception the spectators at the No. 1 tee gave to the local boy from Latrobe, Pa., was enough to raise goose bumps on the most jaded observer.
Palmer's presence here in the United States Open has not been universally applauded.
There are those who have questioned whether the United States Open is still open.
Since the United States Golf Association has seen fit to give out five special exemptions into the field at Oakmont Country Club, the most in the history of the championship, it has been suggested that the United States Open is on the way to becoming the United States Invitational.


Restaurants That Roll Out the Welcome Mat for Gay Diners
ALTHOUGH a number of New York City restaurants have quietly catered to predominantly homosexual clienteles for decades, a new crop of gay restaurants has emerged in the last few years.
These gay-friendly restaurants have cuisines that range from very good to just satisfactory.
They do not always have gay owners, but they are places where gay customers feel comfortable.
More frequently than in the past, these restaurants aggressively court gay customers, even as they welcome heterosexuals.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.24
3.14
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.09
4.16
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.46
4.55
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.98
7.05
5.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.30
7.35
6.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.15
8.18
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.18
6.20
5.85
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


When Richter Believes, Brilliant Saves Happen
Mike Richter and Adam Graves had had the conversation last season.
Richter's confidence, like that of so many Rangers, was at a low beyond anything he could remember.
The Rangers were in last place, Richter was playing poorly and it seemed as if all his promise was suddenly under question.


At Long Last, Leetch Experiences His M.V.P. Moment
At the very end, Brian Leetch was transformed into a child, the way the Stanley Cup transforms them all.
He stood with the gleaming Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player, the sixth defenseman and first American-born player to receive the award for individual excellence that he had said he did not care about.
Leetch had consistently rejected comparisons with Bobby Orr, but now the two had something in common that will last forever.
He stood near center ice in Madison Square Garden with a smile that was part embarrassment and part pride, just before the moment he had spent his professional life trying to reach.
It was just a few unforgettable moments later, soon after National Hockey League commissioner Gary Bettman said, "Mark Messier, come get the Stanley Cup." Messier took the cup, skated toward the Eighth Avenue end of the Garden and handed it to Kevin Lowe who handed it to Leetch, in front of the net, an area he had worked to protect.


Photographer Is Found Slain in Village
A 32-year-old photographer was found stabbed to death Monday night in his Greenwich Village apartment, the police said yesterday.
The man, Richard Whitesell, was said by neighbors and friends to be openly gay, and the killing prompted the New York City Gay and Lesbian Anti-Violence Project to renew its call for a police task force to investigate 10 cases an organization official said were "pickup murders" of gay men within the last two years.


Whitney Houston In Deal With AT&amp;T
The AT&amp;T Corporation, like other telecommunications marketers, is building a campaign around a celebrity.
AT&amp;T said yesterday that the singer Whitney Houston had been signed to sing in at least two television commercials, as well as to be the new voice for all of AT&amp;T's "True Voice" commercials promoting the sound quality of its connections.
Jon Mellor, a spokesman for AT&amp;T in Basking Ridge, N.J., said Ms.
Houston "captures the emotion that consumers associate with long-distance calling."


No Headline
"It's difficult now for young black people to understand that their parents couldn't go in shops, restaurants. We've had middle-aged people bringing in young people to say, 'We went through this, and you don't understand what it was. It defined who you were."' GRAHAM DOMINY, curator of the Natal Museum.  [ A10:1. ]


Dole Is Taking Concrete Steps For Presidency
Taking a step toward a race for the Republican nomination for President in 1996, Senator Bob Dole said yesterday that he had instructed his advisers to seek commitments from political strategists and fund-raisers around the country before other candidates locked them up.
Mr.
Dole emphasized that he had not decided whether to run.
But he said he gave the go-ahead for his advisers to move quickly because he did not want other contenders to get an edge in building organizations.
That happened in 1988, when Mr.
Dole wrestled with George Bush, who was Vice President then, for the Republican nomination.


Rabbi Schneerson's Legacy
The worldwide Lubavitch Hasidic movement lost a beloved leader on Sunday when Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson died at the age of 92.
Rabbi Schneerson was both a unifying and a divisive figure, charismatic and mysterious.
Sometimes criticized for allowing himself to become the center of a cult of personality, the man known as the Rebbe was nonetheless respected for molding a small religious sect into a powerful movement with political influence from Eastern Parkway to Jerusalem.
In recent years, the debate about whether Rabbi Schneerson was the Messiah overshadowed his accomplishments.


Dublin Journal; 90 Years Ago, Leopold Bloom Took a Walk . . .
Stately, plump Ken Monaghan, the 69-year-old nephew of James Joyce, put on a borrowed purplish Edwardian frock coat last Sunday and strolled in an unfashionable corner of Dublin with a small group of Joyce adepts.
Under a gloomgray sky, they read aloud sections of "Ulysses," in which Mr.
Monaghan's uncle had depicted the life of Leopold Bloom on June 16, 1904.
Mr.
Monaghan and a dozen or so other Dubliners who are serious about "Ulysses" and other Joyce writings spend several hours a week going over texts line by line, joke by joke, mystery by mystery, epiphany by confusion, curse by debauch.
On Sunday, they wanted to get a more or less private jump on the thousands of tourists and nonexperts who turn Dublin into a James Joyce Theme Park each year for Bloomsday.


The Laws Against Crack Protect Society
To the Editor:
"Cocaine Injustice" (editorial, May 31) declares that stringent laws against crack are the result of prejudice.
The laws are there to protect society, not those who prey on their fellow citizens.
No drug arrived as quickly as crack cocaine.
Crack was developed to broaden the market for cocaine to make it cheap enough for children and poor people to buy it.


Oxford Is Keen For American History
To the Editor:
I was surprised to find in your June 9 article on President Clinton at Oxford a statement attributed to Michael F. O'Brien, minister counselor for public affairs in our Embassy in London, on the subject of American history at the university (some editions).
He said, you report, "when the idea of establishing an endowed chair in American history came up, the dons refused, agreeing that 'there wasn't enough of it.' "


Haiti Official Seen as Ready To Step Down
In a sign of a growing rift between Haiti's top military leaders, the brother of the country's police chief hinted today that the chief was willing to step down.
He also called on the leader of the army to resign to prevent an invasion by the United States.
In a radio interview, Evans Francois, a Haitian diplomat who is the brother of the widely feared police chief, Col.
Joseph Michel Francois, said his brother was "willing to make the necessary concessions."


Market Rallies Sharply as Dow Gains 31.71
In its fourth consecutive advance, the stock market rallied strongly yesterday, making a seemingly convincing break after nearly three weeks of flat and lackluster trading.
The surge in stock prices came as traders chose to believe the latest favorable economic report, a mild two-tenths of a percentage point rise in the May Consumer Price Index, especially in combination with a second report, a two-tenths of a percentage point drop in May retail sales.
The numbers imply a slow-growth economy with little prospect for high inflation, which lowers the value of stocks and bonds.


Clarke Rejoining Flyers
BOB CLARKE is returning to Philadelphia to become president of the Philadelphia Flyers.
The Flyers announced Clarke's return yesterday but declined to say what they offered the Florida Panthers in return or whether Clarke will become a part-owner.
A news conference has been scheduled for today.
Clarke finished his 15-year career in 1984 as the Flyers' career leading scorer with 358 goals and 1,210 points in 1,144 games.
He served as general manager from 1984 to 1990, when he was fired, ending his 22-year association with the franchise.


An End to Welfare?
For all its complexity, the welfare plan that President Clinton put forward today will be judged by one, seemingly simple standard: Does it deliver on his famous pledge "to end welfare as we know it"?
He has reasons to argue that it does.
The President has proposed a set of work requirements far stricter than those advocated by his predecessors, and penalties that are far more severe.
When his program is fully in place, women who refuse to join a work program will get no more money.
Period.


Sprint Forms European Alliance
The Sprint Corporation announced yesterday that the state-owned telephone companies of France and Germany would spend $4.2 billion for a 20 percent stake in Sprint and form a global alliance to compete in the fast-growing international communications business.
The deal would make Sprint the technical pacesetter in a partnership with Europe's two largest telecommunications companies, Deutsche Telekom and France Telecom.
While each company would continue to control its operations within its own national borders, the three would combine forces for a global network and an international operating company that would each be 50 percent owned by Sprint.


Flag Day Comes Before the Fireworks


A Way to Check Doctors' Credentials
NOW that it is considered acceptable for doctors to advertise directly to consumers, many practitioners who seek a competitive edge claim to have special skills or cite misleading credentials indicating that they are members of a self-designated specialty board.
Consumers often do not know that once doctors complete medical school, they are legally allowed to practice in any specialty, even surgery, despite the lack of advanced training in the field.
A properly trained specialist has completed such training and been certified by the appropriate medical specialty board.


Lucas Will Coach the 76ers
The Philadelphia 76ers are hoping JOHN LUCAS can do for them what he did for the San Antonio Spurs -- turn a loser into a winner.
Lucas, who resigned as coach of the Spurs last week, was appointed coach and general manager of the 76ers yesterday.
"He is a players' coach and a standup individual and exemplifies the image that the N.B.A. should represent," said HAROLD KATZ, the club owner.
"He is the perfect person to lead the Sixers on and off the court in the future."


For Rangers, a Celebration 54 Years in Making
Goal. Game. Rangers. Cup.
The Stanley Cup jinx is dead, and the New York Rangers are the champions of the National Hockey League.


New Law Against Age Bias on Campus Clogs Academic Pipeline, Critics Say
The historian Richard Pipes, who will turn 70 next month, can go on teaching at Harvard University for the rest of his life if he so chooses.
But his departmental colleague Bernard Bailyn was obligated to retire last year, after his own 70th birthday.
The two professors saw the later stages of their working lives take such contrary directions not because of differences in their performances at Harvard -- both are highly regarded in their field -- but because of a new Federal law that took effect in January prohibiting mandatory retirement on the basis of age for tenured faculty members.


Give Messier a Hand, To Wear His 6th Ring
Mark Messier already owned five Stanley Cup rings, one for each finger of his left hand, when he arrived in New York at the start of the 1991-92 season.
He would always be considered one of the great players in the game.
He did not need to prove anything to anyone.
Always, though, Messier felt as if he needed to prove something to himself.


A Little Sausage Can Make a Big Difference
IT doesn't take much sausage in a dish for its flavor to have a big effect.
With neutral ingredients like chicken and rice, the spicier the sausage is, the better.
Many supermarkets now carry low-fat sausages.
To complete this one-dish meal, you might want to serve some crusty country bread.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  POPULATION PROPOSALS ATTACKED  The cardinals of the Roman Catholic Church attacked proposals backed by the United States for a conference on world population, portraying them as feminist and as cultural imperialism.
A1  SIGNS OF STRAIN IN HAITI  A Haitian diplomat whose brother is the powerful police chief called on the country's military leader to step down, an indication that sanctions and threats of military intervention are having an impact.
A3


James Pollack, a Top Researcher In Space Science, Is Dead at 55
James B. Pollack, the senior research scientist in the space science division of NASA's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field, Calif., died Monday at his home at San Jose, Calif.
He was 55.
The cause was cancer of the spine, said Jeffrey N. Cuzzi, the chief of the Ames center's theoretical studies branch, which is a part of the space science division.


Reporter's Notebook; The Emperor Passes! Make Way! Make Way!
They emerge from their limousine buffed and polished, silent and waving, slightly stooped, as if fixed in a permanent bow.
Cameras whir.
Pleasantries are exchanged.
Months of planning and mountains of expense vanish in a moment.
Their Majesties move on.


The Pop Life
Speaking for Soundgarden
In 1988, Soundgarden became the first of Seattle's so-called grunge-rock bands to sign with a major record label.
Its ascent, however, has been slow.
It wasn't until March, when its album "Superunknown" (A&amp;M) entered the pop charts at No. 1, that Soundgarden reached a level of success comparable to that of other Seattle bands like Pearl Jam and Nirvana.
Tomorrow and Friday night, Soundgarden is to perform at the 5,000-seat New York State Armory in Manhattan, which rarely has concerts.
The shows sold out in less than two days.
Soundgarden plays slow, bluesy heavy-metal dirges rooted in the hard rock of 70's bands like Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath.
Its songs seem to come from a heart so overloaded with pain that it has become numb.
But speaking by telephone before a concert in Chicago, the Soundgarden singer, guitarist and songwriter Chris Cornell sounded anything but numb.
In fact, he was quite passionate, especially when given the opportunity to expound upon the group's success.


Once a Resort, Village Struggles With Urban Problems
Claudie Pierre owned a clothing boutique on Main Street here not long ago.
But as this once-rustic village changed, so did her line of work.
Like a charity worker, she now helps people find jobs and housing, provides children with a place to stay while their parents work and offers translation in French, Creole and Spanish for new immigrants -- all from a rundown storefront on the street where she once catered to fashion tastes.


1994: The Year That Made 1940 Just Another Number
This Rangers' Stanley Cup championship season really began last spring, when Mike Keenan began to appear high above the ice at Madison Square Garden, peering down from a private box at the wreckage of the 1992-93 team as it concluded the season amid its booing and taunting fans.
His official purpose then was to scout for players for Team Canada, which he would coach at the world championships in Europe.
But everyone knew that Keenan, who was between jobs in the National Hockey League, would be back, somewhere, sooner or later.
It turned out to be sooner, and it turned out to be in Manhattan, when he was presented by the general manager and president, Neil Smith, as the new coach of the Rangers on April 17, 1993, just days after the season had ended with the team out of the playoffs and in last place in the Patrick Division.


In America; Forget Farrakhan
I remember the rally in Madison Square Garden in October 1985 when Louis Farrakhan, standing beneath championship banners honoring sports heroes named Frazier and Reed and Bradley and DeBusschere, fired up a crowd of 25,000 black people with his ranting against Jews and his demand to know if black leaders who "sold out" should be allowed to live.
The audience was wild for Mr.
Farrakhan.
His every pronouncement provoked the kind of thumping, foot-pounding, whistle-blowing, mind-boggling ecstasy normally reserved for playoff games and rock concerts.


Travelers and Met Life Form U.S.'s Biggest Health Insurer
The new company does not yet have a name, or even a headquarters office.
What it does have are two illustrious parents -- the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and Travelers Insurance -- and a customer base of 13 million that makes it the largest health insurer in the country.
The merger of Met Life's and Travelers' health care businesses, which was formally announced yesterday, was widely praised by analysts who said the combination gave the companies a better chance of catching up with the leaders in managed health care.


For Mexico's Indians, Promises Not Kept
More than 100 Nahua Indians streamed out of the parched, stony villages of central Guerrero State not long ago and marched a dozen days to Mexico City, emboldened by the battle cries of Indian rebels in southern Mexico and hoping to win their own set of Government promises to improve their lives.
Armed only with anger, they occupied the city's heart for several days until President Carlos Salinas de Gortari listened to their complaints about poverty, discrimination and injustice, facts of life for nearly all of Mexico's nine million or so Indians.
After Mr.
Salinas agreed that something had to be done and promised to meet them again in 60 days, they went home.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Richard E. Snyder was dismissed as chairman and chief executive of Simon &amp; Schuster by Viacom, the publisher's new parent.
Viacom named Jonathan Newcomb, Simon &amp; Schuster's president, to succeed Mr.
Snyder.  [ Page D1. ]


Consider the Patient And Not the Insurer
To the Editor:
"The A.M.A. -- Deja Vu, Again," (editorial, May 29) shows again that the patient's needs are overlooked in the health care reform debate.


A Female Commissioner
As LINDA M. BRUNO saw it 20 years ago, the chance of a woman heading a major athletic conference was little more than wishful thinking.
Now Bruno is the new commissioner of the Atlantic 10 Conference.
"The world has changed a lot," said Bruno, 39, after her appointment yesterday.
"Fortunately, you now have people who judge people on a person can do. Fortunately, the search committee just treated me as a person."


Cruise Lines Betting That Bigger Will Be Better
Driven by resurgent bookings, younger passengers and a bit of "our ship is bigger than your ship," the cruise industry is in the midst of a construction boom that will create some of the biggest passenger ships ever seen.
At least 28 ships are scheduled to be launched through 1998, including a 100,000-ton giant from Princess that is expected to carry 2,600 passengers and will be far larger than the 76,049-ton Norway, the biggest ship afloat.


Executive Changes
CIRCUIT CITY STORES INC., Richmond, appointed Richard Sharp, its president and chief executive, to the additional position of chairman.
Also W. Alan McCullough was named senior vice president of merchandising.
He was previously president of the central division operations since 1991 and will be replaced in that position by John Froman.
CULLIGAN INTERNATIONAL, Chicago, a unit of Astrum International Corp., said its president and chief executive, I. Donald Rosuck, had resigned to "take advantage of Culligan's early retirement program." Joseph Dempsey Sr., Astrum chief financial officer, was named interim president while the Culligan board seeks a permanent replacement.


Robert Phillips Burroughs; Insurance Executive, 94
Robert Phillips Burroughs, a retired insurance executive who specialized in pension and profit-sharing plans, died on Saturday at Elliot Hospital in Manchester, N.H.
A Manchester resident, he was 94.
He had suffered a brief illness, his family said.


Losses And Gains After The Tonys
Despite winning only one Tony Award on Sunday night, "Beauty and the Beast," the Disney Company's extravagant stage adaptation of its own animated film, claimed a Broadway record on Monday with ticket sales of $1.3 million.
The total surpassed the previous single-day sales high of $920,000, recorded by "The Phantom of the Opera" on Nov. 23, 1987, the day its box office opened.
Indeed, it was a case of the rich getting richer and the poor poorer on Broadway this week as theatergoers responded to the Tonys, which were handed out on national television.
In the two days after the awards, four struggling shows announced they would close after failing to win the recognition that their producers hoped would renew the interest of ticket-buyers.
The producers of one of those, "Broken Glass," by Arthur Miller, said the show, which had been nominated for only one award, best play, would close on June 26 after 73 performances.
The award was won by "Perestroika," Part 2 of Tony Kushner's play "Angels in America."


Hillary Clinton Says She Once Tried to Be Marine
The First Lady has offered a kaleidoscope of images to the public, but today she added the most curious one yet: Private Hillary.
Speaking at a lunch on Capitol Hill honoring military women, Hillary Rodham Clinton said that she once visited a recruiting office in Arkansas to inquire about joining the Marines.


CHRONICLE
Old school ties: they sang the Princeton fight songs "Crash Through That Line of Blue" and "Going Back" at a luncheon in the Princeton Club of New York yesterday, but the anthems had new lyrics.
They were a tribute to Dr.
JAMES H. ARMSTRONG for the fight he's been waging, not on the athletic field or in the halls of academe but in his office in Kalispell, Mont., where he is one of three or four physicians in the state continuing to perform abortions.


Russian Rangers Say Nyet to Possible Defeat
The world is getting smaller.
Ever since Lord Stanley donated the cup that would bear his name in 1893, there has never been a Russian citizen's name engraved on the Stanley Cup.
There were names of Russian extraction, but never a Russian.
Now there will be four: Aleksandr Karpovtsev, Aleksei Kovalev, Sergei Nemchinov, Sergei Zubov.
All four of them born in Moscow, they will have their names inscribed in the shiny, weighty, well-traveled symbol of the National Hockey League, North America's best-known sporting trophy, as a result of the Rangers' 3-2 victory in the seventh game last night.


Consumer Prices Rise by Only 0.2%
Two more signs of a slowing economy and restrained inflation emerged today as the Government reported that consumer prices crept up by a modest two-tenths of a percentage point in May while retail sales fell by an equal amount.
Bond investors, greeting the news as a sign that the economy would not overheat and feed inflation, bid up bond prices.
Long-term interest rates fell to 7.30 percent from 7.35 percent.
The stock market also rose, with the Dow Jones industrial average climbing 31.71 points, to 3,814.83.


Review/Jazz; The Other Festival Improves Its Timing
For the last five years the Knitting Factory has produced What Is Jazz?, a festival meant to run roughly at the same time as the JVC Jazz Festival.
At times it has been the opposition, meant to illuminate the concept of jazz as experimental and inclusive, which the JVC Jazz Festival hasn't subscribed to.
And at others it has been produced under the auspices of the JVC Jazz Festival itself.
This year, much to its benefit, the Knitting Factory anticipated the JVC Jazz Festival by a week, and has no connection with that event.
The current What Is Jazz?, which started on Sunday and will run through June 22, is the strongest in years.
It presents its own point of view without being reactionary or apologetic.
And showcasing performers who straddle the line between jazz-related improvisation and more traditional jazz, the festival makes it clear that a sizable community of musicians exists in that world along with a dedicated audience.


Review/Music; Poetic Call and Response As a Tribute to WNYC
Just before he read his new poem "No Longer Very Clear" from the stage of Alice Tully Hall on Monday evening, John Ashbery compared the work to Paganini's 24th Caprice, a work on which several composers have based variations.
But the fame of Paganini's theme was posthumous; Mr.
Ashbery's rewards are more immediate.
His poem, a 4-stanza, 18-line reflection on the uneasy relationships between time, memory and both abstract and emotional associations, was commissioned by the radio station WNYC-FM and given to a dozen composers.
Their responses were presented on Monday evening as WNYC's 50th-anniversary concert.
Much has been written and said in recent weeks to dispel fears that the adventurous station might be sold, but on Monday the celebration was cautious, and the concert often seemed less a birthday party than a show of solidarity among the station's staff, the composers it has long championed and the audience for new music.
Most of the composers were on hand to introduce their pieces in brief interviews with John Schaefer, the director of music programming for WNYC.


Couple Found Slain in Chinatown Travel Agency
A young couple who planned to be married were bound and then shot to death yesterday in the Chinatown travel agency where they worked, in what may have been a robbery, the police said.
Bobby Chan, 30 years old, and Lai Wah Chan, 25, were each shot once in the head, said Sgt.
Andrea Herzberg, a police spokeswoman.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD O'Brien Piles Up Points  Dan O'Brien scored the second highest first-day total in decathlon history yesterday as he stormed through the first five events of the USA/Mobil track and field championships in Knoxville, Tenn.
The world champion and world record-holder led the 22-man field with a total of 4,738 points, second only to the 4,747 he posted in this meet in 1991 in New York, a performance marred for record purposes by the lack of a wind gauge.
Here, O'Brien won the 100 meters with a 10.31-second clocking, took second in the long jump with an effort of 25 feet 7 1/2 inches, led the shot-put with 52- 1/2, tied for first in the high jump with a personal best of 7-1 1/2 and finished second in the 400 meters in 48.19.
O'Brien is 18 points ahead of his world record of 8,891, set in Talence, France, shortly after the 1992 Olympics.
Second, nearly 300 points behind, is Steve Fritz, with 4,442 points.


Publishing Chief Is Out At Viacom
Richard E. Snyder was dismissed yesterday as chairman and chief executive of Simon &amp; Schuster, the company he helped build into a publishing behemoth over the last 33 years.
The decision was made by Simon &amp; Schuster's corporate parent, Viacom Inc., which acquired the publisher as part of its $9.7 billion takeover of Paramount Communications Inc. in February.
Mr.
Snyder's abrupt dismissal, attributed by officials at Viacom to a difference in styles, stunned him, the more than 9,000 employees of Simon &amp; Schuster and the publishing industry.
Since the takeover and subsequent departure of Martin S. Davis, the Paramount chairman, Mr.
Snyder, whose name has been nearly synonymous with Simon &amp; Schuster for years, was seen securing his position there.
In a move that people in the industry interpreted as a peace offering and a sign of confidence in the publishing division, Viacom recently decided to call it Simon &amp; Schuster again, after Paramount had changed its name to Paramount Publishing.
A Short Meeting
But at a meeting that lasted less than five minutes late yesterday morning, Mr.
Snyder was told by Frank J. Biondi Jr., Viacom's president and chief executive, that he was being let go.
"This was not done with any particular finesse," said a literary agent who had been told about the meeting.
"He was told that their styles were totally different and that it was never going to work, and then he was given a day or two to clear out."


In School; A remote island that finds it hard to keep teachers loses a treasure.
It is hard keeping teachers on this remote island, but Tom McKibben took to the one-room school and the people -- all 45 of them -- and stayed a record six years.
June 15 is his last day at Matinicus Elementary School.
At the age of 31, he has decided it is time to move on, back to the mainland.
A lot has happened.
Mr.
T., as he is known, wrote and directed a hit school play -- "Lenny the Blue-Backed Lobster." He and his students cleared a nature trail.
The teacher put in time on the water, as a sternman on Joe Bray's lobster boat.


Sports of The Times; Good Old Felonies Of the Hoops Game
AS Knick fans agonize over whether their team can win Game 4 of the National Basketball Association finals tonight, Fay, proprietor of the Second Avenue Dry Cleaners and an emigre from Odessa, says she likes their chances in Madison Square Garden.
She told me confidentially, her eyes peering over her spectacles, "We have saying in Russia, 'Motherland gives strength.' "
Her husband, Viktor, agreed, though viewing it more from a pure basketball standpoint.
"For home team," he said, "referee makes less whistle."


Croatian Leader Tours Sarajevo on Behalf of Bosnia Federation
Once reviled in this ravaged city, Croatia's President, Franjo Tudjman, visited Sarajevo today for the first time in the 26-month war to discuss a nascent Bosnian federation of Muslims and Croats allied to his country.
"We are at the end of the tragedy that this city and the Muslim nation, and together with it the Croatian nation, had to experience," Mr.
Tudjman said as he formally dedicated a new Croatian Embassy here.


Review/Film; The Hero Within The Child Within
The circle of life, as described in and borne out by "The Lion King," is a cycle of evolution.
Birth, growth, maturity, decline: nothing is immune to change, not even Disney animation.
Taking its place in the great arc of neo-Disney classics that began with "The Little Mermaid," "The Lion King" is as visually enchanting as its pedigree suggests.
But it also departs from the spontaneity of its predecessors and reveals more calculation.
More so than the exuberant movie miracles that came before it, this latest animated juggernaut has the feeling of a clever, predictable product.
To its great advantage, it has been contrived with a spirited, animal-loving prettiness no child will resist.


Teaching, As Taught By Patton
IS there anything in the world that could have better prepared someone for teaching in a New York City high school than watching George Patton at close range as Old Blood and Guts as he inspired war-weary men and boys to slice through German positions?
"Well, I can see how someone might think that," said Joseph D. Rosevich, a 79-year-old retired English teacher at the High School of Fashion Industries in Manhattan.
For three and a half years he was Patton's secretary in North Africa, then in Sicily, and ultimately accompanied him during the thrust toward Paris and eastward across the Rhine.


Books of The Times; A Medium and Message Of Unspoken Eloquence
Seductive Cinema
The Art of Silent Film
By James Card
Illustrated. 319 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.
"We had faces, then!" cries Norma Desmond, the dethroned and deranged silent-movie actress played by Gloria Swanson in "Sunset Boulevard." They did, and they had bodies, too, alive to every flicker of expression.
Watching "The Cabinet of Doctor Caligari" in 1926, Virginia Woolf thought the film got at something beyond the grasp of any novelist: "some secret language, which we feel and see, but never speak." Having watched it again and again between the 1920's and the 90's, James Card remains in thrall, not just to the demonic graphics of "Caligari," but also to the entire medium of silent film.
He is a film historian who for nearly 30 years was the director of the film department at the prestigious George Eastman House of Photography in Rochester.
"The Seductive Cinema" is his tale of a medium and a passion.
By the end, you too will be a willing captive.
The tale begins in Cleveland in 1920.
Houses had phonograph records and player pianos, but only the downtown district had movie theaters: 147 in all, and by the mid-1920's, averaging five films a week, Mr.
Card had sat in just about every one.
He had got his first hand-cranked home projector in 1921.
By high school, he was renting Douglas Fairbanks's "Robin Hood" and John Barrymore's "Tempest," and showing them to local audiences.


Electronic Liberation or Entrapment?
Maybe those "electronic bracelets" for people under house arrest should have been a clue.
In the mobile 90's, the laptop computer, fax machine and cellular phone are supposed to be the great liberators, allowing professionals to work any time, anywhere.
Empowered employees would be freed from the supervisor who squelches creativity by lurking near their desks, unchained from the tyranny of the structured day, released from the quiet desperation of life at the office.
The new productivity would mean a shorter workday, leaving more time for family and friends or contemplative arts like haiku and Roller Derby.


Henry Mancini Dies at 70; Composer for Films and TV
Henry Mancini, a prolific composer whose music was heard in hundreds of films and television shows, and who won four Academy Awards in a career of more than 40 years, died yesterday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 70.
The cause was complications of pancreatic cancer, said his press agent, Linda Dozoretz.


Exxon
Shares of the Exxon Corporation, which a Federal jury on Monday found at fault in the Valdez oil spill, fell for a second day.
The verdict immediately opens Exxon to as much as $1.5 billion in actual damages from Alaska property owners and others.
But the question of billions more in punitive damages may not be resolved for months, placing a cloud over the stock indefinitely.


Shameful Dawdling on Rwanda
One can stipulate that the U.S. has no vital interests or historical ties in Rwanda that might justify sending troops to this tormented central African country.
That said, the Clinton Administration chose an awful time to delay logistical aid to U.N. peacekeepers, and a worse time to apply a semantic sponge to crimes against humanity.
Just the other day, President Clinton was in France summoning the memories of a just war against a genocidal foe.
Meantime the appalling butchery continues in Rwanda, where rebel militias last week slaughtered three Catholic bishops; the worth of a cease-fire agreement announced yesterday remains to be tested.
Yet a paralyzed Pentagon quibbles over nickels and dimes instead of rushing U.S. armored vehicles to the first elements of a projected force of 5,500 U.N. peacekeepers.


Faith in Confidentiality of Therapy Is Shaken
After an emotionally intense Alcoholics Anonymous meeting in Manhattan last week, one young woman looked shocked when asked if she thought a court could get access to what had been said that evening.
"Oh no, it all stays here," she said.
"They can't make me testify about what someone shared at a meeting."
But that bedrock assurance of trust and privacy, based on a common misunderstanding about legal protections, was badly shaken last week.
At a Westchester murder trial, seven members of Alcoholics Anonymous testified under subpoena that another member, Paul Cox, had told them about his emerging memories of one terrible, drunken New Year's Eve in 1988, when he thought he had killed a Larchmont couple as they slept in their home.


Message to Teen-Age Mothers
Set against his campaign pledge to "end welfare as we know it," President Clinton's reform plan comes up short -- covering about half of all recipients by the year 2000.
Even so, Mr.
Clinton can be credited with keeping the spirit of his promise by offering a measured attack on a social pathology: 10 million children raised in poverty, mostly by single parents.
Mr.
Clinton's bill should deliver a stark message to teen-age parents that welfare will no longer substitute for work.
His proposal calls for spending a bit more money ($9.3 billion over five years) and toughening the reciprocal obligation of recipients.
It would require recipients to commit themselves to training and education, then seek work or, if need be, take a government-subsidized job within two years of entering the system.


Sports of The Times; '1994! 1994! 1994!'
THE Rangers won the Stanley Cup.
Such a simple sentence.
But since 1940 nobody has been able to say it out loud until now.
And at the final buzzer of their 3-2 victory over the Vancouver Canucks last night, the roar of 18,200 parishioners at Madison Square Garden was louder than the fireworks that exploded above the ice.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CAIRN ENERGY U.S.A.
INC., Dallas, an oil and gas producer, said it would acquire all the oil and gas properties of Smith Offshore Exploration Co.
II for $33.75 million in stock.
PENNZOIL CO., Houston, said 91 percent of the common shares of Co-Enerco Resources Ltd., Calgary, Alberta, and 99 percent of its debentures had been tendered under Pennzoil's offer for the petroleum company.


INSIDE
Senate Whitewater Hearings
The Senate Banking Committee will hold public hearings, but they will be limited to three elements unlikely to embarrass the President.
Page A22.
Giuliani Veto Is Overridden
The City Council overrode Mayor Giuliani's veto of a bill to allow hearings on efforts to turn over city services to private companies.
Page B1.
Surprising Hollywood, Part II
Three weeks after moving 12 TV stations to Fox, New World stunned the industry again by naming Brandon Tartikoff program chief.
Page D1.
Publishing Chief Is Ousted
Richard E. Snyder, who built Simon &amp; Schuster into a publishing giant, was dismissed by its new owner.
Page D1.
Henry Mancini Is Dead
The four-time Oscar winner who composed "Moon River" and "Days of Wine and Roses" was 70.
Page D21.


Students Turn Greens Into Gold
THE owners of Food From the 'Hood, a produce and salad dressing company in the South Central section of Los Angeles, wear baggy, low-riding jeans, knee-length T-shirts and very big, very expensive sneakers.
Many have braces on their teeth.
Most have earrings in their ears.
All have Attitude, and they are using it to make money and a difference in their neighborhood.
"We're hip-hop entrepreneurs," said Carlos Lopez, 15, one of the 39 students from Crenshaw High School who after the riots two years ago, turned an overgrown corner behind the school's football field into a garden and formed Food From the 'Hood to sell the vegetables and herbs they grew.


Blacks Say Unity Seems A Bit Closer
For now, words of fire and hope were the best the National African American Leadership Summit had to offer when the three-day conference ended today with promises of more and bigger meetings.
But many of the dozens of prominent blacks who had gathered here from across the country said they had never expected to produce much more than talk -- something they said was a crucial first step for so diverse a group, ranging from black Masons and dentists, to black sorority sisters, civil rights leaders and businessmen, to Louis Farrakhan.


U.S. Seeks Other Countries to Help Resettle Haitian Refugees
Worried that a flood of Haitian boat people will create major political and economic problems, the Clinton Administration is urging other countries to help resettle Haitians who are granted asylum.
So far only a few positive responses have been received, but Administration officials say they hope other countries will accept at least 5,000 Haitian refugees -- a figure some refugee groups say is far too optimistic.
Last year, the United States accepted 1,700.


Wine Talk
THE British actress Lillie Langtry captured the hearts of some of the most prominent men of her time, among them William Gladstone, James Whistler and King Edward VII.
Probably the last and, in his own way, the most ardent of all her admirers is Orville Magoon, who was born in Hawaii the year before she died in 1929 at the age of 76.
Now he owns what was once her California vineyard.


When a Breeze Is a Must


Rebbe Leaves All to Group And Doesn't Pick Successor
The Lubavitch Grand Rabbi, Menachem Mendel Schneerson, designated no successor in a brief will that bequeathed a modest estate consisting of books, manuscripts, artwork and household effects to Agudas Chassidei Chabad, a Lubavitch umbrella group that oversees the religious group's worldwide activities.
The 22-member council was the sole beneficiary named in the two-page document that was dated Feb. 14, 1988, and filed at Surrogate's Court in Brooklyn late Monday, two days after Rabbi Schneerson died.
Rabbi Yehuda Krinsky, the spokesman for the Worldwide Lubavitch Movement and one of Rabbi Schneerson's secretaries, was appointed executor of the estate, which was valued at less than $50,000.


AT DINNER WITH: Walter Mosley; Heroes in Black, Not White
WALTER MOSLEY describes Los Angeles so precisely in his detective novels that it is a surprise to learn that he hasn't lived here in years.
His descriptions are drawn partly from childhood memories, partly from his parents' stories and partly from the occasional consultation of street maps.
"L.A. is not my city," says Mr.
Mosley, who lives in New York with his wife, Joy Kellman, a dancer.
"It's not for living. I don't like to drive. In my neighborhood in New York, there's a little old lady who's lived in the same building for 70 years; next door is Charles Kuralt; next door are some yuppies, and next door is Roy Lichtenstein. And people walk in the streets, all kinds of people, not just young people with well-developed chests who are walking so that other people will look at them."


Gerhard Naeseth, 81, Norway Genealogist
Gerhard Brandt Naeseth, a chronicler of Norwegian emigration to the United States, died on Saturday at the Middleton Village Nursing Center near Madison, Wis., where he lived.
He was 81.
He died of prostate cancer, his family said.


Yankees Shock Orioles And Smith
One inning away from another frustrating defeat, and with the dominant Lee Smith standing 60 feet 6 inches away and ready to extinguish the lights on their night at Camden Yards, the Yankees rallied for two runs in the ninth inning to swipe a dramatic 4-3 victory over the Orioles.
Since Smith had been nearly untouchable while saving 24 of 26 games, the rally shocked the Orioles and their fans as several rows of seats emptied before the home team even batted in the ninth.
Instead of having their lead over the second-place Orioles reduced to one game, the Yanks increased their advantage to three games.


Top Executive Quits Young &amp; Rubicam
Young &amp; Rubicam New York, in another shake-up of its troubled media department, lost a top executive yesterday after another executive was brought in to a position above hers.
Beth Rockwood, 40, executive vice president of media planning and associate director of the Y.&amp; R. communications services department, has resigned.
In confirming a report of her departure in the Advertising Age Daily Fax edition, Ms.
Rockwood said yesterday that she was leaving because of the hiring of Michael G. Samet to the new position of executive vice president and director of media and new technologies.


CHRONICLE
"Confucius taught that it is better to change a malignant element into a useful one, rather than kill it," said Dr.
WANG ZHENYI, a Chinese cancer researcher, who did just that to find a promising treatment for patients with acute promyetlocytic leukemia.
Using retinoic acid, a chemical derivative of vitamin A, Dr.
Wang, of the Shanghai Second Medical University, and Dr.
LAURENT DEGOS, a hematologist at the Hopital St.-Louis in Paris, departed from the traditional therapy of trying to kill cancer cells and instead succeeded in making them grow like normal cells.


Catholics Challenging Right-to-Die Legislation
Since 1988, when a court ruling significantly restricted the right of New York families to end life support for incapacitated relatives, the Legislature and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have struggled to enact laws that would establish that right.
But the latest such effort -- a bill that would allow family members and friends to make medical decisions for incompetent patients, without the patients' explicit permission -- faces difficulty in the Legislature because of new opposition from the state's Roman Catholic bishops.


After Inquiry, A Company Alters Name
Citing the Manhattan District Attorney's investigation into widespread real-estate payoff schemes, a leading New York City apartment management company has abruptly announced a change of name.
In a letter last week to co-operative apartment boards and other clients, the company, Darwood Management, said it was transferring its assets to another firm, General Property Management "as a consequence of the recent action by the Manhattan District Attorney's office."


Chlorination Alone Won't Control Giardiasis
To the Editor:
Regarding giardia and cryptosporidium in our water systems, discussed by Prof.
Daniel A. Okun in "We Need Watershed Protection and Filtration" (letter, May 28): Do not trust chlorination to control the intestinal disease giardiasis.


TV Causes Violence? Try Again
To the Editor:
In "Look to Television's Role in Youth Violence" (letter, June 1), Paul Kettl, a professor of psychiatry, cites research that shows a statistical correlation between the rise in the rate of homicide in the United States and the onset of television.
He cites his own research, which shows, he states, that "Children who watch more than two hours of television a day are especially at risk" of having "behavioral problems."


COMPANY NEWS;
The Xerox Corporation and Electronic Data Systems put the final touches on what is considered the largest commercial outsourcing contract ever awarded.
In a deal first announced in March, Xerox confirmed yesterday that it would turn over all its worldwide computer and telecommunications networks for E.D.S. to operate.
E.D.S. is an $8.6 billion unit of the General Motors Corporation.


Robb Wins Primary Race; Wilder Files
Senator Charles S. Robb today won a primary to become Virginia's Democratic nominee for the Senate, and one of his biggest political rivals, L. Douglas Wilder, filed a petition to enter the senatorial race as an independent.
Prolonging the suspense and the attention, Mr.
Wilder stopped short of proclaiming himself a candidate.


Canucks Are Out of Step In Big Dance
By the time the Vancouver Canucks found any kind of rhythm on the ice last night, or discovered the type of game that suits their style, the Rangers had already scored twice.
That is not an easy deficit to overcome in the ultimate game of the season against a team determined to mark its place in history.
The Canucks played nowhere near the way they had performed in the previous two games, when they had stopped the Rangers, shocked the New York fans and forced a high-tension seventh game for the Stanley Cup at Madison Square Garden.The hitting and effective forechecking that brought them those victories was mostly absent, especially in the first period.
Passes by the Canucks went astray in all three zones and Vancouver's first sustained attack didn't come until there were little more than two minutes left in the first session.


DELTA TO DROP FOUR TRANS-ATLANTIC ROUTES
As part of a cost-cutting program aimed at saving $2 billion in the next three years, Delta Air Lines said yesterday that it would drop four trans-Atlantic routes in September and remove all 13 Airbus Industrie A310 aircraft from its fleet.
The announcement came a day after Delta said it would eliminate 2,500 technical jobs in order to cut $175 million from the annual budget of its technical operations division.
The airline said it would drop its routes from Cincinnati to Munich, Germany; New York to Oslo, and New York to Stockholm as of Sept. 12.
Its flights from Miami to London will end on Sept. 10.
Delta said elimination of the A310 wide-body aircraft would significantly reduce aircraft rentals, salaries and training and inventory costs.


For the Indians of Mexico, Promises Not Kept


CLINTON MAY BEND ON WAY TO FINANCE HEALTH CARE PLAN
As the capital strained to find a compromise on health care, President Clinton and the Senate Finance Committee focused today on a possible variation on the Administration's proposal that employers be required to pay for health insurance for their workers.
The President was clearly receptive to the idea of deflating opposition to required payments, the major roadblock his proposal faces, by an approach that would make employers pay only if other steps did not get almost all Americans covered.


Editorial Notebook; More Rushes to Judgment
If the Supreme Court is raining down eight decisions, as it did on Monday, it must be June.
The traditional final month of a high court term is half over, and 23 of the term's 85 argued cases have yet to be decided.
Now the nation can brace for hundreds of pages of decisions.
No law ordains this blizzard of print.
The Court, supremely autonomous in setting its own calendar, could extend its term into the summer.
It can put over the thorniest cases for re-argument in the fall.
Monday's output, most of them unanimous decisions, indicates that as usual the hardest, most divisive cases lie ahead.


Ad Spending Forecast Is Revised Upward
The straws in the wind indicating growth in advertising spending after years of sluggishness are beginning to accumulate into a tidy haystack.
But no one is yet trying to spin the straws into gold.
After a first quarter in which marketers of products like automobiles, packaged foods and computers spent more money than anticipated, in turn enriching advertising media like network television and magazines more than anticipated, the growth is continuing.


Public &amp; Private; We, The Jury
Report of juror 30892, Superior Court of New Jersey, County of Hudson:
"The Best of Montel Williams" was on the television in the jury holding room.
"They would call me out of the classroom every morning to measure my hair," a girl who was suspended from school because her hair was too big told Montel.
Luna caught Max cheating on "One Life to Live" and Bobbi brandished a gun on "General Hospital."


Book Notes
Temperature and Ante Rise
George Dawes Green's first book, "The Caveman's Valentine," was rejected by editors around New York until Warner Books decided to publish it for a not-bad advance of $45,000.
It was a sort of literary, not particularly commercial novel about a murder and a homeless man with schizophrenia who lives in a New York park.
Although the novel received very good reviews, it hardly made Mr.
Green famous.
By the most generous estimates, 10,000 to 15,000 copies were sold.
Mr.
Green's editor at Warner, Jamie Raab, felt sympathy for her author because, she said in an interview, his decision to write fiction for a living (he had previously written poetry and worked for a magazine called Suburbia Today) had been disastrous financially.
"He was penniless, living hand to mouth," she said.
At one point, he moved back in with his parents in Georgia.
"I knew he was at work on a second novel," she said, "and all I could think about at the time was that I hoped it was good so that I could give him a second contract."


Personal Health; The war on brittle bones must start early in life.
A CONFERENCE of experts is not needed to tell Americans that their bones are in jeopardy.
All they have to do is look at the huge numbers of older people who have developed rounded backs and lost inches in height because their spinal vertebrae have collapsed, or the millions who have suffered debilitating fractures, particularly of the hip, which too often end in death.
More than 25 million people have osteoporosis, the bone-loss disease that results in more than 1.5 million fractures a year in people over 50 at an expense to society of more than $10 billion a year.
Yet this costly problem has what appears to be a very inexpensive solution: Get every American to consume more calcium, the mineral that is the primary contributor to the density and strength of bones throughout the body.


PRESIDENT OFFERS DELAYED PROPOSAL TO REDO WELFARE
President Clinton sought today to give a harder edge to his domestic policy agenda by putting forward a long-postponed proposal to toughen the rules for millions of Americans on the welfare rolls.
The plan that Mr.
Clinton announced would expand training to young welfare recipients but require those still on the rolls after two years to join a work program or risk losing their benefits.
That would represent the first time limit imposed on welfare payments, and it would be reinforced with the most aggressive effort ever to extract child-support payments from delinquent fathers.


Adoption Can Be Compelled, Appeals Court Rules
The New York Court of Appeals ruled today that a person who backs out of an adoption at the last minute can still be forced to become the child's legal parent.
Legal experts said the ruling set a precedent because it stated explicitly that a person could be legally compelled to become a parent against his or her wishes.
But the decision was so narrow that the experts said it was unlikely to have a widespread effect.


Review/Music; Georg Solti, Teacher, Leads Carnegie's Orchestral Workshop
Teachers teach in two ways.
There are the explainers; they tell us why things happen.
Look for the general principle in a particular problem, they say; it will help you solve other problems when no teacher is around.
Then there are the doers, those for whom the action is the explanation.
This is also known as the watch-me school of pedagogy.
In its high-level workshop series over the last few years, Carnegie Hall has offered admirable explainers: Robert Shaw rehearsing choral pieces by isolating words, rhythm and musical line and then reassembling the three; Pierre Boulez confiding to his novice conductors a precise language of gesture.


Treasury Securities Stage Rally
Treasury securities rallied for the first time in three trading sessions after two economic reports momentarily eased investors' inflation fears.
The reports, on consumer prices and retail sales for May, indicated that inflation was not yet a problem and that interest rates should remain stable in the near future, analysts said.


Hitler Book Withdrawn in Japan
Reacting to international criticism, the publisher of a book that extols Hitler as a role model for Japanese politicians said today that he would immediately cease publication and withdraw the remaining copies from bookstores.
"Hitler Election Strategy: A Bible for Certain Victory in Modern Elections" urges Japanese candidates to adopt the Nazi leader's tactics, like liberal use of propaganda, in their campaigns.
The book, written by a public relations official in Japan's largest political party, was condemned by Jewish groups in the United States and by the Israeli Government.


Olajuwon Is Now Scoring In More Ways Than One
Midafternoon yesterday.
Rudy Tomjanovich, the Houston Rockets' head coach, sat at a table at the Downtown Athletic Club looking across the room at Hakeem Olajuwon, the best center in professional basketball, who was holding court with wave after wave of news reporters.
On Monday, Olajuwon made a guest appearance on "Late Show With David Letterman" and many of the reporters at a pre-practice interview session wanted to know how he liked it, what he thought about the experience, was he a Letterman fan.


Maldini to Play, but Italy Still Is Mum on Lineup
Paolo Maldini looked like some movie star trying to get to a waiting limo.
Tightly surrounded by a threesome of police officers brandishing raised forearms, Maldini nodded and smiled to the encircling mob of camera-wielding, microphone-stabbing journalists all shouting at once.
A Brazilian television reporter even dashed up the steps of the team bus to interview him, but she was pulled off by the police.


Psychiatrist Testifies in Larchmont Killings Trial
A carpenter charged with breaking into his childhood home in Larchmont and killing two doctors suffered an alcoholic blackout and thought he was killing his parents, a psychiatrist offered in his testimony today.
"He really snapped," said the psychiatrist, David Weber, who was called by the defense.
"He experienced some very bizarre, irrational state of mind in which the rules of reality did not operate. He went through these actions as if he was going back in time to eliminate the people he blamed for all of his problems when he was 7 years old."


Upshaw Tackles the Cap
N.F.L. executives use the $34.6 million salary cap as the reason for releasing older veterans.
Some N.F.L. players believe the salary cap will force them to take a salary cut to accommodate free agents signed by their teams.
GENE UPSHAW, executive director of the National Football League Players Association, said he believes those are just two of the big misconceptions about the salary cap as it relates to unrestricted free agency.
"Even though teams may be getting rid of older players, the players they're getting to replace them are making more money," Upshaw said yesterday in a meeting in Manhattan with reporters.


Questions for the N.A.A.C.P.
Where is the N.A.A.C.P. headed under its president, the Rev.
Benjamin Chavis?
That is a pressing question, given the fruits of the so-called "National African-American Leadership Summit" staged by Mr.
Chavis this week in Baltimore.
Black elected officials, including all but one member of the 39-seat Congressional Black Caucus, avoided the meeting in droves.
Also absent were some prominent non-government civil rights figures, including Joseph Lowery of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.


Toast Of Town Makes Rounds
Stanley became a man about town yesterday.
On vacation from his elegant new home near the waterfront in downtown Toronto, he finally had the opportunity to hit the streets.
His summers on Long Island may have been great.
The view from his place in Edmonton was nice.
And none can argue with late springs in Montreal.
But this?
Receptions such as this are normally reserved for moon walkers, war heroes, popes, Beatles and Mets.
After his liberation late Tuesday night, when he was placed in the hands of the Rangers for the first time since even Stanley can remember, the guy has not stopped.
If Elvis came back, would anyone hold a parade?


Mark IV Industries(IV,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Executive Changes
L.A.
GEAR INC., Santa Monica, Calif., the maker of athletic shoes, said Mark Goldston had resigned as president to pursue other business opportunities.
He will be replaced by William Benford, 51, who had been executive vice president and chief financial officer.
WALTER K. LEVY &amp; ROBERT E. KERSON ASSOCIATES, New York, a retail management and executive search firm, appointed Arnold H. Aronson partner and co-manager of the management consulting services of the firm.
With the addition of Mr.
Aronson, the firm will now change its name to Levy, Kerson, Aronson &amp; Associates Inc.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about economic indicators that showed slower growth included an incorrect figure supplied by the Labor Department for the change in consumer prices from May 1993 to May 1994.
The index rose 2.3 percent in that period, not 2.8 percent.


Levi's Spot Receives Top Radio Award
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding of San Francisco and LANY Music of Los Angeles took top honors last night at the third annual Radio-Mercury Awards ceremony sponsored by the Radio Creative Fund of New York.
Foote, Cone and LANY won the $100,000 Radio-Mercury Gold award for a radio commercial titled "Cover Me," for Levi's 501 jeans.
The spot featured a rhythm-and-blues tune created by LANY.


Philip Vera Cruz, 89; Helped to Found Farm Worker Union
Philip Vera Cruz, who helped found the United Farm Workers union, died on Saturday at Mercy Hospital in Bakersfield, Calif., his hometown.
He was 89.
The cause was emphysema, said his wife, Deborah Vollmer.


At This Year's Open, 'Whoa' Is the Word
The United States Open is arguably the most difficult championship in the world to win, but there is one point on which there is very little argument as it gets under way at Oakmont Country Club on Thursday.
That point is this: Oakmont is the toughest, most uncompromising, unyielding golf course on the United States Open rotation.


General Host (GH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 22


Freeloaders, Not Bozos
To the Editor:
Metropolitan Transportation Authority billboards are wrong to call motorists driving to work "bozos." They are special interests taking advantage of an excessive subsidy.


Daly Reaches the Green
JOHN DALY was a big winner even before teeing off today in the first round of the United States Open in Oakmont, Pa.
Wilson Sporting Goods announced a contract yesterday that will keep Daly in the money for the next decade.
Though specific terms of the contract were not released, one report, in Golfweek magazine, said it is a $30 million deal over 10 years.


The German Surprise in Europe
The European parliamentary elections recall Winston Churchill's complaint about a pudding, that it lacked a theme.
A swing to the right among voters in the 12-nation European Union?
Well, yes, except that Socialist parties emerged with the most seats in the European Parliament: 200 out of 567.
True, Italy's former Communist Party did worse than expected, causing the resignation of its leader.
But former Communists in eastern Germany did better than expected on their old turf, winning a surprising 40 percent in what used to be East Berlin.
The European Parliament has only limited powers and is far from being the legislative seat of a true European Union.
But these elections offer a useful barometer of political shifts.
And this poll produced a big and unexpected winner, Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany.
That could be important not just for Europe but for President Clinton.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Open-Air Mad Scene In 'Lucia di Lammermoor'  Central Park
The circumstances of the Met's performances in parks throughout the city make it difficult to judge the quality of individual voices.
Amplification, first of all, removes the natural texture and depth of the voice.
Then there are continual distractions from the huge, intermittently focused audience.
My reception of Lucia's Act I aria and cabaletta on Tuesday night was damaged by a neighboring child's imitation of the singing (although one sometimes hears this sort of thing from adults in the concert hall as well).


Ex-Communist In Ukraine Gets President's Aid
President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine asked Parliament today to appoint a stalwart of the former Communist elite as Prime Minister in what appeared to be an effort to draw support from leftist and eastern voters in a tough presidential race.
Mr.
Kravchuk spoke without warmth in endorsing the Soviet-era candidate, Vitaly A. Masol, who served as Ukraine's Prime Minister from 1987 to 1990.
He said Mr.
Masol was the best choice because he was the "only candidate" acceptable to the Parliament, with its big bloc of Communist and Socialist lawmakers.


The Showroom Must Go On
THESE days, when trade decorator showrooms seem to be an anachronism, it's uplifting to see one that appears to be thriving, filled with lamps, tables, accessories and seating, all of it stylishly upscale without being too much.
At the John Boone showroom, at 1059 Third Avenue at East 63d Street, Mr.
Boone (near left) and his business partner, Christopher Lockwood (far left), have assembled collections that include French reproductions and contemporary designs.


Strain Shows In Committees On Health Bill
Democrats struggled to keep health care legislation moving on Capitol Hill today, but the strain was showing.
The House Ways and Means Committee was buffeted by challenges from the left and attacks from the right as it tried to cobble together a bill that could hold a very tenuous center.


GOING HOME WITH: Germaine Loc Swanson; A Voyage So Bitter, So Sweet
ON a cool, gray afternoon this spring, Germaine Loc Swanson stepped down from the van that had carried her from the airport to the Thu Do Hotel in Hanoi, Vietnam.
Her aunt, Vu Thi Nga, 72, who had cared for her as a child, had been sitting in the hotel lobby since early morning.
She didn't want to miss this meeting.
As the women wrapped their arms around each other, the older woman rubbed Mrs.
Swanson's cheek and cried.
They had not seen each other in 40 years.
Tears welled up in Mrs.
Swanson's eyes but few escaped.
She does not cry easily.


About the Documents and Their Selection
The thousands of pages of documents discussed here were sorted by paralegals working for the law firm of Wyatt, Tarrant &amp; Combs, beginning in 1985, as it prepared them for use in potential lawsuits that might be brought against its client, Brown &amp; Williamson.
They include indexes and summaries of the company's store of 750,000 pages about research.
The paralegals read the papers and filled out a form for each, identifying the author, the subject and whether or not the material might be damaging to a company defense in court.


A Floor For the Ages
AT Ann Sacks Tile and Stone, a showroom and shop at 5 East 16th Street, people can walk around and touch a wide variety of tiles.
But one surface in particular may stop them in their tracks: a floor made of random pieces of weathered, well-patinated stone that looks as if it's been walked on for hundreds of years.
As well it should.
The limestone material, imported from Israel, is 500 to 1,000 years old.
It comes from village streets and buildings that have been replaced by new construction.
"Biblical stone" is what David Inbal (right), an Israeli architect and the purveyor of the material, likes to call it.
And who wouldn't?


Life on the Birthday Merry-Go-Round
IMPATIENTLY awaiting her reign as host for more than 40 friends, parents of friends and family members who were attending her third-birthday party last weekend, Gemma Marden stuck her fingers into one of her two birthday cakes.
Then, she licked.
Her Blaine Trump moment had begun.
With her wispy baby hair flying, Gemma, along with her 17 young guests, grew giddy with the freedom to climb up ramps, crawl through foam tunnels, throw balls and try to walk on the balance beams at her gymnastics birthday party at the Columbus Gym on the Upper West Side.


Ciba Corp. Decides to Keep Its U.S. Headquarters in the County
One of Westchester County's largest employers, the Ciba Corporation, has decided to keep its American corporate headquarters in the county, rejecting financial incentives offered by Connecticut.
New York offered more than $13 million of its own to keep the pharmaceutical and chemical manufacturing company, formerly known as Ciba-Geigy, and its 1,000 jobs, in Westchester.
Neither Connecticut officials nor Ciba executives would say how much Connecticut had offered to lure the company across the state line.


METRO DIGEST
WITHERING HEAT MAKES WINTER A MEMORY Like a blast from an open oven door, a withering heat wave turned winter's fury into a distant memory for the New York metropolitan region.
In Central Park, a temperature of 96 degrees tied the record for the day that was set in 1988, and at Newark International Airport, a reading of 101 degrees surpassed the day's record of 99, which was also set in 1988.
A1.
MANAGERS CHARGED IN CO-OP BRIBERY  More than 80 New York real-estate managers and management companies pleaded guilty or were charged in a wide-ranging corruption investigation involving bribery in the maintenance of hundreds of cooperative and condominium apartment buildings.
A1.


As Players Kiss Cup, Fans Kiss a Curse Goodbye; Triumph in the Winter Game Gets a Warm Welcome From Exultant Ranger Fanatics
With the Ranger curse broken and the Stanley Cup in hand, New Yorkers searched for fresh variations on the bellowing of "We're No. 1!" yesterday and found the proudest entry echoing among the Russian emigres of Brighton Beach, who had no fewer than four Russian Rangers to cheer home on the championship team.
"Shayba! Shayba! Shayba!" boomed Pavel Katsen, naturalized American, Russian-born vodka quaffer and leader of the most ebullient covey of Brooklyn's Ranger fans, repeating the word for puck.


Seven Teams Awarded For New Soccer League
Seven franchises, including teams to play at Giants Stadium and on Long Island, were awarded today for the proposed soccer league that is meant to be a World Cup legacy.
Well, there were supposed to be seven teams announced.
Alan Rothenberg, the new league's commissioner, omitted Washington, until someone reminded him that the nation's capital had also been included.
It was a day full of omissions.
Play in Major League Soccer, as the new league is called, is scheduled to begin in April of 1995, but the league has yet to award 5 of its 12 franchises.
It has also not signed any players, nor named any investors or sponsors beyond a joint television venture with ABC Sports, ESPN and ESPN2.


Pay, Training and Standards for Interpreters in Courts Are to Be Raised
After a panel studied the widespread problems faced by non-English speakers in New York State's courts, the chief administrative judge said yesterday that the court system will increase the pay, supervision and training of interpreters.
The judge, E. Leo Milonas, said that the pay of court interpreters, who help criminal defendants as well as people in court with legal problems ranging from landlord-tenant disputes to child custody battles, will be raised substantially, making it more competitive with the Federal courts.


Design Credo: Heed the Nose
FOR Proust, it was the scent of lime-flower tea.
For Flaubert, it was the musk of Louise Colet's slipper.
For Walt Whitman, it was the tang of a working man's sweat.
What sends Lorraine Moore into raptures is Peaches and Dreams potpourri by Claire Burke.
"Child, it smells good, just like a bowl of peaches," said Mrs.
Moore, a private-duty nurse's aide who lives in Neptune, N.J.
The memory of its powerful, fruity aroma brings a beatific smile to her face.
"Open the bag, and it smells up the whole house," she said.
"And it makes me happy."


Moynihan Health Bill a Political Enigma
Perhaps the only thing that makes Daniel Patrick Moynihan madder than not being acknowledged as the reigning intellect of the United States Senate, his colleagues say, is being pigeonholed as an egghead who can't master the political maneuvers of passing a big bill.
So it may be no surprise that last week, when Senator Moynihan finally disclosed his version of the biggest bill of the last quarter-century -- the Health Security Act of 1994 -- he set critics and allies alike to wondering what the chairman of the Finance Committee could really be up to, and whether it was progress or a setback for health care reform.


Pressure Points: Knicks Surge Past Rockets in 4th
Whatever it took to prevail last night, the Knicks were willing to do.
It took Charles Oakley grabbing 20 rebounds and blocking out the pain of his sore left ankle.
It took another classy point guard performance by Derek Harper, who scored 21 points, made five 3-pointers and played the entire second half.
It took the leadership of John Starks, who scored 10 of New York's last 13 points, including two 3-point baskets during the final four minutes.
And it took five Knicks reaching double figures to offset the onslaught of Hakeem Olajuwon, who played his most dominant game of the series and scored 22 of his 32 points in the second half.


Withering Heat Makes Winter Just a Memory
Like a blast from an open oven door, a withering heat wave yesterday turned winter's fury into a distant memory for the New York metropolitan region.
In Central Park, a temperature of 96 degrees tied the record for the day that was set in 1988, and at Newark International Airport, a reading of 101 degrees surpassed the previous record for June 15 of 99, which was also set in 1988.


Accounts
*
Natural Country Farms, Rockville, Conn., to Taylor-Gordon &amp; Co., New York, to handle the fresh juice and juice drinks marketer's account, previously in-house.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Nancy's Specialty Foods, Newark, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle advertising for the maker of quiches.
Billings were estimated at $2 million to $3 million.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
A Cocteau Collaboration On the French Revolution  Bouwerie Lane Theater
Revolutionaries are trundling the poor French queen off to the guillotine yet again, and what a tedious mess they make of it in "Marie Antoinette," at the Bouwerie Lane Theater (330 Bouwery, at Bond Street, East Village).
Mind you, it is no mean achievement to turn the French Revolution into an utterly static event and some of its chief actors into bloodless bores; the mystery is why it has been done.


People
*
Richard W. Edelman, president and chief operating officer of Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, New York, was promoted to the new position of co-chief executive.
He will share responsibilities with Daniel J. Edelman, founder, chairman and chief executive. *
John Eckelberry, vice chairman of Doremus &amp; Co., New York, was promoted to chairman, succeeding Curt Troeger, who retired.


Patterson Dental Co.(PDCO,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Castro Dons Civvies for Latin Conference
Tailoring his attire to a changing foreign policy, President Fidel Castro of Cuba has broken his 35-year tradition of only wearing olive-green military uniforms in public and has appeared at a meeting with Latin America's civilian heads of state here by wearing a white cotton guayabera shirt.
"We are all used to the general in olive green, and now he is in a guayabera," commented Cesar Gaviria Trujillo, Colombia's President and host to the annual Ibero-American summit meeting.
"We think this represents a good change."


Mara Overwhelmed, Too
Wellington Mara began by saying he wasn't sure how long he could control his emotions.
This was Phil Simms, after all.
And Simms was being released by the Giants, a move that brought a strong reaction from Mara, the longtime Giants owner.
In the most emotional scene at Giants Stadium yesterday, Mara said that he had disagreed with the decision to let Simms go, but would support it now that the decision had been made.


After Decades, Researchers Find Hormone That Helps Clot Blood
An important blood-forming hormone that had eluded discovery for 35 years has at last been isolated after several biotechnology companies had raced to find it.
The discovery is expected to benefit cancer patients directly as well as earn an estimated billion dollars a year for the company that wins the patent for making the substance.
A further consequence is that with the new hormone, all major components of blood can now be manipulated, with far-reaching implications for medicine.


Washington Talk; A Shake-Up Of Advisers: Who's Next?
The French are reacting with characteristic sang-froid, the Germans with apprehension.
And the Italians, in the press at least, are wondering whether it is happening because the Clinton Administration failed to anticipate the strong showing of neo-Fascists in Italy's elections.
The decision to replace Jennone Walker, the White House specialist on Europe, and Stephen A. Oxman, the Assistant Secretary of State in charge of Europe, also has diplomats and bureaucrats asking who's next.


2 Young Quarterbacks Find a Sudden Opening
Dave Brown and Kent Graham wanted to be absolutely clear that on this day, they were uncomfortable talking about themselves.
This was Phil Simms's day, not theirs.
But they don't have a choice; they are in the spotlight now and the Giants hope they can fill the void left by Simms.
When Simms was cut by the Giants today, it left the quarterback spot wide open.
Brown, who the Giants chose out of Duke in the 1992 supplemental draft, hopes to step in.
Graham, an eighth-rounder out of Ohio State in the regular 1992 draft, hopes to step in.
Obviously, both can't play at once, so they will continue to battle for the spot that Simms has controlled for most of the past 15 years.


Military Court Sharply Rebukes Favoritism in Navy Fraud Case
A military court has ruled that a systematic effort was made by Navy officials to be lenient with the son of the Navy Secretary at the time, H. Lawrence Garrett 3d, after the son admitted to credit card fraud, smoking marijuana and lying to investigators.
In a searing rebuke, the Navy-Marine Corps Court of Military Review concluded that "the military justice process was infected throughout by senior naval officers who considered who the accused was rather than what he had done."


No Headline
The Egyptian Government has arrested five more lawyers, members of the powerful Egyptian Bar Association, human rights officials said today.
Lawyers and human rights officials said they fear that the arrests signal a broadening of the Government's attack on the country's legal establishment.
The Bar Association is one of the most powerful political voices in Egypt, where legal opposition parties have minimal power and professional unions serve as a platform for dissent.


Essay; What Fathers Want
Keep your ties; never mind the designer polo shirts and forget the phony-macho perfume.
Let me tell you what fathers want.
We want our intrinsic authority back.


Stock Prices Ebb in Restrained Trading
After four consecutive advancing sessions, the stock market fell yesterday in restrained trading.
Falling bond prices, a declining dollar and rising commodities prices all contributed to weakness in the leading stock indexes.
The Dow fell 24.42 points yesterday, to 3,790.41, while the broader Standard &amp; Poor's 500 fell 1.76, to 460.61.
The smaller-company Nasdaq composite index fell 0.14 point, to 735.84.


COMPANY BRIEFS
AVNET INC., Great Neck, L.I., a distributor of electronic components and computer products, agreed to acquire all the stock of Penstock Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., a distributor of microwave and radio frequency products.
The terms were not disclosed.


First Data Offer for New Valley Unit Topped
The New Valley Corporation, abandoning a week-old $595 million bid for its Western Union Financial Services unit from the First Data Corporation, said yesterday that it had accepted a $650 million offer from Forstmann Little &amp; Company.
In addition to the $650 million in cash, Forstmann Little has offered to assume the financial services unit's debt and pension liabilities, which are estimated at between $260 million and $400 million.


Bridge
The winners of the ninth Worldwide Bridge Contest, played Friday and Saturday, were a New Zealand partnership, A. Bower and J. Rudell, who scored 80.5 percent playing North-South Friday night at the Whangerei Club.
A French partnership, Marcel Fournier and Pierre Hedoux, playing in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, headed the North-South field Saturday with 77.9 percent.
The best East-West scores were Wang Zeguo and Liu Li of China, with 77.1 percent Friday, and Sue Cooper of Winston-Salem, N.C., and Hugh Hughes of Greensboro, N.C., 74.7 percent Saturday.
The French organizers, headed by Jose Damiani, confirm that there were nearly 100,000 players in 90 countries in 3,000 clubs, but some may have been counted twice after playing Friday and Saturday.


Japan Gives Arts Awards
The English actor Sir John Gielgud and the French composer Henri Dutilleux are among the five winners of the 1994 Praemium Imperiale awards for lifetime achievement in the arts.
The winners were announced yesterday at the Museum of Modern Art by Ryuzo Sejima, the chairman of the Japan Art Association, which confers the awards, and David Rockefeller Jr., an international adviser to the association and the event's host.
The other winners are the American sculptor Richard Serra, the Chinese painter Zao Wou-ki, who lives in France, and the Indian architect Charles Correa.
Each is to receive about $150,000 and a commemorative medal to be presented in the fall in Tokyo by the Japanese imperial family.


Bridge Toll Collector Robbed by Motorist
A toll collector at the Henry Hudson Bridge in Manhattan was robbed early Wednesday morning by a motorist with a handgun, the second such attack in as many days, officials said.
On Tuesday night, a robber tried to hold up a collector at the Triborough Bridge plaza in the Bronx but made off with no money.


Lawyer for O. J. Simpson Quits Case
Two days after guiding O. J. Simpson through a three-hour police interrogation about the killing of Mr.
Simpson's former wife, Howard L. Weitzman withdrew as the onetime football star's lawyer today, saying he had too heavy a workload.
Mr.
Weitzman was immediately replaced by another prominent lawyer, Robert Shapiro, who said Mr.
Simpson was at home at the time of the slaying and had no connection to it.


Review/Music; The National Symphony's Verdi Requiem
Changes in leadership among American orchestras have have been executed in a series of violent U-turns these last few years.
In terms of musical taste, one senses overthrow, if not revolution.
In New York, urban glitz (Zubin Mehta) has given way to provincial rectitude (Kurt Masur).
In Philadelphia, machismo (Riccardo Muti) has gone away; contemplation and order (Wolfgang Sawallisch) have arrived.
It is not a new phenomenon when one thinks about the 1960's.
How more drastically could the New York Philharmonic have reinvented itself than in its shift from Leonard Bernstein to Pierre Boulez?
Maybe there exists something uncomfortably totalitarian in even the most benign and inspiring of stewardships.
Maybe American orchestras just get tired of the same face and the same voice.
Mstislav Rostropovich is leaving the National Symphony here, presumably of his own free will, but the orchestra could have picked no successor more different than Leonard Slatkin, who takes over in 1996.


Virginia Gets Wide Choice For Senator
With three candidates now in the Virginia Senate race and a fourth expected, voters can be assured of an extraordinary choice in the November election.
But political experts disagree about what variable is most likely to decide the outcome.
Some say it could be party loyalties.
Oliver L. North, the Republican nominee, is viewed a poster boy for conservatism, while Senator Charles S. Robb, who easily won the Democratic primary on Tuesday, is a strong supporter of Clinton Administration policies.


Late Surge By Orioles Bewilders Wickman
Bob Wickman sat in the same chair, wore the same dazed expression and answered questions in the same friendly voice tonight in the visiting clubhouse at Camden Yards as he did on Monday night.
But Wickman was talking about two drastically different topics, a save and a botched save.
Tonight, Wickman mishandled the opportunity.
Pitching for the third straight night because Manager Buck Showalter is obviously treating the series with the second-place Orioles very seriously, Wickman failed to protect a 4-3 lead in the eighth inning and was involved in all five runs that flooded home as Baltimore emerged with an 8-4 victory over the Yankees.
Wickman was blitzed for two walks, two hits and four runs in forfeiting a save opportunity for the second time and losing his second game.


Improvement for Holyfield
EVANDER HOLYFIELD, the former heavyweight champion, reported to a hospital yesterday in Atlanta for a test that showed improvement of the weakened heart that forced his retirement from boxing.
However, a spokesman for Crawford Long Hospital said doctors would release no further information on the test until after they had a chance to discuss it with Holyfield, probably this morning.


Foreign Policy: Beyond the Facelift
The hope remains that President Clinton's D-Day tour of Europe signaled a new start on the Administration's troubled foreign policy.
In that regard, the replacing of three officials responsible for Europe could be a good first step.
Richard Holbrooke will take over from Stephen Oxman as an Assistant Secretary of State.
Alexander Vershbow will relieve Jennone Walker at the National Security Council.
And a figure yet to be named will replace Thomas Simons Jr. as coordinator of aid programs to the former Soviet Union.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Violist Spans the Centuries In a Single Recital  Christ and St. Stephen's Church
Violists are always looking to expand their somewhat limited although quite distinguished concert repertory.
Veronica Salas's program on Monday night covered a wide field, from Bach to Bax to Piazzolla.
Arnold Bax's Fantasy Sonata for Viola and Harp opened the program (with the harpist Alyssa Hess Reit), but soon wore out its welcome.
Bax's strong suit was the orchestra, and orchestration in particular; in chamber format, his thematic ideas are often revealed to be meager.


Mitchell's Decision Not to Run Sets Off a Statewide Scramble in Maine
Ever since Senator George J. Mitchell announced in March that he would not run for re-election, setting off a ripple effect from the state's highest offices to the lowest, Maine has been swarming with candidates.
"It was like he threw a rock at a bee's nest," Ben Coes, the executive director of Maine's Republican Party, said of Mr.
Mitchell's announcement.


So Flows The Chocolate
THE Godiva Chocolatier shops are stepping back in time, returning to the look of the traditional European candy shop, with a modern accent.
The sleek black-and-chrome style of the shop is on the way out; the fluid, curvy Art Nouveau look is on the horizon.
And today, the new design will be unveiled at Godiva's flagship boutique (below), at 701 Fifth Avenue at East 55th Street, which has been closed since Valentine's Day for the renovation.


CHRONICLE
There are not many people who inspire ISAIAH SHEFFER to arise before 5 A.M.
"Only my wife and James Joyce, and certainly no other author," he said yesterday.
Mr.
Sheffer, the artistic director of Symphony Space, was contemplating a radio broadcast this morning at 5 under the marquee of Symphony Space, at Broadway and West 95th Street.
He is director of the theater's 13th annual "Bloomsday on Broadway" celebration of Joyce's "Ulysses," and the occasion was an appearance with the actor Malachy McCourt on Dublin's most popular radio talk show.


Games of the Street: The Concrete Facts
YOU think you know all of the games played on streets, sidewalks or stoops, and their rules, of course.
Until that 7- or 11-year-old asks you to clarify a fine point about hit the penny, slap ball, running bases or potsie.
But there's a book that can help make adults look and sound like the experts most children expect them to be.
Old-fashioned, low-tech games like these are explained in detail in "New York City Street Games," by Ray and Dennis Vignola (MIG Communications $14.95).
Along with the spiral-bound book is a plastic net with three pieces of jumbo sidewalk chalk, two bottle caps and a pink rubber ball.


Forest City Enterprises Inc.(FCEA,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Chrysler Revamps Neon Assignments
The Chrysler Corporation said it had divided advertising responsibilities on the Neon subcompact car account between the Southfield, Mich., offices of BBDO Worldwide and Bozell Inc.
For the last year, BDDO had solely handled the introductory campaign for Neon, which is sold under the Dodge and Plymouth nameplates.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $80 million.
Rick Deneau, a spokesman for Chrysler in Highland Park, Mich., confirmed a report of the change this week in Adweek.
He said the change reflected the fact that Neon's campaign would shift to focus on regional dealer advertising.
BBDO handles Chrysler's Dodge car and truck account, while Bozell handles assignments including the Chrysler corporate account and the Chrysler-Plymouth and Jeep-Eagle divisions.


Radical Moderation, Right Out of the 60's
HUMANISM survived the 60's.
That's one way to interpret the choice of the 50-year-old French architect Christian de Portzamparc to receive the Pritzker Architecture Prize for 1994.
Europe's great secular tradition of dignified, classically based building was not blown to bits by the student uprisings of May 1968, when Mr.
Portzamparc's generation exploded onto the scene.
It is alive and well and giving rise to some of the most noteworthy new buildings in Paris.
Some interpretation of this year's Pritzker selection is definitely called for, because many find Mr.
Portzamparc a baffling choice.
The prize, which was presented to him on June 14 at a ceremony in Columbus, Ind., is widely considered architecture's most prestigious honor.
Mr.
Portzamparc, who was born in Morocco of Breton lineage, is the first French architect to win it, and he is the first Pritzker laureate from the generation that grew up after World War II.


Jan Bell Marketing Inc.(JBM,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Farm Credit Bank is selling $25 million of floating/fixed-rate medium-term notes due in 1996 priced at 100 through Discount Corp. of New York.
The issue has a one-time call option on July 5, 1995.
If the issue is not called, the coupon is fixed at 6.2 percent until maturity. *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of multiple step-up notes due in 1999 priced at 100 to yield 7.22 percent through Smith Barney Inc.
The issue, callable in one year, has an initial coupon of 6.6 percent.
If the issue is not called, the coupon increases to 6.8 percent, then annually to 7 percent, 7.5 percent and 8.5 percent.
Separately, the Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $100 million of notes due in 1997 priced at 100 to yield 6.22 percent through Morgan Stanley Group Inc.
The issue is noncallable.


Corrections
A brief article by Bloomberg Business News in some copies of Business Day yesterday about a dispute between IDB Communications Group Inc. and its former auditor, Deloitte &amp; Touche, misstated the period involved for three disputed accounting items that were later resolved.
It was the first quarter of 1992, not this year.
Items in dispute from the first quarter of this year remain unresolved.


Bryan Foods Selects Larkin, Meeder
Bryan Foods, a subsidiary of the Sara Lee Corporation that markets meat products, has selected Larkin, Meeder &amp; Schweidel of Dallas to handle its account, which had been at Ogilvy &amp; Mather South in Atlanta for the last three years.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.
Larkin, Meeder was awarded the account by Bryan, which is based in West Point, Miss., after a seven-month review that also included Ogilvy and two undisclosed shops.


Marshall Moves Again, This Time to the Redskins
The Washington Redskins yesterday signed unrestricted free agent defensive lineman LEONARD MARSHALL, who had been recently released by the Jets.
Marshall, entering his 12th National Football League season, has 81 1/2 quarterback sacks.
He spent 1993 with the Jets following 10 seasons with the Giants.
Marshall started 12 games and had 37 tackles and 2 sacks for the Jets last year before breaking his arm on Dec. 5.


Whew!
On Tuesday night, after more than five decades of unrequited excellence and uneventful mediocrity, the New York Rangers captured their first Stanley Cup since 1940.
Superb performances from those who were supposed to perform -- notably Brian Leetch, Mark Messier and the goalie Mike Richter -- lifted the Rangers to a thrilling 3-2 victory over Vancouver.
They also lifted a 54-year-old gorilla, weighing a whole lot more than the ancient silver cup itself, from the backs of the players and New York City itself.


It's Not All Built, but They'll Come Anyway
Class A baseball comes to Frankford Township, N.J., tonight, when the New Jersey Cardinals take the field against the Hudson Valley Renegades at 7:30 P.M. in the new Skylands Park.
The stands should be packed, with all 4,200 seats sold in advance, half of them through season ticket sales.
While the fans in this town 50 miles northwest of New York City may be ready, the stadium is not.
Its parking lot, concession booths, ticket office, picnic areas, and skyboxes are incomplete or unbuilt.
The young players on the New York-Penn League teams will find partly finished clubhouses.


Maclean to Pick Bid for Cable Units
The ranks of the biggest cable television companies in America are about to get shaken up for the second time in a month, as Maclean Hunter Ltd. of Canada prepares to pick a winning bid for its collection of United States cable franchises.
The aspiring buyers include several of the biggest cable companies in the country: the Comcast Corporation of Philadelphia; Continental Cablevision of Boston, and a joint venture between Tele-Communications Inc. of Denver and Knight-Ridder Inc., based in Miami.


FEWER ABORTIONS PERFORMED IN U.S.
The number of abortions performed in the United States dropped to 1,529,000 in 1992, the lowest level since 1979, according to a newly released study by the Alan Guttmacher Institute, a nonprofit group that studies reproductive issues.
And it is not only the number of abortions that has fallen.
Both the percentage of pregnancies ending in abortion and the number of abortions for every 1,000 women ages 15 to 44 are at their lowest levels since 1976 -- three years after the United States Supreme Court, in Roe v.
Wade, established a constitutional right to abortion.


Stasys Lozoraitis, Vilnius Envoy, 69
Stasys Lozoraitis, Lithuania's Ambassador to the United States from 1991 to 1993, died on Monday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington, a former aide, Victor Nakas, said yesterday.
He was 69.
He lived in Rome and was on a private visit from Vilnius to the United States.
The cause was liver failure, said Mr.
Nakas, who was on Mr.
Lozoraitis's staff in Washington.


Journal; The Tony Scandals
On Monday Edward Albee, the author of "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?" became the first American playwright to be invited to a state dinner at the Clinton White House.
But only the night before, Mr.
Albee had been persona non grata at the theatrical gala of the year: the Tony Awards.
No wonder the Clintons invited Mr.
Albee.
His new hit play, "Three Tall Women," won the Pulitzer Prize this spring.
But that's not enough to win Mr.
Albee a place at the Tonys.
Because "Three Tall Women" is not playing at a theater owned by the club that controls the awards, it is designated an Off Broadway show and is barred from the potentially lucrative Tony competition.
Mr.
Albee's name went unmentioned at Sunday's Tony broadcast on CBS.


Inquiry Finds No Evidence Of Leak to Ex-Fed Governor
A confidential report by the Inspector General of the Federal Reserve apparently turned up no evidence that top Fed officials leaked sensitive information to Wayne D. Angell, a former Fed governor turned Wall Street economist, before the Fed pushed up interest rates on May 17, according to a letter written by Henry B. Gonzalez, chairman of the House Banking Committee.
Mr.
Angell, who completed his eight-year term at the Fed on Feb. 9, joined Bear, Stearns &amp; Company on April 11 as its chief forecaster.


INSIDE
Breast Implant Findings
A new study has found no harm from silicone breast implants, renewing debate on their efficacy.
Page A18.
U.S.
Faults Empire on Billing
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield owes the Government $200 million for bad billing, officials say.
Page B1.
Spending Without Growth
Rarely has so much business spending brought so little expansion -- and so few new jobs.
Page D1.
Giants Release Phil Simms
The Giants cut their quarterback after 15 years in which he helped the team win two Super Bowls.
Page B11.


Serbs Pressing Ouster of Foes From Bosnia
A campaign of intimidation aimed at forcing non-Serbs to leave northwestern Bosnia has taken on new momentum during the last six weeks despite assurances by Bosnian Serb leaders that such operations would cease, United Nations officials said today.
In the last 24 hours alone, 462 Muslims and Croats have fled the Banja Luka area, said Peter Kessler, the Sarajevo spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.


Big Step for Rangers, Bigger for Sport
It would seem that Gary Bettman, the commissioner of the National Hockey League, learned a few tricks in his years as an executive in the front office of the National Basketball Association.
In an effort to elevate the profile of big-league hockey during his first full season on the job, he arranged for this year's Stanley Cup finals to end on an off-day during the N.B.A. finals, and that's not all.
He also planned for the two tournaments to intersect in New York, the media center of the country.
The script he wrote called for the Rangers to end a 54-year Stanley Cup drought in a cathartic Game 7, eliminating the Vancouver Canucks with a tension-filled 3-2 victory that wasn't assured until the final face-off with less than two seconds remaining on the scoreboard.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Oil prices surged to their highest levels in a year on signs of a new pricing discipline within OPEC as well as a decline in American stockpiles.
Crude oil rose to $19.86 a barrel.  [ Page D1. ]
Treasury prices retreated after rising slightly on reports that suggested a slowdown in the economy.  [ D8. ]


Sony Picks Game Chip By LSI Logic
The Sony Corporation said today that it had chosen the LSI Logic Corporation to supply the custom microprocessor that will provide most of the processing power for its Playstation 32-bit video game, which is to be introduced into the United States next year.
Sony will be a late entrant into the $7 billion market for video games that is now dominated by two other Japanese companies, Nintendo and Sega.
But the market for the current generation of video games, based on 16-bit microprocessors, is maturing.
Sony believes that it has a chance of making up lost ground in the next generation of 32- and 64-bit systems, which will sell for less than $500 while offering processing power that surpasses today's fastest desktop personal computers.


National Service Industries(NSI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Beating of Recaptured Inmate Brings Indictment of Guards
A Federal grand jury in Mississippi has indicted six state corrections employees, including the department's deputy commissioner, in connection with the 1991 beating of an inmate who had been recaptured after escaping from a state prison.
The nine-count indictment was unsealed on Tuesday in Federal District Court in Oxford, Miss., as Federal prosecutors announced that five other guards had pleaded guilty to charges of helping to beat the inmate or taking part in a cover-up.


Sports of The Times; The Cruelest Sack of All For Simms
IN pro football now, the most significant words are no longer rush the passer or deep post pattern.
They are: salary cap.
Don't think that salary cap is merely another impersonal phrase that a bean counter might use.
To those affected by it, it's as personal as a blitzing linebacker.
Because the salary cap has sacked a quarterback.
Not just any quarterback, but the best quarterback the Giants have ever had.


Japan's First Couple Meets New York's First Couple


CHARGES EXTENDED TO TOP MANAGERS IN CO-OP BRIBERY
More than 80 New York real-estate managers and management companies pleaded guilty or were charged yesterday in a wide-ranging corruption investigation involving bribery in the maintenance of hundreds of cooperative and condominium apartment buildings.
The charges, which follow a three-year investigation by the Manhattan District Attorney's office, touch many of the leading management companies in the city.


Power Pitching and Hitting From Johnson and Griffey
Mariners 5, Rangers 2
Randy Johnson, the Seattle left-hander, struck out 12 for his sixth consecutive victory in a 5-2 decision over the Texas Rangers yesterday in Arlington, Tex.
Johnson (8-3) got offensive support from Ken Griffey Jr.'s major league-leading 29th homer.
Twins 7, Red Sox 5
Kent Hrbek and Shane Mack homered as Minnesota won its seventh straight and sent the host Red Sox to their seventh consecutive loss.
Indians 4, Blue Jays 3
Jim Thome homered off Scott Brow with one out in the 13th inning as Cleveland beat Toronto for its 14th consecutive home victory.
After the game, the Blue Jays purchased reliever Dave Righetti's contract from Class AA Knoxville.
Righetti, 35, began the year with Oakland but was released after compiling a 16.71 e.r.a. in seven appearances.
Athletics 7, White Sox 5
Ruben Sierra hit a three-run homer, capping a four-run rally in the ninth inning that gave Oakland the victory over host Chicago.
Royals 4, Angels 3
Jose Lind hit a sacrifice fly with one out in the ninth inning, lifting Kansas City over visiting California.
The Royals, who gave up the tying run in the top of the ninth, won for the fourth time in five games.
Brewers 11, Tigers 7
Greg Vaughn hit his 12th homer and Dave Nilsson went 4 for 4 as Milwaukee beat visiting Detroit.
Expos 13, Pirates 2
Ken Hill (10-3) became the second 10-game winner in the National League and Darrin Fletcher had 4 r.b.i. to lead host Montreal over Pittsburgh.
Fletcher was batting clean-up in place of Larry Walker, the team's r.b.i. leader, who was ejected Tuesday night for charging the mound and sat out last night with a sore neck he injured in the ensuing brawl.
Marlins 13, Cardinals 3
Greg Colbrunn drove in 4 runs, and Jeff Conine went 4 for 6 with 3 r.b.i. as Florida set 4 team records in the rout of St.
Louis at Busch Stadium.
Every Marlins starter had a hit by the third inning as they roughed up Rick Sutcliffe (3-3) and reliever Bryan Eversgerd.
The Marlins had a team-record 8 doubles, 22 hits and 10 extra-base hits.
Astros 7, Giants 2
Luis Gonzalez drove in three runs and Doug Drabek scattered eight hits in his league-leading fifth complete game in Houston's victory over San Francisco at Candlestick Park.
Braves 4, Rockies 0
David Justice had two solo homers and three r.b.i. and John Smoltz won his third straight game, leading Atlanta past visiting Colorado.
Justice raised his career average against the Rockies to .417 (30 for 72).
Reds 4, Dodgers 2
Hal Morris drove in the tying and go-ahead runs and John Roper (3-0) pitched seven strong innings as Cincinnati stayed in a first-place tie in the N.L.
Central with the victory over host Los Angeles.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  U.S.
PENALTIES FOR NORTH KOREA  The United States outlined a plan for United Nations sanctions against North Korea, including a ban on arms trade, in an effort to force the Government to cooperate with inspectors seeking to discover whether it is building an atomic bomb.
A1


Sports of The Times: N.B.A. FINALS; The Task at Hand for the Knicks
WHAT could the Garden do for an encore?
Well, at halftime last night, it could bring back the Stanley Cup, all polished and apparently none the worse for wear after a very long night in noisy places on the island of Manhattan.
The cup seemed permanently attached to Mark Messier, he of the gigantic smile, as he weight lifted it at center court on a wooden court, just above the spot where he had hoisted it the night before.
The mutual appearance of the cup and the captain prompted the heavy hitters of basketball tickets to erupt into a Let's Go Rangers chant.


Residents Seek to Assess Impact of Indictments
After three months of anxiety over the Manhattan District Attorney's investigation into kickbacks in the residential property management industry, co-op and condominium residents and boards were trying yesterday to assess the potential effect on their buildings as indictments were announced against management companies and agents.
Officials of co-ops and condominiums whose management companies or agents were indicted will be trying to determine whether kickback schemes caused their buildings to lose money and whether those losses were high enough to justify a lawsuit.
Another concern is whether being represented by a tainted management company might cast a cloud over the building, hurting the value of the apartments.


Pension Deal Announced in Trenton
Averting an open split, New Jersey's ruling Republican triumvirate announced a compromise today on a hotly disputed element of the Governor's plan to balance the state's budget by tapping public employee pension funds for $1.3 billion.
Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco and Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian revealed their new agreement at a news conference that was interrupted by loud and angry outbursts from union leaders who crammed into the Governor's outer office along with reporters and administration officials.


Behind Italy's Sunny Smile Hides the Whirlwind
To the Editor:
Andrea Lee is certainly correct in "New Kids on the Right" (Op-Ed, June 3) to see a significant, perhaps even historical, turn to the right in Italy's youth in Silvio Berlusconi's electoral victory.
Perhaps she is even entitled to her cheery view of the new right-wing Government: sun tans, youth, everybody happy so far, no worries about neo-fascists in power.


Economic Scene; Getting welfare recipients into jobs probably won't be cheap.
Is America ready to dump a welfare system that permits -- even encourages -- permanent dependence?
President Clinton apparently thinks so, and this week is proposing changes that would, among other things, limit the time that healthy adults could remain on the dole.
But findings from an ambitious experiment, released just yesterday, suggest that any reform guaranteeing a living to everyone who plays by the new rules would not come cheap.


Oil Price Is Highest In a Year
Oil prices bounded today to their highest levels in a year as OPEC oil ministers congratulated each other in Vienna and a report showed that supplies had fallen in the United States.
Crude oil for July delivery rose 91 cents, to $19.86 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange today, continuing an advance from the $14 range in March.


Viacom Acts to Calm Fears Over Ouster at Publisher
As the startled publishing industry continued to react yesterday to the sudden dismissal on Tuesday of Richard E. Snyder, Simon &amp; Schuster's longtime chairman and chief executive, officials at the publishing company and at its corporate parent, Viacom Inc., sought to assure a mildly jittery constituency of agents, authors and employees that business was continuing as usual.
Some people's fears concerned what Mr.
Snyder's removal might mean for the small but very high-profile trade department.
Trade, which refers to general fiction and nonfiction books, makes up only about 10 percent of Simon &amp; Schuster's annual revenue of $2 billion, with the bulk of the rest coming from the international, professional, reference, business and education divisions.
But it is the trade books that give a publishing house its cachet.
So executives yesterday took a line meant to quell any worries about the division.


G.E. Gave Kidder a $200 Million Infusion
The General Electric Company injected $200 million late last month into Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, its brokerage subsidiary, to offset capital losses caused by the discovery of fictitious trades at the firm, Kidder executives said yesterday.
That infusion of fresh money, from GE Capital Services, another G.E. subsidiary, replenished 95 percent of a $210 million loss of equity at Kidder, according to a memorandum sent earlier this week to the firm's clients.


Skyline Corp.(SKY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Players to Start Debate On Owners' Proposal
The labor negotiations that will take their next step when the Players Association's executive board meets in Chicago today are fast becoming a two-planet affair.
The two sides are taking such a drastically different approach to the effort to get a new agreement that one side might as well be negotiating from Neptune and the other from Uranus.
The players, who will also debate the wisdom of setting a strike date now, will discuss changes they want to make in the expired collective bargaining agreement.
Their proposals, not expected to be radical, will follow the elements of past agreements.


Haiti Colonel Denies Urging Junta to Quit
Col.
Joseph Michel Francois, the powerful Port-au-Prince police chief, distanced himself today from a demand that the armed forces chief resign and reaffirmed his support for him.
On Tuesday, Colonel Francois' brother, Evans Francois, called on the army leader, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, to step down to avert an invasion by the United States.
He also hinted that Colonel Francois was ready to resign, saying his brother was "ready to make concessions" to save Haiti.


Standard Microsystems Corp.(SMSC,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Albert Bobs but He Doesn't Bend
Third period of the Rangers' Stanley Cup victory Tuesday.
I'm sitting behind Marv Albert and Sal (Red Light) Messina in WFAN's cramped radio booth.
It's loud, hot and humid.
I'm wearing a headset with all the slack of a Venice Beach hard body so I can't stand and listen to the radio call at the same time.
Marv's bobbing head, which accompanies his trademark staccato vocal delivery, is blocking my view of the Canucks' goal.


Berlin Journal; The Workers' State, as It Was Painted (Badly)
BERLIN, June 15 -- A portrait of the late former East German leader Erich Honecker painted on the skin of an Ethiopian wild boar is at the center of a new debate over who should inherit property that belonged to the East German Communist Party.
No one claims that the portrait, which was given to Mr.
Honecker by Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia, is anything other than laughable kitsch.
But behind the debate lie serious political and artistic questions.


For Game 4, Give Oakley a Passing Grade
Charles Oakley was in the laps of some photographers when John Starks's shot went in.
He never saw Starks square up from the right of the key.
He never saw the perfect arc of the shot or his nearly perfect pass hit Starks right in the hands.
Nobody makes that pass better than Charles Oakley.
How many even get to the ball?
Oakley has made these crazy, spectacular plays all season, and last night's version fueled the Knicks' 91-82 victory in Game 4 over the Houston Rockets, the victory that determined whether the National Basketball Association finals became a Houston rout or another torrid marathon that you've got to like the Knicks' chances in.


Cigarette Makers Debated the Risks They Denied
For more than 40 years, American tobacco executives followed a two-track approach to the health dangers of cigarettes, saying in public that there was no proven risk, while privately debating how to deal with the very risk they were denying.
That is the picture that emerges from more than 4,000 pages of documents from the archives of the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation.
The documents, obtained by The New York Times, include memorandums, indexes, chronologies and minutes of research meetings attended by company executives and researchers.


Royal Pair From Japan On a Visit In New York
The Emperor and Empress of Japan arrived in New York yesterday afternoon to a carefully calibrated and glittery reception at the Metropolitan Museum of Art to celebrate what Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo called the "blossoming friendship between our two great peoples."
Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, seeming every bit as modest and unassuming as they are reputed to be, shook hands and chatted in fluent English with New Yorkers gathered reverentially for a black-tie dinner in the hall that houses the Museum's Temple of Dendur.


An Informal Troop Of Playwrights And Its Den Mother
"If Ellen Stewart is La Mama of Off Off Broadway," says the actress Christine Baranski, "Lynne Meadow is La Mere of Midtown." As the artistic director of the Manhattan Theater Club for 21 years, Ms.
Meadow has become a prolific provider of new plays, nurturing playwrights and offering them frequent productions of their work.
The members of the Manhattan Theater Club's extended family of writers include Alan Ayckbourn, Terrence McNally, Richard Greenberg, Beth Henley and John Patrick Shanley, some of the most successful playwrights in the contemporary theater.
In effect, Ms.
Meadow pretends she is running a regional theater in a one-theater city, trying to appeal to her audience with a wide diversity of plays, although in New York, of course, she is surrounded by other nonprofit companies.
Just as a number of them -- the New York Shakespeare Festival, the Circle Repertory Company and Playwrights Horizons -- have had periods of leadership, today the Manhattan Theater Club has greater critical approval and audience support.
Each of those companies, however, came to be identified with a specific kind of theater.
At the Manhattan Theater Club, the repertory is far more difficult to define.


Kmart's Chief Turns to Plan B
Joseph E. Antonini, burned two weeks ago by a shareholder revolt against his plan to improve the fortunes of the Kmart Corporation, is apparently ready to try again.
The embattled chairman and chief executive of the $34 billion retailer will propose to his board as early as next Tuesday that the company spin off its specialty chains and offer the public 20 to 30 percent stakes in them, according to people familiar with his plans.
The move would be a step toward appeasing disgruntled Kmart shareholders after two weeks of what could be best described as a lesson in how not to deal with powerful shareholders who want more of a say in corporate strategy.


Bribes Alleged On Dumping At Fresh Kills
Nine present and former New York City sanitation workers were accused yesterday of taking bribes from trash haulers in exchange for letting them dump unapproved garbage at no cost at the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island, depriving the city of more than $10 million in fees, prosecutors and city officials said.
Not only were the trash haulers allowed to dump the garbage, but the sanitation workers doctored records so that the haulers were paid millions by the city for the dirt they were supposed to be dumping, the officials said.


Market Place; Countrywide Credit takes a battering from rising rates.
THE ill effect of rising interest rates on mortgage banking companies is no secret.
Wall Street expected companies that originate and service mortgages to report lower profits this year because fewer homeowners are refinancing their mortgages.
But analysts were still surprised this week by developments at Countrywide Credit Industries of Pasadena, Calif.
On Tuesday, the day before Countrywide officials met with investors and analysts in New York and announced weaker-than-expected earnings for the quarter ended May 31, the company's stock was hit by a wave of selling by large investors.


Study Sees a New Threat In Tuberculosis Infections
New evidence suggests that a large number of tuberculosis patients in New York City contracted the disease in recent years, rather than from latent infection spread long ago.
The finding suggests that tuberculosis may be a more serious threat to public health than many scientists had believed.
Two studies published today in The New England Journal of Medicine of tuberculosis patients in New York and San Francisco found that more than 30 percent of the cases they studied were spread in recent years.


N.B.A. FINALS: GAME 4
The Knicks raced to a big early lead and then the Rockets caught up.
At halftime the Stanley Cup appeared at center court.
An omen?
The game see-sawed after intermission with each team trading basket for basket.
The Knicks' star player, Patrick Ewing, fouled out in final minutes but New York held on to tie the series 2-2.
SportsThursday, page B11


Compensation for Clarke
The Florida Panthers have released BOB CLARKE, the team's vice president and general manager, from the remaining two years of his contract in exchange for cash and a draft pick from the Philadelphia Flyers.
Clarke is returning to Philadelphia to serve as president and general manager of the Flyers, who held a news conference to confirm his appointment yesterday.
Clarke spent his entire playing career in Philadelphia.


U.S. to Supply 60 Vehicles For U.N. Troops in Rwanda
Reacting to criticism that Washington has responded too slowly to the killing in Rwanda, the Administration has speeded up plans to equip United Nations peacekeepers there with armored personnel carriers, officials said today.
The Administration has also decided to describe the deaths there as genocide, after once instructing its spokesmen to say only that "acts of genocide may have occurred."


Panel Is Told of Failure to Correct Problems in Cancer Study
The University of Pittsburgh's own auditors found serious problems at 10 percent of the hospitals it checked that carried out federally financed breast cancer studies, yet the university professors conducting the studies failed to correct them in a timely and constructive way, a Congressional hearing was told today.
The leaders of the study spent up to $80,000 on lavish parties for the surgeons who participated in the studies, about as much as the University of Pittsburgh spent to carry out audits.
Many of the problems identified were chronic and yet led to no action, a Congressional committee headed by Representative John R. Dingell, a Michigan Democrat, was told.


Calendar: Drawings And Quilts
18 Architects  Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street; (212) 708-9400.
Drawings by architects, including Raimund Abraham, Tadao Ando, Frank Gehry, Karen Fairbanks and Rafael Vinoly, will be on display through July 5.
The works were donated to the museum by the architects in honor of Lily Auchincloss, a museum trustee.
The Lily Auchincloss Study Center for Architecture and Design at the museum was dedicated in May.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Roman Catholic Church's resistance to global population strategies proposed at the United Nations misidentified a State Department official, Timothy E. Wirth.
He is Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs, and no longer holds the post of counselor.


It's Crowded on the Road as More Bands Go on Tour
Concert promoters are calling this season the Summer of Greed.
With Pink Floyd, the Eagles, Barbra Streisand, the Rolling Stones and the Billy Joel-Elton John team on the road, promoters predict that 1994 will be the concert industry's highest-grossing year, topping 1990's record of $1.1 billion in ticket sales for touring acts.
For some bands, however, there is no worse time to be on the road than the present.
"We are, no pun intended, in heavy traffic," said Ron Weisner, who manages Traffic, one of several bands that have reunited to tour this summer.
"Some of the markets we've gone to have been milked to the bone prior to us even going on sale."


Sally Milgrim, 103, A Clothes Designer
Sally Milgrim, a designer of women's apparel who with her husband, Charles, owned the Milgrim fashion store on 57th Street for many years, died on Saturday at St.
Francis Barry Nursing and Rehabilitative Center in Miami.
She was 103 years old.
Mrs.
Milgrim began as a custom designer on the Lower East Side in Manhattan in the early 1920's, moved briefly to Broadway and 72d Street and in 1927 opened the store on 57th Street near Fifth Avenue, where it became one of the area's best-known custom and specialty stores from the 1930's through the 1950's.
The Milgrim shop emphasized quality dresses that were ready to wear at a time when high fashion was still a world of made-to-order styles and custom-made tailored suits.


O'Brien Falls Short in Last Decathlon Event
For all but the last five minutes, it was the greatest decathlon in history.
Then it all fell apart as Dan O'Brien slogged through the muggy night air to cover 1,500 meters in 5 minutes 16.42 seconds to fall 184 points short of his own world record of 8,891 points.
O'Brien completed his two days' work with a total of 8,707 points, the sixth best performance ever by an American (four of the other five are also his), and well ahead of Steve Fritz, who took second with a personal best of 8,548.
It was O'Brien's third national title.


Setback in European Vote Hurts French Socialist Chief
Two years ago Michel Rocard was the Socialists' "virtual" candidate to succeed President Francois Mitterrand.
Last year, after the party was voted out of office, he was demoted to its "natural" candidate.
Today his chances of being nominated began to evaporate.
With the Socialists winning just 14.5 percent in France's voting on Sunday for European Parliament seats, party leaders have wasted no time in blaming the former Prime Minister for the debacle.
They are also questioning his ability to pose a serious challenge to the right in the 1995 presidential elections.


Echlin Inc.(ECH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Diluted Medicine
To the Editor:
Re "The Nurse Paradigm," Anna Quindlen's June 1 column:


Behind Italy's Sunny Smile Hides the Whirlwind; Left Propaganda Line
To the Editor:
"The Ghost of Mussolini Keeps Rattling His Chains" (news article, June 1) quotes "a reporter for L'Unita who covers the far right" to buttress the central point that there is a political link between the Italian right, Fascism, and Nazism.
You do not mention that L'Unita is not an objective observer.
It is the organ of the Democratic Party of the Left, which recently changed its name from Italian Communist Party, whose flag bears the red hammer and sickle and whose every leader has sung the party hymn, whose final stanza says: "Red flag, color of wine, long live Stalin, liberty."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Tommy Davis, infielder, and assigned him to Albany of the South Atlantic League.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Agreed to terms with Christopher Clemans, John Ambrose, and Jeremy Griffith, pitchers; Douglas Beardon and William Moore, shortstops; and Jerry Whittaker, outfielder.


Palestinians Learn to Police Their People, and the People Learn to Accept It
Undercover men from the Palestinian police had their eyes on a ring of suspected car thieves and drug dealers, and one night this month in Gaza City they did what police officers are supposed to do.
They gave chase, even though a few bystanders were accidentally hit when bullets started to fly.
As they fled, the wanted men told neighborhood residents that their pursuers were agents of the recently departed Israeli Army, an assertion that made sense to the locals.
Suddenly the policemen found themselves surrounded by dozens of suspicious citizens demanding I.D. cards and explanations.


Ault Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.31
4.23
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.11
4.09
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.49
4.46
3.13
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
6.98
5.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.30
6.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.23
8.15
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.19
6.18
5.83
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
CHARLOTTE ARMSTRONG graduated from Harvard Law School in 1953, a member of the first class to include women.
"You don't realize when you're going to school that you are making any kind of social statement," she said yesterday.
"You just put one foot in front of another and then it turns out that you are a trailblazer."
More than she could have foreseen, it turns out.
Last week, Mrs.
Armstrong became president of the 30,000-member Harvard Law School Alumni Association, the second woman to hold that post.


Keeping Children Rolling in Safety
WHEN Casey Bracken of Manhattan was just 2, she pleaded with her parents for her first pair of in-line skates.
She was already bored with her plastic roller skates -- the kind with the front and rear wheels that click-clack along the sidewalk at a sluggish speed.
She wanted "something less babyish, more grown-up, like what she saw adults wearing," Maureen Bracken, Casey's mother, recalled.


International Game
Shares of International Game Technology, a Reno-based maker of gaming machines and software, fell yesterday after it said it was more "comfortable" with the lower end of analysts' profit estimates for the year ending in September.
Those range between $1 and $1.10 a share compared with profits of 85 cents a share a year earlier.


CHRONICLE
On Tuesday evening, ELIZABETH TAYLOR made her first public appearance since undergoing a hip replacement in March, The Associated Press reported.
The opening of the Carole and Barry Kaye Museum of Miniatures in Los Angeles served as the backdrop for the benefit that brought her out, a cocktail party and silent auction for the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation.
"It's strange," Miss Taylor said, smiling from a wheelchair.
"It's been a long time. I'm doing very well." Doctors say she will need crutches or a walker for months.


Council to Draft Its Own Budget
The New York City Council broke off budget negotiations with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday after the two sides could not agree on spending cuts and on the Mayor's pledge to eliminate 15,000 municipal jobs over the next year, officials said.
The Council's leadership announced yesterday evening that its staff would begin to draft its own budget proposal.
The Council could pass its own budget in defiance of the Mayor, but it has not taken that step since being granted more power over the budget in 1990.


Parade to Celebrate Stanley Cup Victory
A parade to celebrate the Rangers' Stanley Cup victory will be held tomorrow in Manhattan.
The parade, featuring team members, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and other notables, will begin at 11:45 A.M. at Battery Park, move up Broadway and end around 1 P.M. at Worth Street between Church and Broadway.


No Headline
"We are all used to the general in olive green, and now he is in a guayabera. We think this represents a good change." -- PRESIDENT CESAR GAVIRIA TRUJILLO of Colombia, on a Castro fashion statment.  [ A3:1. ]


Knicks Guards Win This Round of Battle
For all the talk about the Knicks' defense and Houston's Hakeem Olajuwon, the championship series has been marked by each team's inability to play good games back to back.
Houston's inconsistency is a function of its starting guards: Vernon Maxwell, the streaky shooter, and Kenny Smith, the point guard who has been unable to generate offense for himself or his teammates throughout the playoffs.


A Confident Defense of First Jersey
After two decades of out-of-court battles with Federal regulators, Robert E. Brennan, the golden boy and former chairman of First Jersey Securities Inc., took the stand in Federal court in Manhattan yesterday.
With a mix of annoyance at his accusers -- and his trademark cool confidence -- he insisted that he and his company had maintained "the highest standards" in serving customers.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
The Ghost of Judy Garland Visits Her Spiritual Children  Theater Off Park
Although she may have a rival in Norma Desmond (as played by Gloria Swanson, not Glenn Close), it seems a safe bet that Judy Garland will be the most widely impersonated figure in the cultural events commemorating the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising.
Remember that funeral services for the actress, who launched an infinity of drag imitators, were held on the same day as (and probably helped precipitate) the uprising, a turning point in gay liberation.


U.S. Offers a Plan For U.N. Sanctions On North Koreans
The United States outlined a plan today for United Nations sanctions against North Korea, including a ban on arms trade, in an effort to force that nation to cooperate with United Nations nuclear inspectors seeking to discover whether it is building an atomic bomb.
The American plan would require United Nations members to halt all trading in arms with North Korea, a move that could cost it between $50 million and $100 million a year in lost exports.
But North Korea's arms exports are mostly missiles sent to Iran and Syria, two countries with spotty records of compliance with United Nations directives.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Gerhard Brandt Naeseth, a genealogist and retired university librarian, misstated the period for which he traced 18,000 Norwegian immigrants.
It was 1825 to 1851, not 1925 to 1951.
The obituary also misstated the day of Mr.
Naeseth's death.
It was Friday, not Saturday.


Topps Co.(TOPP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


It's 15 Years Down and So Long: A Stunned Simms Is Cut
On Tuesday Phil Simms was doing what he has done almost everyday this off season -- work out at Giants Stadium -- when Giants Coach Dan Reeves said he needed to speak with him.
Simms thought Reeves wanted him to autograph some footballs, but when the two sat down, Simms said, he sensed something was terribly wrong.
The discussion was not about autographed footballs.
It was about the National Football League salary cap and the quarterback's recently operated-upon shoulder.
Simms was a victim of both today.


Scientists Linked to the Vatican Call for Population Curbs
As the Vatican campaigns vigorously against some of the family-planning proposals drafted for a United Nations conference, one of its lay panels has urged limits on family size to avert "insoluble problems" of runaway growth.
The report, by the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, also suggests that the birth rate should be limited to about two children per couple.
This assertion seems to conflict with the views of the Vatican, which disputes the notion of a consensus on the urgency of population problems and opposes abortion and artificial means of birth control.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.(RYK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


U.S. Clears British Deal With MCI
The Justice Department today approved British Telecommunications P.L.C.'s $4.3 billion purchase of 20 percent of the MCI Communications Corporation.
But its action suggested that the Sprint Corporation might face more difficult hurdles as it seeks approval of a similar alliance with the French and German telephone companies.
The department's antitrust lawyers imposed no significant changes in British Telecom's deal with MCI, the second-largest American long-distance carrier after the AT&amp;T Corporation.


Virginia Grace, 93, Archeologist, Dies
Virginia Randolph Grace, an American archeologist who spent more than six decades studying the ancient civilizations of Greece, Cyprus and Egypt, died on May 22 at her home in Athens.
She was 93.
She had suffered a brief illness, said Nicholas Grace, a nephew and executor of her estate.


Don't Let Presidency Be Sued to Death
To the Editor:
What Paula Jones, who has sued Bill Clinton for sexual harassment, is attempting is not a suit against Mr.
Clinton, although that is the surface formality, but rather a suit against the President of the United States.
To permit such a suit to be tried is to threaten an institution central to the health of the nation's polity.
The merits of her highly questionable allegations are not at issue so long as Mr.
Clinton is President.


Lintas New York loses the last member of its executive Big Three.
AS recently as eight months ago, the three top executives of the New York office of Lintas Worldwide were so cohesive a team they were sometimes referred to, in rock-group style, as Stone and the Tonys -- F. Stone Roberts, the president and chief operating officer; Anthony G. Miller, the chairman and chief executive, and Tony DeGregorio, the executive vice president and chief creative officer.
But that was before Lintas New York was rocked by the departures of three of its largest accounts -- Diet Coke, I.B.M. personal computers and Molson beers in America -- as well as smaller accounts like Van Heusen.
Those losses cost the agency billings estimated at up to $200 million, reducing total billings to $511 million.


Beleaguered Cott's Shares Plunge
The Cott Corporation, the Canadian bottler of private-label soft drinks that has mesmerized the stock market with its marketing gains in recent years, now has the short-sellers on its tail.
Its shares fell $4.875 (Canadian) today, to $20.125, on the Toronto Stock Exchange, a decline of 20 percent.
Early last week, the stock was trading above $30.
The company's stock also plummeted today in the United States, falling $3.50 (United States), to $14.50, in Nasdaq trading.


Why Can't We Have a True Waterfront Park on the Hudson?
To the Editor:
"Down by the Riverside" (editorial, June 5) praises the new path along Manhattan's Hudson River waterfront.
As you write: "who needs fancy when a great waterway is dancing practically at one's feet?"


CREDIT MARKETS Gains Fade On Fears Of Inflation
Prospects for a rally in the bond market on raised expectations of a slowing economy quickly faded yesterday.
A sharp rise in commodity prices, a weak dollar and comments by a Federal Reserve official all helped revive investors' concerns about inflation.
Bond prices initially rose on industrial production and business inventory data that suggested a slowdown in the economy, traders said.


S.E.C. Asked to Study Derivatives in Funds
Reacting to recent sharp price drops for several supposedly low-risk mutual funds, the chairman of the House subcommittee with securities oversight asked the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday for a comprehensive study of such funds' use of the complex financial instruments known as derivatives.
Representative Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat who heads the House subcommittee on telecommunications and finance, has recently held a series of hearings into the regulatory issues posed by the growth of derivatives.


Corrections
A front-page article on Monday about Viacom Inc.'s plans to sell its sports teams and other properties misstated the terms of the MSG cable television network's contract with the New York Yankees.
The contract calls for the network to pay the Yankees $486 million over 12 years, not $550 million over 10 years.


Corporate Spending Booms, but Jobs Stagnate
Rarely since World War II has corporate America spent as much as it is spending today on the new equipment that is the foundation of a thriving economy.
Companies are becoming more efficient and profitable.
But don't celebrate.
Rarely has so much spending resulted in so little expansion by businesses -- and so little job growth.
Take the Whirlpool Corporation.
Its decision to build a factory in Tulsa, Okla., to produce stoves sounds like an expansion that would create a lot of jobs and a lot of stoves.
But that is not the case.


The Options; Getting There Will Be Even Less Than Half the Fun
There are a few ways to make it past the Long Island Rail Road strike without excessive pain.
These tips for both city and suburban commuters were compiled from the Transit Authority, the New York City Transportation Department, and consumer transportation advocates.
Leave early or late.
The best times for getting a morning subway train are between 5 and 6 A.M., and between 9 and 10 A.M.
The worst time is between 8 and 9 A.M.
Going home, the best times are between 3 and 4 P.M., and between 7 and 8 P.M.
The worst is from 5 to 6 P.M.
Avoid the E and F subway lines from Jamaica to midtown Manhattan.
These express lines, which generally provide the fastest and most convenient service to midtown, are already the most crowded in the city.
Though they are the easiest to reach for many Long Island commuters, the Transit Authority is urging suburbanites to look elsewhere.
If you insist on heading to the first stations on the E, F or 7 lines, prepare to wait outside the stations until the police let you down the stairs.
To keep masses of riders from holding open train doors, officers will be "metering" the crowds by restricting access to the platforms.
Metering will also take place in the afternoons at the Fifth Avenue and Lexington Avenue stations on the E and F lines in Manhattan.
Try the J and Z trains, which leave from Jamaica Center at Parsons Boulevard and Archer Avenue and head for lower Manhattan; they are generally under-used.
Even if you're headed for midtown, it will be faster to take one of these trains and transfer to the uptown IRT at Chambers Street/Brooklyn Bridge.
Second-best are the 7 line from Flushing to midtown and the A and C trains from southern Queens to downtown.
These lines are already crowded, but not as much as the E and F trains.
Charter buses ($5 from Nassau, $8 from Suffolk) will drop off Long Island commuters to the parking lots at Shea Stadium on the 7 and Kennedy International Airport on the A. Avoid transferring bewteen the 7 train and the E and F lines at 74th Street and Broadway in Queens, because there will be limited room on the trains and the police will be metering the crowds.
The 7 train will be entirely local for the duration of the strike, which will mean more trains for riders at local stations but will annoy those used to an express ride.
And if the strike continues until the next day game at Shea Stadium on June 29, stay away from the stadium lot.
Take local trains rather than expresses.
The R train from Forest Hills to midtown will be more comfortable than the E and F trains on the same track.
Subway riders in the Kew Gardens area are advised to walk or take a bus a few blocks west on Queens Boulevard to an R stop.
Dress for the Tropics.
Nearly all of the special buses to the Queens subway stops will be school buses without air conditioning.
And there are likely to be far more people than tickets, so have a backup in mind.
If you're driving in from Long Island, consider taking Jericho Turnpike, Route 25a and Sunrise Highway as alternatives to the Long Island Expressway, the Northern State Parkway and the Southern State Parkway.
But be advised that less congested roads are likely to fill quickly.
"Traffic is like water, it follows the path of least resistance," said Melvin I. Cooperman, a State Transportation Department spokesman.
Parking.
Transportation officials say that if you must drive, try to leave the car in Queens of Brooklyn rather than driving into Manhattan.
Long Island drivers who know Queens well can try parking on city streets near local stops on less-popular trains.
Stephen Dobrow, president of the Committee for Better Transit, a consumer group, recommends driving to Astoria and taking the N train, or parking in Elmhurst or Woodside along the R line.
To make these schemes easier, the city has suspended alternate-side parking in Queens and Brooklyn until the strike is over.
There are also inexpensive parking lots near Queens Center, downtown Jamaica and Queensborough Plaza that are adjacent to subway stops.
But getting that far into Queens on jam-packed roads will be hard enough.
And Robert Slovak, a T.A. spokesman, advises commuters not to cruise the streets of Queens aimlessly looking for a space.
"Take a map," he suggests.
Don't think about Monday, Thursday and Friday will probably be bad but next week will probably be worse.
Those who can skip work today and tomorrow will probably rejoin the commute by then.
Where to call for help New York City Authority Authority -- (718) 330-1234 Long Island Rail Road New York City -- (718) 217-LIRR Nassau County -- (516) 822-LIRR Suffolk County -- (516) 231-LIRR Nassau County Bus Service -- (516) 766-6722 Suffolk County Bus and Car Pool Information -- (516) 852-5200 David Firestone


Game 7 a Cable-Ratings High
Game 7 of the Stanley Cup finals Tuesday night produced a 5.2 national cable rating, the highest ever for a hockey cable rating.
The local telecast of the Rangers-Canucks finale yielded a 16.2 rating for the MSG Network.
When the two ratings are combined and weighted, they yield a 6.9 cable rating.
The 6.9 greatly exceeds ESPN's typical ratings.
Its Stanley Cup finals average was 2.5, up 19 percent from last season, and its playoff average was up to 1.4 from 1.3 in 1993.
ESPN's regular-season rating averaged an 0.7.
ESPN reaches about 63.1 million cable subscribers.
ABC, which aired three regular-season and three playoff games this season, averaged a 1.7 Nielsen rating.


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
A Pianist as a Role Model In the Small-Group Mode  The Blue Note
When the pianist Horace Silver first recorded for Blue Note in the early 1950's, he rapidly became one of jazz's most influential models for small groups.
Mr.
Silver arranged his compositions perfectly, dictating the rhythms for the rhythm section, taking care to set the right tempos and blending gospel, blues and Caribbean ideas into a personal compositional vocabulary that has, over the years, produced several jazz standards.


Espaliers Beautify Tight Quarters
MORE and more people seem to like the idea of greenery that doesn't take up much room.
And the plant of their dreams?
The espalier.
Espaliers (pronounced es-PAL-yers) are shrubs and trees that have been trained to grow flat against a wall or fence, or as a free-standing divider.
They guarantee a sculptural touch in gardens both small and large, in town or out.


Full Relations For Israelis And Vatican
Fulfilling a commitment made six months ago when they officially recognized each other, Israel and the Vatican established full diplomatic relations today and said that they hoped they had put Jews and Roman Catholics farther along the path of reconciliation.
The creation of formal ties, announced at the same time in Jerusalem and the Vatican, still leaves a good deal of unfinished business, notably the legal and financial status of the Catholic Church in the Holy Land.
Two commissions were formed to handle those matters, and officials here said that they expect negotiations to take two years.


Countrywide Credit Industries(CCR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Team That Came In From the Heat
Maybe it was the heat, or the humidity.
The weather was more suited to sipping lemonade on a stoop in Flushing than running around in long pants at Shea Stadium last night.
In any event, the Mets played their quickest game of the year, disposing of the Phillies by 1-0 in 2 hours 10 minutes as Bobby Jones and John Franco combined for the shutout.


Douglas W. Bryant Harvard Library Director, 80
Douglas W. Bryant, a director of Harvard University's libraries, died on Sunday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
Mr.
Bryant, who lived in Lexington, Mass., was 80.
He died of cancer, his wife, Rene, said.
Mr.
Bryant joined the Harvard library staff in 1952, becoming university librarian in 1965 and director of the library system in 1972, when he was also named a professor of bibliography.
He retired in 1979.


Dairy Mart Convenience Stores Inc.(DMCVB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Technology Exports Mean U.S. Growth
To the Editor:
It is not correct to state that the Senate bill on exports "authorizes the Secretary of Commerce, acting alone, to grant relief from export controls" ("Too Relaxed on High-Tech Exports," editorial, May 29).
The Secretary of Commerce leads the interagency government process to determine if relief is warranted, but is not the only actor.
The process ends with the President in the absence of agency consensus.


'53 Experiment Found Cancer Link
In 1952, Dr.
Richard Doll published a groundbreaking study on the health risks of smoking.
The study linked the risk of developing lung cancer to the number of cigarettes smoked, with the risk rising in direct proportion to the number.
One of the findings dealt with benzopyrene, an aromatic hydrocarbon that is found in cigarette smoke and is now widely considered to be one of tobacco's chief cancer-causing substances.
Although an exact relationship between dose and biological response, like that found by Dr.
Doll (later Sir Richard), is a strong indication that a substance is a cause of disease, such studies do not conclusively demonstrate that cigarette smoking can induce malignant tumors in living animals; nor do they pinpoint the carcinogenic components of cigarettes.


Review/Dance; Lover as Ideal, Lover as Victim, Lover as Flirt
The New York City Ballet's season continues apace, and even some of the premieres that were presented during the recent Diamond Project will continue to be repeated through Sunday night.
The constant is the exceptional dancing that surfaces amid the excellent.
The latest instance came on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater with the season's first performance of Peter Martins's "Symphonic Dances" on a bill with two ballets by Jerome Robbins and a debut by Robert Lyon in George Balanchine's "Vienna Waltzes."


Jeffrey Lawrence, 56, Is Dead; Headed School for Young Artists
Jeffrey Lawrence, headmaster of the Professional Children's School in Manhattan, which teaches young performers and young people studying or careers in the arts, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 56 and lived on the Upper West Side and in Stony Creek, Conn.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus, said his companion, Harold S. Spitzer.


See Ya Later


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Two Choreographers Share A Fondness for Abruptness  Merce Cunningham Studio
There were no stories in the new works Maja Lorkovic and Jody Sperling presented on Sunday night.
Nevertheless, the choreographers' love of abrupt movements made the performers resemble nervous people.
These dances could be called abstractions with the jitters.


Service Is Halted on Long Island Rail Road, Although Union Gives No Word on Strike
Service on the Long Island Rail Road came to a halt early this morning, a few minutes after a midnight strike deadline but without official word from the United Transportation Union or railroad management that a strike had begun.
Management negotiators made a new offer late Wednesday, said Edward Yule Jr., the general chairman of the 2,300-member union local.
He said he had spoken twice to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo by telephone after midnight, as well as to the Secretary of Labor, Robert B. Reich.


Study Finds No Implant-Disease Links
A new study of silicone breast implants has found no evidence that they cause connective tissue diseases or other illnesses.
This is the third large epidemiological study in the United States to find no harm from implants, leading some experts to say that if they cause any disease at all, it must be unusual or rare.
The study, published today in The New England Journal of Medicine, is generating a debate over the sort of medical evidence that courts have accepted in ruling that women were injured by implants.
The journal, in an editorial, also questioned the Food and Drug Administration's decision to remove implants from the market two years ago.


U.S. Says Empire Blue Cross Billed Improperly
Federal auditors said today that Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the biggest health insurer in New York State, owed the Government $200 million because it had improperly billed Medicare for claims that the company should have paid.
Empire is both a private insurer and a Government contractor, reviewing and paying claims to elderly people enrolled in Medicare.
While this arrangement is legal, it contains potential conflicts of interest, and the auditors said that Empire had shifted costs from its private lines of business to the Government.


Diner's Journal
A Caviar Bar
Now is not a good time to be a sturgeon.
Pollution and politics are not being kind to the Caspian Sea, home to 90 percent of the world's sturgeon.
They may be ugly, unlovable fish, but their eggs are the world's best caviar.
Now, on top of everything else, poachers are encroaching.
Each year the harvest is smaller.
This is sad news for caviar aficionados.
But there is good news as well: ever hopeful, America's largest distributor of caviar has just opened a tasting bar.
If you yearn to learn about caviar, this is the perfect place to discover the differences between beluga, osetra and sevruga.


Franklin D. Murphy, 78, Dies; Leader in Arts and Publishing
Franklin D. Murphy, a leader in medicine, higher education, the arts and publishing, died yesterday at the Medical Center of the University of California at Los Angeles.
He was 78.
He died of lung cancer, said Robert F. Erburu, who succeeded Dr.
Murphy as chairman, president and chief executive of the Times Mirror Company in Los Angeles.


Books of The Times; An Excess of Ego, With Echoes of Ford
The Devil's Own Work
By Alan Judd  115 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $17.
A looping, discursive narrative that's filled with mysterious foreshadowings.
A narrator who depicts himself as a naive, fuzzy sort of guy, uncertain of the truth of the events he's relating.
Two couples, linked to each another by adultery and deception.
A disturbing series of events, culminating in death and emotional disorder.
Each of these elements can be found in Ford Madox Ford's famous 1915 novel, "The Good Soldier." Each of them can also be found in Alan Judd's new novella, "The Devil's Own Work," a meticulously written story that stands, at once, as a sly homage to Ford and as a chilling little piece of fiction on its own.


A Retailer's Home-Grown Success
Even if Rose Blumkin, the 100-year-old founder of the Nebraska Furniture Mart, stopped showing up every day to sell carpets, the company would still qualify as one of the most unusual retailing enterprises in the nation.
While Mrs.
B., as everyone around here knows her, continues to zip around the Furniture Mart's outlet store on her three-wheeled cart, her grandsons are successfully bucking the common wisdom that big retailers cannot prosper without expanding beyond their original location.


Prenatal Testing for H.I.V. Hasn't Worked in New York State
To the Editor:
Re "The Baby Bill" by Anna Quindlen (column, June 8), on a New York State bill proposing testing of newborns for human immunodeficiency virus: As director of the pediatric AIDS program at Harlem Hospital, I can share some information about the testing program at our center.


Commercial Metals Co.(CMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Art; Simple Hardware, Complex Effects
Bill Viola's video installation "Slowly Turning Narrative," at the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton, consists of just two video projectors, a large revolving screen mirrored on one side, and an audio tape with a text of vaguely biblical import.
But it engulfs the viewer in a disorienting swirl of images and meanings that touch on life and death and the nature of visual perception.
It provides an impressive glimpse of the artist who will represent the United States at the Venice Biennale next summer and who also has one of the inaugural displays at the American Center in Paris, which opened on June 11.
Mr.
Viola, who was born in Flushing, Queens, in 1951, began working with video in the early 1970's, when the medium was in its infancy.
He came to it not from painting or sculpture, as most video artists of the period did, but from electronic music, which he studied at Syracuse University.
Since then, he has moved from making elaborately edited videotapes to an almost exclusive concentration on video installations in which his tapes, often of himself and his family, are projected into the viewer's space with increasingly complex results.


At the Bar; Joe Camel takes his lumps at the hands of a California lawyer.
Long before he started peddling Big Macs, Fred Flintstone pushed Winstons and anti-smokers sat still.
But since R. J. Reynolds began using another cartoon character, Joe Camel, to push its cigarettes, the company has not had a moment's peace.
Thus far, the tobacco giant has been able to swat away complaints that the tuxedo-clad, piano-playing, sunglasses-sporting Joe Camel -- a "smooth character" in English-speaking neighborhoods, "un tipo suave" for Spanish speakers -- is a cynical attempt to charm, and hook, impressionable children.
The Federal Trade Commission recently declined to attack the debonaire dromedary, which is said to have been patterned after Don Johnson of "Miami Vice" and James Bond.


CHRONICLE
Every time she sees the new documentary about her husband, "Southern Justice: The Murder of Medgar Evers," MYRLIE EVERS finds it a bit less difficult to watch.
The film, which was made by the BBC and will be shown on HBO on July 11, was screened for invited guests in Washington last week and in New York on Wednesday, and is to be shown at a preview in Los Angeles on Tuesday.
"The first time in Washington was very difficult and very emotional for me," said Mrs.
Evers, who was interviewed for five hours by the BBC for the film.
"I had to remove myself from the film and try to critique it, to find something wrong with it, to keep myself from bursting into tears. Last night was easier. I had one of my sons on my right side, and one on my left."


Handleman Co.(HDL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Exodus Continues: CBS's Brown Joins Fox
JAMES BROWN, the CBS Sports play-by-play announcer, has reached an agreement with Fox Sports to co-host its football studio show this fall, his agent, BOB ROSEN, said yesterday.
The hiring, which has been expected for several weeks, makes Brown the latest CBS broadcaster to move to Fox, following JOHN MADDEN, PAT SUMMERALL, TERRY BRADSHAW, MATT MILLEN and DICK STOCKTON.
On the Fox show, Brown will primarily deliver news and narrate highlights.
He will work with Bradshaw, the co-host, and the analysts HOWIE LONG and JIMMY JOHNSON.


Winnebago Industries(WGO,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  CLINTON WEIGHS KOREAN OFFER  President Clinton met with his top advisers to consider Pentagon proposals to bolster American troops in South Korea.
At a news conference, he held out the possibility that a new diplomatic offer by North Korea might lead to a resolution of the crisis over the North's suspected nuclear weapons program.
A1  CARTER MEETS PYONGYANG LEADER  Former President Jimmy Carter met with North Korea's reclusive President, Kim Il Sung, and reported that the leader was now willing to allow two United Nations inspectors and their equipment to remain at a disputed nuclear site.
A10


Lawyers Freed By Egyptians; 9 Others Held
The Egyptian authorities released 10 lawyers today but renewed detention orders on 9 others who were jailed for taking part in a march protesting the death of a lawyer in police custody, attorneys and human rights officials said.
The move came two days after five more lawyers were arrested by plainclothes security agents as part of a crackdown aimed at crippling the powerful bar association and ending its protests over the treatment of lawyers who represent Muslim militants.


Review/Film; Wolf Bites Man; Man Sheds His Civilized Coat
All of us experience the occasional touch of beastliness, but Will Randall's case is something special.
For Will, a suave, well-respected New York book editor, it would be helpful to have an animal urge or two.
Polished and civilized as he is, Will has no self-protective instincts when it comes to the laws of the jungle, professional variety.
And he needs some.
There are times, as the first hour of "Wolf" makes enjoyably clear, when going for the jugular is exactly the right etiquette in corporate life.
So it's almost a boon for Will when his car hits an animal in Vermont one night.
Getting out to investigate, Will is bitten by a wolf, and the short-terms results are remarkably salutary.
He returns to his office with strange new powers nicely suited to the business world.
His senses are more acute, his energy revitalized.
He now has the advantage of being able to see, hear and sniff out whatever sneakiness is going on behind his back.


Mabou Journal; Nova Scotia Hears the Lilting 'Gibberish' Again
To the Highland Scottish immigrants of the early 19th century, Cape Breton's brooding hills and misty lakes and streams were strikingly similar to the land they left behind.
The Highlanders farmed the new land, fished the waters and brought their fast fiddle tunes, stomping dance steps and tall tales about walking herrings and fair-haired priests who look up at the sky so much they get stuck in it.


D'Amato Defending Remarkable One-Day Profit
Almost every day for weeks, New York Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato has risen on the Senate floor to deride Hillary Rodham Clinton's profits in commodity trades and exhort his colleagues to approve hearings to examine the investments.
Now it turns out that Mr.
D'Amato has also made a remarkable profit in a speculative foray.





Ovitz Firm Gets AT&amp;T Executive
The Creative Artists Agency said today that one of AT&amp;T's highest-ranking executives would join the powerful talent agency in an unexpected move that substantially advances the convergence of entertainment, information and communications.
The executive, Robert Kavner, 50, is the former chief financial officer of the AT&amp;T Corporation and now heads the telecommunications giant's expanding multimedia efforts.
When he joins C.A.A. on July 1, Mr.
Kavner will be in charge of seeking opportunities for directors, writers and performers in the fast-growing arena linking personal computers to on-line services involving, at the outset, education, shopping, films and video games.


A City of Sharp Elbows Minds Its Manners
The glass-curtained door swung open, and the couple that the little crowd outside had been waiting for -- he in a gray suit, she in a beige kimono -- emerged from the town house.
Wordlessly, the couple waved.
Wordlessly, the crowd waved back.
Then Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko of Japan stepped into their limousine, and suddenly the crowd broke into golf-course applause, the controlled clapping that does not disturb another's concentration.
It was so, well, polite.


Christopher Chen; Engineer, 73, Led Shipping Company
Dr.
Christopher Chie-Yuan Chen, chairman of the Energy Transportation Group, a shipping company, died on Tuesday at the North Shore Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
Dr.
Chen, who lived in Far Hills, N.J., was 73.
The cause was complications after surgery, said a statement from his sons, Kimball and Kendall Chen.


Yellowstone Will Shelter Wolves Again
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt has given final approval to a plan to reintroduce about 30 gray wolves into Yellowstone National Park and central Idaho, a decision that is being hailed by some environmentalist groups as a victory for wildlife but is being denounced by ranchers who fear for their livestock.
Other groups, like the Sierra Club, have expressed disappointment with the policy, which does not give the wolves protection as an endangered species even though wolves elsewhere have that protection.


Games Begin, Even if Fever Isn't Spreading
The World Cup arrives Friday to be greeted by a pavement-buckling heat wave, international anticipation and general American indifference.
A worldwide viewing audience of 750 million is expected to watch the World Cup opener here between Germany, the defending champion, and Bolivia.
The nation's First Jogger, President Clinton, will attend the match at Soldier Field, along with German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Bolivian President Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada, a onetime soccer player who said he would sit in the stands "suffering, shrinking" if Bolivia played poorly.


Who Took Towels? Clinton Aides Have Alibis
As the scandal known around town as "Towel-Hook" unfolded, White House officials scrambled to get their alibis straight.
The President's senior adviser, George Stephanopoulos, said he was too groggy by the time he got to sleep at 2 A.M. to notice any bed linens.


CHRONICLE
Can we shop?
Sure we can, but come mid-July, not with JOAN RIVERS on her home shopping show.
QRT Enterprises announced on Wednesday that it would cease production today of the syndicated daily show "Can We Shop?" The segments that have already been taped will be broadcast until July 15, so callers have one more month to buy, buy, buy.
That was not the only bad news for the comedienne this week: She also learned that her Broadway show, "Sally Marr . . . and Her Escorts," will close on Sunday.


Times Co. to Sell McCall's and Family Circle
The United States publishing arm of Bertelsmann A.G., the German media giant, said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire a group of magazines from The New York Times Company that are directed primarily at the women's market.
The best known of the publications are Family Circle and McCall's, but the unit that is being sold, the Women's Magazines Group, also includes Fitness, American HomeStyle, Child, Mary Emmerling's Country, Custom Builder and others.


Soccer for Children: An Education in Team Play
They form a neat and perfect order, those four pictures lined up on Ben's wall and two on Alex's: each one a group of smiling boys (only an occasional girl), staring intently at the camera, a soccer ball at their center.
The pictures on these walls could not be more misleading, since there is no order to soccer at all.
The day each team posed for the photographer was the first and only time any of these teams formed a straight line, or stood still for a moment.
I remember soccer as four years of chaos: glorious, earnest chaos, but chaos nonetheless, with children moving constantly, in packs, like swarms of bees, across the field.


Arafat Appears Reluctant to Shift Base to Jericho
With each passing day, it seems, a new reason is added for the delay in Yasir Arafat's arrival to formally take over the administration of Palestinian rule in the Gaza Strip and in Jericho.
This morning Khalid Musmar, identified as the press officer of the Palestinian embassy in Amman, said the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman may further delay his much anticipated arrival in Jericho because Israel is preventing Palestinians from completing an airfield that would allow his helicopter to land and take off.


Police Move With Care In the Simpson Case
The Los Angeles city police and the office of the county's District Attorney have every reason to move cautiously as they marshal evidence in the fatal stabbing of O. J. Simpson's former wife and a friend of hers last Sunday night.
The authorities here have failed to win convictions in some sensational cases in recent years, among them the McMartin Preschool child-molestation trial, the first trial of police officers who beat Rodney G. King and the murder trial of the Menendez brothers.
Indeed, the current District Attorney, Gil Garcetti, won office two years ago in part because of the prosecutorial failures of his predecessor, Ira Reiner.


Italian Team Brings Town A Taste of Soccer Frenzy
This little village on a south-facing bench of the Watchung mountains has been in a tizzy since the Italian national soccer team, training for the World Cup, settled into its camp 10 days ago behind a cordon of security guards and yellow police ribbon at the Pingry boarding school near here.
The tight security, foreclosing even a glimpse of Roberto Baggio or Franco Baresi or any other paragon of the Azzurri, as the team is known, did not deter carloads of sightseeing Italians, Italian-Americans and, for some reason, Brazilians who daily make the pilgrimage to central New Jersey in search of their heroes.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CHEMICAL BANKING CORP., New York, extended its $330 million offer to buy all the shares of Margaretten Financial Corp., Perth Amboy, N.J., a mortgage company, until June 30.


Poor Mother, Poor Child
Every year nearly 400,000 Americans are born to girls with no high school diplomas, no husbands and few prospects.
Eighty percent of those babies will know poverty and, more likely than not, be cruelly affected by its pathologies.
Many of them will replicate their mothers' lives -- and become single parents themselves.
Soon they will be responsible for one out of every three children born in this country.
But not financially responsible.
Last year benefits for families begun by poor teen-agers cost the United States $34 billion.
The price those young mothers and their children have paid for being born into poverty is beyond counting.


Repairing the School Repair Team
Chancellor Ramon Cortines is cutting the staff of workers who repair and maintain New York City schools.
That may seem like madness when the schools are dirty and crumbling.
But it is a sensible place to seek necessary head-count reductions -- and a step toward rehabilitating a troubled division.
Nearly 2,600 workers at the Division of School Facilities are responsible for cleaning and upkeep of the city's more than 1,000 school buildings.
They include 1,000 custodians, 800 skilled tradesmen like carpenters and electricians and 770 administrators who plan, analyze and inspect major repairs.


Woman's Next Round Is in Federal Court
No one would argue that ad sales is hard work.
But Vivian Mondello says she took a real beating on the job.
In a lawsuit filed this week in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Ms.
Mondello, 30, contends that her nose was broken by a co-worker after she was forced to box him as part of an ad sales campaign in 1993.


A Gay Festival Banishes Silence
IN the transcendent final scene of Tony Kushner's play "Perestroika," three characters, one of whom is dying of AIDS, sit on the rim of Bethesda Fountain in Central Park and reflect on the end of the cold war, the millennium and the future of gay life in the face of the epidemic.
Reflecting on his own imminent death, the dying character Prior Walter offers a benediction and a prophecy.


Consumers Put a Brake on Economic Expansion
America's consumers are starting to cut back their spending, slowing the rate of the economy's expansion.
The drop in consumer spending, economists say, is the result of higher interest rates, declining savings and the evaporation of pent-up demand as families have splurged on cars and other goods over the last year.


A Revival at Belmont For Stars Who Stayed
Outside of Go for Gin and a few other hometown heroes, the 3-year-old stars who commanded New York's racing stage last week were gone yesterday, resting or girding for the return matches that will decide the 1994 championships.
And they were leaving the scene to seven senior stars who will join tomorrow in reviving one of the country's historic races, the 106-year-old Brooklyn Handicap.
It was run for the first time in 1887, and since then it has been run at four distances at five tracks, and it has been won by Seabiscuit, Whirlaway, Tom Fool, Buckpasser, Damascus, three times by Discovery, three times by Forego.
For the last three years, it has been run for no discernible reason in the cold of November at Aqueduct.
But tomorrow, it's being restored to its place as one of the three races that constitute New York's Handicap Triple.


Navratilova's Bid Ends After 11 Eastbourne Titles
With the seagulls shrieking in apparent disbelief, top-seeded Martina Navratilova made a final and unsuccessful attempt to defend her Volkswagen Cup title today at this seaside resort where she had collected 11 titles during two decades of perfect attendance at her preferred Wimbledon warm-up event.
Navratilova had her bid for a 12th Eastbourne title spoiled, 6-7 (5-7), 6-2, 6-2, by 39th-ranked Meredith McGrath, a comeback case at age 23, who used her full-throttle returns to bruise the mainstay of Navratilova's game, her serve.
Last year McGrath, a former Stanford standout who now resides in Switzerland, returned from an 18-month injury timeout to a ranking of No. 610, which she had improved to 66 by December 1993.


METRO DIGEST
LONG ISLAND RAIL ROAD WORKERS WALK OUT
The Long Island Rail Road's conductors and track and car maintainence workers went on strike early today, leaving more than 100,000 rush-hour commuters to compete for space on already crowded subways and some of the nation's most congested highways.
A1.


Market Place; A biotechnology discovery leaves investors underwhelmed.
ON Wednesday, Genentech Inc. and the Zymogenetics Corporation separately announced one of the most significant discoveries ever in biotechnology.
Yesterday, the market shrugged.
Researchers at Genentech and Zymogenetics, a unit of Novo-Nordisk A.S. of Denmark, published papers in the British scientific journal Nature disclosing their discovery of thrombopoietin, a hormone that stimulates the production of blood platelets, the cells that make blood clot.
Platelets are destroyed by chemotherapy or radiation treatments for cancer, a limitation of such therapy, so a compound that could increase their production would find a ready market.


G.O.P. IN THE HOUSE IS TRYING TO BLOCK HEALTH CARE BILL
At the urging of Representative Newt Gingrich, their deputy leader, House Republicans are trying to keep health care legislation from reaching the floor in a form that could pass.
Despite criticism from Democrats and even from one Republican who accused him of putting partisan politics first, Mr.
Gingrish said today that Republicans should vote against amendments that might broaden the support for a bill that the House Ways and Means Committee is considering.


Inside Art
Another Warhol Motion
While New York's art galleries and auction houses are settling into a slower summer pace, things at the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts are heating up.
This week the foundation filed a motion in the Manhattan Surrogate's Court requesting that Surrogate Eve Preminger disqualify herself from ruling in the two-part suit over the Warhol estate brought by Edward W. Hayes.
Mr.
Hayes, the estate's former lawyer, is seeking up to $11.5 million in additional fees from the foundation under a contract he signed with Frederick W. Hughes, Warhol's business manager and the executor of the estate.
The foundation said in its motion that the "court's impartiality might reasonably be questioned."


I.B.M. Forms Networking Division
I.B.M. said yesterday that it had formed a new division to develop applications and services for both business and consumer computer networks.
The new division, which will be called Networked Application Services, brings together many of I.B.M.'s existing development projects in such varied realms as multimedia, electronic trading, Internet services, video teleconferencing, software for use by networked groups, interactive information kiosks and electronic publishing.


School Offices Raided in U.S. Aid Inquiry
Beginning an investigation into a possible misuse of Federal, state and city funds, United States postal agents yesterday confiscated reams of files from the headquarters of a Brooklyn school district and from a private Hasidic school within the district, officials said.
More than a dozen agents of the Postal Inspection Service descended on the two sites of the United Talmudical Academy of Williamsburg and the main office of Community School District 14, seizing files and sealing the door to the district's headquarters.


Arafat Appears Reluctant to Shift Base to Jericho
With each passing day, it seems, a new reason is added for the delay in Yasir Arafat's arrival to formally take over the administration of Palestinian rule in the Gaza Strip and in Jericho.
This morning Khalid Musmar, identified as the press officer of the Palestinian embassy in Amman, said the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman may further delay his much anticipated arrival in Jericho because Israel is preventing Palestinians from completing an airfield that would allow his helicopter to land and take off.


Clinton May Add G.I.'s in Korea While Remaining Open to Talks
President Clinton met with top advisers today to consider Pentagon recommendations to bolster American forces in South Korea, but he later held out the possibility that a new diplomatic offer by North Korea might lead to a resolution of the crisis over the North's suspected nuclear weapons program.
At a news conference after a day of meetings, Mr.
Clinton said his Administration would be willing to participate in high-level talks with the North Koreans if they agreed to freeze their nuclear weapons program.


Holyfield Says Doctor May Ring the Bell
EVANDER HOLYFIELD left a hospital yesterday after tests on his heart, and said his doctor has given him hope he can return to the ring.
Holyfield was discharged from Crawford Long Hospital in Atlanta after being briefed by the cardiologist DOUGLAS MORRIS on the results of the tests Wednesday.
Morris said the tests found some improvement in his heart condition, which Holyfield claims was cured last week by an evangelist.
But neither the boxer nor hospital officials would elaborate on the improvement.
He said his two-month-old retirement could soon end: "If God will, I will."


U.S. Juries Grow Tougher On Those Seeking Damages
In this land of big lawsuits, the growth of multimillion-dollar jury awards has been halted: juries nationwide have become markedly tougher on people who sue doctors, insurance companies and other deep-pockets defendants, siding less often with plaintiffs.
And there is evidence that the size of the awards has leveled off, too.
In 1992, plaintiffs won 52 percent of the personal injury cases decided by jury verdicts, down from 63 percent in 1989, according to Jury Verdict Research, a legal publishing firm in Horsham, Pa., that is the only one nationally to compile such data.
And there are indications that the downward trend continued last year.


In the Orbit of the World Cup
Teams from Argentina, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Mexico, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Romania, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United States are competing in the World Cup soccer competition, which runs through July 17.
Here is a sampling of activities planned in the New York metropolitan region that may be of interest to World Cup fans.
Today  "A CELEBRATION OF PELE'S AMERICAN YEARS," South Street Seaport, Fulton Market Building, second floor, Fulton and Front Streets, lower Manhattan.
An exhibition of 30 photographs of the noted soccer player by the sports photographer George Tiedemann.
Hours: daily, 24 hours.
Through July 17.
Free.
Information: (212) 732-7678.


Washington Talk; Play It Again, Congress. This Time, Whitewater.
The hearings on the Whitewater affair in the Senate and House of Representatives this summer will not be fact-finding sessions so much as a political scrimmage.
Any doubt about that was dispelled this week when the Democrats, by a vote in the Senate and by an agreement of party leaders in the House, insisted that the hearings be limited to aspects of the case not likely to embarrass President Clinton and his wife, Hillary.
Republicans responded with shouts of cover-up.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT CLINTON, the target of jokes for wearing skimpy jogging shorts that reveal pale legs, unveiled more conservative garb on his morning run yesterday.
The President wore a pair of gray shorts that reached to just above his knee, a distinct change from his customary mid-thigh length, Reuters reported.
He completed the outfit with a dark blue T-shirt and a red baseball cap.


GenCorp (GY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Prenatal Testing for H.I.V. Hasn't Worked in New York State; Mandatory Counseling
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen clearly shows (column, June 8) that the most effective way to get babies who are infected with the human immunodeficiency virus identified and -- more important -- into care is mandatory counseling of all pregnant women and mothers of newborns, with testing based on the mother's consent.


EXEL Ltd.(XL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Art in Review
Amy Sillman  Lipton Owens Company 53 Mercer Street SoHo  Through June 25
Amy Sillman's richly colored and configured paintings fall into a loose category in which the decorative and the political collide and collude, usually with a shove from cartoons.
Fellow travelers include Lari Pittman, Elena Sisto and Margaret Curtis and, from a completely different direction, Sue Williams.
It's a bit of a problem that Ms.
Sillman's contemporaries and influences (who may also include Carroll Dunham) are so visible in her work.
Nonetheless, her new paintings and works on paper show an increased command and visual strength.


Latins Envision a Single Trade Zone
Giving a sharp boost to free trade in the Americas, the leaders of Latin America's 19 largest nations have agreed here to fuse the region's various free trade pacts into one Latin American free trade zone.
"The final goal of this process should be the merging of the different integration schemes," said a statement approved Wednesday night by Latin American heads of state and government, who gathered here with the leaders of Spain and Portugal for a meeting devoted to "trade and integration."


For Children
Soccer is a game where every child has a chance to be a hotshot: just kick the ball and run like heck.
At least that's what children think when they first play, and more are signing up every day.
Soccer is moving faster than the speed of light into basketball territory as the most popular sport for children 12 and under, says the Soccer Industry Council of America.
That's because soccer is fast, uncomplicated and inexpensive and can be played at a young age and by all sizes.
In 1993, 3.6 million children under 12 played 25 games or more, according to the council.
California leads the states in total soccer participation (children and adults), but New York is in second place, and the New York City metropolitan area is the United States metropolitan area with the highest number of soccer players over all.


Hostage Is Now Suspect in Armed Escape, Lawyer Says
The state grand jury investigating the escape of two New York City killers from an upstate psychiatric hospital three weeks ago has focused its inquiry on whether the hospital aide the men led away at gunpoint was an accomplice in the escape, the aide's lawyer said yesterday.
The aide, Robert J. Kamrowski, 46, a former New York State Police officer who is a treatment aide at the Mid-Hudson Psychiatric Center in Orange County, has told the police that he was a hostage of Herbert Arnold and John Casablanca when they escaped on May 28, and was made to drive through the streets of New York with a gun at his head.


Giuliani and Council Deadlocked on Budget
Even as their aides started talking again, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council remained deadlocked yesterday in their effort to approve a budget for the new fiscal year.
In particular, the two sides remained divided over how to cut the size of New York City's work force.
The negotiations, which broke down Wednesday, have stalled primarily over the Council's attempt to save some jobs from immediate elimination, particularly 1,200 positions in the Department of Social Services, officials said yesterday.


Johnny Comes Marching Home
Names will adorn the backs of jerseys for the World Cup, an American conceit that may benefit the players as much as the fans.
Especially John Harkes, who plays in England and thus has had to follow the United States national team by way of teletype, kinescope and carrier pigeon.
This year, Harkes's only official act with the Americans has been the team picture.
He had been away so long, perhaps no one recognized him.
Or his accent.
He went to England as a Jersey guy and came back as David Frost.


Renovations Begin for an East Harlem Library


Women's Cup Team Now in the Spotlight
Move over, men. Women are officially in the America's Cup.
America
yesterday formally introduced its all-female team in San Diego.
The 23-member group includes four Olympic medalists, rowers, weight lifters and even a star from the "American Gladiators" television show.


On My Mind; Saving The President
Representative Charles Schumer of New York calls the Administration's decision "unwise, untimely and unusually dangerous."
Representative Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey calls the decision "surrender and retreat."


Kidnapper Says He Built Cell for Girl
The man who kidnapped Katie Beers pleaded guilty today, admitting in court that he built a secret dungeon in his backyard specifically for her and then locked her inside it for 16 days.
Prosecutors said that to spare Katie, now 11, from testifying, they had agreed to a plea-bargain by the kidnapper, John Esposito, that could cut 10 years off his sentence.


Accounts
*
British Sky Broadcasting, London, to Bartle Bogle Hegarty, London, to handle its account, previously handled in-house and by Zenith Media Worldwide, London.
Billings were estimated at $21 million. *
Zing Systems L.P., Denver, a developer of interactive television products, to CKS Partners, Cupertino, Calif., as the first agency for its $10 million consumer marketing account.


Running for Cover on Whitewater
Senate Democrats are rushing toward a partisan cover-up of the Whitewater affair.
They have voted to hold narrowly circumscribed hearings in the Senate Banking Committee, which they dominate.
They are therefore likely to prolong the agony of the President they hope to protect.
By a 56-to-43 vote, the Senate decided to limit hearings next month to three elements of the case.
One is the U.S.
Park Police's investigation into the death of Vincent Foster Jr., the Deputy White House Counsel.
Two, the way in which members of the White House staff disposed of Mr.
Foster's Whitewater files.
Three, whether White House officials tried to manipulate Treasury Department investigations into Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan.


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing how heat and humidity work together to produce "apparent temperature" positioned the scale of actual temperatures incorrectly.
A corrected chart appears today on page B4.


Choice of New Ukraine Premier Raises Questions About Reform
Parliament voted to approve a new Prime Minister today, a Soviet-style die-hard chosen by President Leonid M. Kravchuk.
The choice presents serious questions about the President's commitment to a market economy in the midst of his re-election campaign.
Mr.
Kravchuk proposed Vitaly A. Masol, the 65-year-old former Prime Minister of Soviet Ukraine, as a concession to his Communist and Socialist opponents in exchange for their support in his uphill battle in the presidential election on June 26.
Mr.
Masol is an advocate of a state-controlled economy and closer ties with Russia.


Judge Rebukes Citadel's Move For Mistrial in Sex-Bias Case
A Federal district judge impatiently dismissed The Citadel's motion for a mistrial in the sex-discrimination case against the state college today.
Then he threatened the defense with sanctions under a legal rule that he said he had never invoked in his 15 years on the bench.
Speaking sharply to the defense and dismissing an 86-page memorandum calling for a mistrial as "totally frivolous," the judge, C. Weston Houck, heard closing arguments in the case today and said he was likely to rule next month in the lawsuit filed by Shannon Faulkner, a woman seeking admission to the corps of cadets at the all-male military college.


It's Easy: Just Flip The Ball To Key
Buck Showalter has a remedy for the headaches that can afflict managers who accept their paychecks from George Steinbrenner.
After a loss, simply take two aspirin, remove the telephone jack from the wall and pray that Jimmy Key is starting the next day.
Tonight, Key again transformed Showalter's headaches into happiness.
Key is merely pitching his second season with the Yankees, but he is rapidly exhausting all adjectives to describe how clever and crafty he is and how important and influential he is to New York.
Erase Key from the splendid picture being painted in the Bronx and the Yankees might be an ordinary team.
But with Key, the Yankees can be overwhelming as they were tonight in humbling Baltimore by 6-1.


Music Fails to Soothe Egypt-Israel Strain
It's only rock 'n' roll -- in most places, that is, except the Middle East, where even a pop concert can turn into a political issue.
So it was for Peter Gabriel, the British performer, who thought he might make a gesture for elusive regional harmony with a concert on Saturday night at Taba, Egypt, the Red Sea resort on the border with Israel and the site of peace talks between the Israelis and the Palestinians last fall.


Players Union Delays Vote on a Strike Date
The executive board of the Players Association did not set a strike date today, but it did put in motion the process by which a date could be set.
Meeting for the first time since the owners presented their proposal for a salary cap, the board decided to have players on all 28 teams vote early next month on whether to authorize the 32-man board to set a strike date.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.30
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.08
4.11
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.43
4.49
3.14
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.03
7.08
5.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.35
7.39
6.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.18
8.23
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.24
6.19
5.82
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


GENERALS OPPOSE COMBAT BY WOMEN
Senior Army generals have forced the civilian Army Secretary to retreat from an ambitious plan to open thousands of combat positions that are now closed to women.
The opposition was so great that Secretary Togo D. West Jr. has withdrawn his recommendations to Defense Secretary William J. Perry and is now huddling with the angry officers to work out a compromise.


Sports of The Times; Arnie's Last Open Battle
AS he walked onto the sixth tee, he was two over par.
Another golfer would have been greeted with silence, if not disdain.
But Arnold Palmer is not just another golfer.
Applause burst from the spectators at the United States Open at Oakmont Country Club, just up the Pennsylvania Turnpike from Latrobe where he grew up and still lives.
With a wave and a wink, he strolled over near the green water cooler and glanced into his gallery of friends, neighbors and employees.


Let the Games, and the Lobbying, Begin; Thousands Gather for Gay Sports Festival and 25th Anniversary of Stonewall Uprising
The largest and most welcomed gay and lesbian gathering in the city's history has begun drawing scores of thousands of homosexual athletes and tourists to town for the Gay Games sporting and cultural festival and for the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising that first signaled gay people's resolve to fight for public tolerance.
"We're all over the place," said Jay Hill, executive director of the fourth quadrennial Gay Games that begin Saturday with men and women from 44 nations competing around the metropolitan area in various arenas and pools, on football fields and ice rinks, and across a Hudson climbers' rock face, too.


Strange's Form as Clear As Frown on His Face
Curtis Strange was wearing the look, the steely, flinty, get-out-of-my-way look that once was a permanent part of his on-course persona.
It was the first round of the United States Open, and Strange was back in his comfort zone and his element.
Finally.
He has been gone for a while.
Strange, who won back-to-back Opens in 1988 and 1989, then went into a protracted twilight sleep from which he only recently has awakened.
The signs of his return were as plain as the frown on his face.


Man Held In 2 Fires That Hurt 34
An angry friend of the superintendent of two downtown warehouses was arrested yesterday and charged with deliberately setting fire to the buildings in which 34 firefighters were injured in late May and early June.
After finding oil splashed on steel fire escapes and interior stairs of one of the buildings, Fire Commissioner Howard Safir had said it looked like an arsonist had spread the oil, like a liquid booby trap, to injure firefighters as they rushed in to fight the blaze.


Reyna's Status for Opener Up in Air
When the United States team practiced in Rochester, Mich., yesterday, getting ready for its opening match against Switzerland tomorrow, Claudio Reyna did not participate.
Reyna, the 20-year-old midfielder who has come on strong for the American team in recent tuneup games, pulled a hamstring on June 8.
He had to limit himself to stretching and running.
"Right now, if the game was today, I couldn't play," said Reyna, who is from Springfield, N.J., and was the college player of the year in 1992 and 1993.
"I don't know if Saturday is a possibility of me playing. It's still up in the air."


Abroad at Home; Who's in Charge Here?
If there was one thing we expected from Bill Clinton's Presidency, it was a common-sense respect for civil liberties.
No longer, we thought, would Government lawyers automatically try to assert their power over individuals when there was no real Government interest at stake.
That expectation has been dashed.
Or so we have to conclude from two current cases of Government overreaching: outrageous cases.


Don't Exaggerate North Korean Military Threat; The Wider Context
To the Editor:
Your sterling June 4 editorial calling for United Nations sanctions against North Korea shows how even the most reasonable people can be misled by righteous indignation.
Unfortunately, such a sentiment is wholly misplaced when dealng with a situation as complicated -- and explosive -- as that on the Korean peninsula.


The World Cup's Universe
Soccer is the world's most popular sport, and its World Cup an extraordinary blend of nations and nationalities.
Of the 22 men on the U.S. squad, 7 were born in other countries.
The Brazilian team's superstar Romario plays professionally for Barcelona, the Spanish champion, where he is top scorer.
Greece's head coach is a U.S. citizen, America's is Yugoslav, Nigeria's Dutch, and Saudi Arabia has Argentine co-coaches who do not speak Arabic.
No matter.
Soccer is a world language.
It is still not well understood here, but after 52 World Cup games on the ESPN and ABC-TV networks, even Americans could develop some fluency.


Cigarette Safety: Research Was Started but Then Stopped
The history of smoking research at the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation appears similar to that at other major tobacco companies, as shown by documents released in court cases against them.
After sponsoring research and extensive work on filters, additives and alternative "safer" cigarettes, all three of the leading companies -- R. J. Reynolds and Philip Morris, in addition to Brown &amp; Williamson -- closed their laboratories on the advice of company lawyers.
Philip Morris did so in 1970 and R. J. Reynolds in 1983.
A British laboratory with ties to Brown &amp; Williamson was closed in 1974.


Felix Partz, 49, Conceptual Artist
Felix Partz, a member of the three-man Canadian art collaborative General Idea, died on June 5 at his home in Toronto.
He was 49.
The cause was AIDS, said A. A. Bronson, the group's surviving member.
Jorge Zontal, the group's third member, died of AIDS in February.


France Seeks Partners for Rwandan Venture
Arguing that the world must act to halt the massacres in Rwanda, France struggled today to persuade other European and some African nations to join it in a "humanitarian" military intervention if a planned United Nations force does not arrive there soon.
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe, who is to discuss the initiative during visits to the Ivory Coast and Senegal this weekend, said any intervention would be of "limited duration" and would aim only to protect civilians threatened with extermination and would not impose a political solution.


Horry Is Down but Not Out for Game 5
Robert Horry, the Houston Rockets' forward who missed the fourth quarter of Game 4 Wednesday night after a hard foul by Anthony Mason, is expected to play tonight when the National Basketball Association finals resume at Madison Square Garden.
According to the Rockets, Horry had X-rays taken of his back and his right wrist yesterday morning, and both were negative.
Rudy Tomjanovich, the coach, said Horry participated in all of the team's practice drills later in the day.


Carter Optimistic After North Korea Talks
Former President Jimmy Carter emerged from his first session of direct talks in Pyongyang with the North Korean President, Kim Il Sung, on Thursday and declared that the 82-year-old leader was now willing to allow two United Nations inspectors and their equipment to remain at the site where the North is storing its latest harvest of nuclear fuel.
After a three-hour talk, to be followed by another meeting today, Mr.
Carter said that "I see this commitment as a very important step in resolving the crisis" with North Korea.
Ostensibly visiting as a private citizen, Mr.
Carter called on the United States to consider suspending the imposition of sanctions against the North until it had a chance to consider fully what he called some "compromise proposals" on tracking the North's nuclear weapons.


James Demske, 72, A Jesuit Priest Who Led Canisius College
The Rev.
James M. Demske, a Jesuit priest and an expert on Existentialist philosophy who led an expansion of Canisius College in Buffalo as its president from 1966 until last year, died on Wednesday at Sister's Hospital in Buffalo.
He was 72 and lived in Buffalo.
The cause was complications from leukemia, said Janet Holler, a spokeswoman for the college.


Presbyterians Try to Resolve Long Dispute
As soon as the vote flashed on the convention hall screens, several thousand Presbyterians meeting here today gasped, rose, clasped hands and began singing, "Praise God from whom all blessings flow."
They were elated because their fellow delegates, at a General Assembly in which deep theological differences were evident, had given nearly unanimous endorsement to a report meant to resolve one of the church's most provocative disputes: the fallout from a November conference that invoked a female personification of God.


New Yorkers Go Toe to Toe
ON 18th Avenue in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, the Italian flags are flying.
That's not unusual.
Tuscany is only marginally more Italian than 18th Avenue.
But mingling with the Italian flags are the ones that read "Forza Italia," or "Go, Italy."
In dozens of delis and gift shops along the avenue, the front windows show the telltale signs of World Cup fever.
A discreet pennant here, a poster of the Italian soccer team there.
Over Ambrogio's import shop, a small banner flaps in the breeze: "Forza Italia -- Here We Go! World Cup '94."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Mike Devereaux, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Activated Jeffrey Hammonds, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.


Yemenis Flee Neighborhoods in Southern Port as Shells Kill 18 and Wound Dozens


Restaurants
Walking into La Goulue on an ordinary evening is like opening a book of Brassai photographs and stepping into the page.
Women, their hair like helmets, their faces perfect masks, put their heads together and whisper.
Their fingernails sparkle, their jewels shine.
The men's eyes languidly survey the room as they lean back, cigarettes in hand, puffing.
Smoke circles in the air, waiters scurry for the kitchen, Champagne spills.
This perfect re-creation of a Paris brasserie is not of this time or this place.
Unless, of course, David Caruso, star of "N.Y.P.D. Blue," happens to be sitting at a front table, wearing a baseball cap and looking as inconspicuous as a butler at a baseball game.


Review/Theater; Gay Guru Offers Advice For the Love-Locked
When we first meet Nan Bemiss, the middle-aged socialite heroine of "The Naked Truth," Paul Rudnick's new comedy at the WPA Theater, she's as stiff and brittle as her glazed, hurricane-proof hairdo.
Confronted with a Mapplethorpe-esque photograph of an immense phallus, she goes into agonies over naming the picture's subject.
Private parts, as her mother told her, should be private: they're a bit, she says, "like Australia -- a lovely place, but no one goes there."
It's all too clear what poor, inhibited Nan needs.
But who's going to teach her how to find it?
Springing prissy squares and patricians from the shackles of convention is a time-honored tradition in American comedy, rooted in a democratic optimism that embraces thorny, potentially troublesome elements of society.


INSIDE
Hollywood Gets AT&amp;T Talent
A top AT&amp;T executive will join Creative Artists Agency, Hollywood's most powerful talent agency.
The hiring reflects the convergence of the entertainment, information and communications businesses.
Page D1.
Admission in Girl's Abduction
The man who kidnapped Katie Beers admitted he locked her in a dungeon for 16 days.
The admission could cut 10 years off his sentence and spare the girl from testifying.
Page B1.
U.S.
Queries Haitians on Ship
Putting a new policy into effect, officials began interviewing 35 Haitians on a Navy ship in Jamaica to see if they qualified for asylum in the United States or other countries.
Page A3.
World Cup Kicks Off
The World Cup, the monthlong soccer tournament, begins today amid American indifference with Germany facing Bolivia in Chicago.
Page B9.


Executive Changes
FLORIDA WEST AIRLINES INC.
Miami, a cargo carrier, said its chairman and chief executive, Maury Joseph, had resigned to "pursue other outside business interests." James Heldenbrand, vice president, will serve as interim chief executive until Richard Haberly, the new president, adds the title of chief executive when audited financial statements are filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


The Years, And Putts, Fall Away At Open
Waves of heat rose from the fairways of Oakmont Country Club, and the two men appeared to be stepping out of a mirage.
Surely, that could not be Tom Watson, floating up the 18th fairway, three under par in the United States Open.
And surely, that could not be Jack Nicklaus, holing a 40-foot putt at the last hole, from one end of the slippery, ice-slick green to the other, to go two under par.
Surely it was, and surely he did.
Tom Watson, who has not won a golf tournament since 1987, has returned to Oakmont to settle an old score.
And Jack Nicklaus, 54 years old, has returned to the site of his first professional victory, to relive an old memory.


L.I.R.R. Workers Go on Strike; Commuters Brace for Gridlock
The Long Island Rail Road's conductors and maintenance workers went on strike early today, leaving more than 100,000 rush-hour commuters to compete for space on already crowded subways and highways.
The strike by the United Transportation Union began a little more than 24 hours after the end of a Federally imposed cooling-off period, and nearly two and a half years after the expiration of the last contract.
And it came despite the strong likelihood that Congress will step in and order the union back to work, as it did during the last strike at the railroad, in 1987.


Bonds Gain as Prices Of Commodities Drop
Prices of Treasury securities rose modestly yesterday after a drop in commodity prices.
The session was a reverse play of the previous day, when bond prices fell in the afternoon, erasing morning gains as investors grew concerned about inflation on a surge in commodities.
Yesterday, the price of the 30-year bond rose 15/32 , to 8628/32 .
Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction from price, fell to 7.35 percent, from 7.39 percent on Wednesday.
Before posting gains in the afternoon, the long bond had fallen as much as a half-point, to yield 7.45 percent.


Parade Route


Quest for Safer Cigarette Never Reached Goal
Increasingly aware of the health hazards of smoking in the 1960's, the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation made a good-faith effort to develop a safer cigarette.
But researchers were blocked at almost every turn, internal company documents show; the harder they looked, the more problems they found.
The company embarked on two major research projects.
One, a practical approach to a safer cigarette -- which company documents refer to as "a device for the controlled administration of nicotine" -- cut down sharply on the amount of tobacco and relied on heating rather than burning.
The other, a multifaceted research project, tried to isolate and identify the harmful components of smoke.


Arafat Appears Reluctant to Shift Base to Jericho
With each passing day, it seems, a new reason is added for the delay in Yasir Arafat's arrival to formally take over the administration of Palestinian rule in the Gaza Strip and in Jericho.
This morning Khalid Musmar, identified as the press officer of the Palestinian embassy in Amman, said the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman may further delay his much anticipated arrival in Jericho because Israel is preventing Palestinians from completing an airfield that would allow his helicopter to land and take off.


Bringing Back Wolves


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "SHE LOVES ME," Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 West 47th Street, Manhattan.
A revival of the 1963 musical, based on the play "Parfumerie" by Miklos Laszlo.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $65.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"TWILIGHT: LOS ANGELES, 1992," Cort Theater, 138 West 48th Street, Manhattan.
Anna Deavere Smith portrays more than 40 characters, using verbatim interviews with Rodney King, Reginald Denny, Daryl F. Gates and others involved in Mr.
King's court case and the subsequent riots.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $42.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.


New York Debates Its Rules For Committing Mentally Ill
After a decade in which thousands of mentally ill people -- some of them menacing, many of them pitiful -- have made their homes on New York City streets, momentum is building in support of proposals that would give health workers and mental health officials more authority to force people into treatment against their will.
In Albany, five bills are pending in the State Legislature that to varying degrees would make involuntary commitment easier.
At least one measure appears to have wide support from lawmakers: a bill that would place those released from mental hospitals under court order to take medication and get counseling -- or go back to the hospital for evaluation and possible commitment.


Woodstock Regeneration in Bethel Gets Some Critical Help
Harry Rhulen was only 5 at the time, but he has vivid memories of his parents making peanut butter sandwiches that were ferried by helicopter into the Woodstock festival to ease a severe food shortage.
Twenty-five years later, Mr.
Rhulen is involved in a rescue mission of his own, this one to salvage a Woodstock anniversary concert -- the second such event being planned this summer -- on the site of the original festival, Max Yasgur's farm in Bethel, N.Y.


Spirit of Woodstock Lives at Original Site
To the Editor:
Your June 6 article on the commercialized Woodstock festival this summer in Saugerties, N.Y., almost overlooks what you call the "more modest gathering" at the original site.
This gathering will have such original Woodstock bands as Country Joe and the Fish, Melanie and John B. Sebastian, and it is rumored they will be joined by the Grateful Dead and Sly and the Family Stone.


Art in Review
Donald Lipski
Galerie Lelong  20 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through June 25
This exhibition is a small retrospective of Donald Lipski's sculptures.
Mr.
Lipski's medium is the found object (a rubber band or safety pin will do), which he transforms and combines in ways that make their own strange sculptural sense and that sometimes imply a history and meaning that is never explicit.
He creates the kinds of things you might make when you absent-mindedly wrap a straw into a knot or a paper clip around your finger.
But Mr.
Lipski transforms this casual practice into a lapidary art.
He pins objects to walls in loose grid patterns, like butterflies in cases or like lighter-than-air parodies of the works of the Minimalists.
Coming out of Post-Minimalism and Process art, his work is linked to ideas about order, geometry and system.
But it is essentially intuitive.


Micron Technology Inc.(MU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 2


Home Video
Now that "The Return of Jafar," Disney's video sequel to "Aladdin," has sold more than seven million cassettes without playing in movie theaters, direct-to-video is suddenly a hot concept in Hollywood.
Who can blame the studios for taking to a new category of low-cost sequel that needn't pass through theaters to turn big profits on tape?
The new cachet of direct-to-video might also be expected to please independent film makers whose movies usually go theaterless, but that is not necessarily the case.
"This is probably the hardest time for independents since home video was started," said Roger Corman, the president of Concorde/New Horizons, an independent producer.


Lotus Agrees to Acquire Softswitch
With the intention of strengthening its foothold in the competitive electronic mail market, the Lotus Development Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire Softswitch Inc., a little known but strategically important maker of switches that link many forms of electronic messaging.
Lotus will acquire Softswitch, a privately held company based in Wayne, Pa., for 1.3 million shares of common stock, based on a value of up to $73 million.
Industry analysts said the price, at more than twice Softswitch's annual sales of $35 million, was high, but they attributed that to what was rumored to be heavy bidding for Softswitch by such rivals as Microsoft, Hewlett-Packard and Computer Associates.


Ohio State Players Involved in Disturbance
A former roommate of the Ohio State basketball player GREG SIMPSON has accused Simpson and another player of attacking him and firing a gun during a disturbance last week.
DANIEL SMITH, the former roommate, told the Columbus, Ohio, police that Simpson, guard CHARLES MACON and a third person threw bricks at him at his apartment late on the night of June 9.
He said he was struck on an arm and in the back.


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons Inc.(WILLA) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Gay Games IV: What, Where and When
Gay Games IV are to begin tomorrow and run through June 26 at various locations around New York City, New Jersey and upstate New York.
An opening-night ceremony is planned for tomorrow at 6:30 P.M. at Wien Stadium of Columbia University, Broadway and 218th Street, upper Manhattan.
There will be a procession of the 11,000 athletes taking part in the games, followed by a lighting of the flame and a fireworks display.
Those speaking at the ceremony are to include the tennis player Billie Jean King, the Olympic diver Greg Louganis, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Tickets range from $25 to $100.
A closing-night ceremony is to be held on June 25 at 6:30 P.M. at Yankee Stadium, 161st Street and River Avenue, the Bronx.
Awards will be given to the winning athletes and there will be performances by Patti LaBelle, Vanessa Williams, Sir Ian McKellen, Cyndi Lauper, Aretha Franklin and the Unity Chorus and Orchestra, which is made up of singers from around the world.
Tickets: $10 to $75.


Subway Kills Man; Suspect Is Arrested
A man was pushed to his death in front of a subway train yesterday and a suspect was arrested a short time later after a witness pointed him out, the police said.
The suspect admitted to being involved in the victim's fall to the tracks, "but he's saying it's an accident," said Lieut.
Robert Valentino, a transit police spokesman.
He said the suspect, whose name was not released, will be charged with murder.


Element of the Unknown Too Much for Mets
The Mets had tried starter after starter in the fifth spot of the rotation -- Eric Hillman, Mauro Gozzo, Frank Seminara, Doug Linton.
The Marlins had been no more successful in their search for pitching help.
And so when the Mets and Marlins took the field tonight at Joe Robbie Stadium, they did so with a pair of starting pitchers who had combined for seven previous big league starts.
The night, it seemed, was ripe for a slugfest.


A Health Care Finance Plan: Ingenious, or Impenetrable?
To finance universal health insurance without additional income or payroll taxes, the new head of the House Ways and Means Committee has devised a method of raising money so complex and intricate that few members of Congress have been able to explain it.
Supporters of the proposal describe it as an ingenious way to raise money from companies that, they say, are evading their social responsibility to contribute to the cost of health care.
Critics say the proposal is just a hidden tax, and a big one.


Knicks' Updated Condition: Well Guarded
The Knicks' backcourt has moved to the forefront of the National Basketball Association finals.
As the Knicks prepared for Friday night's pivotal Game 5 against the Houston Rockets at Madison Square Garden, Derek Harper and John Starks have emerged as leaders for the Knicks and as a problem for the Rockets.


American Power Conversion
American Power Conversion makes "uninterruptible" power supplies, which suppress power surges and provide battery power.
Its share price fell on Wednesday after a company official said analysts' revenue forecasts "may be slightly aggressive." But the price recovered yesterday when Paine Webber raised its assessment of the stock to "buy" from "attractive."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The head of AT&amp;T's multimedia efforts will join the Creative Artists Agency, Hollywood's most powerful talent agency.
The hiring is an example of how the entertainment, information and communications businesses have converged.  [ Page D1. ]


In 100, Devers and Mitchell Are First to the Finish Line
Gail Devers and Dennis Mitchell won the 100-meter dash titles in the third day of the five-day USA/Mobil track and field championships.
Devers, the defending champion and the 1992 Olympic 100-meter champion, got off to a terrible start but edged ahead in the final strides to beat Carlette Guidry by a foot, clocking 11.12 seconds to Guidry's 11.15.


Moscow Is Miffed by U.S. Draft on Sanctions
Complaining that Washington has again neglected to consult adequately with Moscow on a vital issue of international security, Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev refused today to support a Security Council resolution drafted by the United States that would impose sanctions on North Korea.
It was the second time this week that Mr.
Kozyrev had lashed out at the United States.
On Tuesday, he warned Congress that its vote to end the arms embargo against the Bosnian Government could ignite "a new world war."


Haitian Refugee Interviews Begin Aboard U.S. Navy Ship
The first shipboard processing of Haitians' applications for asylum under the Administration's new policy began today aboard a Navy hospital ship moored here.
At 9 A.M. 35 Haitians picked up from leaky wooden sailboats were put on board the white-painted Comfort, the red crosses on its hull gleaming in the tropical sun.


A Time for Exploring New Food in New Places
SPORTS makes you hungry.
Even if you are only a spectator.
Anybody who has ever eaten too many hot dogs at a baseball game knows that.
With athletic events suddenly becoming New York's major preoccupation, the important question becomes: Where to eat after the game?
Or before, if you are so inclined.
Both the World Cup of soccer (at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J.) and the Gay Games (mainly in Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx), which begin tomorrow, offer a fine opportunity for adventurous diners.


Ruling Backs Homosexuals On Asylum
Attorney General Janet Reno today issued an order that would allow homosexuals from other countries to seek political asylum in the United States if they could prove that they were victims of government persecution solely because of their sexual preference.
The decision affects only a few pending immigration cases.
Justice Department officials said they did not know whether it would lead to an increase in the number of gay men and lesbians from abroad who would apply for refugee status on the ground that they would be persecuted if they returned home.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier Has Easy Time  Third-seeded Jim Courier overpowered Bernd Karbacher, 6-3, 6-2, to advance to the quarterfinals of the Halle Grand Prix in Germany yesterday.
In a grass-court stadium that is a replica of Wimbledon's Center Court, Courier slammed aces to end both sets against his German opponent.
"It's not his favorite surface, but he's still one of the best players in the world on grass," Karbacher said of Courier, who reached the Wimbledon final last year.
Courier next faces Yevgeny Kafelnikov, who downed Jonathan Stark, 7-6 (7-3), 6-3.
The Russian, playing in his first grass tournament, has risen from No. 109 to No. 19 in the ranking this year. (AP) GOLF  King Shares Lead  Betsy King, one victory away from the Hall of Fame, and Laurie Brower, who earned her first top 10 finish last month, had six-under 66's yesterday and shared the first-round lead in the L.P.G.A.
Rochester International.
One stroke behind were Vicki Goetze, Lisa Kiggens and Patty Sheehan, who has won three of the last five tournaments at the par-72 Locust Hill Country Club.
In her third year on tour, Brower dropped out of golf for five years to recuperate from surgery for a childhood wrist injury and, later, to care for her mother, who died of brain cancer in 1991.
Her career-best finish was a tie for ninth at the Lady Keystone Open last month.
In three years, she has picked up $52,052 in earnings, compared with King's 17-year career total of $4.6 million. (AP) CYCLING  Kappes Wins in Sprint  Andreas Kappes of Germany won the closing sprint yesterday in Jona, Switzerland, taking the third stage of the 10-stage Tour de Suisse.
His time for the 119-mile run was 4 hours 32 minutes 58 seconds.
The stage's fourth-place finisher, Pascal Richard of Switzerland took the overall lead.
Gianluca Pierobon of Italy, who led after the first two stages, dropped one second behind Richard.
Wilfried Nelissen of Belgium and Tony Rominger of Switzerland were five seconds back.
Rominger, who won the Tour of Spain last month, was in the pack in 111th place.


2 New Assignments For DeVito/Verdi
DeVito/Verdi of New York has been awarded two assignments with billings estimated at more than $6 million.
Circuit City Stores Inc., the consumer electronics retail chain based in Richmond, named the agency to handle a national brand and image advertising assignment.
There was no previous agency.
DeVito/Verdi, which is the agency for Circuit City's new Carmax used-car sales division, has created five television commercials for Circuit City.


Daniel Webster Outdrew Oliver North
To the Editor:
It is not true that the June 4 state convention of the Virginia Republican Party, nominating Oliver L. North for the United States Senate, "drew more than any political gathering in American history" (front page, June 5).
A party estimate of "nearly 15,000 delegates" may have been accurate, but history vouches that back in 1840 on a remote hillside of southern Vermont, more than 15,000 Whigs -- Republican forerunners -- gathered to hear Daniel Webster campaign for "Tippecanoe and Tyler Too." This was the Whig ticket of William Henry Harrison, nicknamed Tippecanoe for his victory over the Indians at Tippecanoe, Ind., and John Tyler.


Bronx Man Is Convicted In Six Deaths
A Bronx man was convicted yesterday in the murder of six people on Valentine's Day 1993, a killing prosecutors called "a crime of unspeakable horror" meant as revenge against one of the victims for slapping the defendant's wife.
Anthony Casellas, 22, was found guilty of murder and conspiracy in the deaths of three adults and three children whom the police said were lined up on the living room floor of a Mott Haven apartment and each shot through the head.
Four other defendants facing charges related to the killings are awaiting trial.


Bure: 5 More Years, Many More Millions
The Vancouver Canucks and PAVEL BURE have agreed to terms on a contract that will keep the Russian star with the club at least five more years.
Terms were not disclosed, but earlier reports said Bure was close to signing a multiyear contract for $25 million.
Bure agreed to a six-year contract, retroactive to the start of the 1993-94 season, that will make him the highest-paid player in Canucks history.
The signing of the right wing was announced at a news conference in British Columbia yesterday, two days after the Canucks lost by one goal to the Rangers in Game 7 of the Stanley Cup finals.


Don't Exaggerate North Korean Military Threat
To the Editor:
In "Reactor Roulette" (column, June 2), William Safire contributes to the myth that North Korea poses a significant military threat to United States interests in Northeast Asia.
He also rewrites history with the words "we would then be in a real war with an enemy that fought us to a standstill two generations ago."


Lavish Shea &amp; Gould Has an Unlikely Heir
There is an irony here.
Shea &amp; Gould was known as much for its opulent corporate life style and internal politicking as for its legal expertise.
Anderson, Kill, Olick &amp; Oshinsky is the Ben &amp; Jerry's of the law world, the place where each of 240 lawyers is a partner and frills are considered superfluous, even embarrassing.
So which of New York's hundreds of law firms just signed a 15-year lease for three of the five lavishly appointed floors, and all of the basement filing space, that the now-defunct Shea &amp; Gould had occupied at 1251 Avenue of the Americas, the old Exxon Building, between 49th and 50th Streets?
Yup.


Things to Do With a Gay Flavor
In conjunction with Gay Games IV and the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising, a number of related cultural activities are planned in New York City.
Here is a sampling.
Events are free unless otherwise noted.
General and ticket information: (212) 727-6053 or (800) 429-4263.
Today  "GAYS AND FILM: GET REEL," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
Screenings of international documentary and non-narrative gay films and videos, including works by Peter Adair, Sadie Benning, Su Friedrich, Marlon Riggs, Jennie Livingston, Pratibha Parmar and Andy Warhol.
Today: Shirley Clarke's "Portrait of Jason" at 6 P.M. and Karen Thorsen's "Price of a Ticket" at 8 P.M.
Through July 12.
Admission included in museum admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly.
Screening schedule and information: (212) 708-9480.


TV Weekend; Of a Comic Who Told Killer Jokes and Died Young
Stand-up comics are on conspicuous display this weekend.
Unfortunately for the current state of the art, the best of them, Bill Hicks, is no longer around.
He died of cancer in February.
He was 32.
Mr.
Hicks was not the average one-liner type of comedian.
He told what the critic John Lahr of The New Yorker described as "jokes to kill," most of them scathing observations on American icons and institutions (George Bush and the Persian Gulf war were among his choicer targets).
That may explain why he was less popular in his own country than in Britain, winning the top award at the 1990 Edinburgh Comedy Festival and doing his last major television special in Britain.


Dow Retraces Lost Ground, Gaining 20.93
Back to Square One, almost.
After declining 24.42 points on Wednesday, the Dow Jones industrial average rose nearly 21 points yesterday.
Over all, the stock market closed mixed in restrained trading despite a fall in long-term interest rates and a decline in commodities prices, two factors that ought to have sparked a broader rally.


Keenan And Detroit Under Watch
On the day the Rangers posed for their formal Stanley Cup team photo, Bob Gutkowski, the president of Madison Square Garden, revealed that he had asked National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman to monitor developments involving Mike Keenan and the Detroit Red Wings.
It was reported last week that Keenan might leave the Rangers to take a job as coach and general manager in Detroit.
Keenan has four years remaining on his Rangers contract.
The day before Game 7 of the Stanley Cup playoffs, Keenan emphatically denied that he would leave New York for Detroit.
Bettman has told Gutkowski he will open an inquiry if Keenan takes a job in Detroit.


Police Shoot Man Who Shot Wife
An Emergency Medical Service technician shot his wife in a Brooklyn subway station yesterday before being shot by transit police officers, the police said.
Both were in critical condition at Coney Island Hospital.
The pair began shouting at each other at about 5:45 P.M. in front of a token booth in the Bay Parkway station on the B line, in Bensonhurst, said Sgt.
Luis Medina, a transit police spokesman.
He said the clerk in the booth alerted two plainclothes officers who were in the station.


Fine Points of the Worldwide Brand of Football
All your life, you have considered it your duty as a loyal American to shun soccer.
But lately you have made the frightening discovery that something called the World Cup of soccer is coming to our shores, and that billions of people are excited about it.
To make it worse, you have a good friend or a close relative or a business acquaintance from overseas who is going to be in the United States this weekend, and you have been invited or even summoned to watch a World Cup game on television.
And you now have a mortal fear of sounding like a total dolt in front of somebody who sees the world from a somewhat different angle.


3 Com Corp.(COMS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Art in Review
Childe Hassam
Jordan-Volpe Gallery  958 Madison Avenue (at 75th Street)  Through July 1
Childe Hassam (1859-1935) was a popular artist in his time.
His career took wing in the era known as the Gilded Age, those prosperous, optimistic years at the end of the 19th century when many American painters reached out to contemporary Europe for inspiration.


Jabil Circuit Inc.(JBIL) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


What Illegal Aliens Cost the Taxpayer
To the Editor:
"Stop Benefits for Aliens? It Wouldn't Be That Easy" (front page, June 8) is bold in its attempt to profile the entire problem of illegal aliens receiving taxpayer benefits through the experience of one mother of three.


Best Buy Co.(BBY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


American Power Conversion
American Power Conversion makes "uninterruptible" power supplies, which suppress power surges and provide battery power.
Its share price fell on Wednesday after a company official said analysts' revenue forecasts "may be slightly aggressive." But the price recovered yesterday when Paine Webber raised its assessment of the stock to "buy" from "attractive."


On Stage, and Off
Another Spin on the Carousel
It must seem to the people at Lincoln Center Theater that all they ever do is hold frantic auditions for Billy Bigelow.
Seven weeks ago, when Michael Hayden, the incumbent in the lead role in "Carousel," missed several performances because of a vocal-cord injury, Marcus Lovett replaced him, zooming uptown from the Majestic Theater, where he had been the phantom in "The Phantom of the Opera," and stepping into the part after just two rehearsals.
Since then the show has had the luxury of two experienced leading men to fill a demanding role, and Mr.
Lovett has, in fact, gone on more than a dozen times, including performances all this week.
Recently, however, Mr.
Hayden decided to leave the show to prepare the role of Prince Hal in a fall production of "Henry IV" at the Shakespeare Theater in Washington.
His last "Carousel" performance was to be on July 31.
And Mr.
Lovett decided to leave his standby post after July 24, perhaps a little irked that given his earlier heroics, he was not handed the job as Mr.
Hayden's successor.
So this week there were auditions to replace both men.


Review/Film; Disciplining a Bad Dad
"You dating yet?" Ted Danson asks, in another handsome but none-too-bright role.
"I'm 11," says Macaulay Culkin, in another of his grown-ups-are-idiots parts.


Hasbro Expects Big Revenue Drop
Hasbro Inc., the nation's second-largest toy manufacturer, said yesterday that it expected revenues for the second quarter to fall as much as 15 percent from a year earlier, a decline that might wipe out earnings for the period.
Although the second quarter is usually difficult for toy makers, the announcement jolted Wall Street.


A Partner Quits Orsatti &amp; Parrish
Lou Orsatti, one of two managing partners of Orsatti &amp; Parrish of Boston, has left the agency after eight years.
Lyle Wickersham has been named vice chairman and chief creative officer, and the agency will be renamed Parrish Wickersham &amp; Partners.
"The agency has grown tremendously and I found myself spending the vast majority of my time doing administrative and managerial things," Mr.
Orsatti said yesterday, adding, "I feel that at 37, I am too young to be kicked upstairs."


American Power Conversion
American Power Conversion makes "uninterruptible" power supplies, which suppress power surges and provide battery power.
Its share price fell on Wednesday after a company official said analysts' revenue forecasts "may be slightly aggressive." But the price recovered yesterday when Paine Webber raised its assessment of the stock to "buy" from "attractive."


No Headline
"Jurors say they're very concerned about the high verdicts you read about in the newspaper -- though they don't ever hear about the verdicts for the defendant -- and they're very concerned about the high costs of health care and insurance." HELEN E. FREEDMAN, a New York judge, on tight-fisted juries.  [ B18:5. ]


Smith's Homecoming Falls Short
Kenny Smith, a native New Yorker playing for Houston, has been given a particularly rotten homecoming, and, as his running mate at guard, Vernon Maxwell, told him, "Kenny, we can't win this without you bein' on the floor."
And Maxwell has given him specific advise for Game 5 here tomorrow night.
He told Smith, "Do something crazy."


Kohl Welcomes Italian Chief
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy, under fire from many European quarters for including far-right elements in his Government, came to Germany today denying that there were Fascists in his Cabinet, and heard no public criticism from Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
Mr.
Kohl patted the new Italian leader on the shoulder and greeted him with full military honors, wishing him "much luck and God's blessing."


Homeless Man Held In Fatal Stabbing
A 29-year old homeless man was arrested late Wednesday in the fatal stabbing of a Greenwich Village photographer, the police said yesterday.
The Chief of Detectives, Joseph R. Borrelli, said the police were able to identify the suspect, identified as Dennis Fay, because he had dropped his wallet in the apartment of the victim, Richard Whitesell, 32.


Review/Film; Recounting the Story Of an Accidental Career
"My Life's in Turnaround," a scrappy low-budget comedy with lots of insouciant charm, is the semi-autobiographical story of its two film makers, Eric Schaeffer and Donal Lardner Ward.
Calling themselves Splick Featherstone and Jason Little, they play friends who simply fell into this line of work after other pursuits proved to be less than promising.
They also present themselves as lacking ambition and talent.
That's definitely a little white lie.
Grainy enough to look at times as if it's been shot through a tea bag, "My Life's in Turnaround" has to get by on wit alone.
The two hapless stars present themselves as an overstressed cabbie (Mr. Schaeffer) and an alcohol-avoiding bartender (Mr. Ward). (Does Jason go to A.A. meetings "because that's where all the big deals are getting made?" a girlfriend asks him. "No, 'cause I'm a drunk," he answers.) So they are eager for a change of pace, once a friend (Lisa Gerstein) with a talent agency steers them toward the movie world.
"Get us meetings," Jason tells her.
"Yeah, we're film makers now," Splick says.


W. E. Swinton, 93; Dinosaur Authority Wrote Textbooks
Dr.
William Elgin Swinton, a paleontologist whose writings included a seminal textbook on dinosaurs in 1934, died on Sunday in Toronto.
He was 93.
Dr.
Swinton, a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, was emeritus professor of zoology at the University of Toronto, where he taught in the 1960's.
At the time, he also served as director of life sciences at the Royal Ontario Museum.
He also helped to set up the Ontario Science Center.


For the Latest in Pain Relief, Try a $100 Million Campaign
What price pain relief?
America's largest marketer is joining with a major drug company to risk more than $100 million on the notion they can squeeze yet another analgesic onto overcrowded store shelves.
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, which dominates product categories like detergent and toothpaste, and the Syntex Corporation, which markets prescription drugs like Naprosyn and Anaprox, are teaming up to introduce an over-the-counter pain-reliever called Aleve.
It is the first new brand in that intensely competitive market, with annual sales of $2.4 billion to $2.6 billion, since ibuprofen began being offered directly to consumers a decade ago under names like Advil, Nuprin and Motrin IB.


L.I.R.R. Strike: The Scene; Some Inconvenience, but No Chaos
The Long Islanders riding the J train through East New York and Bushwick, Brooklyn, yesterday were not hard to spot.
Folding and refolding their subway maps, already moist and creased by 6:45 A.M., they were the ones nervously checking each station stop to make sure the train had not somehow veered off course.
But having taken the train recommended by the Transit Authority for its extra seats, many first-time riders on the J train were pleased with their accommodations, which were actually roomier than those they are accustomed to on the strike-bound Long Island Rail Road.


Q &amp; A
Nonprofit Beneficiary  Q. If a nonprofit organization is the beneficiary of an individual retirement account or a Keogh account, must the organization pay taxes on the proceeds?
C.
RICHARD BECKER, Manhattan  A. When a tax-exempt organization is the beneficiary of an I.R.A., the distribution is taxable in the same manner as if it had been made to the deceased owner.
But when a tax-exempt organization receives a Keogh account, some portions may not be taxable, depending on several factors, including the participant's nondeductible contributions.
"A nonprofit beneficiary of a Keogh account may be able to use special tax treatments for lump-sum distributions, such as five-year or 10-year averaging and capital gain treatment," said Ronald L. Noll, head of a Malvern, Pa., accounting firm bearing his name.
"And if the distribution is due to the employee's death, the nonprofit organization may be able to treat the payment as a lump-sum distribution, whether or not he or she had five years of participation in the plan."
Medigap Abroad  Q. What are the economics of a medigap policy when retiring to a foreign country?
Anna-Liisa Rintala, Manhattan  A. The purpose of a medigap policy, private insurance that supplements Medicare, is to pay costs not covered by the Federal Medicare program.
Medicare generally does not cover health services outside the United States, the primary exception being when a hospital in Canada or Mexico is more accessible than an American hospital.
"Most medigap plans provide some coverage for people who are out of the country on a temporary basis," said Rebecca Moore of the American Association of Retired Persons.
"Medigap plans do not offer coverage for people who are living out of the country permanently."
I.R.A.
Into Fixed Annuity  Q. Can I transfer an individual retirement account to a fixed annuity so I will not be required to pay taxes until the money is withdrawn?
DORIS BROWN, Manhattan  A. Yes, you can.
One of the categories of tax-deferred accounts established by the law creating individual retirement accounts is an individual retirement annuity.
But many financial advisers say you should not switch your I.R.A. into an annuity, because it represents an unnecessary duplication of the tax deferral.
Money invested in an I.R.A. grows on a tax-deferred basis, as does money invested in an annuity, explained Avery E. Neumark, a partner of Weber Lipshie &amp; Company, a New York accounting firm.
Other types of investments probably make more sense.
"If you wish to roll your account over," Mr.
Neumark said, "you must do so within 60 days of the distribution from the original plan. And only one such rollover may be made in any one-year period."


Diagnostic Scale
To the Editor:
When my videocassette recorder started eating my tapes as if it had an incurable stomach disease, I brought it to an acute-care facility called a video "hospital." I was advised by a receptionist that a VCR checkup (which includes deductible diagnosis charge, but no treatment) costs $25.
As a physician, I am paid $7.50 by Medicaid to both diagnose and treat an illness in a human being.


Douglas Bryant, 80 Leader in the Growth Of Harvard Libraries
Douglas W. Bryant, the director of Harvard University's libraries from 1972 to 1979, a period of rapid expansion, died on Sunday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
Mr.
Bryant, who lived in Lexington, Mass., was 80.
The cause of death was cancer, said his wife, Rene.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.18
4.26
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.10
4.08
3.04
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.45
4.43
3.16
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.12
7.03
5.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.35
6.80
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.27
8.18
7.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.28
6.24
5.82
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Press as Power Broker
In political campaigns, paid advertisements are speech amplifiers -- the only practical way for candidates to speak directly to large numbers of voters.
That is why the Supreme Court ruled, in Buckley v.
Valeo (1976), that involuntary spending limits are an unconstitutional infringement of free speech.
Now, in the name of campaign reform, the Senate and House have both passed "voluntary" spending limits for Congressional campaigns.
But while they aim to equalize spending between candidates, these limits would distort the political process, creating a whole new set of power brokers -- including, perhaps not coincidentally, some of the loudest cheerleaders for the new spending limits: America's largest newspapers.


Combining Varied Stock-Picking Styles
The New England Star Advisers Funduses leading money managers from four fund groups to manage an equity portfolio.
They are William M. B. Berger and Rodney L. Linafelter of Berger 100; Edward F. Keely, Founders Growth; Warren B. Lammert, Janus Mercury, and Barbara C. Friedman and Jeffrey C. Petherick, Loomis Sayles Small Cap.
The idea of combining equity managers with different stock-picking styles is great for diversification.
But with a load of 5.75 percent, the price is steep.
You can re-create the same fund at no charge, using a discount brokerage account to minimize paperwork.
The growing reluctance of investors to pay sales charges has inspired several fund groups with excellent track records to convert to no-loads.
The latest example is Heartland, known primarily for its top-performing Value and U.S.
Government Securities funds.
The group dropped its 3 percent sales charge June 1.


Church, in an Era of Change, Is Misunderstood; Women in Priesthood
To the Editor:
Pope John Paul II's statement that "the church has no authority whatsoever to confer priestly ordination on women" is an admission of impotence unacceptable to many devoted Catholics.
That statement, of course, bespeaks the papal posture, reflecting his wisdom and will on the topic.


A Shift on North Korea
North Korea's latest offer to resolve the crisis over its nuclear program appears to include little that is new, but President Clinton's willingness to seize it as an opportunity to avoid a confrontation reflects an abrupt shift of policy.
The change says less about the prospects for a diplomatic resolution than it does about the Administration's apprehensions over a showdown and its difficulties in marshaling an international coalition for tough sanctions.


Review/Dance; A Folk-Modern Mix By Athenian Visitors
The arts and sports were equal pursuits of the gods.
With that in mind, the Greek Ministry of Culture has presented a free monthlong festival of contemporary Greek theater, music and dance at City Center in celebration of Greek participation in the World Cup soccer games in New York City.
On Tuesday night, the Dance Theater Roes of Athens presented a program of dances choreographed by the company's founder, Sofia Spyratou, in the mixed folk and modern dance style for which the troupe is known.
Both elements were present in the dances the five-year-old company presented, with the blend more evident in the opening dance, "Here Is a Table Ready With Damask." The engaging performers are clearly modern dancers.
The styles are smoothly mixed but used less expressively than one might expect.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF King Two Rounds Away From Hall Betsy King moved a step closer to the L.P.G.A.
Hall of Fame, shooting a four-under-par 68 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead in the second round of the International in Rochester, N.Y.
Three birdies on the back nine put King at 10 under over all, one ahead of Michele Redman, whose career-best finish was a tie for eighth at the Atlanta Women's Championship in April.
Dawn Coe-Jones of Canada and Lisa Kiggens were at 8 under.
King would automatically enter the Hall of Fame if she wins her 30th tournament tomorrow at the par-72 Locust Hill Country Club.
King has earned $4.6 million in her 17 years on tour.
This year, she has struggled on the greens, and her best finish was a tie for third at the Lady Keystone Open last month. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco abandoned attempts to develop a safer cigaretteat the end of the 1970's after a decade of negative research results, companydocuments show.  [ Page 1. ]


Fleeing Poverty, He Ran to Limelight
You can hardly blame the Galileo High School coach for assigning the kid to the defensive line.
After all, on a team awash with quick, small players from nearby Chinatown, the fellow from the Potrero Hill section of San Francisco was big, almost 6 feet tall and 160 pounds.
The assignment lasted until the new defensive tackle picked up a fumble one day and ran for a touchdown.
In an instant he became a fullback.
The coach had learned what every kid on Potrero Hill could have told him: Orenthal James Simpson was not only big, but also fast.


Redskins Deal for Linebacker
The Washington Redskins yesterday acquired linebacker TYRONNE STOWE in a trade with the Arizona Cardinals for an undisclosed draft choice.
The 6-foot-2-inch, 250-pound Stowe led the Cardinals in tackles last year with a career-high 119, after finishing second on the team with 104 tackles in 1992.
He has started 15 games in each of the past two seasons. (AP)


5 Each Get 40 Years In Waco Case
Ignoring pleas for leniency from the defendants and the forewoman of the jury that convicted them, a Federal judge today sentenced five Branch Davidians to 40 years in prison for their roles in a shootout near Waco in February 1993 in which four Federal agents and six cult members died.
The shootout began a 51-day standoff that ended when the sect's leader, David Koresh, and 78 of his followers died in a fire after F.B.I. agents assaulted the sect's compound with tear gas and tanks equipped with battering rams.


Hospital Aide Held in Ruse That Helped Killers Escape
Last month, with a loaded gun at his head and two convicted killers leading the way, Robert Kamrowski seemed the very picture of a hostage as the two men escaped from the Mid-Hudson Psychiatric Center, touching off a weeklong manhunt.
But today, the Orange County District Attorney's office charged that Mr.
Kamrowski's role was a ruse.
Mr.
Kamrowski, 46, a former State Police lieutenant who was working as a hospital aide, was arrested and indicted on eight counts, including providing the gun to the killers.


G.M. Dealt Setback On Hughes
A Federal judge ruled today that the Hughes Aircraft Company was entitled to only a small fraction of the $3 billion in royalties and back interest that it had sought from the Government in a 21-year-old legal dispute over a satellite-technology patent.
The decision marked a setback to the parent company of Hughes, the General Motors Corporation, and could prevent the wave of patent claims against the Government that patent experts had predicted if Hughes had won a larger settlement.


Panel Rejects Wider Testing To Develop AIDS Vaccine
An advisory panel of experts today rejected a proposal to conduct large-scale studies of the effectiveness of the two most-tested experimental AIDS vaccines.
The expanded studies would have been conducted on thousands of Americans who are not infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, but who are at high risk of developing the disease.
Instead, the panel recommended continuing smaller studies to test the safety of the vaccines and to evaluate the immune reaction to them.
It said no large-scale study of effectiveness should be started until compelling new data became available or a different type of vaccine showed enough promise.


Malone, 39, Waived by 76ers
The 76ers waived MOSES MALONE yesterday, ending the veteran center's second tenure in Philadelphia.
Malone, 39, was acquired as a free agent last August to serve as a backup and mentor to the $44 million draft pick, SHAWN BRADLEY.
Malone averaged 5.3 points, 4.1 rebounds and 11.2 minutes a game last season.


Oil Surges Past $20 a Barrel, Depressing Stocks
Nervous financial markets were thrown into confusion yesterday, and prices declined sharply after the price of oil surged past $20 a barrel for the first time in more than a year.
A prolonged rise in oil prices, coming just before the peak of the summer driving season, would have broad inflationary implications, analysts said.
The rise may also signal a significant tightening of supplies after 13 years of falling prices and varying degrees of glut.
It would also further unnerve financial markets that have been obsessed with the course of inflation that, so far, has been unexpectedly mild.


House Panel in Compromise on Health Care Issue
In a taste of larger health care battles to come, the House Ways and Means Committee voted today to allow small businesses with as few as 100 employees to insure their own workers.
The size of companies that would be allowed to "self-insure" is a central issue in the debate over a national health care system, and is being fought out in several Congressional committees.
President Clinton has pressed his view that only very large companies should be allowed to opt out of the large insurance-purchasing alliances that are central to his plan.


CHRONICLE
It was JAMES BILLINGTON, the Librarian of Congress, who pointed out that the word "slava" in Russian means "glory." That set the tone for Thursday evening's tribute at the library to MSTISLAV ROSTROPOVICH, the departing music director of the National Symphony Orchestra who is widely known as "Slava."
Lawmakers and at least one priness were among those assembled in the newly renovated Great Hall of the library for a gala dinner.
The guests included Senators John F. Kerry and Howard M. Metzenbaum; Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve; Caspar Weinberger, the former Secretary of Defense, and Princess Ira Von Furstenberg.
Isaac Stern drove down from New York for the occasion because the Washington airports were closed because of high winds.


In Performance; CLASSICAL MUSIC
Mixing Sight and Sound With Some Electronic Help  Paula Cooper Gallery


Kamianka-Buzka Journal; Catholics Can Worship, but Not Always in Church
In the park across from this town's whitewashed church, 68-year-old Teophila Semenjuk, dressed in a skirt and sweater with a scarf around her head, arrived by bicycle to join worshipers at an outdoor Sunday service.
The makeshift altar table and its hastily erected plastic canopy did little to dampen the enthusiasm of the congregation, whose voices boomed into the church just a few hundred yards away where a competing service was being held.


A Mutual Fund That Matches Risk to Your Stage of Life
James P. Miller, 44, of Walnut Creek, Calif., has been selling carpet for 15 years.
His annual income is about $30,000, including some income from rental property.
He is unmarried and has no dependents and estimates he is saving $7,000 a year. 'I am creating my own retirement,' he said.
The only external sources of retirement ncome he forsees are Social Security and a pension of about $150 a month from a former employer.


Williams Holding a Spot for Mansell
The Williams team appeared to leave open the possibility yesterday that NIGEL MANSELL could still return to Formula One in next month's French Grand Prix.
The team released a statement from its headquarters in Didcot, England, saying no announcement on its driver lineup for the July 3 race at Magny-Cours would be made until the week of the race.
Mansell won the Formula One title with Williams in 1992, then moved to the Indy-car circuit where he won the championship with Newman-Haas last season.
This year, however, Mansell has yet to win a race. (AP)


Carter Visit to North Korea: Whose Trip Was It Really?
Completing his mission to North Korea, former President Jimmy Carter hugged the country's dictator on Friday and called the trip "a good omen," but immediately touched off a squabble with the Clinton Administration over whether North Korea had specifically offered to freeze its nuclear weapons development project.
President Clinton and his advisers, who had originally said Mr.
Carter was on a private trip and then became televised participants in the delicate talks with the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung, clearly distanced themselves from the former President's initiative.


Yes, Yes, Yes, Deal Knew It
Lance Deal set an American record in the hammer throw and Kim Batten posted the fastest time in the world this year in the women's 400-meter hurdles here at in the USA/Mobil championships at the University of Tennessee's Tom Black track.
Deal, who competes for the New York A.C. but lives in Eugene, Oregon, sent the 16-pound iron ball flying 270 feet 8 inches on his second throw, erasing the mark of 268-8 set by Jud Logan in 1988.
He also had another fair throw and a hairline foul well past the former record.


North West Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Keep Prevention in the Crime Bill
As the crime bill begins its journey through a Senate-House conference committee, some of its more enlightened provisions will come under attack as wasteful, as pandering to criminals, as attempts to revive discredited Great Society-style social programs.
The bill as it now stands would set up a $22 billion trust fund to be spent over five years.
In contrast to previous such bills, it not only authorizes the money but appropriates it, insuring that the programs that survive will be financed.
It sets aside $10 billion for prevention and rehabilitation programs.


Griffey Puts 30th Homer Into Fountain
Mariners 5, Royals 1
Ken Griffey Jr. hit his 30th homer of the season, Edgar Martinez added a three-run shot and Dave Fleming snapped a personal five-game losing streak as Seattle beat Kansas City, 5-1, last night at Kauffman Stadium.


An Emotional Palmer Disbands His Army
As Arnold Palmer approached the 18th green at Oakmont today in his last United States Open, the ovation erupted.
When he putted out for an 81 and a 36-hole total of 158, the ovation resumed.
Waving his straw hat, he smiled at the thousands standing in the bleachers and walked to the scorer's trailer.
After a brief emotional interview on ESPN, he appeared in the media center's interview tent.
Asked what he was feeling now, he hesitated.


N.B.A. Finals; One More Victory Will Mean One More Parade
If the Knicks can win another game, New York can celebrate another championship.
Outscoring the Houston Rockets by 13-4 during the final three minutes, the Knicks captured Game 5 of the National Basketball Association finals, 91-84, last night before a jubilant crowd at Madison Square Garden.
The Knicks can capture their first championship since 1973 by winning Game 6 of the four-of-seven-game series, tomorrow night in Houston.
Should the Knicks lose, a decisive Game 7 would be played Wednesday night in Houston.


Smucker (J.M.) Co. (SJM.A,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Text of the Letter From O. J. Simpson
Following is the text of a letter that Robert Kardashian, a friend of O. J. Simpson, read at a news conference today, as transcribed by The New York Times.
Mr.
Kadashian said that Mr.
Simpson wrote the letter by hand just before he was to turn himself in to face murder charges.
First, everyone understand I have nothing to do with Nicole's murder.
I loved her.
I always have and I always will.
If we had a problem, it's because I loved her so much.


L.I.R.R. Strike: The Workers; Work-Rule Changes Are at the Heart of a Dispute
For 21 years as a worker on the Long Island Rail Road, Robert Mantle, an equipment operator, has never been expected to work a weekend or night shift without receiving overtime pay.
Now, that Monday-through-Friday day schedule for the roughly 600 track workers has become one of the major sticking points in the negotiations between the railroad and the United Transportation Union, part of the larger dispute over work rules.


Observer; Good Man On a Bad Scene
Congressman Rostenkowski, now under indictment for everything from mopery to failing to wash the ring out of the bathtub, is the kind of Congressman this country needs more of.
Which is to say: honest.


It's Over Before Yankees Can Start
Scott Kamieniecki was the essence of messiness tonight, struggling to properly locate his pitches, constantly placing himself in obvious danger and pitching so poorly that the Yankees felt like uncomfortable visitors in their own stadium.
They were playing host to the Brewers at 161st Street, but it felt more like Wisconsin Avenue.
What happened to home sweet home?
The sluggish Kamieniecki never even established a modest groove and never showed the artistry that has normally been commonplace for him when he pitches at Yankee Stadium.
After Kamieniecki walked Greg Vaughn in the fifth inning to push in Milwaukee's third run, Buck Showalter was exasperated.
The manager leaped from the dugout and approached the mound like an angry parent with an unsatisfactory report card.
Kamieniecki was expelled.


Grim Findings on Tobacco And a Decade of Frustration
By the end of the 1970's, after the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation had gone through a decade of negative research results and inconclusive attempts to develop a safer cigarette, a senior lawyer for the company recommended that much of its medical research be declared "deadwood" and shipped to its affiliate in England.
"No notes, memos or lists" of the material should be made, the lawyer wrote.
Among the documents to be removed were the results of Project Janus, a series of more than 40 separate experiments on the biological effects of cigarette smoke, which had succeeded in isolating some of the hazardous components of smoke.


One Dead in Shootout After Robbery at Mall
A New York City Correction Department officer shot a robber to death and wounded the robber's accomplice in a wild shootout yesterday in a crowded mall in Jackson Heights, Queens, the police said.
The officer, Capt.
Steve Groenwald, escaped unharmed.
The police said that a third robber fled.


Sports of The Times; Swiss Gift, High Score And No Tie Jokes
SWISS watches, you know all about them.
Swiss pocket knives, you know all about them.
Swiss bank accounts, you and I would love to be rich enough to have one.
What we had yesterday was a Swiss soccer goal, straight from the home office in Zurich.
And amen from that.
Knowing they were sailing off the map into uncharted waters for this World Cup, the people who run the sport jiggered with the rules, just for the Yanks.


Clinton Takes Crime Message to Inner City


Vina in Outfield, Mets Still in Doldrums
Fernando Vina had never played the outfield.
Not in the major leagues, not in the minors, not in high school -- not even in Little League.
Yet, there he was tonight at Joe Robbie Stadium, in front of the American League scoreboard in left field, his outfield glove seemingly as big as his entire left arm.
This, more than anything, was a sign of how desperate the Mets have become when it comes to their need for offense.
Not many Mets are hitting, and Vina, a reserve infielder, happens to be one of them.
So instead of benching either Bobby Bonilla, Jeff Kent or Jose Vizcaino in the infield -- three players who have produced this season -- Green put Vina in the outfield, where he has been practicing the past three weeks.


STRIKE'S FIRST DAY PROVES EASY RIDE FOR L.I. COMMUTERS
The first day of a strike by Long Island Rail Road workers proved a surprisingly easy ride, as thousands of commuters found alternative routes to work relatively free of congestion or, fearing a day of gridlock on the roads and in the New York City transit system, chose to stay home.
The walkout, the sixth to shut the nation's busiest commuter rail line since 1960, came as negotiators for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which oversees the railroad, and the United Transportation Union failed to reach agreement after days of intensive contract talks.


Bronx Teen-Ager Drowns, Leaving Many Questions
New York City school officials and police and medical investigators in Pennsylvania were trying yesterday to determine how a year-end school outing to an amusement park near Allentown ended in the drowning of a Bronx teen-ager.
There were discrepancies in accounts of when the youth, 14-year-old Daniel Maracallo, was reported missing, and whether lifeguards had been told he was having trouble in the water.
And there were questions about why the teen-ager's body was not found in a wave pool until after 1 A.M., almost eight hours after the park closed and six hours after lifeguards conducted training exercises in the pool.


A Celebration Long in the Making


Review/Opera; A Love Quadrangle In a Handel Rarity
Restoring "Amadigi" to the public consciousness is like clutching at an object long submerged in water.
Written in 1715 for a particular audience, shaped to the talents of singers now several centuries dead and continually revised and added to according to music-business demands of the moment, Handel's opera has at its core music that speaks of permanence but that remains half-hidden by historical encrustation.
Opera Manhattan is giving "Amadigi" a try.
The first of four performances took place at the Church of the Resurrection, 119 East 74th Street, on Wednesday.
The last two are scheduled for next Wednesday and Friday evenings.
The plot (Oriana is loved by Amadigi and Dardano, Amadigi by the sorceress Melissa) creaks.
The libretto is florid rhetoric.
The music -- amazing, beautiful music -- is very much alive.


Bridge
A winning tournament debut is not uncommon in events restricted to players owning fewer than five master points, but it happened in more spectacular fashion at the Eastern Regional Championships in Manhattan last month.
John Wei of Queens, Peter Shao of West Windsor, N.J., and Fonda Charne of Brooklyn won the Swiss Team event for players with fewer than 100 master points.
They had not a single master point among them, but now have 2.92 each and have joined the American Contract Bridge League.
Their fourth player, with vastly more tournament experience, was Todd Wachsman, an 11-year-old sixth-grader at Parkway Manor School in Allentown, Pa., who had almost three master points.
He is usually a caddy, running errands for the tournament directors, but last year decided to become a player.
Eleven is an ideal age to learn the game, and there are indeed three players, Joel Wooldridge, Sam Hirschman and Douglas Hsieh, who have earned the life master title at that age.


Church, in an Era of Change, Is Misunderstood; Catholic Homosexuals
To the Editor:
Your June 1 article on the Roman Catholic Church in the United States states, "the church's left often resembles a collection of groups seeking recognition for single interests or excluded minorities." You include in this group Dignity, described as "representing Catholic homosexuals."


2 Suspects Attend Hearing Into Slaying of Executive
The two people charged with the murder last week of a Grand Union supermarket executive made their first appearances in court today, but so did lawyers for his two half-brothers and a longtime female companion who are seeking to be named beneficiaries of his $2.3 million estate.
The hearing, called to decide if prosecutors have grounds to hold the two suspects, did not produce much new information about the murder of the victim, Brooke D. Lennon, 54, Grand Union's senior vice president for merchandising.
Kenneth Gribetz, the Rockland County District Attorney, said he had a 48-page confession from Mr.
Lennon's 23-year-old wife of one year, Michelle, and a 57-page confession from Robert Tomassi, the 25-year-old motorcycle mechanic whom he has described as her lover.


Public &amp; Private; Fall From The Nest
The cardinals were in the sun room downstairs, battling the deceptive transparency of the windows.
They were a matched pair, his and her, with the air of belonging together and being there for a purpose.
The purpose was on the floor, a chick with the rheumy rolling eye and bony neck of an old man.
The door had been left open for the dog, and the baby had come in, its parents close behind.
I took the chick back outside and opened the windows for its parents, who fluttered overhead, making the monosyllabic monotonous note of the cardinal, tinged now with a palpable air of distress.
The chick had legs like L's, pale and sinewy, and wings that seemed twice the size necessary to lift its body.
It rose and fell, rose and fell again.
All day long its mother, soft brown with a bright beak, and its father, a flamboyant flag of crimson against the leaves, followed it around the yard, making frantic one-note suggestions.


U.S. Group Plans to Sue Lloyd's of London
Facing crippling financial losses from their investments in Lloyd's of London, a group of American investors said today that it would file a lawsuit in the United States in the next two months seeking to overturn a prohibition on taking legal action against the insurer in a country outside Britain.
The group, the American Names Association, said winning the right to sue Lloyd's in the United States would be a first step in efforts to bring legal action contending that it wase defrauded by the insurer.


It's Not Just Ireland-Italy, It's Norwood-Belmont; A World Cup Match Puts the Ethnic Pride of 2 Bronx Neighborhoods Up for Grabs
This is another Bronx tale, one told in a couple of tongues and any number of different accents.
The Irish, who keep immigrating in multitudes, are in Norwood.
The Italians, who have not all yet left for Westchester, are in Belmont.


Filing an Estate Return Usually Means an Audit
While only 1 in 100 income tax returns is audited, an audit of an estate tax return is very near a certainty.
People with taxable estates, therefore, need to do more than prepare a will to be sure that children, grandchildren or other heirs get what is intended and that family-owned businesses can carry on efficiently during and after a tax examination.


Let's Use Commercial Vaccine Distribution
To the Editor:
Re the Clinton Administration's plan to establish a national warehouse to distribute pediatric vaccines (news articles, May 30-31): The Federal Government's plan for universal immunization of our children is a positive step, and our children deserve a system that insures a safe, effective and timely flow of vaccines.


Relief After a Chemical Fire


Railroad Law in Disrepair
The strike that has disrupted the lives of 100,000 Long Island Rail Road commuters could not have occurred if the line were governed by state law rather than the Federal Railway Labor Act.
The Long Island is the nation's largest commuter rail system.
It is part of the publicly owned transit network -- rails, subways and buses -- serving the New York region under the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.


Michel-Melthon Lynch, 25, Musician
Michel-Melthon Lynch, a bass player and drummer for the Haitian band Boukman Eksperyans, died on June 4 at his home in Port-au-Prince, Haiti.
He was 25.
The cause was meningitis, said his manager, Dan Behrman.


Wearing Your Heart On a Shirt
This time, believe the hype.
In this city where the Rangers, who normally skate on ice, now walk on water, where the Gay Games and the World Cup are about to begin and where the Knicks keep stepping up, no mere railroad strike could lay siege to celebration.


Bowe and Lewis Fight Is On
Riddick Bowe, described as "ecstatic" and thanking his manager profusely, yesterday agreed to fight Lennox Lewis, the man who defeated him in the Olympics and then literally lifted out of the garbage can the heavyweight belt Bowe had tossed away.
The pair signed to meet for either next March or April, with Lewis's World Boxing Council title at stake.
That title once belonged to Bowe, but he discarded the belt in a garbage can in London -- refusing to face Lewis -- shortly after winning the unified crown in November 1992, from Evander Holyfield.
Last November, Holyfield regained the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Association title from Bowe


CHRONICLE
Staying out of the limelight?
The PRINCESS OF WALES announced in December that due to "overwhelming" intrusion by news organizations into her private life, she would withdraw from constant public view.
Now, she is on the cover of the July issue of British Vogue, the London Daily Telegraph reported yesterday, in a portrait taken by PATRICK DEMARCHELIER, the French fashion photographer.
She is wearing a halter neck evening dress by Catherine Walker.


Racal Electronics Plc reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


Pier I Imports Inc.(PIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Recognizing Gay Athletes
Besides providing the setting for the Stanley Cup, the World Cup and maybe a basketball trophy too, New York City gets to play host to Gay Games IV for the next eight days -- with more athletes than the Olympics but still struggling for acceptance.
Starting today, the Games will bring some 11,000 athletes to the city from more than 40 nations for competition in 31 events -- aerobics, ice hockey, in-line roller skating, figure skating, body building, track and field, triathlon and water polo among others.
Proudly a quadrennial sportsfest of "inclusion, not exclusion," the Games are not limited by sexual orientation or anything else.
Organizers expect that 5 or 6 percent of the participants will be "straight" athletes seeking exercise and competition.
The Games are open to the skilled and beginners alike, and a number of events are certified for official amateur athletic recognition.


Sports of The Times; Simpson's Sad Drama A Puzzle
I can't believe what I'm seeing.
Out the corner of one eye I'm watching 10 gifted athletes at Madison Square Garden competing, toe to toe, in Game 5 of the National Basketball Association finals.
On the television screen in the press box, I'm watching in horror as O. J. Simpson, one of the most gifted athletes of his time, rides in a white Bronco down Riverside Freeway followed by a fleet of Los Angeles police cars.
It is halftime, Knicks up, 48-37, on their way to a 91-84 victory over the Rockets and a 3-2 lead in the four-of-seven-game series.
But a group of fans crane their necks and split their attention between the fiction of athletic competition and the terrifying spectacle of Orenthal James Simpson negotiating his life.


Gregg to Coach in Canadian League
FORREST GREGG quit as Southern Methodist athletic director yesterday to coach the new Canadian Football League team in Shreveport, La.
Gregg, a National Football League Hall of Fame member who played for S.M.U. and coached the Mustangs, had been out of coaching for four years.
It will be the sixth head coaching job for Gregg, 60, whose Cincinnati Bengals lost the 1981 Super Bowl to San Francisco, 26-21.
In 11 years of N.F.L. coaching, Gregg was 77-87-1.
Gregg returned to S.M.U. in 1988, coaching the team in 1989 and 1990 when the Mustangs resumed play after the program was suspended for two years.(AP)


Handling of 1989 Wife-Beating Case Was a 'Terrible Joke,' Prosecutor Says
The Los Angeles District Attorney prosecuting the murder case against O. J. Simpson today described the handling of a domestic violence charge against the football star five years ago as "a joke, a terrible joke."
"It sure seems like he got special treatment," the District Attorney, Gil Garcetti, said at a news conference here.


A Parisian Landmark Heard in a New Light
The Arc de Triomphe is not only one of the most famous tourist attractions in Paris, it is also a sacred national site, where a flame burns for France's unknown soldier.
But until the end of August, it has been transformed into a vanguard artwork by an American sound artist, Bill Fontana, and Paris seems pleased.
As you approach the arch from below, through the two tunnels leading under the endlessly revolving traffic of the Etoile, ocean waves from hidden loudspeakers caress the ear.
The exterior of the arch has been subtly festooned with 20 beige loudspeakers, on two levels.
They project more sea sounds, from gentle swooshes to thunderous crashes, toward street level, transmitted live by digital phone lines from Normandy.


In Performance; POP
A Consistent Sound Despite Many Styles  Mercury Lounge


Ex-Communists in Eastern Germany Gain in Voting
Among the many ex-Communists who are celebrating their recent successes at the polls in eastern Germany, few have more reason to do so than Michael Schneider.
Mr.
Schneider heads the Democratic Socialist Party, as the former Communists are called, in the eastern Berlin borough of Treptow.
In Sunday's election for representatives in the European Parliament, the Democratic Socialists won 37 percent of the votes there, making them the borough's strongest party.


INSIDE
Stiff Sentences in Cult Siege
A judge sentenced five members of the Branch Davidian sect to 40 years in prison for their roles in a shoot-out last year near Waco, Tex.
Page 8.
Death Sentence Voided
The Supreme Court said prosecutors must tell of the existence of an alternate sentence of life without parole in seeking a death penalty.
Page 13.
Knicks Need One More
The Knicks defeated the Rockets, 91-84, to take a 3-2 lead in the N.B.A. finals, and can win the title in Game 6 at Houston Sunday.
Page 29.


Medicare Inquiry Subpoenas 100 Hospitals
Federal agents have issued subpoenas to more than 100 hospitals around the country as part of a broad investigation of claims filed under Medicare and Medicaid for the use of new medical devices not approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
The inspector general of the Department of Health and Human Services, June Gibbs Brown, issued the subpoenas as part of an examination of the use of all sorts of devices.
A copy of one subpoena, obtained by The New York Times from a hospital, shows that investigators are also examining claims for a wide range of surgical procedures, many of which involve cardiac catheters, flexible tubes used in the treatment of heart disease.


New Yorkers Can Help Care for Their Trees
To the Editor:
Thank you for your timely report on the plight of New York City's trees (news article, May 31) in the aftermath of last summer's drought and last winter's exceedingly harsh weather.
The great number of dead and dying trees could have been lessened with routine maintenance and preventive care, and this points to a glaring omission in your article: citizen involvement.


Fire Burns Papua Forest Records
Investigators have reported that arson was almost certainly the cause of a fire this month that destroyed vital records on timber contracts in the rain forests of Papua New Guinea, where some of the last vast stretches of unspoiled tropical forest are under threat from foreign loggers.
The June 4 firein offices of the nation's Forest Authority in Port Moresby, the capital, destroyed a building that housed tens of thousands of documents, including forest maps dating back more than 40 years.


Robinson Builds Body and Demands
GLENN ROBINSON, who could be the first pick in the N.B.A. draft, already is looking into ways to boost his expected multimillion-dollar salary.
Robinson, the college player of the year at Purdue, plans to visit the team with the top pick, the Milwaukee Bucks this weekend, according to his agent, CHARLES TUCKER.
Robinson has been working out at his old Roosevelt High School in Gary, Ind., and running six miles a day. (AP)


First Rulings For Haitians: Yes to 6 of 35
This huge white hospital ship, the U.S.S.
Comfort, which has been turned into a floating immigration bureaucracy, meted out its first judgments today as the instrument of the latest shift in President Clinton's Haiti policy.
Now, when fleeing Haitians are plucked from their rickety wooden sailboats by one of a dozen United States Coast Guard cutters on patrol in the Caribbean, they are brought to a shipboard world of computers, interviews, forms and files.
That leads to the difficult decision by an Immigration and Naturalization Service officer on whether each individual will be allowed into the United States.


Reluctantly, Mayor Lets Tennis Deal Go Through
After complaining before and after the mayoral election about the deal that the administration of David N. Dinkins negotiated to expand the National Tennis Center in Queens, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has agreed, with no public notice, to approve the lease for the expansion.
Mayor Giuliani had suggested after taking office that he would try to find a way to squash the deal, which will keep the United States Open tennis tournament in New York until at least the year 2020.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco abandoned attempts to develop a safer cigaretteat the end of the 1970's after a decade of negative research results, companydocuments show.  [ Page 1. ]


Top Scientists For Companies Saw the Perils
The two chiefs of research in the British and American companies, Dr.
Robert B. Griffith of Brown and Williamson and Dr.
S.
J.
Green of British-American Tobacco, or Batco, who appear frequently in the documents, have been the subject of news reports because, contrary to company policy, both said after retirement that they had no doubt that cigarettes caused cancer and other diseases.
An article in The Louisville Courier Journal on June 1, 1994, noted that Dr.
Griffith left Brown &amp; Williamson in 1969 "because he wanted to focus on research and move forward with his ideas for developing a safe cigarette."


Suspects in the Slaying of a Supermarket Executive Appear in Court


Material Sciences Corp.(MSC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Breast Implant Update
What a confusing development.
Two years ago the Federal Food and Drug Administration drove silicone breast implants off the market.
The move was widely interpreted as a judgment that the implants were dangerous.
Women who had received implants were alarmed.
Some who had suffered illnesses filed lawsuits and won huge awards; the manufacturers settled a class-action suit for $4.2 billion, and most quit making the implants.
But now a study by scientists at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota finds no evidence that connective-tissue diseases, one of the major areas of concern, are associated with breast implants.
And the editor of the authoritative New England Journal of Medicine says the F.D.A.'s action against the implants was "unnecessarily alarming."


Up 2-0 With Only 10 Men, Spain Must Settle for a Tie
South Korea, the underdog team that is still looking for its first victory in a World Cup game, mounted a dramatic, two-goal comeback in the final six minutes tonight to tie Spain, 2-2, in a first-round Group C game at the Cotton Bowl.
Seo Jung Won, a South Korean midfielder, scored the tying goal with only seconds left on the unofficial stadium clock, though the two teams played to a frantic standoff during another minute and a half left of injury time.
Seo's goal sent the large South Korean contingent in the crowd of 56,000 into delirium, with fans waving the national flag and shouting "KO-RE-A, KO-RE-A" for several minutes after the game ended.
Nadal Is Ejected
Spain played much of the game with only 10 men after its captain, Miguel Angel Nadal, was ejected 25 minutes into the game.
But surprisingly, Spain scored twice in the first 10 1/2 minutes of the second half.
The first was on a hard shot by striker Julio Salinas, the second off a header by midfielder Juan Antonio Goikoetxea.


Corrections
An article by Reuters yesterday about the release of some Palestinian prisoners referred incorrectly to Nahal Oz, the border point to which they were delivered by Israel.
It is in Israel, not in the Gaza Strip.


Rockets Can't Find Basket In the 4th
The Rockets preferred to emphasize the good news, that they were returning to Houston two home-court victories from a National Basketball Association championship.
They had earned a seventh game at home in the Summit, and now they would make use of it.
"We will give our fans at home a second chance," Hakeem Olajuwon said.
"We accomplished our goal, which was to regain the home-court advantage. Now the ball is in our court. We have to step up and take the challenge."


TransTexas Gas Corp.(TTXG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


In Performance; JAZZ
Saxophonist Stretches Out In an Intimate New Club  Smalls


A Spectacle Gripping And Bizarre
Television viewers nationwide watched last night as a white Ford Bronco carrying O. J. Simpson was chased across the freeways of Southern California by the California Highway Patrol and a fleet of television news helicopters after the vehicle was located by tracing calls from its cellular phone.
The unfolding scene was broadcast live by all the television networks, pre-empting standard Friday fare, like "The Commish," and "Walker, Texas Ranger," and, for a time, even the fifth game of the National Basketball Association's championship playoffs, for millions of viewers across the country.


Petrie Agrees to Work Out Its Sale to Investors
The Petrie Stores Corporation announced yesterday that it had agreed to negotiate an exclusive deal to be bought for $200 million to $250 million in cash by an investor group led by E. M. Warburg, Pincus &amp; Company.
The move brings Petrie's shareholders closer to a complex deal under which they would be reimbursed with 37.1 million newly issued shares of Toys "R" Us.


Review/Pop; David Byrne Is Still Not Decided
Is modern life a mess or a miracle?
David Byrne can't decide, and for nearly two decades, first as the Talking Heads' leader and then on his own, he has turned his ambivalence into songs that veer from giddiness to despair, from withdrawal to engagement, from mourning to celebration.
Few rockers are better at playing the wide-eyed innocent who's anything but naive.
At the Supper Club in the theater district on Wednesday, he luxuriated in conflicting impulses, letting songs contradict each other while the music lilted and romped.
Mr.
Byrne is not fleeing the Talking Heads anymore.
After the band dissolved in the late 1980's, Mr.
Byrne used his solo albums to experiment with Afro-Caribbean rhythms, distinct from the early Heads' crisp rock and funk.
But with his new album, "David Byrne" (Luaka Bop/Sire/ Warner Brothers), and with the four-man band he led on Wednesday night, Mr.
Byrne has integrated his distant and recent past.


New Yorkers Bury the Rangers' Curse in a Sea of Confetti
Dodging slow-swirling confetti instead of 100-mile-an-hour slap shots, the New York Rangers ventured yesterday into a place that for 54 years they could only dream about: lower Broadway's Canyon of Heroes.
Basking -- and baking -- in an 89-degree celebration of a sport played on ice, the team that had been jinxed for generations was lionized along the traditional parade route by crowds that seemed to be roaring louder than at Madison Square Garden.
Long-suffering fans accustomed to whining about missed goals or blind referees changed their chant.
"We want the cup" became "We own the cup."


Islanders to Name Coach Monday
The Islanders have called a news conference Monday to name a new coach, and all indications are that LORNE HENNING will be named the successor to AL ARBOUR.
When Arbour stepped down from his position June 1 after 19 seasons with the team, he strongly endorsed Henning, his assistant since 1989, as the best replacement.
Since then Henning, 42, was widely believed to have the inside track, and at Arbour's retirement Henning said, "I'll be shocked if I don't get it." Henning, an original Islander, would take over a team that turned in a disappointing regular season, with a 36-36-12 record, then was swept in the playoffs by the Rangers.


Composer and Pianist Win $4,000 Awards
Michael John LaChiusa, a composer, lyricist and librettist, and Helen Huang, a pianist, were named winners of Martin E. Segal Awards at a reception in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse at Lincoln Center on Wednesday.
Each is to receive $4,000 to be used for study and career advancement.


France Asks Its Youth: What Do You Want?
Alarmed by the disenchanted mood of many French young people, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur has devised an unusual way of trying to bridge the generation gap.
He is asking all nine million youths between the ages of 15 and 25 to tell him how they feel about home, school, work and society in general.
This weekend, a questionnaire is being sent to millions of French homes, using Government records to determine which households have residents in the right age range, inviting youths to give their reactions -- total or partial agreement or disagreement -- to 58 statements.
They range from "I feel comfortable in this society" to "I would like to receive more love from my parents."


COMPANY NEWS
COVENTRY CORP., Nashville, a health insurance concern, said its directors had approved a 2-for-1 stock split.
GREENFIELD INDUSTRIES Evans, Ga., said its Rogers Tool Works unit would acquire Progressive Carbide from Dresser Industries' Security division.
Terms were not disclosed.
JUSTIN INDUSTRIES, Fort Worth, , a manufacturer of brick and other clay products, said its Acme Brick Co. unit would acquire American Tile Supply, Dallas, for an undisclosed amount of cash, notes and stock.
MARTIN MARIETTA MATERIALS INC., Raleigh, N.C., purchased a granite quarry in Virginia from Solite Corp. for undisclosed terms. 3DO CO., Redwood City, Calif., a multimedia video systems maker, said it had completed a $36.8 million secondary stock offering and received $37 million in financial commitments from new and existing investors.


Under Proposal, Players Could Get Lesser Share
Major league baseball club owners have offered the players 50 percent of their gross revenue, or have they?
An examination of a 27-page document outlining the salary cap proposal raises questions about some of the elements of the owners' proposal and, according to the players association, suggests that the players realistically could wind up with a share closer to 40 percent.


Joy Affects The Budget
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the City Council Speaker moved closer to an agreement on New York City's budget yesterday and, perhaps caught up in a ticker-taped euphoria, they suggested they had the New York Rangers to thank.
Mr.
Giuliani and the Speaker, Peter F. Vallone, agreed to meet face to face for the first time to try to resolve their differences on the budget while at the City Hall ceremony honoring the Rangers' Stanley Cup victory.


Empire Ex-Chief Sues Insurance Company
Albert A. Cardone, the former chief executive of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, is suing the insurance giant and its board of directors for more than $120 million, claiming they cheated him of his employee benefits and defamed him.
Mr.
Cardone was forced to retire in May 1993 after extensive news reports and an internal inquiry detailed deep management and morale problems.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7  AVOIDING A KOREAN SHOWDOWN
News analysis: North Korea's latest offer to resolve the crisis over its nuclear program appears to contain little that is new.
But President Clinton's willingness to seize on it as an opportunity suggests that the Administration is deeply apprehensive about a showdown.  1


In Performance; DANCE
In an Attic of the Mind, Dusting Off and Fussing  La Mama Annex Theater


U.S. Team Knows Stakes, and Heat, Will Be High Today
When the United States makes its 1994 World Cup debut against Switzerland Saturday morning, the heat and humidity inside the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich., will be burdensome, and so will the pressure.
Simply put, everything is riding on this game for the Americans.
A chance to advance to the second round.
The awakening of a somnolent American soccer public.
Perhaps the very future of the sport in this country.
"How can you overestimate the importance of this game?" said Hank Steinbrecher, executive director of the United States Soccer Federation.


STRIKE'S FIRST DAY PROVES EASY RIDE FOR L.I. COMMUTERS
The first day of a strike by Long Island Rail Road workers proved a surprisingly easy ride, as thousands of commuters found alternative routes to work relatively free of congestion or, fearing a day of gridlock on the roads and in the New York City transit system, chose to stay home.
The walkout, the sixth to shut the nation's busiest commuter rail line since 1960, came as negotiators for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which oversees the railroad, and the United Transportation Union failed to reach agreement after days of intensive contract talks.


Discount Brokers: The Cheap Get Cheaper
Price battles are breaking out in the deep-discount broker business, leaving some firms shell-shocked, some on the attack and some posing as noncombatants.
Through all the smoke, savvy investors will discern one thing: the spoils of war.
The first shot was fired in January by National Discount Brokers, based in New York.
A new subsidiary of the Sherwood Group, an investment and research firm with $80 million in 1993 sales, National heavily advertised a flat fee of $30 a trade, topped by a $3 handling charge.
The fee applied to all over-the-counter trades and to trades of fewer than 5,000 shares of listed stocks.
For larger listed deals, the firm tacked on a penny a share on the whole order.


Church, in an Era of Change, Is Misunderstood
To the Editor:
You are to be applauded for "Future of Faith Worries Catholic Leaders" (June 1), which points to the divisiveness that is a common concern of all participants in the debate about the future of Roman Catholicism in the United States.


AT&amp;T Wins Vs. the F.C.C. In High Court
The Supreme Court ruled today that the Federal Communications Commission acted without legal authority when it moved to enhance competition in the long-distance telephone market by relieving AT&amp;T's competitors of the need to file tariffs listing their rates and services.
The 5-to-3 decision was a victory for AT&amp;T, which had fought the deregulatory initiative through several rounds of court battles.
The ruling leaves the matter to Congress, where the issue could complicate the debate over big telecommunications measures that are pending in both Houses.
Setback to MCI Unit
In addition to the F.C.C., a loser in the Court today was the MCI Telecommunications Corporation, a unit of the MCI Communications Corporation, which had used its new rate-setting leeway to compete with AT&amp;T by negotiating customized service agreements with big companies.


Thomas Rudel, 89, Executive, Is Dead
Thomas Ryder Rudel, a leader in the machine-tool industry, died last Friday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 89 and lived in West Park, N.Y.
The cause was a ruptured aneurysm, according to the hospital's death certificate.


Now for the Good News About Our Schools
To the Editor:
They had the place rocking, 50 children, ages 6 to 12, decked out in red, white and blue spangled costumes.
They represented the diversity of our city, and they sang a song of unity composed by their music teachers, who directed them and cheered them on.
They sang with poise and pride, and their joy washed over us like a wave.
Next came a group of 12-year-old girls, led by their music teacher, and they sang a medley of songs about New York City.


E.M.S. Aide Killed by Car At Accident
A 22-year-old ambulance crew member helping victims of a car accident in Brooklyn was killed early yesterday morning when a Jeep driven by a drunken driver plowed through a series of warning flares and crashed into the accident scene, the police said.
The police said the driver had been convicted of drunken driving in 1992, and had been charged with the crime once after that, but was still driving with a valid license at the time of the accident.
Victim Was Rookie of the Year
The victim, 24-year-old Christopher Prescott, who was named Rookie of the Year by the city's Emergency Medical Service earlier this year, was the city's first ambulance crew member to be killed in the line of duty, medical service officials said.


International Multifoods Corp.(IMC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


William Field, 90; Leader for Decades In Study of Glaciers
William Osgood Field, a leader in the study of glaciers and their shaping of the landscape, died on Thursday at his home in Great Barrington, Mass., at the age of 90.
His daughter, Diana Sloane Field, said he had died of cancer.


'A Day at the Movies'
The magic of the movies is the theme of a daylong outdoor festival tomorrow that will include bands, floats, movie characters, actors, technicians, look-alike contests, film programs, bagpipers, food and dancing.
Highlights include a parade from Broadway and 40th Street to Seventh Avenue and 52d Street, starting at 11 A.M., an auction of movie memorabilia at the Sheraton Hotel (Seventh Avenue and 53d Street) at 3:30 P.M., and an outdoor street festival on Seventh Avenue from 47th to 57th Street from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 777-3456, extension 9.


At the Gay Games, Giuliani Takes Step To Forge New Ties
Across six months in office, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has had a strained relationship with gay-rights advocates, parting ways with them on a range of issues from his long refusal to condemn a supporter who spoke out against the Gay Games to his decision to march in the St.
Patrick's Day parade despite the exclusion of a group of homosexual marchers.
But tonight at a Columbia University stadium, Mr.
Giuliani is scheduled to deliver a formal welcoming speech at the Gay Games.
The Mayor's aides helped pave the way for closing ceremonies to be held at Yankee Stadium.
And an interview with Mr.
Giuliani is featured on the cover of the current issue of The Advocate, which describes itself as the national gay and lesbian news magazine.


CHRONICLE
HARRY BELAFONTE sang with Elmo, a "Sesame Street" muppet, JASEN TROTTER, a 12-year-old from Los Angeles, described the plight of children in ghetto areas, and celebrities mingled with diplomats at the fourth annual Day of the African Child at the United Nations on Thursday evening.
The event was sponsored by Unicef.
Archbishop DESMOND M. TUTU talked about the new South Africa and said: "You walked into the polling booth and you emerged through the other side a different person. You entered as a black person wondering if you are God's stepchild and you emerged through the other side and said, 'Hey, I'm free.' "


METRO DIGEST
THE L.I.R.R.
STRIKE: ANGER TURNS TO ACTION, YET CHAOS IS AVERTED The first day of a strike by Long Island Rail Road workers proved a surprisingly easy ride, as thousands of commuters found alternative routes to work relatively free of congestion or, fearing a day of gridlock on the roads and in the transit system, chose to stay home.
Page 1.
A proposal to end overtime pay for night and weekend work became a sticking point.
Page 26.
Long Islanders riding the J train through Bushwick, Brooklyn, were not hard to spot.
Page 26.
HOSPITAL AIDE CHARGED IN KILLERS' ESCAPE Last month, with a loaded gun at his head and two convicted killers leading the way, Robert Kamrowski seemed the very picture of a hostage as the two men escaped from a psychiatric hospital.
Prosecutors now say that Mr.
Kamrowski's role was a ruse, and that it was he who provided the gun to the killers.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI MENDS FENCES AT GAY GAMES Across six months in office, Mayor Giuliani has had a strained relationship with gay-rights advocates.
But tonight at a Columbia University stadium, Mr.
Giuliani is scheduled to deliver a formal welcoming speech at the Gay Games.
For the Mayor, the appearance is another step in his political self-definition and in his effort to forge a Republicanism that can appeal to both "family-value" conservatives and homosexuals.
Page 1.
REVELERS BURY A CURSE WITH CONFETTI Dodging slow-swirling confetti instead of 100-mile-an-hour slap shots, the New York Rangers ventured into a place that for 54 years they could only dream about: lower Broadway's Canyon of Heroes.
Page 28.
QUESTIONS IN DROWNING OF TEEN-AGER New York City School officials and police and medical investigators in Pennsylvania were trying to determine how a year-end school outing to an amusement park near Allentown ended in the drowning of a Bronx teen-ager.
Page 25.
MAYOR LETS STAND A DEAL HE CRITICIZED After complaining before and after the mayoral election about the deal that the administration of David N. Dinkins negotiated to expand the National Tennis Center in Queens, Mayor Giuliani has agreed, with no public notice, to approve the lease for the expansion.
Page 25. 1 DEAD IN SHOOTOUT AFTER MALL ROBBERY A Correction Department officer shot a robber to death and wounded the robber's accomplice in a wild shootout in a crowded mall in Jackson Heights, Queens, the police said.
Page 25.
REGION  HEARING IN DEATH OF EXECUTIVE The two people charged with the murder last week of a Grand Union supermarket executive made their first appearances in court, but so did lawyers for his two half-brothers and a longtime female companion who are seeking to be named beneficiaries of his $2.3 million estate.
Page 27.
AFTER LONG ABSENCE, BUTLER GETS HIS DUE The Mark Twain Memorial, the former home of the author Samuel L. Clemens in Hartford, will restore a long-overlooked room -- that of George Griffin, Clemens's butler and the inspiration for the character of Jim, the runaway slave, in "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn." Page 27.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman......28


Nets and Hill Continue Interviews
BOB HILL, an assistant coach for the Orlando Magic, is scheduled to have his second interview with Nets General Manager WILLIS REED to fill the coaching vacancy left by CHUCK DALY, according to a report yesterday in The Orlando Sentinel.
Hill is a former head coach of the Knicks and Pacers.
Reed said he would like to name a new coach before the draft on June 29.
He has interviewed the New Jersey assistant coaches, PAUL SILAS and BRENDAN SUHR, and Suhr, attending the Knicks-Rockets game last night, said he was still very interested in the job but had recieved no word on how close the teams was to making a decision.


Hoboken Council Votes to Close Bars at 1 A.M.
The Hoboken City Council voted today to crack down on the raucous night life here, moving up the closing time for bars to 1 A.M. in an effort to tame the crowds of young people whose drunken antics often make some historic avenues seem like fraternity row during rush week.
The new ordinance was the latest salvo in a long-running battle between local leaders and more than 100 bar and restaurant owners in Hoboken, which in recent years has become increasingly popular among suburban college students eager to avoid the hassle of traveling to New York City.


Review/City Ballet; Connecting the Dots of Artistic Debts
The New York City Ballet paid homage to several composers in two very different works by George Balanchine on Thursday night at the New York State Theater
"Divertimento from 'Le Baiser de la Fee' " was created for the company's 1972 Stravinsky Festival, and Balanchine later appended a haunting pas de deux.
Stravinsky's concert suite, drawn from his ballet based on a fairy tale by Hans Christian Andersen, paid a tribute of its own: Tchaikovsky's music weaves through the score.


In Performance; POP
Soundgarden Is Seen And Not Heard, Alas  New York State Armory


Fred W. Wilson, Investment Banker, 82
Fred W. Wilson, a partner in the Wall Street investment banking concern Lazard Freres &amp; Company, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
Mr.
Wilson joined Lazard Freres in 1945, became a general partner in 1961 and a limited partner in 1971.
Before joining Lazard, Mr.
Wilson was a financial analyst with the General American Investment Company.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Yasir Arafat's delay in going to Jericho to assume formal control of Palestinian self-rule there and in the Gaza Strip reversed the dates on which two Arafat deputies were killed.
Khalil al-Wazir was killed in 1988 and Salah Khalaf in 1991.


Ewing's Magic Trick: Presto! He's Russell
He came advertised as the next Bill Russell.
Patrick Ewing enjoyed that billing.
His first coach, Hubie Brown, once tried to make a power forward out of him.
Ewing wasn't buying that.
He saw himself as the center of the Knicks' universe, and that's who he has been, though too often not the way he planned it.
Russell was no great scorer.
Ewing has not been for much of this grueling championship series, the lowest-scoring finals since they started limiting possessions to 24 seconds.
He has still dominated the way Russell once seized a whole decade.
Ewing now understands why Russell always went home the winner.


Super Food Services Inc.(SFS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 7


Jerome W. Conn, 86, Discoverer Of Therapy for Gland Disorder
Dr.
Jerome W. Conn, a medical investigator, teacher and clinician best known for finding the cause of a severe hormonal disturbance and working out a treatment, died last Saturday in Naples, Fla.
He was 86 and had lived in Naples since his retirement in 1976.
Dr.
Conn died in a Naples hospital after a brief illness, said a spokesman for the University of Michigan, Bruce Weintraub.


Measurex Corp.(MX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Corrections
A brief report in Business Day yesterday about the stock performance of American Power Conversion misstated Paine Webber's investment recommendation on the company's shares.
Paine Webber raised its assessment of American Power's stock to "buy" from "neutral," not from "attractive."


Montgomerie Jumps to Lead; Nicklaus Close
With the fire taken out of the greens at Oakmont Country Club, a fiery Scot took over the lead in the United States Open today.
Colin Montgomerie, who was born in Glasgow and lives in Surrey, England, took advantage of benign scoring conditions for a round of 65 that gave him a two-stroke lead after two rounds.
It was an elegant display of golf by Montgomerie, 30, who birdied five holes, eagled one and bogeyed just one.
His birdie putt at the 18th hole put him at 136, 6 under par, two strokes off the Open record for 36 holes and two ahead of Hale Irwin, John Cook and David Edwards.
Jack Nicklaus and Jeff Maggert were three back at 139.


High Court Overturns a Death Sentence, Signaling a Turn Away From Conservatives
The Supreme Court ruled in a death penalty case today that if the state argued for a death sentence on the ground that a convicted murderer was too dangerous ever to go free, it could not conceal from the jury the existence of an alternative sentence of life in prison without parole.
Voting 7 to 2, the Court invalidated a murderer's death sentence in South Carolina on the ground that the prosecution and trial judge refused to tell the jury that if it chose a life term instead of a death sentence, the defendant would have been ineligible for parole.
A South Carolina law, as interpreted by the state's supreme court, bars telling the jury about parole ineligibility.


Religion Notes
"It's grisly business, this speculation on the Pope's health," writes the Rev.
Andrew M. Greeley, the maverick Roman Catholic priest and novelist.
But that doesn't seem to stop him.
This week, in a column written from Rome and distributed by Religious News Service, Father Greeley characteristically puts on the table a question that many Catholics are not comfortable talking about -- the church after Pope John Paul II.


WTD Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Marquette Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Elizabeth Paepcke, 91, a Force In Turning Aspen Into a Resort
Elizabeth Nitze Paepcke, who played a central role in transforming Aspen, Colo., from a largely abandoned 19th-century mining town into a winter resort, died on Wednesday at her home in Aspen.
She was 91.
She died of complications from a head injury she suffered in a fall last weekend, her family said.


Executive Changes
MITSUBISHI MOTOR SALES OF AMERICA INC., Cypress, Calif., promoted Kazuo Yoshida to chief executive from president and chief operating officer of its Value Rent-A-Car subsidiary in Boca Raton, Fla.
Replacing him as chief operating officer is Daniel F. McNamara, formerly senior vice president of corporate administration for Mitsubishi Motor, who also becomes executive vice president for Value.
NALCO CHEMICAL CO., Naperville, Ill., said its chief executive and president, E. J. Mooney, had been given the additional role of chairman, succeeding W. H. Clark.
SAMUEL GOLDWYN CO., Los Angeles, appointed John Bard Manulis senior vice president and head of its worldwide motion picture production unit, replacing Tom Rothman, who resigned.
STERLING HEALTH CAPITAL MANAGEMENT, New York, which plans and develops health care facilities, named Henry E. Manning, a former deputy commissioner of the New York City Department of Hospitals, president and chief executive.
KNOGO CORP., Hauppauge, L.I., designers and manufacturers of asset protection systems, has given Thomas A. Nicolette, president and chief operating officer, the additional post of chief executive, replacing Arthur J. Minasy, who died.
Also, Robert T. Abbott was promoted to senior vice president, from vice president of finance and chief financial officer.
He will remain chief financial officer.


After Long Absence, Twain's Butler Is to Return
George Griffin was Mark Twain's butler for 18 years, but he was much more than that.
Historians say he was also the inspiration for the character of Jim, the runaway slave, in "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn."
Despite his importance to Twain, Mr.
Griffin's tiny third-floor room in the Mark Twain Memorial, a museum here and the author's longtime home, has been closed to visitors, the space filled with a heating and cooling system that hums and shudders throughout the day.


Charles E. Saltzman, 90, Dies; Soldier and Wall Street Figure
Charles E. Saltzman, a soldier, statesman and civic leader, died on Thursday at his East Side apartment.
He was 90.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Clotilde Saltzman.


Graduate Students Give Grades a Boost
To the Editor:
"Making the Grades" (editorial June 5) identifies causes of college grade inflation, including promotion of student self-esteem, professors who are reluctant to make waves and administrators who want to satisfy the customers.
But you omit one reason of major proportions.


2d Opinion for Your Portfolio
A second opinion on an investment portfolio can accomplish as much as a second opinion on medical care, providing peace of mind and increasing the chance any flaws will be detected.
Many of the concerns are the same, too.
Like a quack doctor, the new adviser could tell an investor what he wants to hear just to win a client and could argue for overnight changes that are ill advised.


D-Day Photo Soldier Is G.I. Everyman
To the Editor:
"Bullets Tore Holes in the Water" by Alan Trachtenberg (Op-Ed, June 6) identifies Edward K. Regan as the soldier in Robert Capa's famous photograph of an American soldier coming ashore on D-Day.


Club Med Inc.(CMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Classic Matchup, Hottest Ticket
It is unquestionably the marquee game of the early stages of the World Cup.
It is the game for the bragging rights of a megalopolis with the largest ethnic populations in the country.
It is Italy against Ireland Saturday on natural grass atop artificial turf at Giants Stadium.
It is the dream game of the first round for the American organizers, explaining why the sacrifice was made to deprive Boston of the Irish team.
The organizers wanted a big game to kick off the tournament in the news media capital of the world and there was, arguably, no bigger matchup than this.


No Headline
"Now it's official. The curse is broken." MAYOR RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI -- at the victory parade for the Rangers.  [ 28:2. ]


Simpson Is Charged, Chased, Arrested
The police today charged O. J. Simpson with murdering his former wife and a friend of hers, then pursued him for about 50 miles along Southern California highways this evening before he finally surrendered outside his home here, ending a long day on the run.
The extraordinary pursuit, broadcast to the nation by the television networks, developed about six hours after Mr.
Simpson suddenly vanished instead of surrendering to the authorities at midday as his lawyer had arranged.


World Cup '94; Defending Its Title, Germany Slips by Bolivia
They came by the thousands, Bolivians blowing whistles and carrying oversized flags, Germans beating drums and dancing in conga lines, Americans trying to plug into this unfamiliar festive celebration.
The World Cup arrived here today with the first of 52 games, but the locals still have much to learn about football played with the feet instead of the hands.
Oprah Winfrey, the emcee for the opening ceremonies, fell off a platform just after she welcomed a worldwide audience of 750 million television viewers to Soldier Field and appeared to twist an ankle.
Then Diana Ross skipped down the slick turf lip-synching a song, kicked a waiting soccer ball and missed the net wide left.


Mexico's Negotiator With Rebels Quits, Clouding National Election
The governing party was thrown into disarray today after the Government's chief negotiator with peasant rebels in the southern state of Chiapas suddenly resigned, accusing the party's presidential candidate of trying to sabotage his efforts.
The resignation of the negotiator, Manuel Camacho Solis, on Thursday night came five days after the insurgents rejected the settlement he had proposed three months earlier.
The rebels called for new talks focused on their demands for democratic political change.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Scott Bankhead, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Purchased the contract of Rick Trlicek, pitcher, from Pawtucket of the International League.


South Africa Tries to Take the Force Out of Police
Until recently, a sweep by 200 armed members of the South African police through the mixed-race township of Manenberg would have signaled a crackdown on political dissidents.
Instead, the 200 officers who descended on Manenberg one day at the end of May were deployed to root out the violent gangs that have plagued this and other townships on the flat plains east of Cape Town.


BILL CLINTON'S ADHOCRACY
The Clinton adhocracy is not working because Bill Clinton isn't doing it well, not because there is anything inherently wrong with the idea ("Bill Clinton's Adhocracy," by Richard N. Haass, May 29).
Adhocracies can be liberating and energizing -- but only in very skilled hands.
Instead of "discouraging debate and dissent," a well-managed adhocracy (no, that is not an oxymoron) should encourage and respect both.
The trouble starts when it's not clear who makes the final decision.


O'Rourke Criticizes Toll Action
WHEN legislators in Albany agreed earlier this month to end the 25 cent tolls on the Hutchinson and Saw Mill River Parkways, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said it might have been a politically expedient move for lawmakers, but it was bad news for Westchester.
Mr.
O'Rourke said that while motorists will be pleased when the tolls end Oct. 31, a week before elections, the jobs of 26 county police officers who patrol the parkway will be on the line.
The County Executive accused Assembly Democrats, who backed the measure, of "leaving the police officers out in the cold."


Jane H. Fleming, Douglas Williams
Jane Harvey Fleming, the daughter of Peter Fleming Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Jane Breed Fleming, was married yesterday to Douglas Dickinson Williams, the son of Daniel Williams and Nancy Williams, both of Lititz, Pa.
The Rev.
Neely Towe officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Williams, 27, is a manager of business development at New Line Cinema, producers and distributors, in New York.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from Princeton University, she cum laude.
Her father is a partner at Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt &amp; Mosle, a New York law firm.
Her mother was the founder of Neighbor to Neighbor, a volunteer social-service organization in Greenwich, Conn.


Ms. Goldenberg And Mr. Field
Aileen Janis Goldenberg, a daughter of Susan and Herbert Goldenberg of Matawan, N.J., is to be married today to Melvin Field, the son of Steven and Martha Field of West Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Richard Fagan is to officiate at Congregation B'nai Tikvah in North Brunswick, N.J.


Corrections
An article on page 32 of the Arts and Leisure section today about an exhibition of paintings by Thomas Cole at the National Museum of American Art in Washington includes an outdated reference to the show's travel schedule.
After the section went to press, the museum announced that the exhibition would open at the Brooklyn Museum on Jan. 13, 1995.
It will also be on view, as scheduled, at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford beginning Sept. 11.


The President's Inclination: No, It Wasn't a Bow-Bow
"IF I see another king, I think I shall bite him," Teddy Roosevelt once growled.
Offered that opportunity with the Japanese equivalent last week, Bill Clinton turned out to have had quite something else in mind.
It wasn't a bow, exactly.
But Mr.
Clinton came close.
He inclined his head and shoulders forward, he pressed his hands together.
It lasted no longer than a snapshot, but the image on the South Lawn was indelible: an obsequent President, and the Emperor of Japan.


In Search of Democracy for Roosevelt Island
Twenty-five years ago, planners designed a new community on Roosevelt Island with painstaking attention to detail, including special street lamps, an exotic aerial tramway and futuristic vacuum tubes for garbage removal.
But one thing left out of the plan, contend many of the 8,000 people who now live there, was a democratic say in their own affairs.
Although Roosevelt Islanders vote in city elections, many of their services come from the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation, the state authority that runs the complex but is beyond direct electoral control.


Not Special Rights, Just Ordinary Rights
To the Editor:
I am troubled by a statement in an article accompanying your June 5 front-page report of Oliver L. North's nomination as Virginia Republican candidate for the Senate.
It says that "Oliver North is against special rights for homosexuals." This implies that homosexuals are asking for special rights.
That is simply not true and therefore extremely misleading.
I challenge anyone to name one special right a gay or lesbian person is fighting for in this country.
Being able to own a store, eat in a restaurant, teach in a school or practice law is not a special right, but rather a constitutional right given to every American.
However, since sexual orientation is not included in our national nondiscriminatory policy, gay or lesbian people can be -- and are -- denied food at restaurants and are fired from their jobs for no other reason than their sexual orientation.


Davida Horowitz, Brian Amkraut
Davida Horowitz, a daughter of Gloria and Sheldon Horowitz of Tuckahoe, N.Y., is to be married this evening to Brian David Amkraut, a son of the late Ruth and Julian Amkraut.
Rabbi Yaakov Wasser is to officiate at the Glen Island Casino in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride teaches social studies and English at Columbus Academy in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at Albany and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father is a State Special Deputy Attorney General in Manhattan.
Her mother, known professionally as Gloria Goldreich, is a novelist and lecturer.


Over There
To the Editor:
Lester David writes (letter, June 13) that the British sarcastically referred to the American G.I.'s in wartime England as "overfed, oversexed -- and over here." The refrain actually went "overpaid, oversexed -- and over here." The avoirdupois of our soldiers was of no interest to the locals, but that extra disposable income gave them an edge with the girls.
LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York, June 14, 1994


JUNE 12-18: Rally Around the Pope; Cardinals Assail Proposals On the Rights of Women And Curbs on Population
The Vatican does not specialize in coincidences.
Thus, when 114 of the Roman Catholic Church's 139 cardinals rallied last week to defend Pope John Paul II's opposition to proposals to be considered at a United Nations conference on population this year, the event had all the hallmarks of orchestration.
The cardinals, who had been called to Rome to discuss preparations for Christianity's next millennium, endorsed an appeal by John Cardinal O'Connor of New York for the Cairo conference -- regarded by the Clinton Administration, American feminists and population experts as a pivotal opportunity to enhance the status of women -- to avoid "cultural imperialism" that would lead to abortion on demand, sexual promiscuity and distortions of traditional family values.
Coming only weeks after the Pope himself used stern language to repudiate any talk of women in the priesthood, the cardinals' action seemed to offer one more confirmation that the Vatican is crusading against what it sees as a pervasive feminist challenge.
ALAN COWELL


Norma Sandison, Bruce Bennett
Norma Jean Sandison, the director of Mechanics Hall, a concert hall in Worcester, Mass., is to be married today to Bruce Shaw Bennett, the publisher and president of The Worcester Telegram &amp; Gazette.
The Rev.
Richard Black, a Methodist minister, is to perform the ceremony at the bridegroom's house in Worcester.
Ms.
Sandison, 46, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of the late Norman and Jean Sandison.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


The Changing Face of Father's Day
FOR Donald Rosenberg and other men like him, Father's Day has taken on a different meaning in recent years.
Newly divorced and with joint custody of two sons, he will spend today with his younger son's Cub Scout pack -- typical of a new breed of single fathers who are re-examining traditional notions of their roles.
Mr.
Rosenberg, a 45-year-old accountant from Yorktown, explained that he is "seeking a fresh definition of parenting."
Lawyers, social workers and others who work with single fathers say that in a society where once-accepted roles of fathers and mothers have undergone a profound shift, more divorced men and widowers are seeking a greater involvement in the lives of their children.


THE LAST WAR CRIMINAL
I would like to suggest that Ted Morgan's article "The Hidden Henchman" (May 22) bring a respite from articles about the Holocaust.
There are enough museums and sufficient evidence to insure that, no matter what lies are concocted by anti-Semites, the truth will prevail.
As a Jew (who owns photos of slaughtered family members), I know that we must never forget.
We can remember while we focus on current horrors.
IRIS KAUFMAN Pittsburgh


Sally A. Morris and Alan A. Pardee
Sally Ann Morris, a daughter of Carol and Lester Morris of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Alan Alexander Pardee, the son of Aida and Scott Pardee of New York.
The Rev.
Robert T. Ferrick performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The bride is an associate at LeBoeuf, Lamb, Greene &amp; MacRae, a law firm in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Hunter College and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father retired as a district manager at Nynex in New York.
Her mother is a reading specialist for the Glen Cove, L.I., public schools.


Ireland Stuns a Struggling Italy


Manager's Profile
Warren J. Isabelle  Fund: Pioneer Capital Growth, $293 million in assets; 5.75% sales charge.
Manager since 1990 inception. (Sponsor: Pioneer Funds, Boston.)  Born: Jan. 17, 1952; Gardner, Mass.


Reduced Exposure
The merger of the sporty T-shirt and the seductive slip dress has become a signature look for the summer of '94.
The combination is a collaboration between designers' idea of showing slip dresses that often overexposed the wearer, and women not ready to go that far, who have added white T-shirts and tank tops.
The T-shirts allow for modesty and make the dresses wearable, allowing women to wear a bra without the straps showing.
The slip dresses being worn around town are both long and short.
While it is a prominent daytime look, the combination is starting to appear in the evening as well.


Understanding and Care Help to Install Outdoor Outlets
INSTALLING an electrical outlet outdoors may not be much more difficult than installing an outlet indoors, which usually is rather easy.
People with minimum electrical experience and an ordinary assortment of home-repair tools may perform the work, provided that they work carefully and proceed only with a complete understanding of the job.
As with any electrical work, consult the authorities before starting.
Regulations may apply, and the work may require official inspections.


Another Father and Son Day for the Goodens; Dan Is Ailing, but He Is Making a Special Trip to See Dwight on the Mound Again
Growing up in Tampa, Dwight Gooden always looked forward to Fridays.
Fridays were Father and Son Days in the Gooden household, the day he spent time alone with his dad.
On those days, Dan Gooden would finish his job as a maintenance worker at Gardner Chemical, a local plant, and head straight home to pick up Dwight, his youngest child by 13 years.
Together, Dan and Dwight would go to the bank and cash Dan's paycheck, then they would go to a local Italian restaurant, the same one every Friday, and have dinner.
Dwight ordered spaghetti every single time.


No Big Change Needed, Just a Hands-Off Policy
One more victory, and the forecasters of pro basketball's impending collapse will have their champion.
The unglamorous, unrepentant, unrevered and often unsightly Knicks will stand as survivors of the eight-month marathon, the best evidence yet that the apocalypse is upon David Stern, who might as well get with the program and outfit his players with skates and sticks.
That appears to be the view from a few windows high above midtown Manhattan, the proof being the declining number of television sets tuned to the Knicks and the Rockets, as opposed to last year's draws, Michael Jordan and Charles Barkley.


Nancy Errichetti, Evan Misshula
Nancy Beth Errichetti, an associate at Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, the law firm in New York, was married last evening to Evan Misshula, a vice president at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment firm in New York.
Judge Marjory D. Fields, a supervising judge of the Bronx Family Court, officiated at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
Mrs.
Misshula, 31, graduated from the University of Richmond and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
She is a daughter of Bobbi Errichetti of Convent Station, N.J., and the late Michael J. Errichetti.


Kathleen Healey, H. J. Willcox Jr.
Kathleen Mary Francis Healey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Healey of Hempstead, L.I., was married yesterday to Herbert James Willcox Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
James Willcox of Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles A. Kraus performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Charles Borromeo Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Willcox, 27, is an assistant director of public information for Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney.
She graduated from Pine Manor College.


Christopher Street: Changes Sweep the Gay Mecca
IT was once known as Skinner Road, hewing to an ancient dirt path that Indians used to carry lobsters and oysters inland from a cove on the Hudson.
By 1799, it had been renamed Christopher Street.
For most of its modern existence, Christopher Street was a working-class enclave, filled with longshoremen and their families.


It's a Fine Time for Taking Inventory
THIS is a great time to make a serious garden inventory.
What is going to come up, or out, or has done so.
Walk around with keen eyes and maybe even a notebook and pencil in hand.
It will be important to know where any gaps are, where there might be a need for some redoing or fill-in planting.
Or, rarely, it may be that everything in the garden appears to be just right.


Portofino, For the Rich And Less So
SEVERAL years ago, a few of the Italians ensconced in villas on Portofino's green slopes, from which they could see their yachts down at the marina, were in the habit of sending their helicopters to Genoa, 15 miles to the northeast, every morning to fetch the newspapers from Milan and Turin in time for breakfast.
The rotor noise irked other guests of Portofino, so in 1991 the municipal council, representing the little harbor town's 650 year-round residents, banned all choppers from its vast territory.
And thus ended air service to one of the most elegant resorts along the Italian Riviera.
More recently, the ancient town welcomed another, noiseless, means of transportation that added a new dimension to a Portofino holiday: a sightseeing submarine.
Tritone 2, a 56-foot-long, 106-ton craft with a crew of two, since March 1993 has taken as many as 46 paying passengers 150 feet below the surface of the blue sea off the rocky peninsula.
Large portholes permit the observation of underwater flora and fauna, floodlighted by the submarine.


Study Says Anti-Drug Dollars Are Best Spent on Treatment
A dollar's worth of drug treatment is worth seven dollars spent on the most successful law-enforcement efforts to curb the use of cocaine, researchers say in a new study.
The study by Rand, a California research organization that has worked closely with the Federal Government, was partly financed by the White House, which immediately rejected its main points.


Corrections
The Interest Rates chart on the Money page last Sunday rendered the yield for the 30-year Treasury bond incorrectly.
A corrected version appears today on page 00.


Bookshelf
THE LAST TALES OF UNCLE REMUS.
As told by Julius Lester.
Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney.
Dial. $17.99. (All ages) The fourth and concluding volume of skillful retellings of the traditional stories about Brer Rabbit, Brer Possum and the other animals is wonderfully cadenced for reading aloud, but don't miss the engaging illustrations.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MEMOIR  WARRIORS DON'T CRY  A Searing Memoir of the Battle to Integrate Little Rock's Central High.
By Melba Patillo Beals.
Pocket Books, $22.


Where to Find Hotel Discounts
LIKE airlines, hotels would rather have their rooms occupied than empty, even if the rates are less than advertised.
So, just as airlines turn potentially empty seats over to consolidators to sell cheaply, the hotels make deals with discounters and publishers of coupon books to fill the empty rooms at rates they do not necessarily want to discuss.
Big travel agencies like American Express and Carlson and independent agencies that belong to buying consortiums also get discounts on rooms, and the reductions they pass along may create prices as good as the discounters', so it's worth asking.


Trailblazing for Urban Hikers
With its looming factories and tenements, Long Island City is hardly an urban garden where many people would consider a stroll to enjoy the sights.
But the Public Art Fund, a nonprofit group that installs art works around New York City, and the city's Department of Transportation want to change that.


A Shrine to Sakharov In His City of Exile
RUSSIANS build shrines to their poets and to their martyrs.
Andrei D. Sakharov, strictly speaking, was neither.
But in this city, once known as Gorky, the apartment where the Soviet physicist lived for six years in exile is now a museum.
And in its drab stillness, apartment No. 3 on the ground floor of a yellow brick high-rise at 214 Gagarin Street is every bit as intriguing as Pushkin's house in St.
Petersburg or the grave of Patriarch Tikhon at the Donskoy monastery in Moscow. .


Street of Refuge, Street of Change


Treasury Says a Worker Took $1.7 Million in New $100 Bills
A 31-year-old Maryland man who worked in the main plant of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing has been charged with stealing $1.7 million in new $100 bills, Government officials said today.
It was believed to be the biggest theft in the history of the agency, which prints the nation's currency at plants here and in Fort Worth.
All but about $200,000 of the money has been recovered.


REAGAN'S REVENGE -- AS INVENTED BY HOWARD JARVIS
Presodent Clinton no doubt remembers 1978 as the year he was first elected Governor of Arkansas.
But historians may well point to another event that year with an even more important impact on the President's subsequent career: a tax revolt in California that continues, 16 years later, to haunt the American political landscape.
The impact of the tax revolt -- and of the fiscal crisis it helped create -- is particularly visible in the Clinton Administration's two major domestic initiatives of 1994.
The fate of the President's health care reform may well rest on his ability to persuade Congress and the electorate that employer mandates are not a tax.
And the Administration's welfare reform plan is being crippled by Congressional requirements that new expenditures be accompanied by new revenues (something the President is unlikely to request after the trauma of the 1993 budget fight) or equivalent reductions in related programs.


Editorial Notebook; 'The C.I.A. of Emotions'
Death comes along enshrouded in myth.
The most naive of these myths -- and the one most coveted by the movies -- is the myth of deathbed reconciliation.
The scene I have in mind is the one in which the son, after years in exile, sits at his dying father's side and dismisses in a few teary phrases the anger and hostility that have governed their relationship for decades.
A touching idea, but implausible.
The rage of decades works itself deep into flesh and bone; platitudes can never reach it.
My father died two months ago, gaunt and skeletal from cancer in his bones.
My last year with him consisted of visits to a deathbed where the sinuous man I knew as a boy had been rendered down to a ghastly 85 pounds.
Like the son in the myth, I'd been long on the road.
So angry was I at my father that I once went 10 years without seeing his face.
After that decade apart, the best we could manage was a handshake.
"No hugging" he said, half jokingly.
"I can't hug somebody who's got more hair on his face than I do."


Writers' Center Turning Philipse Manor Station Into Its Office
THE fancy footwork of workmen on the roof of the Philipse Manor Railroad Station here recently compares with the feats that board members of the Hudson Valley Writers' Center accomplished this year.
First, the Writers' Center -- until now a vagabond group conducting workshops and literary readings wherever space and time would allow -- acquired title to a Tudor-style building that the center's members had eyed for five years: the 84-year-old abandoned station, perched on a bluff overlooking the Hudson.


Gay Games Are Opened In Pageantry
The Gay Games began officially yesterday as thousands of athletes and spectators gathered in Manhattan for a gala opening ceremony that included marching bands, several standing ovations, and a baton twirler in a two-foot-tall beehive hairdo.
It was the start of seven days of Olympic-style athletic competition that its organizers and participants say will be more than swimming and marathons: It will be a celebration of modern-day gay life.


Two Generations Of Latin Crooners
AS THE LEVEL OF masculine aggression has escalated in movies, television and pop music, the image of the traditional Latin lover has begun to undergo extensive renovation.
In pop, the stereotype has evolved from a suave Mediterranean seducer wearing a tuxedo and murmuring fervent sweet talk to a sweatier multilingual pop-soul belter dressed in fashionable street clothes.
To understand the difference, compare the newest albums by the enduring Spanish pop superstar Julio Iglesias and the Cuban-American singer Jon Secada, both of whom live in southern Florida.
Between Mr.
Iglesias, who is 51, and Mr.
Secada, who is 32, the ratio of ethereality to testosterone in the singing has shifted decisively toward the more hormonal.


City Planning Should Join The Fight to Control Kitsch
To the Editor:
As your June 5 article, "On West 57th, a Confederacy of Kitsch," makes clear, something needs to be done to stop the T-shirt culture.
Most merchants seem to feel that if they abide by the zoning regulations as to the location and size of signs and awnings, they're at liberty to install anything they consider eye-catching and good for business.


Fredric L. Gilde, Julie A. Alperin
Julie Ann Alperin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Alperin of New York, is to be married today to Fredric Lawrence Gilde, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jon Gilde of Dix Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Harlan J. Wechsler is to perform the ceremony in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 25, is a kindergarten teacher at the Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School in New York.
She and the bridegroom graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the vice chairman of Hasbro Inc., the toy company in New York.


The Blue Meanie
As quickly as a mercurial summer sky erupts in white lightning, a graceful run of striped bass can turn into a wild melee of bluefish.
Bass glide like bolts from Thor, their power and elegance a lesson in reason and restraint.
A school of bluefish, on the other hand, is a blur of senseless aggression.
To see a school of blues feeding is to see a blind frenzy of unfettered rapacity. (Much as one feels after a few days of eating nothing but salads.)


Peacemakers


A Theater Hard to Define, but Always With a Bit of Adventure
MOST of the state's professional theaters play in the fall, winter and spring: the extent of a standard theater season.
And then there are the summer playhouses.
But what of the Foundation Theater, which is more than a summertime thing, but less than a year-round operation?
With a fall event, a spring classic, a summer season and a dark winter, the theater, in Burlington County, does not fit into a definable slot.


A Blast of Pure Refreshment


A Profile Misses the Important Issues
To the Editor:
Your article on Bruce A. Lehman, the Patents and Trademarks Commissioner ("Even in a 'Big Tent,' Little Insults, Little Compromises," Profile, May 29), had nothing to do with business, the United States Patents and Trademarks Office or even Mr.
Lehman's qualifications -- other than his experience as a homosexual.


IN SHORT: FICTION
PSYCHOLOGICAL THRILLER
GLORIA
By Mark Coovelis.  Pocket Books, $21.


POSTINGS: Street of Choice; More Cachet For East 64th
The block of East 64th Street off Fifth Avenue is fast becoming a current street of choice.
Ivana Trump lives there.
Daniel Wildenstein's house and gallery are there.
David Geffen, the record magnate, bought two nondesript one-story houses, at 7 1/2 and 9 East 64th, in February and has hired the architect Richard Meier to design a town house for the double lot.
On June 9, Edgar Bronfman Jr., the new president of Seagram's, bought the 31-foot-wide limestone mansion at 15 East 64th, currently cut up into nine apartments, paying $4.375 million for the foreclosed property.
When it was put up for sale in December 1991 the asking price was $8 million.
Mr.
Bronfman, who was out of the country and unavailable for comment, reportedly plans to make it a one-family house.


For Big Outdoor Sounds, It's Not Just the Boom Box
MUSIC ALFRESCO ranks high among the pleasures of summer, when patios and backyards become part of the musical scene.
A common way to bring music outdoors is the boom box.
Granted, there is something to be said for a sound system that can be picked up by a handle.
But even the best portables -- though far above the dismal norm -- will hardly bring joy to the musically astute.


Yeltsin's Anti-Crime Decree Sets Off a Storm of Outrage
When President Boris N. Yeltsin announced last week that he was preparing an urgent decree that would finally reckon with Russia's powerful mobsters -- "criminal filth" he called them -- the nation was delighted.
When he released the decree a few days later, after a weekend in which the Moscow police said there were nearly a dozen bombings and at least eight contract killings in the capital alone, it seemed that nothing would be more welcome.


In the Service of Religion, A Fence Around Manhattan
To the Editor:
The May 29th article about plans for an eruv, "Synagogues Propose a Ritual Fence," failed to mention that an eruv has been in place for 70 years that encompasses all but a few blocks of the whole island of Manhattan.


Looking Forward To Mondays
Cross "The Cotton Club" with "Saturday Night Fever," add a dash of "Star Wars" (remember the interplanetary saloon?) and you'll have an idea of the scene that unfolds every Monday night at the China Club, the venerable dance palace and rock club at 75th Street and Broadway.
Call it Monday Night Fever.
"Monday at China," which began six years ago as a promotion for what is generally the deadest night of the week in clubland, has become an exotic nocturnal institution, attracting an enthusiastic crowd of 800 to 1,100 over the course of an evening year-round.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CELEBRATING PIPE ORGANS
SOME 300 noted pipe organists and historians will assemble in Connecticut this week for their annual Organ Historical Society Convention.
The society was founded in 1956 to encourage the restoration and preservation of the country's 19th-century organs.
The convention opens today and will continue through Friday, with evening concerts open to the public free of charge.
They begin this evening at 8 o'clock in New Haven, where Will Headlee, organist at Syracuse University, will play the 1951 Holtkamp organ at Battell Chapel on the Yale campus.


'WE'RE ALL RACIST NOW'
A good dose of phonics and spelling rules in first grade, followed by a reasonable reading program, will produce literate, educable students.
Lack of money in inner-city schools is no excuse.
Phonics is dirt cheap to teach, requiring mostly teacher-made materials.


In America; Leslie Fay's Logic
The three women who came into my office one recent afternoon had stepped out of a different era, and while they are still hard-working and energetic, there is no longer a place for them.
Their services are no longer needed.
The women have labored for years in garment production plants in northeastern Pennsylvania, helping to make a company called Leslie Fay one of the big names in the industry.
But that's an old story and anybody with any business sense knows that the manufacturing action nowadays is in semi-slave labor in countries like Guatemala, Honduras, Malaysia, the Philippines and India.


Huffman Up, Up, Up To U.S. Mark in Vault
Scott Huffman, the pole-vaulter from Kansas with the unique cartwheel style, sailed over the crossbar on his first attempt at 19 feet 7 inches today to set an American record on the final day of the USA/Mobil outdoor championships.
For Huffman, the former University of Kansas athlete who clears the bar by getting one leg and then the other over, there was a surreal feeling to the occasion.
"The pole I cleared the record with I hadn't cleared a height with since 1992," he said.
"I started with a smaller pole and then switched to it, but the pole I really needed is in my garage in Lawrence. I didn't think I'd need it, but I'll take it to Europe with me."


Religious Issue Roils Colombia On Eve of Vote
I


Sami Plotkin, Keith Morton
Sami Plotkin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jon Plotkin of Singer Island, Fla., was married last evening to Keith David Morton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Maxwell Morton of Wellesley, Mass.
Rabbi Irving Lehrman performed the ceremony at the Breakers in Palm Beach, Fla.
The bride graduated summa cum laude from Brandeis University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is studying for an master's degree in film at Columbia University.
She is a granddaughter of Theodore Plotkin and Edna Hibel, an artist, of Singer Island.


Property Managers Plan For Outside Monitoring
As property-management companies in the city rush to name monitors and tighten procedures after indictments in a scandal that prosecutors said defrauded co-ops and condominiums of millions of dollars, some people in the business are saying the industry needs external monitoring.
A few managers have also called for mandatory training, testing and licensing of managers, who do not now have formal controls.


WEDDINGS HEADLINE&gt;Elizabeth Cohen And Neil Bercow
Elizabeth S. Cohen was married last evening in Old Westbury, L.I., to Dr.
Neil R. Bercow.
Rabbi Lee Friedlander officiated at the de Seversky Center.
The bride graduated from Haverford College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Until recently she was a managing director of the Alliance Corporate Finance Group, an investment management company in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon H. Cohen of Weston, Mass.


Helen C. Pearce, Todd L. Bequette
Helen Chapman Pearce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Pearce of New York, was married yesterday to Todd Lewis Bequette, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Bequette of Gridley, Calif.
The Rev.
Stephen H. Phelps officiated at St.
Peter's Presbyterian Church in Spencertown, N.Y.


Suzanne Becker And Gary Stein
Suzanne E. Becker, the daughter of Phyllis and Dr.
Leslie Becker of Northport, L.I., was married last evening to Gary M. Stein, a son of Joan and Alexander Stein of Penn Valley, Pa.
Rabbi Barton A. Shallat officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.


Accident at Hydrant Kills a 3-Year-Old
A 3-year-old Manhattan girl who was playing in front of an open fire hydrant was killed yesterday after a stream of surging water from the hydrant sent her hurtling into the path of a sanitation truck, the police said.
The accident happened shortly after 10 P.M. on East 116th Street, between Second and Third Avenues, where the child, identified as Meagan Barroso, her mother and the child's babysitter went to cool off in front of the hydrant, the police said.


Q. &amp; A.
The Rules On Renting Co-op Units Q A year and a half ago I sublet the co-op I own in New York City after the board approved a one-year lease.
The board limited the term of the lease to a year.
At the time of the sublet the co-op's bylaws allowed a unit to be sublet for up to four years before the shareholder had to move back in or sell it.
When the tenant rented my unit it was with the understanding that the four-year clause was in effect even though the lease was for only one year.
The intent on both our parts was to sign a new lease for each of the four years.
This year, part way into the second one-year lease, the co-op board changed the sublet period to a maximum of two years, after which I must either move back in or sell.
Do I have the legal right to sublet my apartment in years three and four, either by grandfathering in the four-year sublet clause, which was in place at the time the lease was first signed, or by any other means? . . .
Lynda Wels, New Canaan, Conn.


The Truth of the Matter
To the Editor:
Using Walter Reich's own argument that even a well-documented event like the Holocaust is subject to denial, one can only imagine the difficulty of people who have been sexually abused getting their stories believed.
Unfortunately, the mainstream of psychoanalytic thinking has been guilty of relegating these stories to possible fantasy or projection on the part of a person seeking help.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
FATHERHOOD IN AMERICA: A History By Robert L. Griswold.
Basic Books, $13.
The author documents the evolving role of fathers, from the aloof disciplinarian of earlier days to the nurturing New Age dad.
Interestingly, demographic trends have resulted in fewer opportunities for male parenting just at a time when it has also gained status.
Mr.
Griswold "persuasively charts all sorts of attitudinal changes," Michael Kammen said here last year.


Organizing a City: A Celebration From A to Z
LAST month, Mayor Giuliani asked his Labor Commissioner to have a quiet talk with George M. Steinbrenner, the Yankees' owner, about what was good for the city.
What was good for the city, the Mayor wanted Mr.
Steinbrenner to know, was to let 10,400 gay and lesbian athletes parade through Yankee Stadium for the closing ceremonies of the Gay Games IV and Cultural Festival, an eight-day Olympic-style competition meant to break down stereotypes about homosexuality.


The Haunting Tale Of Ned Kelly, Irresistible Outlaw
ONE OF THIS SEASON'S sleepers in New York is the exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of "The Ned Kelly Story" by the Australian painter Sidney Nolan, who became famous in the 1950's for these paintings of the rebel and outlaw who has been for more than a century a national hero in Australia.
Nothing much was made of the show when it opened, but it has drawn an enthusiastic attendance.
They take their time, too, over a true and enthralling story that loses nothing when Sidney Nolan is there to tell it.
These are paintings in which he comes on as poet, historian and dramatist.
He also comes on as a potential cinematographer who could fill every frame with the laconic high drama that Australians take for granted.


A Chef-Owner's Straightforward Menu
THE Wyckoff Inn, in the hamlet of Sherman in northwest Connecticut, is the kind of discovery one always hopes to make while driving through the countryside.
We happened upon this small white clapboard inn on a recent Saturday night.
It was early and only one other table was occupied.
"Oh-oh," we feared, "maybe there's a message here." But by the time we left, after a relaxed three-course dinner, the small dining room and the few tables in the separate bar were filled and the decibel level was rising.
For diners in the area and from across the New York State line, the Wyckoff Inn is a major gathering place.


Sports of The Times; Prodigal Son Kicks Goal In Homeland
THIS is why young people leave home to grow up, to learn their trade.
Eric Wynalda and John Harkes and Tab Ramos wanted to make money, wanted to be world-class soccer players.
Their best chance was in a foreign land.
So Wynalda went to Germany and Harkes went to England and Ramos went to Spain, and then they came home yesterday to play in the World Cup, the biggest sports tournament in the world.


How Black? How White?
THE SWEETER THE JUICE By Shirlee Taylor Haizlip.
Illustrated. 271 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.


Political Notes; Repentant Rollins Revisits The Scene of His Undoing
Edward J. Rollins Jr., the Republican political consultant, returned to New Jersey last week anything but humbled for his first visit since he touched off a controversy that many observers figured would end his career in politics.
Mr.
Rollins came back to apologize to black ministers for saying in November that the campaign of Christine Todd Whitman had paid black ministers not to encourage their congregations to vote for her Democratic rival, Jim Florio.
Mr.
Rollins later recanted his statement, writing it off to bravado.


WOULD YOU BAPTIZE AN EXTRATERRESTRIAL?
I loved Jack Hitt's article "Would You Baptize an Extraterrestrial?" (May 29).
I am pleased to see it acknowledged that science and religion can complement each other, in a progressive way.
LAUREN KRAUT Roosevelt Island, N.Y.


Are Parents People?
To the Editor:
In her essay on baby-care books ("Still Guilty After All These Years: A Bouquet of Advice Books for the Working Mom," May 8), Susan Chira presents an inaccurate picture of the Penelope Leach I know and with whom I have worked.


Stuck in Drydock, With 2,000 Miles to Go
This was not part of the plan.
The 60-foot ocean racer, Hunter's Child, looked like the victim of its father's sword -- beheaded as it was -- sitting here in the water at the Little Harbor yacht basin without its mast.
The sailboat's skipper, Steve Pettengill, wanted it that way, having found that the 85-foot spar needed modifications on shore one more time.
Only then would he be ready to set sail in his 2,000-mile qualifying run for the coming BOC Challenge, the solo yacht race around the world.
If all had gone as expected, Pettengill would have been out at sea right now.


Hundley and the Mets Get The Message on Hitting
This time, Dallas Green did not scream.
He did not kick garbage cans and he did not use incredible amounts of profanity when he addressed his slumping Mets.
This time, it was a dialogue, not a monologue, that Green had with his players.
It produced the same kind of results.


Wedding Band
AFTER 27 years of playing at countless weddings, Stuart White has confronted every type of nuptial disaster.
"I've had a family member drop dead on the dance floor, serious fights with people flying over tables, even two nuns slugging it out at the table," Mr.
White said.
"My one rule when disaster strikes is: Play music!"


Nominal Differences
To the Editor:
Lindsley Cameron's article on Peking Opera  [ "Hello Again, My Concubine," June 5 ]  observes that one reason for non-Chinese misconceptions about the form is its name.
But her explanation addresses only the confusion surrounding the use of the term "opera." Actually, it was clear in Aljean Harmetz's article on the dramatization of Maxine Hong Kingston's memoir "The Woman Warrior"  [ "It's Tough to Get Ghosts to Be Human on Stage" ]  in the same issue that there is another problem concerning the genre's name.


Ireland Defuses Baggio's Attack
Ray Houghton had just made everyone here with a brogue extremely happy, and Roberto Baggio was gazing confidently at his Italian teammates with his arms outstretched and his palms bobbing toward the no-longer artificial turf.


Savagery and Hope
A HISTORY OF THE ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICT By Mark Tessler. 906 pp.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Cloth, $57.50.
Paper, $27.50.


Jennifer Altman, Jason Lee Fein
Jennifer Sue Altman, a daughter of Linda and Earle Altman of Harrison, N.Y., was married last evening to Jason Lee Fein, a son of Monica and Fred Fein of New City, N.Y.
Cantor Bernard Dienstag officiated at the Essex House in New York.
Ms.
Altman is keeping her name.
She is a psychology associate with the child development center of the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services in New York.
She graduated from Lehigh University and received a master's degree in counseling psychology from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a candidate for a Ph.D. in school and child psychology at New York University.
Her father is a senior vice president at Helmsley-Spear in New York.


'Get Outta My Face'
THE man wanted to buy some perfume, and he seemed to be in a hurry.
"Girl!" he shouted at the young woman behind the cosmetics counter at Petrovsky Passage, one of the city's swankier malls.
She didn't budge.


'Kind of Like a Gay Jurassic Park'
The tinted picture windows at The Monster bar in Sheridan Square have always drawn their share of gawkers, those who came either to ridicule or just to gape at the vibrant gay nightlife that has existed inside the bar since it opened in 1981.
But in recent years, patrons say, it has grown even worse, with the double-decker tour buses slowing as they make the corner at Grove Street and Washington Place so passengers can lean out to look.


Nancy Israel, Lonnie Powers
Nancy Diane Israel, a daughter of David J. Israel of Chestnut Hill, Mass., and the late Charlotte M. Israel, was married last evening to Lonnie Austin Powers, a son of Jimmie H. Powers of Texarkana, Ark., and the late Rev.
James B. Powers.
Rabbi Albert Axelrad officiated at the home of the bride's father in Chestnut Hill.
Ms.
Israel, who is keeping her name, is the associate general counsel at Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University, from which she also received her law degree.


Science Would Get Nowhere Without Dreamers; Join the War on Cancer
To the Editor:
Dick Teresi starts "Physics Is History" (Op-Ed, June 11) with a profound misconception, when he says the superconducting supercollider started its "march toward extinction" a year ago.
The project was doomed in 1978, when insiders decided they wanted all the control, and future big machines were to be solely American-financed and controlled.
If anything is going to be learned from the failure of the supercollider it is that such large projects must be internationally financed and controlled.


Science Would Get Nowhere Without Dreamers
To the Editor:
In "Physics Is Dead" (Op-Ed, June 11), Dick Teresi, editor of a motorcycle magazine, laments the cancellation of the superconducting supercollider by Congress.
This is admirable, but then he takes a swipe at my book "Hyperspace," by saying that theories like 10-dimensional strings, parallel universes and time warps "can never be verified," hence are comparable to "Star Trek" episodes.
He makes the silly point that "physics is history" because it would take an accelerator "one light-year in radius" to test the "theory of everything." But negativists like him miss two key points.
First, almost all the great advances in physics were made indirectly, not directly.
In 1825, negativists like Auguste Comte flatly declared that science will never know one thing: the composition of the stars.
This was a reasonable statement, since another silly calculation would have shown it would bankrupt the planet earth to send a probe to the nearest star.
Almost simultaneously physicists used indirect means, analyzing starlight, and proved that stars were made of hydrogen.


Eileen Mangan, Andrew Van Hoek
Eileen Marie Mangan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Mangan of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Andrew Daniel Van Hoek, a son of Richard Van Hoek and Rosanne Van Hoek, both of Jackson Heights, Queens.
Msgr.
James Connolly performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph.
Mrs.
Van Hoek, a graduate of Fairfield University, is the promotion manager of Working Mother magazine in New York.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president and an associate general counsel at Equitable Life Insurance in New York.


Business Diary: June 12-17
COMPANIES At Simon &amp; Schuster, a Pawn in the Corporate Game  Publishing sometimes seems a world apart, exempt from big-money corporate chess games.
But the outside world crashed in on this literary island last week when Viacom, which recently acquired Simon &amp; Schuster as part of its Paramount package, swooped into the publishing house and sacked the man who'd built it into a powerhouse in recent decades, Richard E. Snyder.
The publishing world's reaction: shock, mystification -- and jitters about the fate of various authors.
Viacom gave a well-worn explanation: a difference in styles.
But it soon spied a gathering storm, and moved quickly to calm it, going out of its way to state its "commitment to literature and the printed word." Of course, not everyone at Simon &amp; Schuster mourned, as some were glad to bid farewell to what they called Mr.
Snyder's explosive temper.
They expected his successor, Jonathan Newcomb, to set a softer tone.


Fear of Defeat Clouds Debate on Health Care Bill
As the struggle for overhauling health care enters a critical stage, one of the most powerful pressures on Congress is a possibility that was simply unthinkable here until the last few weeks: that there might not be a major health care bill this year.
Such an outcome is still not considered likely, and it is dismissed out of hand by Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill.
But lawmakers and lobbyists involved in the struggle are increasingly worried about the possibility of gridlock -- and ultimate legislative collapse -- on a health care bill.


Tartabull Dispatches Long-Distance Message
A little superstition, perhaps a hunch, too, and maybe a smart manager trying to get a player out of a slump.
Add eye of newt, and you get a Yankee rarity lately: a victory at the Stadium.
The 4-2 decision over the Brewers yesterday ended the New Yorkers' five-game home losing streak.


30 Years Later, It's Freedom Summer Again
THIS MONTH MARKS THE 30TH anniversary of the Freedom Summer, when 1,000 college students from the North traveled to Mississippi to register black voters.
The unbridled optimism of the movement, the cynicism that managed to stifle it at that summer's Democratic National Convention and its legacy in the lives of its participants are represented in the documentary "Freedom on My Mind," which opens Wednesday at Film Forum.
"Freedom on My Mind," which won the audience award for best documentary at this year's Sundance Film Festival, tells the story of the Mississippi Voter Registration Project.
The film begins in 1961 when Robert Moses, a Harvard University graduate student, registered the first black man, a farmer named Herbert Lee, to vote in Mississippi.
Soon thereafter, Mr.
Lee was shot and killed by a white segregationist state legislator with whom he had grown up.
The act would prove a grim portent of the violence to come, including the murders of the 14-year-old Emmett Till, the N.A.A.C.P. attorney Medgar Evers and the civil rights volunteers Michael Schwerner, James Chaney and Andrew Goodman.


Miss McCaffrey, Mr. Walshe
Kathleen Marion McCaffrey, a daughter of Kathleen McCaffrey of Kilnaheery, County Tyrone, Northern Ireland, and the late Hugh McCaffrey, was married yesterday to John William Leo Walshe, the son of the late Arthur Hopkins Walsh and the late Margaret Finn Walsh.
The Rev.
Francis McKiernan, the Bishop of the Cathedral of Sts.
Patrick and Felim in Cavan, County Cavan, Ireland, performed the ceremony in the cathedral.
Mrs.
Walshe is an administrator in an ophthalmological office in Teaneck, N.J.
She graduated from Sedgley Park College in Manchester, England.


A Lifelong Loyalty, True to the End
Even as a youth, O. J. Simpson was the one with all the charm, never out of place in any situation, always in control.
Al Cowlings was bigger, even hulking, and somehow less graceful.
O.
J. moved through the streets of Potrero Hill in San Francisco with the ease of a natural leader.
A.
C. was never far behind, looking to his friend as a model, a brother and even a father figure.
They were rarely apart.
Old friends of Mr.
Simpson and Mr.
Cowlings, trying to sort out the bewildering developments that concluded with their arrests on Friday night after a 50-mile pursuit by the Los Angeles police, said that at least one aspect of the saga did not surprise them: in the end, it was Mr.
Cowlings at Mr.
Simpson's side.


Dr. McKibbin, Dr. Lloyd-Jones
Dr.
Kathleen Margaret McKibbin, an internist, is to be married today to Dr.
Donald Miller Lloyd-Jones, a third-year resident in internal medicine, both at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
The Rev.
Thomas McDonald is to perform the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Good Shepherd in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
The bride graduated from Amherst College and received her medical degree from Albany Medical College.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald P. McKibbin of Rhinebeck, where her father is an internist.


A Profile Misses the Important Issues
To the Editor:
At first, I was generally impressed with Bruce A. Lehman, but as I continued to read your article I grew concerned about his views on enforcing antidiscrimination policies among his employees at the Patents and Trademarks Office.
"As far as I'm concerned," he is quoted, "it's got to be forced down their throats." Is this what Mr.
Lehman and his "hero" Mr.
Clinton want for America -- forcing feelings, opinions and thoughts on those who disagree with them.
This is the most frightening face of bigotry!
Our rights to choose a doctor, health care and hospitals for our families and even the right to bear arms are slowly being taken away.
What will be next?
Will our right to disagree about political correctness be taken away by growing Government intrusion?
BERNIE BUSSACCO  Honesdale, Pa., May 31


Sarah Hodder And Peter Allen
Sarah Melville Hodder, a daughter of Melville and Elizabeth Hodder of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Peter John Allen, a son of Kenneth and Gloria Allen of Orono, Me.
The Rev.
Margaret Gunness performed the ceremony at St.
Saviour's Episcopal Church in Bar Harbor, Me.
Ms.
Hodder, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a legal researcher, in Washington, for NBC News.
She and her husband graduated from Harvard University, she magna cum laude and he cum laude.
Her mother is an instructor of writing and a supervisor of student teachers at Harvard.
The bride's father is a senior vice president, in Boston, for Smith Barney Inc., the securities firm.


Symphony for Seniors
THE National Senior Symphony, an organization of musicians 50 or older, will perform at 7:30 P.M. on Thursday at Waterford High School.
The group meets not only for rehearsals and performances but also for social events and sightseeing programs.
The symphony, founded in 1989 by Victor Norman, has in past years attracted retired musicians from more than 25 states.
After stepping down as music director of the Eastern Connecticut Symphony and completing a 46-year stint as organist at Beth El Synagogue in New London, Mr.
Norman acted on his credo that "You can retire from a particular job, but you can't retire from music -- the music is always with you."


RECREATION
City beaches are open seven days a week from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
The city's 32 large outdoor swimming pools and 32 mini-pools open July 2.
Pool hours will be from 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Beaches and pools remain open through Labor Day weekend and are staffed with 1,000 lifeguards.
BRONX  Orchard Beach, 1.1 miles QUEENS  Rockaway Beach, 7.5. miles Jacob Riis Beach, 1 mile.
Swimming will be allowed at this federally run beach, part of the Gateway National Recreation Area, starting June 25.
The delay was caused by Federal cutbacks.
BROOKLYN  Coney Island and Brighton Beach, 2.5 miles Manhattan Beach, one-third mile STATEN ISLAND


More Than A Face
The supermodel lives on the top floor of an unremarkable midtown brownstone decorated with ivy outside and characterized by a dark and creaky stairway inside.
There is no elevator and that, happily enough, eliminates the need for a Stairmaster.
Veronica Webb doesn't do gyms.
She doesn't do bread, either, but that may be one of the few temptations she denies herself in life amid stardom.


Tech Notes; Product Prognostication, and Then the Unveiling
THEY do things differently in the computer industry, and new-product announcements are a good example.
Months before a company announces some new piece of hardware or software, the company will have handed out samples to preferred customers -- beta testers, in computerese -- for a digital test drive.


The Lazy, Hazy Vacation-Home Market
A WEEKEND house in the Hamptons.
A condominium in Vermont.
A place at the Jersey Shore.
A cabin in Maine.
A cottage upstate New York.
A country home in Connecticut.
Before the crash of the residential real estate market in the Northeast in the late 80's, a second home was often considered an affordable luxury among the affluent and a not unreachable dream for many in the middle class.


Implants: Courts Dispose While Science Unfolds
AFTER thousands of women have been thrown into a state of fright by the possibility that their breast implants were causing devastating illnesses like arthritis, after juries have awarded millions of dollars to women who claimed injuries, and after implant makers have agreed to pay $4.2 billion to settle a class-action suit brought by women with implants, the first epidemiological studies of the devices are starting to emerge.
Women who received the implants and the companies that made them have reason to be encouraged by the results, which fail so far to find evidence of widespread side-effects.
After studying almost three decades' worth of medical records of 749 women with implants, scientists at the Mayo Clinic concluded that any ill effects are likely to be extraordinary cases.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Japanese Yen
102.70
103.60
109.75
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6105
1.6665
1.6805
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3908
1.3750
1.2743
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5355
1.5095
1.4975
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$391.50
$383.50
$371.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


INSIDE
Fear of No Health Care Bill
As the fight to overhaul health care enters a crucial phase, a powerful pressure on Congress is a possibility that was unthinkable until recently: that there might not be a major health care bill this year.
Page 18. 6 Slain in Northern Ireland
Gunmen killed six people watching Ireland's World Cup soccer victory over Italy in a Northern Ireland pub , the police said.
The militant Protestant Ulster Volunteer Force claimed responsibility.
Page 5.


Donna Jacobson, Jeffrey Gershenwald
Donna B. Jacobson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Miles R. Jacobson of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Jeffrey E. Gershenwald, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Gershenwald, also of Dix Hills.
Rabbi Robert Jacobs officiated at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck in Kings Point, L.I.
The bride, 29, is a senior manager of business analysis at American Express Travel Related Services in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.


Ruffles and Flourishes
Four celebrations and benefits around New York.


Haytaian and Lautenberg Step Up Their Sparring
Amid the standard verbal sniping in the race for United States senator from New Jersey, an intense war of words is being fought with reams of legislation.
On the snowy March day when Assembly Speaker Chuck Haytaian announced his candidacy in the race, the incumbent, Frank R. Lautenberg, was pushing his name into the headlines with a visit to the White House, where he discussed gun control.


Corrections
A chart in the Business Diary column last Sunday, tracking investment trends in South Africa, omitted the source of the data.
It was the Investor Responsibility Research Center.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HISTORY  RESISTANCE  The Warsaw Ghetto Uprising.
By Israel Gutman.
Marc Jaffe/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.


Relief From the Stress of Counting Beans, or Paper Clips
TO teach certified public accountants how to "lighten up" a group of them was asked to dress casually for a four-day training camp.
Jeffrey Oster of Garden City showed up in a short-sleeve shirt under his jacket and tie.
"This is casual," he said.
"And he's taken off his jacket," Neil Guilmette said.
"For a C.P.A. that's really casual."


Remembrance of Slave Ancestors Lost to the Sea
More than 1,500 blacks, many dressed in traditional African dress and jewelry, gathered on the sun-baked planks of the Coney Island Boardwalk yesterday and looked into the Atlantic Ocean.
With prayers, speeches and song, they searched the hazy blue expanse for genetic memory of Africans engulfed by a sea voyage into slavery known as the Middle Passage.
"This is not about worshiping the dead, but paying tribute to our ancestors," said Tony Akeem, an organizer of the fifth annual Tribute to the Ancestors of the Middle Passage.
"We are here to remember and to know our history and know our greatness."


A Brash Kid No More: The Maturing of a Maestro
IF YOU THINK MICHAEL Tilson Thomas is still that brash kid looking over Leonard Bernstein's shoulder, you probably have not kept up with his recordings.
But it hasn't been easy to do so.
Mr.
Thomas's recorded output is scattered on six different labels, and many of his fine early recordings are out of print or have been reissued in confusing repackagings.
Mr.
Thomas has recorded with many orchestras -- though mainly with the London Symphony, of which he has been principal conductor since 1988, and the New World Symphony, his superb training orchestra in Miami Beach.
An overview of his recordings reveals that the "kid," who turns 50 in December and is soon to become music director of the San Francisco Symphony, has become a mature and distinctive maestro.


The Sweat Factor
Last week, the weather sizzled.
Now, as summer begins its official run, should New Yorkers expect a sustained, hot-air flip side to this winter's cold misery?
Not really,s ay weather experts.
Their predictions: It will be warm and dry, but not as hot as last year.


Miss Mooney, Mr. Clark
Stephanie Michelle Mooney, a daughter of Michael and Dallas Mooney of Evansville, Ind., was married yesterday to Christopher Avery Clark, a son of Joseph S. Clark Jr. of New York and the late Felicia R. Clark.
Edward Horn, a retired justice of the peace, officiated at the bridegroom's home in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Clark, an actress, graduated from Ball State University.
Her father is a builder in Evansville.


The Werewolf Within Dances With Abandon
IN "THE COMPANY OF WOLVES," Neil Jordan's deliciously dark fairy tale, Granny offers her adolescent granddaughter some timeless advice.
The 1984 film, based on Angela Carter's shrewd story, turns "Little Red Riding Hood" into a blatant tale of erotic awakening.
To navigate the wolf-filled woods of adulthood, Granny tells the girl, "Never stray from the path; never eat a windfall apple; never trust a man whose eyebrows meet." Or, she might have added, whose eyebrows arch as demonically as Jack Nicholson's.
Granny (Angela Lansbury) would have instantly spotted the hero of "Wolf" as part of a new breed of movie werewolves.
Though Mike Nichols's film is being advertised with the provocative line "The animal is out," one of Granny's sentiments would have served much better.
"The worst kind of wolves," she warns, "are hairy on the inside."


Disability No Obstacle to Fresh Air Fund
It is not easy for a parent to contemplate the first time a child will be away from home for a long time, and the feeling deepens when the child has a physical disability.
The month of June, when many children prepare for their first summer camp, is often when parents are most anxious.
Eight New York City families got a chance to ease those anxieties on a weekend earlier this month as they and their children, ages 8 through 12, went to Camp Hidden Valley on a Spring Family Camping Weekend organized by the Fresh Air Fund.
Hidden Valley is one of five camps the Fund operates at the Sharpe Reservation in Fishkill, N.Y., where about 2,900 disadvantaged New York City youths will go to camp this summer.


From Apartment Window, A Drama of Man vs. Bee
To The Editor:
The plethora of public events that transpire daily in New York is taxing to the news media, I am sure, but it is with regret that I inform you that you have missed -- or possibly just ignored -- one of the more significant happenings in our particular neighborhood.
It occurred on June 7 at the corner of Third Avenue and 84th Street, about 10 feet below my apartment window.


Brock B. Houghton, Martha H. Davis
Martha Hocking Davis, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James Allan Davis of Cambridge, Mass., was married there yesterday to Brock Biddle Houghton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Richard Houghton of Cambridge.
The Rev.
Eugene V. N. Goetchius performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
The couple graduated from the Art Institute of Chicago.


New Heights
Play clothes swing into summer.


Significant Others


Really No Need to Trek to Afghanistan
FAMILIES, many of them Afghani, gather on Sunday nights at Kabul Cuisine in Great Neck.
Children were very much in evidence at almost every table on a recent evening.
They were seen digging into challows, or Afghani stews, and kebabs with a relish usually reserved for pizzas and hamburgers.
The white tablecloths, fresh flowers and candlelight set the stage for a civilized meal, while low prices make Kabul Cuisine affordable enough to take the whole family.


Trait of Kindness
To the Editor: What struck me most about Margo Kaufman's story of coping with her hip injury while on a tour of Southeast Asia ("On a Limp and a Prayer," April 17) were the numerous instances of concern and kindness shown her by total strangers.
As an American traveling 9,000 miles from home, Ms.
Kaufman has shown us a positive side of human nature rarely presented on television, radio or in newspapers.
Kindness, I believe, is a trait that transcends international boundaries.
BRIAN G. KEOGH  Massapequa, L.I.


Recalling the Laughter of Friends as the Days Dwindle Down
Since he moved into Bailey Holt House in February of this year, Elvin Houston has seen at least 20 friends and acquaintances wither and die.
Down the mirrored, charcoal-gray halls of the six-story building, the news travels quickly, but sometimes not quickly enough.
"You wake up and walk down to see someone and you hear, 'The ambulance came for him last night,' or 'She's gone, man,' " Mr.
Houston said last week, looking out a corner window onto the West 10th Street Pier, where he drank beer with friends in better days.
"Sometimes you lose count."


Being Anonymous And Going Truant; Troubled Schools Feed Boredom
Every school day at Louis D. Brandeis High School in Manhattan, Alfred Cruz punches his student identification card into the machine just inside the front entrance.
He steps onto a metal scanner and if the red light blinks on, he has to empty his pockets.
He shoves his book bag through the X-ray machine, then he raises his arms so a security officer can wave a portable metal detector over his body like a wand.
Alfred says he no longer minds the mechanized routine of going to school, but educators point to the metal detector as a vivid emblem of the failures of the large urban high school.
Overcrowded and impersonal, with a threat of violence, schools like Brandeis contribute to a staggering truancy rate, particularly among black and Hispanic boys, academic experts and educators say.


First Out of the Chute: Bob Dole
Guess who's talking about running for the Republican Presidential nomination in 1996?
Bob Dole.
Mr.
Dole has come in for plenty of criticism here for sabotaging President Clinton's economic stimulus package and for his purblind opposition to campaign finance reform.
Still, the Kansas Senator is a serious public servant and a warrior.
We welcome his interest.
To which we add this thought: Let the Republican games begin.
If nothing else, Mr.
Dole's decision to hire political strategists and start raising money should awaken his party and force other potential candidates to show their hands.
Moreover, it might concentrate the attention of the White House on the fact that Mr.
Clinton does not look exactly like a lock for re-election.


SUNDAY, June 19, 1994; Death and Taxes
Americans are supposed to hate unpleasant truths.
Walter Mondale committed an unforgivable sin when he was running for President in 1984 and said he would have to raise taxes.
Ronald Reagan, who practiced public denial, won.
But a grim, truthful book by a physician named Sherwin Nuland, "How We Die," has lately become a best seller, and a critical success as well.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
SOCCER PRACTICE
Soccer fans -- especially those with ties to Ireland -- will want to follow the straight path before them, leading to Doc Young Field at Drew University in Madison, for there the Irish World Cup soccer players will be practicing for their game against Norway at 12:30 P.M. on June 28 at the Meadowlands.
The very tentative training schedule is 3 P.M. next Sunday and 10:30 A.M. the following day.
All those interested in this free peek at a world-class team should call to verify both the time and day of the session.
To reach Doc Young Field, turn toward the campus at the Lancaster Road traffic light on Route 124.
Information: (201) 408-3150. IRONBOUND TOUR
Those old pros at bringing history and architecture to life during walking tours, Adventure on a Shoestring of New York City, will conduct a "snacks-and-sights safari" in the Portuguese community Ironbound section in Newark on Saturday.
The tour costs $5 and will depart at 2:45 P.M. from a site in Newark.
Those interested should call for details.
Dinner at a Portuguese restaurant after the tour is optional.
Information: (212) 265-2663. GREAT SWAMP DISPLAYS
Today from 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. will be the last chance to see and smell a mountain laurel display at the Great Swamp Outdoor Education Center, 247 Southern Boulevard in Chatham Township.
Visitors may also view oil paintings by Margaret Hoppe, a volunteer at the center who is a member of the Unity Club, a division of the American Retarded Citizens, and a New Jersey Special Olympics bowler.
The exhibition will continue through the end of the month.
Admission is free for both exhibitions.
Information: (201) 635-6629. RIVER EDGE SCENES
The River Edge Public Library at Elm and Tenney Avenues also has a special exhibition through the end of the month.
Paintings and photographs depicting local scenes, including the von Stueben House, the Campbell-Christie House, local streets, New Bridge Landing and other historical sites have been produced by local artists for display in celebration of the borough's centennial.
Information: (201) 261-1663. CONCERT IN WAYNE
Vadim Tunitsky, cantor at Temple Emanuel in Paterson and a graduate of the Kharakov School of Arts in Moscow, will sing a medley of Russian, Yiddish and Hebrew songs and will play compositions for violin at a concert on Wednesday in Wayne.
The event celebrates Operation Exodus II, which has not only brought Jewish immigrants to New Jersey but also assisted in resettling 600,000 refugees in Israel in the last four years.
Shimon Pepper, director of Operation Exodus II for the United Jewish Appeal, will present an eyewitness report on the rescue of Jews from Russia, Uzbekistan and Azerbaijan.
A simulation of a Russian coffeehouse will open at 7 P.M., serving fresh-baked delicacies made by immigrants resettled by the Jewish Family Service of North Jersey.
The affair will be at the Y.M./Y.W.H.A., 1 Park Drive.
The refreshments are included in the admission, which is $5.
Information: (201) 595-0555. 'FOLK 'N ROLL'
Country, folk, swing, gospel, ballad and rock will be the musical mix when Dave Sherman, John Siehl, Joe Surowiec and Dan Mulvay -- New Jersey musicians every one -- combine their talents for a guitar-picking, piano-fingering "folk 'n roll" performance opening the summer Clearwater Coffee House Series on Saturday at Fort Hancock in Sandy Hook.
The series, a joint venture of the Monmouth County Friends of Clearwater, which is dedicated to environmental education and action, and the National Park Service, will continue on Saturdays for three months: on July 9, Aug. 13 and Sept. 17.
Admission is $5 for each concert at 8:15 P.M. in the chapel of the fort at Sandy Hook.
Information: (908) 872-9644. 'JAZZ IN BLOOM'
"Jazz in Bloom," a concert in the garden at the Newark Museum early Thursday evening, will star Houston Person and Etta Jones, raise money to help finance a series of seven free lunchtime concerts in the garden and feature sample fare from a variety of the city's restaurants.
Portuguese, Korean, Spanish, Cuban and "down home"-style North American cuisine at a minimal charge, free soft drinks and a cash bar will all be part of the event in the Alice Ransom Dreyfuss Memorial Garden at the museum, 49 Washington Street, from 5 to 7:30 P.M.
If it rains, the concert will be in the Engelhard Court.
Admission is $12.
Information: (201) 596-6550. FLORAL WATERCOLORS
The West Orange Public Library has decorated its wall for the month of June with about a dozen 24-inch-by- 30-inch floral watercolors by Karen Schauben of Livingston.
Two 32-inch-by-40-inch prints in her painterly and intense style are also on display.
The deep colors in her work are striking in contrast to the hues usually seen in watercolors.
The library, 46 Mount Pleasant Avenue, opens at 9 A.M.
Monday through Saturday and closes at 9 P.M. except on Tuesday and Friday (5:30 P.M.) and on Saturday (5 P.M.).
Sunday hours are 1 to 5 P.M.
Information: (201) 736-0198. MARY L. EMBLEN STAGE PORTRAYALS
For the last 14 years, Richard Hoehler has been writing short fiction based on his dead-end travels from blue-collar job to blue-collar job in New Jersey.
The pieces have been published in newspapers and collections, including "Middle Jersey Writers Anthology."
His recollections of, among others, house painting, school bus driving and bartending led to a stage adaptation, "New Jersey/New York," that was presented off Off Broadway last year, with Mr.
Hoehler himself in a cast of six.
In "Out of the Blue," Mr.
Hoehler, 40, who grew up in Carteret, has created eight New Jersey characters expressly for the stage.
They include an immigrant fruit juice vendor and an instructor of English as a second language.
And he is playing them all.
"Richard is looking back at his working-class life -- his father was a truck driver; his mother is a secretary -- not in anger, but with affection," said Jonathan Slaff, a spokesman for the new play.
"He has no social or political agenda. And it's easy to see yourself in his characters. Working-class people don't necessarily have muddy boots on; they're now indoors, wearing headsets or aprons."
Performances of "Out of the Blue" take place today and next Sunday at 3 P.M. and Thursday through Saturday at 8 P.M. in the Joyce and Seward Johnson Theater at the Theater for the New City, 155 First Avenue (at East 10th Street) in Manhattan.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 254-1109. ALVIN KLEIN


The Old Ball Game Gets New Times at Bat
Never mind that the fierce winter delayed completion of the playing field at Waterfront Park, the handsome new baseball stadium in Trenton, and so the Trenton Thunder were vagabonds for 10 home games, playing in distant places.
Never mind that Waterfront's ticket booths, permanent concession booths, restaurant and entry plaza remain unfinished.
Never mind that Skylands Park, home field of the New Jersey Cardinals in the state's rural northwest, was unfinished for the season opener Thursday night and its owners are in bankruptcy court and scrambling to arrange loans and stock sales to pay off creditors.


Beached
It was cold and rainy as the Normandy invasion started, and nothing was going as planned.
As we hit the beaches, Helen Thomas was in the lead, charging off the aircraft carrier George Washington with toothbrush and tape recorder.
Sam Donaldson provided air cover in a Chinook helicopter hovering over the English Channel.
"General Hillary," as a British paper dubbed her, arrived on the field of battle with her hairdresser, Sylvan.


JUNE 12-18: A Phenomenon and a Riddle; Abortions Decline in U.S., But No One Is Sure Why
No one knows exactly why, but the number of abortions performed in the United States has been dropping, and is at its lowest level since 1979.
There were 1,529,000 abortions in this country in 1992, representing 27.5 percent of all pregnancies, according to a study released Thursday by the Alan Guttmacher Institute, a nonprofit research group.
The total was a significant drop from the early 1980's, when about 30 percent of all pregnancies were ended by abortions.


The Truth of the Matter
To the Editor:
In Walter Reich's review of books on the subject of repressed memory and child abuse (May 15), he makes very clear the need to maintain a judicious balance between taking such claims seriously when the evidence warrants it and guarding against false claims spawned by a combination of credulity and opportunism and fostered by a horde of "therapists" who are often nothing more than zealots or charlatans.


Brazil Inflation
To the Editor: We returned in March from three weeks in Brazil.
Travelers should be aware of the chaotic situation of the currency.
The official rate of inflation exceeded 40 percent in February, and the exchange rate of the dollar more or less follows inflation, climbing 1 or 2 percent daily.
As a result it becomes necessary to change money daily.
Another consequence is that many stores, hotels and restaurants do not accept credit cards.
And if they do, they charge a premium of over 40 percent.
This makes it necessary to deal in large amounts of cash.
A final difficulty is that not all banks will even change traveler's checks.
We found plenty of cambios in Rio and Sao Paulo, but in Florianop olis, a vacation center for Brazilians in the southern state of Santa Catarina, the American Express office was unable to cash its own traveler's checks.


Our Lingua Franca: "Who's Going to Win?"
THE ROOFERS barreled in before breakfast last week, a jolly bunch of burly guys who started banging on my drain pipes while I was just starting to remember how anxious I was about the Knicks.
Finally, I blurted, "Who's going to win?"
They lowered their mallets, switched off the power drill and turned respectfully to the eldest, who said something I could not understand to one of the younger men, a son or nephew, who said to me, "Probably Brazil, although, of course, we are rooting for Spain."


Navratilova Still Awaiting the Sweetness of Her Parting
Careering across the English countryside with a friend's foundling mongrel in the passenger seat and yet another loss in the rear-view mirror, Martina Navratilova, a classic herself as well as an avid reader of the genre, couldn't help remembering something Shakespeare once said about parting being such sweet sorrow.
If that's true, then why, wondered the 37-year-old Wimbledon diva, has her much-ballyhooed leave-taking of tennis this year been packed with sorrow and absolutely devoid of sweetness?


Elizabeth Cluett, Reginald Thors
Elizabeth Tucker Cluett, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark Sturtevant Cluett of San Francisco, was married yesterday to Reginald Fincke Thors, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thor Thors Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Charles H. Clarke Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Blue Hill, Me.
Until recently Mrs.
Thors was a vice president in the Boston office of Robinson Lake/Sawyer Miller Group, a communications consulting concern in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and is to attend Harvard Business School in the fall.


Drowned Out
To the Sports Editor:
George Steinbrenner has broken his silence and is once again hornswoggling New York about the poor attendance at Yankee Stadium this spring.
It's crime in the Bronx that keeps the fans away, he asserts.


At Work; Surprise: Bigger Isn't Always Better
MANY companies continue to make health insurance available to their employees, but coverage is declining, a Labor Department study has found.
The overall percentage of workers receiving coverage through their employers dropped to 61 percent last year from 65 percent in 1988.
The drop in coverage occurred mostly in the private sector, where it went to 58 percent from 62 percent over the last five years.
Public sector coverage dropped by only 1 percentage point.
About 37 million workers receive no insurance through their employers and 16 million of them have no coverage at all.
"This report makes clear that employer-provided health insurance is still the bedrock of America's health care system, but it's ailing," Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said when he announced the findings late last month.
Not surprisingly, Mr.
Reich said the research underscores the "urgent need" for health care reform.


Maine Restaurants
This listing was omitted on June 12 when an article about Maine restaurants appeared.
Except for Arrows, these restaurants also function as full-service inns.


It's a Fine Time for Taking Inventory
THIS is a great time to make a serious garden inventory.
What is going to come up, or out, or has done so.
Walk around with keen eyes and maybe even a notebook and pencil in hand.
It will be important to know where any gaps are, where there might be a need for some redoing or fill-in planting.
Or, rarely, it may be that everything in the garden appears to be just right.


ACCORD REACHED TO END WALKOUT AGAINST L.I.R.R.
The Long Island Rail Road reached a contract agreement with its largest union late tonight, capitulating on work rule issues, after officials concluded that Congress would not step in soon to stop the strike.
The chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Peter E. Stangl, appearing before reporters shortly before 11 P.M., said he had decided to settle the strike by giving up.
"I made a decision that I'd pay the ransom before it got too bad out there," he said.


No Tunnel Vision: Anatomy of a Decision
When neighborhoods mount vociferous campaigns against unwanted projects like homeless shelters, sewage plants and prisons, it often seems as if planners at City Hall aren't listening.
But 10 days ago, environmental officials withdrew an application to build a much-needed shaft for the city's third water tunnel in the heart of the thriving Bulova Corporate Center in Jackson Heights, bringing an end to a bitter two-year battle with residents.
The city has proposed another site at 46-01 37th Avenue in Woodside.


Understanding and Care Help to Install Outdoor Outlets
INSTALLING an electrical outlet outdoors may not be much more difficult than installing an outlet indoors, which usually is rather easy.
People with minimum electrical experience and an ordinary assortment of home-repair tools may perform the work, provided that they work carefully and proceed only with a complete understanding of the job.
As with any electrical work, consult the authorities before starting.
Regulations may apply, and the work may require official inspections.


Pamela Abel, Max Reynal
Pamela Press Abel, a daughter of Marjorie W. Abel of Essex Fells, N.J., and the late Dr.
Ronald M. Abel, was married at her mother's house last evening to William Andrew Reynal, a son of Eric and Carmen Reynal of Upper Slaughter, Gloucestershire, England.
Cantor Theodore Aaronson officiated.
Mrs.
Reynal, 28, is a field producer with "Lifetime Magazine" at ABC News in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University and received a master's degree from Columbia University.
Her father was the chief of cardiothoracic surgery at St.
Michael's Medical Center in Newark.


Knicks Take a Deep Breath at Hint of a Title in Air
A riveting Knicks season filled with memorable moments, intriguing twists and many challenges is one victory away from culminating in a championship.
All the current Knicks have been waiting their entire careers for this.
New York has been waiting since 1973, when the Knicks won their last championship.


Julie Hock, James McLaughlin
Julie Hock, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Hock of Orange, Conn., was married yesterday to James H. McLaughlin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Howard McLaughlin of Woodbury, Conn.
The Rev.
George LaLiberte performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Teresa's Church in Woodbury.
Mrs.
McLaughlin is an assistant fund-raiser at Miss Porter's School in Farmington, Conn.
She graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University.


Science Would Get Nowhere Without Dreamers; Europe's Collider
To the Editor:
In "Physics Is History," (Op-Ed, June 11), Dick Teresi performs some useful services, notably debunking misleadingly optimistic reports about new particle acceleration technologies.
But his overall thrust is distressingly narrow.
For one thing, he overlooks the international dimension of science.
While bemoaning the United States cancellation of the superconducting supercollider, Mr.
Teresi fails to inform readers that the Europeans seem likely to go ahead with a project (the Large Hadron Collider, at the CERN laboratory in Geneva) that can do most of the same physics.
Thus predictions of an end to major experimentation in fundamental physics are premature.
A new golden age is equally possible.


If Baedeker Had Traveled Through War Zones . . .
AT the height of the siege of Sarajevo last winter, a Rubik's Cube of armored cars crammed the basement of the Sarajevo Holiday Inn, bulky Land Rovers emblazoned with the names of newspapers, magazines and television networks.
Each morning began with much backing and turning as journalists ventured out into the day's mayhem.
The cavernous lobby, its soaring windows shattered and taped over, had a sign asking guests to, please, not store gasoline in their rooms.
Guests wore parkas and hats against the cold in public spaces and unrolled down sleeping bags in their rooms.
Water ran only sporadically; when it did, there was a rush to fill up plastic jugs and elaborate schemes were used to heat it so showers could be taken from soda bottles.


Louise Sinnott, Michael Stocker
Louise Marie Sinnott, a special-projects manager at Parker Media, a publishing company in Hartford, and Dr.
Michael Aubrey Stocker, the president of the Cigna Healthplans insurance company there, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Orlanda Brugnola, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Boathouse Cafe in New York.
The bride graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Jeanne Nolan Sinnott of Rye, N.Y., and John J. Sinnott of Darien, Conn.


SEPARATE IS BETTER
Susan Estrich's article "Separate Is Better" (May 22) is right on the money.
When boys and girls are together in the classroom, not surprisingly, the same gender dynamics that characterize the rest of our culture are played out.
Coed classrooms are the norm, but the norm does not serve girls well; it needs to be challenged and, ultimately, changed.
Single-sex education is counterculture, but it's good for girls.
When boys and girls come together, it tends to be on the boys' terms and much happens that has little to do with learning.


Repairs Making Coachman More Livable
LONG regarded with opprobrium by housing and human rights advocates and with fear and dismay by its neighbors, the Coachman Hotel in downtown White Plains has served as little more than a warehouse for homeless families.
Merchants and neighbors alike have protested the conditions at the hotel, in which families with mental-health and drug- and alcohol-abuse problems were placed with little or no follow-through care and where more functional families had to struggle to maintain order amid chaos.


Lainey Webb, Richard Moseley
Lainey Leta Webb, the daughter of Lucy Hoffman Webb of Washington and the late Col.
Charles Webb Jr., was married yesterday to Richard Duraunde Moseley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Moseley of Hampstead, N.H.
The Rev.
James Blackburn performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in St.
Michaels, Md.
The bride, 30, is an associate producer with "48 Hours," the CBS-TV news program in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father was a squadron commander in the Air Force.


General Foods Selects 45 Students for Summer Job Program
THERE was a sense of hope in the room, especially heartening at a time when many young people are depressed about their future.
These young people were at an orientation meeting for General Foods U.S.A.'s Operation Opportunity Summer Jobs Program for economically disadvantaged high school students, at Kraft General Foods headquarters on North Street here.
Attending were the 45 students who will be working at General Foods this summer, their parents, school district superintendents, high school principals and guidance counselors and General Foods executives.
The students, selected on merit and need, were obviously happy to be there.
And their parents appeared happy and proud.


BILL CLINTON'S ADHOCRACY
There are valid reasons to criticize Bill Clinton, but his use of special task forces led by a small inner-circle of confidants is not one of them.
Rather, this M.O. may be the only way to meet voters's expectations -- not just for improvements but for the deep transformations that are usually described with words like reform, reinvent, restructure.
SIGFRIDO LICHTENTHAL Scarsdale, N.Y.


Jayne Jahre, Stephen Sinsheimer
Jayne Jahre, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Jahre of Brooklyn, is to be married today to Stephen Lloyd Sinsheimer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leopold Sinsheimer of Manhattan.
Rabbi Brooks Susman is to perform the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride is an associate at Schiavetti, Geisler, Corgan, Soscia, DeVito, Gabriele &amp; Nicholson, a law firm in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received her law degree from Buffalo Law School.
Her father retired as a sales representative at Metropolitan Distributors, suppliers of tobacco and candy products in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Shirley Jahre, is an educational assistant at Public School 95 in Brooklyn.


Paula A. Dyjak, Joseph W. Giles
Paula Ann Dyjak, a daughter of Irene Dyjak of Simsbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Joseph William Giles, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Y. Giles of Villanova, Pa.
The Rev.
James T. Dever officiated at Holy Redeemer Roman Catholic Church in Chatham, Mass.
Mrs.
Giles, 33, was until recently an asset manager for Aetna Realty Investors Inc. in Hartford.
She graduated cum laude from Ohio Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Virginia.
Her mother retired as a clerical assistant at Ensign-Bickford Industries Inc., an explosives manufacturer in Simsbury.


Corrections
The Architecture View column on page 34 of the Arts and Leisure section today, and a picture caption with it, about the concept of "queer space," misspell the name of a New York center for gay youth in some copies.
It is the Hetrick-Martin Institute.
In some copies the article also misspells the surname of a critic who has argued that post-modern architecture may represent a covert gay assault on the modern movement.
He is Aaron Betsky.


A Rabbi's Complicated Relationship With Judaism
RABBI MENACHEM MENDEL SCHNEERSON, who died last weekend at the age of 92, rewrote the book on what it means to be a Hasidic rabbi.
And in so doing, the rabbi, a colorful, charismatic and often controversial figure, became perhaps the best known Jewish leader in the world.
But this man, who came for many to personify Judaism, in fact had an uneasy relationship with some Jews because of his uncompromising orthodoxy, his efforts to spread Judaism and the cult of personality that developed around him.


Beyond the Supermarket: Shopping in Hell's Kitchen
To the Editor:
In the map accompanying your May 29 article, "Congested. Expensive. Out of Date," you indicate that there is only one "real" supermarket, a Food Emporium, serving the 20 or so blocks of Manhattan known as Hell's Kitchen.
But supermarket chains are not the only measure; there is an abundance of good, clean and inexpensive food available in this low-income neighborhood, inhabited mostly by working-class immigrants and theater artists.


How to Adjust for the Disadvantage Black Candidates Suffer
To the Editor:
"Jackson Tours to Tell Blacks of New Threat" (news article, June 5) suggests that oddly shaped predominantly black Congressional districts may be unfair to both blacks and whites.
But amid the polemic discussion surrounding creation of such districts, critics and the courts seem to lose sight of an important point.
One of the fundamental tenets of Federal Voting Rights legislation is to protect black voters -- and black political candidates -- from electoral discrimination.
Blacks have made extraordinary political gains in the last three decades (more than 7,000 black elected officials at the Federal, state, city and county levels).
But an intractable problem remains: racial considerations continue to loom large -- and to the detriment of black candidates -- in electoral circumstances where a black political aspirant must vie for support among white voters.


Alison Sughrue, James Feeley 3d
Alison Mary Sughrue, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
O.
Stevens Sughrue Jr. of Winchester, Mass., was married yesterday to James Aloysious Feeley 3d, a son of Patricia L. Feeley of Winchester and Mr.
Feeley Jr. of Needham, Mass.
The Rev.
Paul S. Sughrue, an uncle of the bride, performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in the chapel at Salve Regina University in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Feeley, 29, is a senior underwriter in Boston for the American International Group, the New York insurance company.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
Her father is a lawyer in Boston.
Her mother, Jane B. Sughrue, is a mathematics teacher at the McCall Middle School in Winchester.


Women's Art Festivals In Finland and France
Marseilles and Helsinki will be the sites of two women's arts events next month, concentrating on film and theater, respectively.
The 11th Festival International du Film au Feminin in Marseilles will take place from July 4 to 9.
Some 60 films will be screened, including silent, classical, television and contemporary movies.
Many will come from North America, and there will be a series on the "Far West Heroines" of older films, starring such actresses as Barbara Stanwyck.
Some 20 countries will be represented.
Tickets cost $6.75 a film, $5.75 for students.
Tickets that allow admission to eight films cost $35.75.
Call (91) 91 91 91 on weekdays.


South African TV Ads Switch to Black and White
THE final scene of a television commercial for Sales House, a chain of clothing stores, depicts an elderly black man sitting serenely in South Africa's Parliament.
"Cape Town, 1994" reads the caption, alluding to the Presidency of Nelson Mandela, whose russet skin tone the actor evokes.
The commercial, which pushes clothes and not politics, is but one example of the changing world of South African advertising, in which companies, mindful of the emerging black consumer market and the current air of racial harmony, seek to sail with the prevailing political winds.


New Policy of Processing Haitian Refugees


Medgar Evers College Savors a New Start
After years of struggle, Medgar Evers College has won back its original status as a four-year, senior college, and the school and its Crown Heights neighbors are celebrating.
State Senator Marty Markowitz, a Democrat whose district encompasses Crown Heights, offered a one-word reaction: "Hallelujah!"
With the recent passage of the state budget, which included $1.3 million to pay for the transition from a two-year to an official four-year program, school officials will put the change into effect for the fall semester.
Tuition will rise from $2,100 to $2,450.
Officials also hope to turn their backs on a period of confusion and strife during which two of the school's presidents were forced to resign.


'Lost Decade' Drains Africa's Vitality
You don't have to be a detective to spot the decline in living standards in Africa.
It hits you right away.
It can be seen in the shantytowns that surround every capital city, sprawls of humanity living in hovels with no windows, open sewers and garbage heaped in mounds chest-high.
It can be heard in the lessons sung out in ancient schoolrooms, where enrollments are dropping and yet class sizes swell to 120 pupils.


Catherine Jackson, Edward Morris
Catherine Lynn Jackson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard G. Jackson of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Edward Follett Morris, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Morris of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Morris, 26, graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Dick Jackson Inc., an advertising agency in New York.


From Private Collection to Public
David and Peggy Rockefeller donate some of their favorite works, and the Museum of Modern Art says thank you with a party, June 8.


Leslie Cheeseman, Albert Bixler 3d
Leslie Ann Cheeseman, a third-year medical student at Temple University, was married on Friday to Albert George Bixler 3d, a partner at Hangley Connolly Epstein Chicco Foxman &amp; Ewing, a law firm in Philadelphia.
Judge Anita Brody of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania performed the ceremony in her chambers in Philadelphia.
Ms.
Cheeseman, 35, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of South Dakota.
She is the daughter of Max and Joyce Cheeseman of Pierre, S.D.


Two Koreas Plan Summit Talks on Nuclear Issue
For the first time since the Korean peninsula was divided five decades ago, the Presidents of North and South Korea agreed today to hold a summit meeting, which is likely to focus on defusing tensions over the North's suspected effort to build a nuclear weapon.
The agreement was brokered by former President Jimmy Carter, who delivered the offer from North Korea's 82-year-old leader, Kim Il Sung, after returning to Seoul this morning from a three-day visit to Pyongyang.


Ms. Matsumoto, Mr. Iwakura
Rei Matsumoto, the daughter of Sanae Matsumoto and Dr.
Seiji Matsumoto of Hyogo, Japan, is to be married today to Masakazu Iwakura, a son of Keiko and Yasunori Iwakura of Tokyo.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard is to officiate at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
The bride, 25, is a student in Columbia University's American Language Program.
She graduated from Sacred Heart University in Tokyo.
Her father, a pediatrician, is the founder of the Matsumoto Hospital in Hyogo.


A Profile Misses the Important Issues
To the Editor:
Your article on Bruce A. Lehman ends with a display of pure petulance.
Mr.
Lehman's male partner requests anonymity; the article does everything to identify him -- just short of giving us his name.
The final paragraph sneers at "this nameless, silent man . . . clinging to anonymity in a room full of 200 people." When Mr.
Lehman agreed to be interviewed, I'm sure he didn't expect to be pierced by one more "little insult" by The New York Times.
MARGARET LACEY  Richmond, Ind., June 1  The writer is the author of "Silent Friends," a novel about growing up as a Quaker.


SURFACING
GALAS The party line: It has become something of a tradition at charity parties this season to end the event with a line dance. (Above, a benefit for the Fresh Air Fund).
COOL Arnet sunglasses: The hip eye wear among surfers, snowboarders, rockers, etc.
Reduces sunlight, attracts limelight.
EXERCISE Power yoga: At fitness clubs all over, classic yoga poses are mixed with more rigorous exercise routines and moves like sit-ups and push-ups.


Wall Street; Stockpile Concerns Create Problems for a Stock
CHEYENNE Software Inc. lost more than half its value on Friday, after the computer software company said earnings in the quarter that ends June 30 would be disappointing.
Cheyenne lost $8.375, to close at $8.
It was the second recent rout for the stock, which suffered a one-day loss of 13 percent on June 9.
Word spread then that Terence M. Quinn, an analyst at Furman Selz, had unearthed information about unsettling inventory buildups at distributors of Cheyenne software products.


In the Region/Connecticut; Subdivisions Make a Comeback After 4-Year Hiatus
IN recent months Connecticut developers have been plunging back into the business of building new homes in multi-unit residential communities, ending a hiatus of more than four years.
"At least two dozen subdivisions of 16 to more than 200 units are under construction or breaking ground," said Joanne Carroll, a director of both the Connecticut Association of Home Builders and the parallel national organization.
"Developers are picking the best locations in towns with good transportation and good schools."


Robin G. Harrison, Jeffrey M. Kaplan
Robin Gail Harrison, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert W. Harrison of New York, was married last evening to Jeffrey Michael Kaplan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen H. Kaplan of Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi David Wice officiated at the summer home of the bride's parents in Southampton, L.I.


Artist Included Rejected Paintings
As a Manhasset resident and one who is dedicated to our library, I am disheartened by the manner in which the incident involving the banning of the exhibition of nude paintings was depicted in "Library Sued Over Ban on Nude Art"  [ May 8 ] .
This artist was given the opportunity to show her work in our library as long as she adhered to its policy of not displaying nude pictures.
She had agreed to do this.
However, when she presented her paintings to be hung she included paintings previously rejected.
Her subsequent suit demanding monetary recompense smacks of publicity-seeking plus a desire for financial gain.
The area for display is directly adjacent to the children's activities.
As a result the library staff has established criteria as to what paintings would be suitable for children's viewing.
The library's staff should be commended for expanding the possibility for community cultural experiences and for giving largely unknown talented artists an opportunity to exhibit work that might otherwise gather dust in some studio bin.
It is sad to see that such an act of professional generosity and support should be rewarded with this mean-spirited act of ingratitude.
DORIS LURIE Manhasset


New United: Friendly Skies or Bloody Sunday?
WOULD you like to own shares in a company run by its unions? What about bonds?
Those are the big questions facing investors regarding the new United Airlines, whose 1994 buyout effort now seems likely to succeed.
This has been a deal born of mistrust, with a not-very-subtle threat by employees to bring the company down unless they got a majority stake.
When the stock price fell in the months after the deal was disclosed, the company responded by rejiggering the arrangement to make it more favorable to the unions.
They now get 55 percent of the company, up from 53 percent.


Allied Soldiers March to Say Farewell to Berlin
Soldiers from the United States, Britain and France marched through Berlin today in a military farewell to the city their armies entered as victors and then guarded for nearly half a century.
Cannons boomed in salute, parachutists fell through the clouds and helicopters flew in formation as an estimated 75,000 spectators watched the soldiers step smartly through the streets to the beat of martial music.
A lone DC-3 represented the planes that took part in the Berlin airlift of 1948-49, when the Soviet authorities established a blockade between West Berlin and West Germany.


Els Attacks Course and a U.S. Monopoly
In a fearless and nearly flawless display of golf, combining power and finesse and a complete disregard for what had gone before, Ernie Els put himself in position to win the United States Open today.
Els, the 24-year-old South African, shot a round of five-under-par 66 at Oakmont Country Club and took a two-stroke lead over Frank Nobilo of New Zealand, who shot 68.
Els's total of seven-under-par 206 is three strokes better than the American threesome of Hale Irwin, Tom Watson and Loren Roberts and the Scot, Colin Montgomerie, who led when the day began.


30 Years Later, It's Freedom Summer Again
THIS MONTH MARKS THE 30TH anniversary of the Freedom Summer, when 1,000 college students from the North traveled to Mississippi to register black voters.
The unbridled optimism of the movement, the cynicism that managed to stifle it at that summer's Democratic National Convention and its legacy in the lives of its participants are represented in the documentary "Freedom on My Mind," which opens Wednesday at Film Forum.
"Freedom on My Mind," which won the audience award for best documentary at this year's Sundance Film Festival, tells the story of the Mississippi Voter Registration Project.
The film begins in 1961 when Robert Moses, a Harvard University graduate student, registered the first black man, a farmer named Herbert Lee, to vote in Mississippi.
Soon thereafter, Mr.
Lee was shot and killed by a white segregationist state legislator with whom he had grown up.
The act would prove a grim portent of the violence to come, including the murders of the 14-year-old Emmett Till, the N.A.A.C.P. attorney Medgar Evers and the civil rights volunteers Michael Schwerner, James Chaney and Andrew Goodman.


In Section 121, Ellis Island Is Reborn
It was hot and loud as a subway car in Section 121, full of Irish and Italians and tension.
Ireland led Italy, 1-0, in the opening round of the World Cup, and the regulation 90 minutes were up.
The final whistle could come at any moment.
An Irishman from Galway in a Larry Bird jersey pulled at the national flag that was already encircling his neck.
The Italians, their hands making eloquent arguments in the air that needed no translation, pleaded for a goal and the dignity of a draw.
Soon, a fight began, and the security forces, stylishly color-coordinated and faintly paramilitary, moved in.


BEST SELLERS: June 19, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
2
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
2
2
16
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
3
6
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
4
135
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
5
4
8
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
6
5
97
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
7
10
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
8
11
4
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $22.95.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
9
6
9
"K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's daughter.
10
10
4
PRINCE CHARMING, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $22.) A lady in Victorian London discovers the man of her dreams, who lives in Montana.
11
8
3
ALL GOOD THINGS ... , by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $20.) "Star Trek"'s Enterprise crew tries to quash an effort to eliminate the human race.
12
1
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $19.95.) A former schoolteacher's efforts to unmask her aunt's blackmailer in London's high society.
13*
2
WALKING SHADOW, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser looks into the murder of a member of a theatrical troupe in a Massachusetts town.
14
12
7
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
15
15
3
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $21.95.) The private eye V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
58
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
2
9
2
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) An account of the Allied invasion of Normandy 50 years ago.
3
2
5
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
4
3
26
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
5
5
15
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
6
4
5
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
7
6
7
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
8
7
3
THE HALDEMAN DIARIES, by H.R.
Haldeman. (Putnam, $27.50.) Notes made by the man who was Richard Nixon's chief of staff from 1969 to 1973.
9
10
9
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
10
11
16
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
11
8
10
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
12
1
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
13
12
23
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
14
93
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
15
13
ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she was 11 years old) to 1993.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
8
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
3
56
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
2
8
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
22
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) BLACK BETTY, by Walter Mosley. (Norton, $19.95.) In Mr.
Mosley's fourth novel about the black Los Angeles private detective Easy Rawlins, Easy agrees to track down Black Betty, "a great shark of a woman" who figured conspicuously in his own earlier life.
BONE BY BONE: Stories, by Gary Krist. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Fictions that carry their own weight by drawing, with engaging observation, the daily activities of ordinary people learning to swim in hot water.
CIGARETTES ARE SUBLIME, by Richard Klein. (Duke University, $21.95.) People smoke them because they are dangerous, and for a lot of other reasons as well, according to this polemical, analytical, lit-critical, theoretical, political ode to deathweed by an up-to-date professor of French.
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) In the second language-ensorcelled volume of a projected trilogy, a youthful hero, the custodian of an untamed wolf, crosses from Texas into the inconsolable landscape of Mexico to perform an impossible quest.
MINE EYES HAVE SEEN THE GLORY: The Civil War in Art, by Harold Holzer and Mark E. Neely Jr. (Orion, $60.) The art that recorded and remembered the war, explored for its intentions, its effects at the time and its uses in a struggle to control the collective memory of Americans.
MOSES SUPPOSES, by Ellen Currie. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) A distinguished first collection of Ms.
Currie's short stories, new and old; in relationships gone wrong, in everyday objects, she discerns hints of large meanings and glimmers of submerged mysteries.
SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND, by Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) A deft, affecting novel whose aging protagonist retires in the vain hope that he can plan the outcome of life and decline slowly, affably toward its end.
SHOT IN THE HEART, by Mikal Gilmore. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Fifteen years after Norman Mailer's "Executioner's Song," Gary Gilmore's youngest brother reclaims his own life in this highly personal account of his family.
THE STRUGGLE FOR RUSSIA, by Boris Yeltsin. (Belka Publishing/Times Books/Random House, $25.) Russia's first democratically elected leader shows himself more thoughtful, more observant, more sensitive to nuances of other people's behavior than at first he appeared.
THANK YOU FOR SMOKING, by Christopher Buckley. (Random House, $22.) A comic novel that succeeds in enlisting the reader on the side of the devils, represented by an implausible hero: Nick Naylor, an energetic, unscrupulous lobbyist for the cigarette industry.
A WAY IN THE WORLD, by V.S.
Naipaul. (Knopf, $23.) A brilliant, probing autobiographical meditation on empire and inheritance by a mind at the peak of its powers, made of complementary narratives about characters from the author to Sir Walter Raleigh.


Reform vs. Reform; The Hidden Antagonist Of Clinton's Health Plan
EVEN more than the insurance industry, or the doctor industry, or the Republicans, good government may be the most formidable enemy of the troubled health care legislation President Clinton and leading Democrats are pushing.
Perhaps good government is saving the nation from higher taxes and bad medicine, as the President's enemies say.
Or perhaps it is costing many Americans their best chance in years to safeguard their health, as his allies say.


Joshua D. Lebowitz, Elizabeth Ferber
Elizabeth Margherita Ferber, the daughter of Dr.
Jane Ferber of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married last evening to Joshua David Lebowitz, a son of Dr.
Regina Lebowitz of Brooklyn and Dr.
Arthur Lebowitz of Norwood, N.J.
Rabbi Roger Ross officiated at the Hammond Museum in North Salem, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a kindergarten teacher at St.
Ann's School in Brooklyn Heights.
A graduate of Barnard College, she received a master's degree in education from New York University.
She is also a writer whose first novel, "Soon Found, Soon Lost," is to be published shortly by Yardbird Press.
Her mother is the associate director of residency training at the Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Long Island City, Queens.


Boarded-Up, Alexander's Awaits New Life
Ever since Alexander's flagship store closed in bankruptcy two years ago, the dormant building has taken on a desolate look, its boarded-up facade serving as a magnet to graffiti writers and poster pasters.
Now company officials are trying to capitalize on the site, prized for its large size, upscale neighborhood and coveted location next to Bloomingdale's.
The plan they are showing to potential developers and tenants would move the New York headquarters of Sotheby's, the world's largest fine-art auction house, from York Avenue and 72d Street to the Alexander's site, real estate executives say.
A luxury tower would be built above, to house either a hotel, apartments, offices, stores or a combination.


Ms. Hendrickson And Mr. Kohn
Susan Emery Hendrickson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Hendrickson of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Robert Sharpe Kohn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Immanuel Kohn of Princeton.
The Rev.
Cynthia A. Jarvis performed the ceremony at the Nassau Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 28, is an associate at Arnold &amp; Porter, the Washington law firm.
She graduated from Harvard University, from which she also received a law degree and a master's degree in public policy.
Her father, who retired as a senior vice president of Merck &amp; Company, is the chairman and chief executive of Envirogen, an environmental technology company in Lawrenceville, N.J.


Being Led Down A Garden Path
A dinner-dance at the New York Botanical Garden, June 9.


'WE'RE ALL RACIST NOW'
Thanks for saying what the educational establishment denies.
When a secondary school goes black and lower class, teachers' energies are devoured by efforts to maintain discipline.
Parents are justified in getting their children out of those schools or demanding protected programs where white achievers are not intimidated and black achievers are not ridiculed.


Correction
A letter on this page last Sunday about horse racing misstated where the filly, Go for Wand, is buried.
She is buried at Saratoga Race Track, not at Belmont Park.


'Looking at the Sun'
To the Editor:
I feel obliged to set the record straight about F. M. Scherer's comments on my book "Looking at the Sun: The Rise of the New East Asian Economic and Political System" (May 8).


Sports of The Times; Open-and-Shut Case of Torture
It is the only golf course that's a National Historic Landmark, but to the golfers in the United States Open it's more of a National Historic Land Mine.
Like so many of America's best golf courses, Oakmont is nearly 100 years old but its founder created only this one course.
His son perpetuated its diabolical design.
And it has endured as arguably America's most severe Open exam.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Designing a Framework for Diversity
NEXT WEEKEND, WHEN lesbians and gay men march through the streets of New York and other cities, they will be asserting something more than a political agenda.
They will also be asserting the vitality of the public realm and the importance of the city street as one of its major manifestations: a symbol of the openness, tolerance and diversity of democratic society.
By occupying that symbol in vast numbers, they hope to bring society closer to these ideals.
Queer space, a term that has been floating around architectural circles in recent months, takes the struggle out of the street and into the closet, so to speak, or at least into the tiny New York gallery Storefront for Art and Architecture (at 97 Kenmare Street), where a show of 13 new projects by architects and artists on the theme of "queer space" opened yesterday.
Organized by a cadre of writers and academics to coincide with the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall riots, the show is more concerned with social space than architectural form per se.


New School? Certainly. But Not Here.
A plan to build a $25 million elementary school for 650 children in the heart of Flatbush has met with resistance from community residents.
They argue that although a new school is needed, the selected site is in an area already crammed with thousands of college and public-school students.
Given the resistance, an official of the School Construction Authority said, the agency will consider looking for alternative sites, although the city already owns the one in question.
The school's opponents say the community contains privately owned vacant buildings that might be suitable locations.


A Bambi For the 90's, Via Shakespeare
LAST SUMMER, PEOPLE WORRIED ABOUT whether the dinosaurs in "Jurassic Park" were too frightening for children.
This summer, some may look at "The Lion King" and wonder if the death of the father lion is too traumatic.
In the first case, the worry was that brilliant special effects would leave children frightened of animals they know do not really walk the earth; in the second, that a well-told story would have children identifying with an animated lion cub and his grief and guilt over the loss of his father.
In "The Lion King," which opened on Wednesday, Mufasa, the king of beasts, is trampled in a wildebeest stampede as he saves his little cub, Simba.
Mufasa's evil brother, Scar, who provoked the stampede to kill his brother and take over the lion kingdom, convinces Simba that he killed his father.
The distraught cub leaves home, nearly dies and wanders the veldt until he grows up enough to return and challenge his usurping uncle.


POSTINGS: Change of Location for Water-Tunnel Shaft; A Bigger Queens Corporate Center Made Possible
It is not clear when the Bulova Corporate Center in Jackson Heights, Queens, will expand.
But one big obstacle -- 750 feet deep -- has been removed.
On June 10, Marilyn Gelber, the Commissioner of Environmental Protection, withdrew a plan to build Shaft 17B of the city's third water tunnel on the Bulova property.
She said she was responding to concerns that "the shaft could interfere with plans for future development at the site" and "was too close to schools and residences."


The Emperors of Ice Cream
BEN &amp; JERRY'S: THE INSIDE SCOOP How Two Real Guys Built a Business With a Social Conscience and a Sense of Humor.
By Fred (Chico) Lager.
Illustrated. 242 pp.
New York: Crown Publishers. $22.50.


PRO BAsKETBALL; The Prognosis for Little Bobby Hurley: Back to Normal, Slowly but Surely
In white T-shirt, blue jeans, a black cap and with a black equipment bag slung over his shoulder, he came into the locker room at St.
Rose's High here on the Jersey Shore on Friday night looking like one of the school's freshmen.
Even at 22 and at 6-foot, Bobby Hurley gives a boyish impression, with short-cropped hair, a thin frame and eyes that appear as innocent as a deer.
Only the thin scar that reaches from the corner of his left eye to his ear gives any outward evidence of the near-fatal automobile collision Bobby Hurley suffered nearly six months ago, on Dec. 16, after a game in which the Sacramento Kings, the team he played point guard for, had lost to the Los Angeles Clippers.


More Treasures to Explore
The Museum of Natural History celebrates two new galleries, June 6.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  McGrath Wins an All-American Battle  In Eastbourne, England, Meredith McGrath won the battle of unseeded Americans yesterday to take a grass-court championship with a 6-2, 6-4 victory over Linda Harvey-Wild.
The triumph gave McGrath her second career title and solidified her comeback after injuries kept her off the tour for 18 months.(AP)


Ms. Arredondo And Mr. Rolfe
Fabiola Raquel Arredondo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carlos A. Arredondo of Greenwich, Conn., and Madrid, was married yesterday to Andrew John Rolfe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Terrence Rolfe of Johannesburg.
Msgr.
Charles W. Stubbs performed the ceremony at St.
Marys Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich.
Ms.
Arredondo is keeping her name.
She graduated from Stanford University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Harvard University.
The bride, who is the director of strategic planning for the Bertelsmann Music Group in New York, plans to move to Madrid, where she is to become the group's vice president of international marketing, artists and repertoire for Latin America.
Her father is a general partner in Arredondo &amp; Company, a real estate development firm in Greenwich.


In Game of Surprises, Early Goal Is Biggest
Soccer is full of surprises.
But with all the hooting and hollering over Ireland's 1-0 victory over Italy yesterday, one of the most surprising things was how many people were surprised by the result.
Surprised that Ireland can play on the same level with Italy?
Though the Irish are relatively new to World Cup competition, 1990 having been the first tournament they qualified for, they've done well in the year leading up to this World Cup, with victories over Holland and Germany, for example.
The team is loaded with some of the best players in the English Premier League.


New Twist on Barbecued Chicken Dinner
GRILLED chicken, potato salad and pie: these are the quintessential dishes of outdoor summer barbecues.
The following menu, however, gives these old favorites a new twist.
Chicken breasts are served with a salsa made from roasted tomatoes, deep-fried capers and ginger along with a salad of Yukon Gold potatoes with chives.
For dessert, there is tarte Tatin, made with apricots instead of apples, with vanilla ice cream.


Ms. Contopoulos, Mr. Lambropoulos
CATHERINE KALLIOPY CONTOPOULOS, 29, and Apostolos Pericles Lambropoulos, 26, met two years ago at the Thiasos Cafe, a Greek nightclub on West 21st Street near Avenue of the Americas that looks like a country restaurant, with a timbered ceiling, yellow plaster walls and blue window frames the color of Mediterranean fishing boats.
Seated at different crowded tables, they spotted each other across the room and flirted, without meeting, for hours.


Lords of the Ring
NIGHT AFTER NIGHT By Diana Starr Cooper.
Illustrated. 173 pp.
Washington: Shearwater Books/Island Press. $18.


Flawed View
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's column disparaging the "butting and pounding, and sometimes complaining" current Knicks ("Knicks' Style Is Simply Shocking," The Times, June 12) is flawed in perspective and bankrupt of perception.


A Fragrant Family's Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
I BOUGHT this plant a couple of weeks ago at Cheryl's, a little roadside stand out in Flanders, on Long Island.
"It's an angel's trumpet," said Cheryl Pellis, the owner.
Oh, boy, I thought, picturing lovely white bells with an elusive fragrance that grows stronger at night -- perfect for luring guests up to my roof garden.


Canada Rebuffs Veterans of U.S. Forces in Vietnam
During the Vietnam War, as thousands of young Americans sought refuge in Canada to avoid the conflict, thousands of young Canadians were recruited by the United States to fight in that same war.
Some 20,000 American draft dodgers and 12,000 deserters are estimated to have fled to Canada, while 40,000 Canadians, the majority of them volunteers, served in the American armed forces, and at least 12,000 fought in Southeast Asia.


Officials Focus on Chaperones In Drowning of Bronx Student
School officials continued yesterday to investigate the drowning of 14-year-old from the Bronx on a class outing to a water park in Pennsylvania to determine whether negligence by chaperones contributed to the accident.
"Obviously, I personally feel someone somehow failed," said Carmelo Saez, president of Community School District 9, which includes the school, Intermediate School 166 in the Morrisania section of the Bronx.
Mr.
Saez said that normal procedures required a high degree of watchfulness by teachers and administrators on such trips and that parents have a right to expect tight supervision.


House Panel Is Facing Vote On School Aid
In the last decade, several efforts to tighten fiscal control of Federal student aid programs, which lose $3 billion to $4 billion a year to defaults and fraud, have been delayed or defeated by higher education lobbyists and their Congressional allies.
With a crucial July 1 deadline approaching, it may be happening again.
On Tuesday, the House Appropriations Committee is expected to vote on whether to postpone a new law intended to crack down on trade schools run for profit, which account for most student aid defaults and frauds.


How the Federal Reserve Sets Policy
To the Editor
Stuart E. Weiner promotes a serious misunderstanding of the natural rate of unemployment and its usefulness for policy purposes.


Karen Christensen, Charles Shaffer 3d
Karen Christensen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Poul Erik Christensen of Madison, Conn., was married yesterday to Charles Milton Shaffer 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Shaffer Jr. of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Edward Anderson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Siasconset Union Chapel on Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Shaffer, 27, is an associate at Certilman Balin Adler &amp; Hyman, a law firm in East Meadow, L.I.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received her law degree from George Washington University.


'WE'RE ALL RACIST NOW'
No one could excel in the atmosphere created by a "teacher" like Bill Paterson, whose contempt for his students runs so deep that "some days he can barely face the class. . . ."


Wilder Becomes the 4th to Enter Virginia's Fractious Senate Race
L.
Douglas Wilder, whose wit and drive took him from segregation to the Virginia Governor's Mansion, today returned to his boyhood neighborhood here to declare his candidacy for the United States Senate.
Mr.
Wilder's entry as an independent brings to four the number in the field for a contest that The Hotline, a national daily political newsletter, this week called "the Senate race of the century."


Officials Fear to Inform About Tainted Water
"Eight Years Later, Wells Remain Tainted"  [ May 22 ]  did an excellent job of presenting the current state of confusion and inaction in the cleanup of numerous toxic sites in Nassau County.
The article failed to credit the role of the Citizens Campaign for the Environment and its extensive support for COPE, the coalition that is conducting a county health survey to investigate the relationship between public health, environmental quality and risk.
Citizens Campaign for the Environment staff have volunteered countless hours and support in bringing COPE into being.
Further, the agencies empowered to protect the public do not seem to want the public to be involved or informed.
An upcoming meeting of state environmental and public-health officials was apparently canceled when it became known that the public would also be present to learn more about the Garden City Park ground-water contamination plume.
SARAH J. MEYLAND Executive Director Citizens Campaign for Environment Massapequa


Airlines Expanding Routes Within U.S.
Several airlines are adding new domestic routes this summer.
USAir, (800) 428-4322, added flights in May from Pittsburgh to Bangor, Me.; Saginaw, Mich.; and Portland, Ore.
It also started flights from Philadelphia to Seattle in May, and this month, began flying from Philadelphia to Denver.


The Unsinkable Rocky Goodstein
ROOMMATES  My Grandfather's Story.
By Max Apple. 211 pp.
New York: Warner Books. $19.95.


Miss Maslin, Mr. Kulukundis
Kirsten Augusta von Lehmden Maslin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kirksey Brunswick Maslin of New York, was married yesterday to Alexander Elias Kulukundis, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elias Nicholas Kulukundis of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Salvatore Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Kulukundis is the manager of international strategy at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.


POLL FINDS A LACK OF FAITH IN POLICE
New Yorkers express anxiety about the Police Department's ability to protect them, and many say there is widespread corruption in the force, according to a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
The survey and follow-up interviews suggest a serious lack of confidence in the department because of a fear of crime and concern over revelations of corruption in several precincts.


'Flyin' West' on Stage
IF "hit," that crassly commercial tag, can be used in the nonprofit sphere of regional theater, pin it on "Flyin' West."
Pearl Cleage's lyric, militant comedy drama about visionary black women staking a claim to the land that will make them free in Nicodemus, Kan., in 1898, will be at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven for one more week.
This is a co-production between the Alliance Theater in Atlanta and Indiana Repertory Theater in Indianapolis.
In another staging by Crossroads Theater Company, of New Brunswick, N.J., where the play was seen early this season, "Flyin' West" is to open for one month's run at the Kennedy Center's Eisenhower Theater on Sept. 12.


Behind the Easy Smile, O. J. Was Hard to Read
On a warm June night twenty-five years ago, O. J. Simpson was sitting in a far, dark corner of a Manhattan bar called Bachelors III, waiting to meet one of its owners, Joe Namath.
It was a 60's scene, the air steamy with youth and sex and power; now, with O. J.'s freeway run overlaying every memory, it becomes a portentous prelude.
"It's a better crowd since last time I was here," Simpson was saying then.
He was warm, humorous, totally relaxed, his quick eyes checking the house.
"It was kind of slummy then, come as you are, but now it's more shirt and tie. Not real class, but comfortable. It's nice for Joe to have a place of his own."


Which City Has the Sharp Elbows?
After 54 long years without a Stanley Cup, New York City hockey fans made up for lost cheering last week when the Rangers beat the Vancouver Canucks in Game 7 of the finals at Madison Square Garden.
In an era when violence by celebrating fans has become routine, it should hardly seem surprising that the game Tuesday night was followed by a riot that left scores injured, caused widespread property damage and led to 50 arrests.


Jennifer Ward, Jonathan Oppenheimer
Jennifer Janvier Ward, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rodman Ward of Centerville, Del., was married yesterday to Jonathan Maximillian Ernest Oppenheimer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas F. Oppenheimer of Johannesburg.
The Rev.
Tony Coulson performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Anglican Church in White Waltham, Berkshire, England.
Mrs.
Oppenheimer graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received a law degree.
The bride, who was a Fulbright Scholar in Hong Kong, is an associate in the London office of Davis, Polk &amp; Wardwell, the New York law firm.


Volunteers Work on Refurbishing Old Boats and Their Museum
The 150-year-old square rigger that lay in the high grass at the Suffolk Marine Museum in West Sayville for nearly 20 years long concerned the volunteers at the museum.
With the institution struggling to get back on its feet last year after floundering economically, a group of volunteers decided to try to turn the complex around as well as to restore the vessel, the Two Brothers.
"We always knew the boat was there," a volunteer, Norman Lacourciere of Bohemia, said.
"Nothing was ever done about it. So we dragged it out."
Leading the nine-member rebuilding crew is Doc McKnight of Holbrook, a cabinetmaker.
He joined the volunteers in October, when he "saw they were in trouble," he said.
Since Suffolk County bought the 26 acres of a former estate on Great South Bay in 1966 the museum has showcased crafts, shipwreck artifacts and maritime activities.
After the county brought the former Anson Wales Hard estate, the museum, which the county and donation had financed purchased historic buildings and small seagoing boats.
Old Salts and Schoolchildren
Over the years baymen met to talk over old times and help restore boats, volunteers turned out to care for the vintage vessels, and schoolchildren visited on field trips.
In 1991 the county stopped paying $40,000 of the $87,480 it paid toward salaries and operating expenses.
By March 1993 the county had removed its full amount of financing.
The chairman of the board, Stanley Feldman, said the 20-member board, with several new members, was trying to reinvigorate the museum.
Last year the museum began to try to broaden its fund-raising base, and it changed its name and focus.
The Suffolk Marine Museum had concentrated on the Dutch settlers and the early life along Great South Bay that centered on Oyster and clamming.
The board changed the name to the Long Island Maritime Museum.
Volunteers like Ron Swedborg of Oakdale, who teaches wood carving and will soon run the new blacksmith shop at the museum, have returned.
"The volunteer program hit its peak in the mid-80's," Mr.
Swedborg said.
"But it went down when the funding went down, and the boats didn't go out. But this year the people have come back. And there's a lot of new people, as well as the regulars from all over Long Island."
"The people who want it to work are working their head off," said Elizabeth Whitehouse, a trustee and a retired teacher from Sayville who runs the education program.
That program attracted more than 2,000 schoolchildren last year, and the museum had a total of 10,000 visitors.
The museum is sponsoring the Long Island Antique Classic Boat Show on Saturday, a nautical fair and seafood festival on Aug. 27 and 28 and an old-timer's regatta in September.
But a trustee, Alfred Terry Jr. of Bayport, voiced skepticism.
"I doubt whether they can raise the money," Mr.
Terry said.
"Maritime museums are just not out there. They should tell the state and county to pick up the tab."
In January the board also vetoed a $2.5 million proposal by the Village of Patchogue to buy and relocate the outbuildings and boats to a two-and-a-half-acre federally owned site along the Patchogue River.
Last year the museum dismissed three top employees, including the director, curator and librarian.
To Run 'Like a Business'
"No one was accredited before to handle the fund raising and grant writing," Mr.
Feldman said.
"Now we are going to run the museum like a business."
The operating budget is $165,000, including salaries for an executive director and a curator.
Volunteers have donated 10,000 hours this year, Mr.
Feldman added.
More than 20 grant requests, written by board members who are former educators, have been sent to governmental and private agencies.
County Legislator Steve Levy, Democrat of Sayville, has proposed that the county spend someof its income from the 0.75 percent hotel tax on the museum.
Mr.
Levy has also asked a company about providing ferry to dock at the museum, he said.
Another focus for the revitalization is membership, and 636 members have joined.
Their dues totals $25,000.
The board is looking inviting to other maritime groups to use the museum for their social events.
"We're trying to make friends," the treasurer, Gary Herold of Bellport, said.
A walk around the museum usually begins at the 100-year-old Baymans' Cottage, a neat grey structure with green shutters on a rise overlooking the bay.
Inside, the tiny rooms include all the amenities that made life comfortable for the bayman, appearing as if the family had just stepped out for a moment.
Next is the small craft building, housing more than 50 historic boats.
Flat duck boats and pleasure boats, some created by a well-known designer from Patchogue, Gil Smith, rest on racks in various stages of renovation or decay.
Across the field is the 19th-century boat shop.
Mr.
Terry, an expert in rebuilding Smith boats, said he remembered when the boathouse was moved from its site in Center Moriches down the river to the bay across the water and west to the museum.
Today the smell of wood shavings permeates the largest room of the building.
It is a working shop, and a boat in progress rests on a cradle with tools nearby.
Upstairs three ancient Singer sewing machines sit ready for work.
Next door is the oyster-processing house, set up for shucking and processing.
At its wraparound dock are moored the boats used in clamming and oyster in the late 1800's, the Priscilla, a two-masted schooner, and Modesty, a sloop, both of which participated in Op Sail 1986 and 1992.
Also docked, but not in working order, are a little tugboat, the Charlotte, and the newly acquired Vixen, once a sailboat and now a powerboat.
Mr.
McKinght said the crew working on the Two Brothers, which Neil Isbrandtsen Risig of Brightwaters donated in 1976, was aiming for a dedication ceremony next month.
"Now we'll be able to demonstrate square riggers to the youngsters," said Mr.
McKnight, who also teaches the scrimshaw class.
The museum, on West Avenue off Montauk Highway, is open yearround.
Its telephone number if 854-4974.


MY OLD FLAME
In David Ignatius's bone-chilling new post-cold-war suspense novel, "The Bank of Fear," one character in the search for Saddam Hussein's hidden wealth is a computer guru.
"Her idea of fun," the reader is told, "was roaming the Internet bulletin boards and flaming people she didn't like."
The author, an editor steeped in the lore of the Middle East, has evidently spent long hours in the company of creative hackers researching the techniques of computer-directed heists.
Among that set of nervous netties, flaming is a hot word.


Turks Fear Russia Role In Ex-States
Turkey's foreign-policy makers welcomed the breakup of the Soviet Union as an opportunity to create a sphere of influence ranging "from the Adriatic to China's border," as the catch phrase often heard a year or two ago went.
High hopes marked initial advances into the region.
But now hope has been replaced by worry that Russia wants to restore its hold over the Caucasus and Central Asia, and fear that Islamic militants might come to power in the region.
This fear has made some top officials tolerant of otherwise disliked but secular leaders like President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.


How the Federal Reserve Sets Policy
To the Editor:
In "History Upholds Fed's Rate Moves" (Viewpoints, May 29), Stuart E. Weiner fixes the natural rate of unemployment at a remarkably precise 6.75 percent.
This figure neatly justifies the four interest rate increases made by the Federal Reserve the last few months despite any evidence of inflationary movement.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 19, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
2
18
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret to an 11-year-old boy.
3
5
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
4
9
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
5
4
INTEREST OF JUSTICE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A judge's pursuit of the murderer of her sister and brother-in-law.
6
1
DARK APPRENTICE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) Volume 2 of the "Star Wars" Jedi Academy Trilogy.
7
1
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man from New York State mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland, where he works on a newspaper.
8
3
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Americans on holiday in Italy learn a lot about themselves.
9
8
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
10
7
THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) The sins of their mother haunt a boy and girl when a carnival comes to town.
11
2
MCNALLY'S RISK, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) Archy McNally investigates a Palm Beach woman and mysterious deaths.
12
8
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
13
2
THE RED HORSEMAN, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $6.50.) An American intelligence officer tries to control Soviet nuclear forces.
14
13
THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Doomsday brings horrors to America.
15
98
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
23
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.
2
7
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
3
554
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4*
5
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects.
5
3
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in combat in Vietnam and recently committed suicide.
6
23
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
7
70
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
8*
4
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business innovation.
9
6
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
10
12
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
11
9
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
12*
33
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
13
1
THE LONGEST DAY, by Cornelius Ryan. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $11.) The Allied assault on Normandy, June 6, 1944.
14*
140
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
15
55
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
16*
153
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
170
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
177
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
112
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
3
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 4, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Risk and Refuge: The New World Near West Street
Many of them first came to the waterfront edge of Christopher Street when they were barely teen-agers, brought by older friends or drawn, from wherever they lived, by a sense of wary curiosity.
What they found was an exciting, sometimes frightening night life near the bustling highway and on the rotting piers.
It was a place that some had glimpsed only in movies like "Paris is Burning," about transvestite life, or "Cruising," with Al Pacino, a dark story about a killer who stalked gay bars.


Bucking the Biggest Odds of All
WHEN JEFFREY Tate raises his baton in the Theatre du Chatelet here on Saturday evening to invoke the Rhine music that begins Wagner's "Ring" cycle, two dramas will be unfolding: that of the composer and that of the conductor.
Wagner's conception of the "Ring," which began in 1848 with a "Sketch for a Nibelungen Drama" and reached its fruition in Bayreuth, Germany, in 1876 with the work's first complete performance, encompasses the conflict of gods, giants and dwarfs, and traverses a vast mental world, ranging from Norse saga to Buddhist philosophy.


George Ball Memorial
A memorial service for George W. Ball will be held on Tuesday at 11 A.M. at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church, 7 West 55th Street.
Mr.
Ball, an under secretary of state in the administrations of Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, died May 26.


Thomas Cole, Early American Pessimist
"THOMAS COLE: LANDSCAPE Into History" is the latest effort by the National Museum of American Art, under its director, Elizabeth Broun, to examine art in the context of social and political history.
The museum's preachifying "West as America" exhibition of 1991 argued that the grandiose landscapes of later 19th-century artists like Thomas Moran and Albert Bierstadt celebrated the westward expansion of the United States.
This time the results are much better.
Cole was the right man at the right time.
The founding father of the Hudson River School of American landscapists, he started out in the wrong place.
He was born in Lancashire, England, in 1801, the son of an industrious but hapless small-time woolens manufacturer who moved his family to the United States in 1818 looking for better luck.
He didn't find it, but his son did.


Oddly Artistic Look At Real Art Ways
THE current show at Real Art Ways in Hartford is titled "About Face" and aptly so, for it seems contrary to the gallery's usual style.
On one hand, it is a juried exhibition, and on the other, Trevor Fairbrother, who is doing the honors, is Beal curator of contemporary art at the Museum of Fine Arts, in Boston.
The result is 42 contestants chosen out of roughly 100 and all of them unusually reviewable by Real Art Ways standards.


Beyond the Supermarket: Shopping in Hell's Kitchen
To the Editor:
Your article omitted any mention of couponing, which can cut 25 percent and more off the cost of shopping in drugstores and supermarkets.
Here's how it's done:


Road Projects Galore, and Not a Place to Turn
SUSAN STARR used to take 20 minutes to commute to work from Syosset to Lake Success, until construction started on the Long Island Expressway . . . and the Northern State Parkway . . . and Jericho Turnpike and . . .
Now, said Mrs.
Starr, who teaches nursery school at the Lake Success Jewish Center, the 15-mile trip takes up to an hour, often with five construction delays en route.
"I leave home a half-hour earlier than I normally would," she said, "and I'm still often late to work. I try to take different routes, but you never know where the construction will be. Half the time the roads are coned off, and there's no one even working there."


A Black Fan Of Country Music Finally Tells All
I HEARD THAT REBA McENTIRE'S new album, "Read My Mind," shot to No. 5 on the Billboard chart the first weekend of its release.
Well, she got my $11.95.


Farewell, Judy; Hello, Madonna
I USED TO FEEL SORRY FOR JUDY Garland when she was alive, but now that she has been dead for 25 years I feel even sorrier.
That the hoopla surrounding the anniversary is so low-key (a recordings reissue, an appearance in the film "That's Entertainment! III," several tributes in cabaret clubs and Off Off Broadway and the like) is bad enough.
But it is as a gay icon that her stock has really plummeted.
She used to be both an emblem and a bond.
Now she's an embarrassment that people don't talk about, like an aunt who went crazy.
Perhaps the biggest insult to her memory is the collective amnesia on the part of gay people when it comes to her role in the Stonewall riots.
They began on the night of her funeral, when a group of bar patrons, their emotions heightened by her dramatic last rites (more than 20,000 fans filed past her coffin at Campbell's Funeral Home in Manhattan), fought back during a then all-too-common police raid.
Gay liberation had been simmering for years, of course, but she was the spark that lighted its flame, its Boston Tea Party, so to speak.


David Middleton and Martha Eddy
Martha Hart Eddy, a dance and movement teacher in San Francisco, was married yesterday to David Blakeskee Middleton, an architect and associate partner at Polshek &amp; Partners, an architectural firm in San Francisco.
The Rev.
James Martin performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church in West Tisbury on Martha's Vineyard, Mass.
Ms.
Eddy is keeping her name.
She is also an adjunct professor of perceptual motor development at Columbia University and is an instructor at the Laban/Bartenieff Institute of Movement Studies in New York.
She graduated from Hampshire College and received a master's degree in movement science and education from Columbia, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in those subjects.


In Debate on Cap, Simms Is Now Exhibit A
The seasons of the professional sports run into each other and now seem inexorably linked, as witnessed when Lord Stanley's cup arrived on court to lend moral support to the Knicks last week.
Alas, schedules aren't the only things overlapping in sports.
So are labor issues, as three pro sports -- baseball, basketball and football -- all wrestle with the issue that has been equally explosive and controversial in each arena: the salary cap.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column last Sunday about cruise ship accommodations for the disabled described Cruise Consultants International of Santa Monica, Calif., incompletely.
In addition to being a travel agency, it consults with cruise companies on travel for the disabled.


Mozart Opens 49th Caramoor Season
CARAMOOR in Katonah -- with its official title expanded to the Caramoor International Music Festival 1994 and Andre Previn installed as artistic adviser -- opens its 49th season next weekend.
As usual, the roster is crowded with major personalities -- among them the pianists Ivan Moravec, Misha Dichter and Richard Goode, the violinist Elmar Oliveira, the Emerson Quartet, the Tokyo Quartet, the soprano Benita Valente, the conductor Julius Rudel and members of the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center.
Making their festival debuts this year are such notable younger pianists as Andrew Armstrong and Ignat Solzhenitsyn.


Corrections
Two pictures in some editions yesterday with an article about O. J. Simpson's career carried an incorrect caption in some copies.
The top picture showed Simpson running for a touchdown for the Buffalo Bills in the 1973 game against the Jets when he broke Jim Brown's yardage record.
The bottom picture showed him in one of his acting roles, in "Naked Gun 33 1/3: The Final Insult."


Controversial Principal Is Subject of Hearings
HEARINGS in the case of a principal who tried to introduce whole language and found herself facing disciplinary charges began here recently.
Whole language, a way of teaching reading and writing, focuses more on creativity and "invented spelling" and plays down traditional phonics and grammar.
The situation remains so controversial that the educator's supporters and detractors each put out their own newsletter about the case, and the Board of Education issued its own update.
Joanne Falinski, 41, the principal of the Furnace Woods School in Cortlandt, was suspended with pay last October, shortly after the Hendrick Hudson School District here brought 59 formal charges against her.
Most of the charges allege that she prevented children from getting the special-education services they needed.
In April, the district filed 51 additional charges, this time including several criminal charges concerning official misconduct and tampering with public records.


Cameron Paynter, Michael Nelson
Cameron Clark Paynter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Grenville H. Paynter of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Robert Nelson, a son of Dr.
Robert R. Nelson and Sue Nelson Messaglia, both of South Bend, Ind.
The Rev.
David Simpson performed the Congregational ceremony at the Stone Church in New Preston, Conn.


Pamela Auerbach, Barton Aronson
Pamela Jane Auerbach, a law clerk to Judge Rya W. Zobel of United States District Court in Boston, is to be married today in Wellesley, Mass., to Barton Samuel Aronson, an assistant district attorney for Norfolk County, in Quincy, Mass.
Judge Rena K. Uviller of the State Court of Claims in Manhattan officiated at the Wellesley College Club.
Rabbi Joshua Elkin took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Auerbach, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she and the bridegroom received law degrees from the University of Chicago.


Susan L. Varisco, Robert L. Levy
Susan Leah Varisco, a foreign policy analyst in the Office of the Secretary of Defense in Washington, was married yesterday to Robert Louis Levy, an associate in the New York office of Morrison &amp; Foerster, a San Francisco law firm.
Marie Sherman, a justice of the peace in Brewster, Mass., officiated at the First Parish Unitarian Meeting House there.
Ms.
Varisco, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Radcliffe College.
She received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University, where she is a candidate for a Ph.D. in political science.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominic C. Varisco of Needham, Mass.


Volunteers Work on Refurbishing Old Boats and Their Museum
The 150-year-old square rigger that lay in the high grass at the Suffolk Marine Museum in West Sayville for nearly 20 years long concerned the volunteers at the museum.
With the institution struggling to get back on its feet last year after floundering economically, a group of volunteers decided to try to turn the complex around as well as to restore the vessel, the Two Brothers.
"We always knew the boat was there," a volunteer, Norman Lacourciere of Bohemia, said.
"Nothing was ever done about it. So we dragged it out."
Leading the nine-member rebuilding crew is Doc McKnight of Holbrook, a cabinetmaker.
He joined the volunteers in October, when he "saw they were in trouble," he said.
Since Suffolk County bought the 26 acres of a former estate on Great South Bay in 1966 the museum has showcased crafts, shipwreck artifacts and maritime activities.
After the county brought the former Anson Wales Hard estate, the museum, which the county and donation had financed purchased historic buildings and small seagoing boats.
Old Salts and Schoolchildren
Over the years baymen met to talk over old times and help restore boats, volunteers turned out to care for the vintage vessels, and schoolchildren visited on field trips.
In 1991 the county stopped paying $40,000 of the $87,480 it paid toward salaries and operating expenses.
By March 1993 the county had removed its full amount of financing.
The chairman of the board, Stanley Feldman, said the 20-member board, with several new members, was trying to reinvigorate the museum.
Last year the museum began to try to broaden its fund-raising base, and it changed its name and focus.
The Suffolk Marine Museum had concentrated on the Dutch settlers and the early life along Great South Bay that centered on Oyster and clamming.
The board changed the name to the Long Island Maritime Museum.
Volunteers like Ron Swedborg of Oakdale, who teaches wood carving and will soon run the new blacksmith shop at the museum, have returned.
"The volunteer program hit its peak in the mid-80's," Mr.
Swedborg said.
"But it went down when the funding went down, and the boats didn't go out. But this year the people have come back. And there's a lot of new people, as well as the regulars from all over Long Island."
"The people who want it to work are working their head off," said Elizabeth Whitehouse, a trustee and a retired teacher from Sayville who runs the education program.
That program attracted more than 2,000 schoolchildren last year, and the museum had a total of 10,000 visitors.
The museum is sponsoring the Long Island Antique Classic Boat Show on Saturday, a nautical fair and seafood festival on Aug. 27 and 28 and an old-timer's regatta in September.
But a trustee, Alfred Terry Jr. of Bayport, voiced skepticism.
"I doubt whether they can raise the money," Mr.
Terry said.
"Maritime museums are just not out there. They should tell the state and county to pick up the tab."
In January the board also vetoed a $2.5 million proposal by the Village of Patchogue to buy and relocate the outbuildings and boats to a two-and-a-half-acre federally owned site along the Patchogue River.
Last year the museum dismissed three top employees, including the director, curator and librarian.
To Run 'Like a Business'
"No one was accredited before to handle the fund raising and grant writing," Mr.
Feldman said.
"Now we are going to run the museum like a business."
The operating budget is $165,000, including salaries for an executive director and a curator.
Volunteers have donated 10,000 hours this year, Mr.
Feldman added.
More than 20 grant requests, written by board members who are former educators, have been sent to governmental and private agencies.
County Legislator Steve Levy, Democrat of Sayville, has proposed that the county spend someof its income from the 0.75 percent hotel tax on the museum.
Mr.
Levy has also asked a company about providing ferry to dock at the museum, he said.
Another focus for the revitalization is membership, and 636 members have joined.
Their dues totals $25,000.
The board is looking inviting to other maritime groups to use the museum for their social events.
"We're trying to make friends," the treasurer, Gary Herold of Bellport, said.
A walk around the museum usually begins at the 100-year-old Baymans' Cottage, a neat grey structure with green shutters on a rise overlooking the bay.
Inside, the tiny rooms include all the amenities that made life comfortable for the bayman, appearing as if the family had just stepped out for a moment.
Next is the small craft building, housing more than 50 historic boats.
Flat duck boats and pleasure boats, some created by a well-known designer from Patchogue, Gil Smith, rest on racks in various stages of renovation or decay.
Across the field is the 19th-century boat shop.
Mr.
Terry, an expert in rebuilding Smith boats, said he remembered when the boathouse was moved from its site in Center Moriches down the river to the bay across the water and west to the museum.
Today the smell of wood shavings permeates the largest room of the building.
It is a working shop, and a boat in progress rests on a cradle with tools nearby.
Upstairs three ancient Singer sewing machines sit ready for work.
Next door is the oyster-processing house, set up for shucking and processing.
At its wraparound dock are moored the boats used in clamming and oyster in the late 1800's, the Priscilla, a two-masted schooner, and Modesty, a sloop, both of which participated in Op Sail 1986 and 1992.
Also docked, but not in working order, are a little tugboat, the Charlotte, and the newly acquired Vixen, once a sailboat and now a powerboat.
Mr.
McKinght said the crew working on the Two Brothers, which Neil Isbrandtsen Risig of Brightwaters donated in 1976, was aiming for a dedication ceremony next month.
"Now we'll be able to demonstrate square riggers to the youngsters," said Mr.
McKnight, who also teaches the scrimshaw class.
The museum, on West Avenue off Montauk Highway, is open yearround.
Its telephone number if 854-4974.


Beth Colt, P. K. Simonds
Elizabeth Saunders Colt, an actress in Los Angeles, and Peter Kemble Simonds, a screenwriter there, were married yesterday at her parents' house on Naushon Island, Mass.
The Rev.
Preston Hannibal, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride is known as Beth Simonds Colt.
She also develops scripts for Stardance Productions in Los Angeles.
She and her husband graduated from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Colt of Wenham, Mass.
Her father is of counsel to the Boston law firm of Taylor, Ganson &amp; Perrin.


Technology; Desktop Computers Reshaping the Way Ads Are Made
THE cowboy dances around the bar and throws pick-up lines at the camera.
"Darling, you got real pretty hair," he says with an exaggerated Western accent.
"What's the matter? Cat got your tongue?"
The point of this television commercial is to ask, wouldn't you rather be home Saturday night watching Home Box Office than at some bar trying to fend off the yahoos?


Proud to Be a Virgin
"Look at me, I'm Sandra Dee, lousy with virginity," sang Stockard Channing, the cool fast girl taunting goody-two-shoes Olivia Newton-John in the 1978 movie "Grease," and teen-age virgins in the audience heard the movie's message all too clearly: If you want to win the man you love, stop being such a stiff.
Get out of that fluffy sweater and into a pair of leather pants and stilettos (as Ms. Newton-John's character did to win over the sleazy heartthrob played by John Travolta).
Smoke.
Have sex.
Live.
But today the revival of "Grease" on Broadway seems peculiarly dated, and not because it's a campy sendup of the 50's.
For all its poodle skirts and duck tails, "Grease" is steeped in a 70's sensibility: Sex as an adventure, even for good girls and boys.


Elizabeth Matt, David Lemire
Elizabeth Kemper Matt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis X. Matt 2d of New Hartford, N.Y., was married there yesterday to David Shaffer Lemire, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David H. Lemire of Scottsdale, Ariz.
The Rev.
Paul Drobin performed the ceremony at St.
John the Evangelist Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Lemire, 25, is the promotion manager for Vogue magazine in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is the chairman of the F. X. Matt Brewing Company in Utica, N.Y.


Miss Frisman, Mr. Rosenthal
Amy Leigh Frisman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Frisman of South Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Matthew Rosenthal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Rosenthal of Natick, Mass.
Rabbi Aaron Pearl officiated at the Short Hills (N.J.) Hilton.


It's a Fine Time for Taking Inventory
THIS is a great time to make a serious garden inventory.
What is going to come up, or out, or has done so.
Walk around with keen eyes and maybe even a notebook and pencil in hand.
It will be important to know where any gaps are, where there might be a need for some redoing or fill-in planting.
Or, rarely, it may be that everything in the garden appears to be just right.


JUNE 12-18: Electric Bill From Ukraine; The West Is Still Having Chernobyl Nightmares
Its very name is now a shorthand for nuclear disaster, but the Chernobyl power plant in Ukraine is still in operation, and the West is having a hard time figuring out how to shut it down.
Just two months ago the Clinton Administration thought it had found a way to quiet nightmares about a repeat of the 1986 catastrophe.
But its "agreement in principle" with Ukraine to close the plant now appears much less than that, and American officials fear that Kiev may decide instead not just to keep its two current reactors in service, but to restart a third one, which was undamaged in the 1986 explosion but has been out of operation since a 1991 fire.


SUNDAY, June 19, 1994; New From Disney: Your Wedding, The Animated Feature
Reinventing tradition to blend into a theme park landscape is the Disney stock in trade.
Consider Main Street U.S.A., Fort Wilderness and the "Victorian elegance" of the Grand Floridian Beach Resort.
Now young lovers can add weddings -- modeled on the Disney version of fairy tales.
The bride can come down the aisle in a gown reminiscent of a mermaid or another cartoon heroine of her choice, but many will probably go with the Cinderella theme, which includes a horse-drawn carriage and desserts served in a white chocolate slipper.
For the reception, Disney also provides a clever variation on the old trick of dressing the bridesmaids in dowdy frocks so the bride benefits from the comparison -- professional, presumably unattractive stepsisters can be employed to mingle at the reception.


Quietly, a Slice of Bronx History Disappears
A piece of 19th-century history vanished last week.
Until it was boarded up about nine months ago, the dilapidated two-story stucco house at 2975 Independence Avenue was the thrift shop of the Frances Schervier Home and Hospital.
The building, which occupied a small section of the home's nine-acre complex, was leveled because it was unsafe.
Grass will be planted and the site will be used as a park for elderly residents of the home and children in the day-care program.


IN SHORT: FICTION
FAMILY DRAMA  STARCARBON  A Meditation on Love.
By Ellen Gilchrist.
Little, Brown, $22.95.


Safe Driving
To the Editor: I have a question regarding Betsy Wade's Practical Traveler column, "Driving on the Safe Side" (May 15).


Dancing (and Free Lessons)
STARTING Wednesday, New Yorkers will have a chance to dance under the stars at Lincoln Center's Fountain Plaza.
Lester Lanin and Vince Giordano and other band leaders will offer music for dancing, be it the waltz, the mambo or the country-Western two-step, at the Midsummer Night Swing.
The sessions will start at 8:15 P.M.
Wednesday through Saturday for a month.
And on Wednesdays through Fridays, beginning at 6:30 P.M., novices will be offered dance instruction at no extra charge.


Commercial Property/The Gallery at Metrotech; Learning a Lesson In Urban Retailing
FINALLY, Bruce C. Ratner can walk through the Gallery at Metrotech without wincing.
The floors of the enclosed mall are clean, the walls conspicuously graffiti-free.
The shopper traffic is a lot lighter than he would like, but then the roving gangs of kids that once kept the shoppers away are sparse, too.
And for Mr.
Ratner, whose Forest City Ratner development company has owned the downtown Brooklyn mall for four years, here's the best news of all: The mall finally has an anchor tenant.
Since November, Toys 'R' Us, the kind of family-oriented, good-credit tenant that is every mall operator's dream, has been operating a 45,000-square-foot, two-level store that dominates the mall, both physically and psychologically.


Tax Assessments With Distortions
To the Editor:
The headline in Alan Oser's article on May 8 observed that the New York City real estate tax process is based on "An Assessment System With Distortions Built In." A careful reading indicates the complexity of the problem and suggests the extent of the effort required to understand and resolve it.
But, presumably to attract interest, the main focus is on 339 apartment sales in 152 Manhattan buildings, with a total of 9,907 residence units.
The writer might have mentioned the facts that there are 497,900 cooperative and condominium apartments in the city, of which 219,900, less than half, are located in Manhattan in about 3,100 buildings.


Mara DiMambro and Richard Calame
Mara Gerard DiMambro, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur R. DiMambro of Durham, N.H., was married there yesterday to Richard Aidan Calame, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Calame of Manhasset, L.I.
The Rev.
Patrick Irwin performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More.
Mrs.
Calame, 28, and her husband are associates at Boston law firms, she at Foley, Hoag &amp; Eliot and he at Sullivan &amp; Worcester.
She graduated from Yale University.
The couple received law degrees from Boston University.
The bride's father, who is retired, is an orthopedic surgeon.


No Headline
"I found him to be vigorous, intelligent, surprisingly well informed about the technical issues and in charge of the decisions about this country." JIMMY CARTER after meeting the North Korea leader, Kim Il Sung.  [ 12:3. ]


Alaska by Land And by Sea
Until now most travelers to Alaska had to choose between seeing the coast on a cruise ship or the interior by train, car or bus.
Visitors can drive one way on the Alaska Highway and put the vehicle on a state-run ferry, returning to the Lower 48 on the Alaska Marine Highway.
But the ferries lack the more elegant elements of a cruise.
Now it is possible to rent a recreational vehicle in Bellingham, Wash., follow a two-week land itinerary to Anchorage and sail back for a week on Holland America Line's Nieuw Amsterdam or Noordam along the Glacier route and the Inside Passage from Seward to Vancouver.


Mutual Funds; A Rise in Rates Lifts Money Funds
BOND prices have fallen markedly in 1994, but a silver lining is the increase in money market fund yields.
Since Feb. 4, when the Federal Reserve raised interest rates for the first time this year, the seven-day average yield on taxable money funds has risen to 3.59 percent, from 2.68 percent, the highest in two years.
While economists disagree on when and how much, many believe the Fed will raise rates again, and that's further good news for money fund investors.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CARNEGIE HILL  $800,000
1133 Park Avenue (90th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,448, 27% tax deductible, listed at $895,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Corcoran Group)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $195,000
69 West 9th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, windowed dining area; maintenance $1,122, 50% tax deductible, listed at $225,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Frederick Lee Real Estate)  FLATIRON  $210,000  5 East 22d Street  (Madison Green)  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 850-sq.-ft. condo in 11-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, balcony; common charge $400, taxes $3,300, listed at $229,000, 26 weeks on market (Broker: Newell &amp; Associates)  WEST VILLAGE  $765,000
281 West 4th Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath brick town house; fireplace, 22-ft. ceilings on 1st and 2d floors, private garden and roof deck; taxes $6,900, listed at $1.2 million, 1 year on market (Brokers: Swift &amp; Watson; Douglas Elliman)  BRONX
ALLERTON AVENUE AREA  $147,500
2863 DeWitt Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,200, listed at $155,000, 30 weeks on market (Broker: Grand Circle Realty)  CLASSON POINT  $155,000
458 Theriot Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old detached wood-framed house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 50- by 50-ft. lot; taxes $800, listed at $160,000, 6 weeks on market (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN
EAST FLATBUSH  $175,000
1251 New York Avenue  2-family, 65-year-old attached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; finished basement, taxes $1,175, listed at $189,000, 40 weeks on market (Brokers: Helmar Brokerage LTD.; Century 21/Greenfield)  PROSPECT HEIGHTS  $257,000
253 Prospect Place  3-family, 3-story brownstone; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 20- by 131-ft. lot; taxes $1,400, listed at $300,000, 1 week on market (Brokers: Helmar Brokerage LTD.; Lazuma Realty)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $950,000
108-88 68th Road  6-bedroom, 7-bath, 25-year-old detached center-hall colonial; dining room, den, fireplace, c/a, finished basement, 2-car garage, taxes $8,000, listed at $1.3 million, 3 years on market (Broker: Terrace Realty)  REGO PARK  $222,500
86-11 66th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,800, listed at $239,000, 1 week on market (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  STATEN ISLAND
ANNADALE  $168,000
64 Alexander Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old semi-attached house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 24- by 99-ft. lot; taxes $1,289, listed at $173,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Linda Nasta, LTD Realtor)  CLOVE LAKE  $54,000
1000 Clove Road  (Fountains)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 954-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining room, large closets, golf course view; maintenance $914, includes heat and hot water, 50% tax deductible, listed at $68,000, 1 1/2 years on market (Broker: Salmon Realty)  LONG ISLAND
EAST ISLIP  $255,000
60 Suffolk Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, living room with fireplace, central air-conditioning, 2-car attached garage; taxes $8,600, listed at $274,000, 20 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island Realty; Eric J. Ramsay Jr. Associates)
HICKSVILLE  $182,500
42 Felice Crescent  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, laundry room, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,700, listed at $189,990, 25 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Metro Realty; Levittown Equities)
LOCUST VALLEY  $250,000
29 Birch Street 3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; office, enclosed porch, basement, 3-car garage with legal 2-bedroom apartment; taxes $2,700, listed at $275,000, 29 weeks on market (Broker: Harmonious Homes)
WESTBURY  $165,000
854 Leonard Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 39-year-old split level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage; taxes $5,500, listed at $169,900, 7 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Galeria Real Estate)  WESTCHESTER
NORTH SALEM  $230,000
30 Hilltop Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; slate entry hall, stone patio, landscaping, basketball court, satel-lite dish; 1.3 acres; taxes $5,875, listed at $239,000, 14 weeks on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker)  PEEKSKILL  $140,000
324 Montross Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 75-year-old Tudor; foyer, hardwood floors, sunroom, dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace, remodeled bathroom; taxes $3,451, listed at $155,000, 13 months on market (Broker: Coldwell Banker)  TUCKAHOE  $90,000
3 Consulate Drive  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 24-year-old condo; entry hall, European kitchen with pass-through, pool; taxes $2,263, common charges $228, listed at $97,000, 11 weeks on market (Brokers: Tri-Crest Realty; Re/Max Prime Properties)
YONKERS  $187,000
11-51 Jackson Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old condo; modern eat-in kitchen, sunken living room; taxes $4,800, common charges $275, listed at $192,000, 6 weeks on market (Brokers: Century 21 Gold Castle; John P. Streb &amp; Son)  NEW JERSEY
BOONTON  $175,000
126 Oxford Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; front porch, 2-car garage, full basement; taxes $3,600, listed at $179,000, 1 week on market (Broker: The Prudential New Jersey Realty)  FAIR LAWN  $130,000
4-49 Plaza Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old Cape Cod; 1-car garage, deck, hardwood floors, full basement; taxes $3,194, listed at $140,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins Realtors)  OCEAN CITY  $190,000
722 Pleasure Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 9-year-old condominium town house; deck, 40-foot boat slip, master suite with Jacuzzi; monthly maintenance $103, taxes $2,520, listed at $229,000, 1 year on market (Broker: Richards Agency)  PORT READING  $176,500
10 Friend Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; in-ground pool, central air-conditioning, fireplace; taxes $4,100, listed at $189,000, 12 weeks on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)  CONNECTICUT
GREENWICH  $317,500
33 West Putnam Avenue  (Mayfair Court)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. condo in year-old building; dining room, 1-car garage, common charge $300, taxes $2,500, listed at $329,900, 12 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties Inc.; William Pitt Real Estate)  NEW CANAAN  $2.125 million
573 Cascade Road  10-bedroom, 8 1/2-bath, 64-year-old wood-frame colonial; elevator, library, eat-in kitchen, 3 fireplaces, 2 greenhouses, 2 pools, 3-car garage, 7.8-acre lot; taxes $21,511, listed at $2.495 million, 10 weeks on market (Brokers: Preferred Properties Inc.; Brotherhood &amp; Higley)  NORWALK  $125,000
42 Seir Hill Road  (Seir Hill Gardens)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 2,200-sq.-ft. condo; dining room, fireplace, hardwood floors, central air-conditioning, 1-car garage; common charge $125, taxes $2,800, listed at $139,000, 8 weeks on market (Brokers: New England Marketing; Prudential Connecticut Realty)  WESTPORT  $230,000
155 Imperial Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 960-sq.-ft. 39-year-old wood-frame house; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 1-car garage, 102- by 154-ft. lot; taxes $2,714, listed at $245,000, 4 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Connecticut Realty)


Man in the News; Rail Union's Hard Bargainer: Edward Yule Jr.
In a 40-year career with the Long Island Rail Road that has taken him from lowly ticket clerk to unchallenged leader of the largest union for the nation's busiest commuter rail line, Edward Yule Jr. has always known how to find the inside track.
It was a talent his friend of three decades, Bill McAllister, discovered about him on the first day they met, in the railroad's medical office in Jamaica, Queens, where both wound up one day in 1962.
Mr.
McAllister, freshly hired for the freight department, and Mr.
Yule, newly transferred to the unit, were among nine employees scheduled for physicals that day.
But only Mr.
Yule knew that seniority in the unit would be dictated by the order in which the physicals were given.


Case Might Fit Pattern Of Abuse, Experts Say
While the killing of Nicole Brown Simpson has attracted unusual publicity, experts in domestic violence say that if her ex-husband, O. J. Simpson, is ultimately convicted, the case will fit an all-too-common pattern.
"Unfortunately, it is not at all unusual for women to be murdered when they try to leave a violent relationship," said Rita Smith, coordinator of the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence.
"It's a pattern we hear all the time: the repeated violence, the repeated calls to the police, the repeated attempts at reconciliation."


'California Style' Innovations on Pizza
ON Long Island, California Pizza Kitchen falls into the "never heard of it" category.
Its wood-fried Thai chicken, Southwestern burrito, goat cheese, Peking duck and moo-shu chicken California pizzas are virtually unknown here, even by adventurous pizza lovers.
All that may soon change.


War Over Role of American Fathers
The idea of the new American father, that tender diaper-changer of the 90's, is under political attack by those who want to bring him closer to Ward Cleaver than Mrs.
Doubtfire.
They prescribe a provider and disciplinarian with a modern twist: he is not afraid to tell his children he loves them.
Regrouping after a foray into espousing family values and denouncing Murphy Brown, several groups ranging from conservative to centrist are mounting an ambitious public-information and political drive to combat what they call "fatherless America." They are pushing the idea that the old father, with some updating in the nurturing department, will do just fine.


Deals and Discounts
SAVING ON EIRE Citing a stronger dollar, two tour companies have reduced the prices of Ireland trips from last summer's levels.
C.I.E.
Tours International has a one-week driving tour that starts at $921 a person through August; last year the same tour started at $1,038.
It includes round-trip air fare from New York or Boston on Aer Lingus; a minimum-category rental car with unlimited mileage; six nights' accommodation at farmhouses and bed-and-breakfasts throughout the country; Irish breakfast daily, local tax and service charge.
Contact (800) 243-8687.
For those who prefer a group tour, Cosmos Tourama has reduced its 10-day Scenic Ireland itinerary by $129; this year the program costs $629 to $664 a person.
Prices include bus transportation, superior tourist-class hotels with private bath, daily Irish breakfast, five dinners and some sightseeing.
Air fare is extra.
Destinations include Dublin, the Cliffs of Moher, the Ring of Kerry, Donegal and Connemara.
There are weekly departures to Oct. 7; space is limited on peak summer dates.
Information: (800) 851-0728, extension 518.


Jamie Wortman, Joel B. Manning
Jamie Hope Wortman, a daughter of Toni and Walter Wortman of East Northport, L.I., was married last evening to Joel Bruce Manning, a son of Myra and David Manning of Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Ezra Finkelstein officiated at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.
Mrs.
Manning, 25, is a social worker in the therapeutic nursery at Metropolitan Hospital in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in Wortman, Fumuso, Kelly, DeVerna &amp; Snyder, a law firm in Hauppauge, L.I.


Time for the Navy To Pump Its Bilge?
It was just the latest in a string of misfires by the Navy.
A military court ruled last week that top Navy officers systematically tried to shield the son of the Navy Secretary at the time, H. Lawrence Garrett 3d, after the son admitted to credit-card fraud, smoking marijuana and lying to investigators in 1991 and 1992.


'WE'RE ALL RACIST NOW'
It is no wonder that Bill Paterson's pupils are unruly and academic failures.
He has such obvious disdain for them.


The Rockets' Red Glare and Their Hearts Bursting With the Joy in the Air
Someday soon we'll be saying how young they all looked, even the oldest among them, when the words Stanley Cup champions felt brand new as they flashed overhead and the Rangers formed a pile on the ice of Madison Square Garden.
After the white-gloved attendants finally brought the cup in view, after it was placed in the hands of Mark Messier, who screamed, "I can't believe it," as he began to skate, it was time for one of the most recently developed traditions in sports, the team picture that transforms professionals into peewees before our eyes.
The tradition was imported from Edmonton, too.
The noise from the stands was still pouring down.
The sweat was still in their matted hair.
The adrenaline was still flowing, and their arms and legs were no longer so heavy.
They sat and crouched and leaned around the silver trophy, arms locked around shoulders and necks, as if there were station wagons waiting outside the rink to take them home.
And their heads bobbed and their chests swelled as they remembered the resolve that pulled them through the longest Ranger season, all from the same end of the rope: "HEAVE-HO, HEAVE-HO, HEAVE-HO, HEAVE-HO." The Song Says It
A few moments before, as the players began to gather, the voice of Natalie Merchant of 10,000 Maniacs boomed from the speakers above:


F.Y.I.
Corner Paradise
Q.
At the corner of Greenwich and Charles Streets is a tiny white house.
It's got a iron fence, a cobbled driveway and a white gazebo in its beautiful green yard.
I've coveted the place for years.
What is this tiny slice of paradise's history?


New Twist on Barbecued Chicken Dinner
GRILLED chicken, potato salad and pie: these are the quintessential dishes of outdoor summer barbecues.
The following menu, however, gives these old favorites a new twist.
Chicken breasts are served with a salsa made from roasted tomatoes, deep-fried capers and ginger along with a salad of Yukon Gold potatoes with chives.
For dessert, there is tarte Tatin, made with apricots instead of apples, with vanilla ice cream.


Just for Kicks
FEVER PITCH By Nick Hornby. 247 pp.
New York: Penguin Books.
Paper, $9.95.
THE SIMPLEST GAME  The Intelligent Fan's Guide to the World of Soccer.
By Paul Gardner. 323 pp.
New York: Collier Books/Macmillan Publishing Company.
Paper, $12.
TWENTY-TWO FOREIGNERS IN FUNNY SHORTS  The Intelligent Fan's Guide to Soccer and World Cup '94.
By Pete Davies. 290 pp.
New York: Random House.
Paper, $10.
SOCCER!
The Game and the World Cup.
Edited by Elio Trifari and Charles Miers.
Illustrated. 170 pp.
New York: Rizzoli. $24.95.


Glory for The Green: Ireland Stuns Italy
The color green painted the stands and dominated on the field this afternoon as Ireland posted a 1-0 upset over Italy in the marquee game of the first round of the World Cup.
A crowd of 74,826 at Giants Stadium created a sense of pageantry in a place where American football is the normal fare and artificial turf is the normal surface.
But today, the natural grass that was put on top of the turf looked as lush as any Irish hillside.


Meredith Pastore, Lincoln Bleveans
Meredith Anne Pastore, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Pastore Jr. of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Lincoln Edward Bleveans, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Bleveans of Evanston, Ill.
The Rev.
William E. McConville performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Chapel of the Divine Compassion at Good Counsel Academy in White Plains.
Mrs.
Bleveans, 25, and her husband, 27, graduated from Kenyon College, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in American Literature from Northwestern University.
Her father, who was the provost of Pace University from 1984 to 1991, is a professor of business administration at Pace's campus in Pleasantville, N.Y.


Television, Meet Life. Life, Meet TV.
WHAT made the episode so real was its departure from television's professionally crafted reality.
Fans of the so-called reality-based shows are accustomed to having the facts laid out for them, with the help of close-ups, music, re-enactments, whatever it takes.
If there's a police chase, you know what to expect.
Whether it ends in a shootout or a crash or a surrender, you can count on being in on every moment of it, in the best seat in the house, kissing distance of the perpetrator or protagonist.
For about two hours on Friday night, we were really there, yet always at a considerable remove.
The competing realities of other network programming disappeared, leaving us with the dreamlike reality of a car chase in slow motion.
Instead of a chase, there was a stately procession along Los Angeles freeways: the white Bronco containing, we were told, O.J.
Simpson, American icon and accused murderer, holding a gun, perhaps, or maybe it was only a cellular telephone, was followed at a careful distance by half a dozen police cars we could see and who knows how many in that other, off-camera reality.
They were not moving very fast or doing anything daring.


Devil His Due Wins by 8 1/4 And Smashes Race Record
Devil His Due, one of the senior warriors of racing, delivered one of his power performances at Belmont Park yesterday when he won the 106th Brooklyn Handicap by more than eight lengths and broke the record for the race set 59 years ago by the renowned Discovery.
The 5-year-old bay, who is owned by Edith LiButti and trained by Allen Jerkens, snatched the lead turning for home and widened it relentlessly down the homestretch.
When he crossed the wire, he was eight and a quarter lengths in front of Wallenda, who had a length and a quarter on Sea Hero, the winner of last year's Kentucky Derby.


THE LAST WAR CRIMINAL
Thank you for Ted Morgan's article.
Henri Bulawko's quote about his brother was not only the perfect ending to the piece but the definitive response to any query about the validity of Holocaust remembrance.
ELLEN DIAMOND Highland Park, Ill.


Cory F. Brayton, Hardy Edwards 3d
Dr.
Cory Flagg Brayton, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Brayton of Ne ork, was married yesterday to Hardy Malcolm Edwards 3d, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edwards Jr. of Winterville, Ga.
The Rev.
Paul Brayton, a cousin of the bride, performed the Congregational ceremony at the Brayton family home in Westport Point, Mass.
The bride is the director of the center for comparative studies at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.
She graduated from Williams College and received her doctorate in veterinary medicine from Cornell University.


Margaret Kois Meghan Walsh and Robert Cioffi
Meghan McEnery Walsh, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank E. Walsh Jr. of Chatham Township, N.J., was married there yesterday to Robert Franklin Cioffi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William George Cioffi Sr. of St.
Albans, Vt.
Msgr.
James T. Mahoney performed the ceremony at Corpus Christi Church.
Mrs.
Cioffi, 25, is a social worker at Big Brothers and Big Sisters in Morristown, N.J.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father is the chairman of the Wesray Capital Corporation, investment bankers, in Morristown.


Monument to Challenger Astronaut Is Unveiled


Understanding and Care Help to Install Outdoor Outlets
INSTALLING an electrical outlet outdoors may not be much more difficult than installing an outlet indoors, which usually is rather easy.
People with minimum electrical experience and an ordinary assortment of home-repair tools may perform the work, provided that they work carefully and proceed only with a complete understanding of the job.
As with any electrical work, consult the authorities before starting.
Regulations may apply, and the work may require official inspections.


Life, Meet TV
The broadcasters of the fugutive's stately procession along California highways seemed so real because the scene differed so much from television's professionally crafted reality.
Week in Review, Section 4.


Law and Order


Are Parents People?
To the Editor:
If only you'd published Susan Chira's essay two years ago!
You would have saved me a lot of money: in fees to my therapist and in money shelled out to bookstores as I sought, in vain, for a book that reflected what I knew to be true -- that if I'm not happy, my children won't be either.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
PERSEPHONE AND THE POMEGRANATE A Myth From Greece.
Written and illustrated by Kris Waldherr.
Unpaged.
New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. $14.99. (Ages 4 to 8)  PERSEPHONE  Retold and illustrated by Warwick Hutton.
Unpaged.
New York: Margaret K. McElderry Books. $14.95. (Ages 7 and up)


Rebelling Against Disney
Disney's America -- the planned theme park in northern Virginia -- has inspired something rare in these shallow times: impassioned debate among intellectuals and a surge of preservationist zeal in the Congress.
Hooray!
It would be a crime against the national heritage if the country's best historical thinkers and its legislators slumbered through this desecration of historic ground.
There is a time when a nation must listen to its scholars.
A veritable pantheon of historians and writers -- C. Vann Woodward, John Hope Franklin, James McPherson, Shelby Foote, Barbara Fields -- has formed a group called Protect Historic America to oppose Disney's plan to build a 3,000-acre park only four miles from the Manassas battlefield.
Twenty members of Congress introduced a resolution on Thursday objecting to the project.
Led by Michael Andrews, a Texas Democrat, they echo these distinguished thinkers in rebelling against a state's right to sell out a national treasure.
"It's not just a Virginia issue," Mr.
Andrews said.
We agree.
Virginia's Legislature and Governor have betrayed their state's tradition as guardian of the most important collection of Colonial, Revolutionary and Civil War sites in the nation.


Police Buffeted as Tides in Simpson Case Change
Just days after the authorities had been criticized as too aggressive in handcuffing O. J. Simpson before questioning him in a double homicide, they were pilloried again today, this time by critics who said lax treatment stemming from his celebrity had enabled him to elude capture for more than six hours on Friday.
City Councilwoman Jackie Goldberg described Mr.
Simpson's day on the run as "an embarrassment" to the Los Angeles Police Department, and Marvin Braude, another Council member, said he might call for an investigation.


Karen Weiss, Douglas Karmel
Karen Michele Weiss, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Larry S. Weiss of Memphis, is to be married there today to Dr.
Douglas Lawrence Karmel, a son of Leonard and Barbara Karmel of Glen Cove, L.I.
Rabbi Rafael Grossman is to perform the ceremony at the Baron Hirsch Synagogue.
The bride, 25, teaches second grade at Sherwood Elementary School in Memphis.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Missouri.
Her father is a dentist in Memphis.


Simpson, Under Suicide Watch, Is Jailed on 2 Murder Charges
O.
J.
Simpson, whose thrilling play on the football field seemed to symbolize freedom, today sat locked in a 9-foot-by-7-foot jail cell on a double-murder charge with only a toilet, a sink and a bunk for furnishings.
The authorities said they had taken sharp objects, shoelaces and his belt away from Mr.
Simpson, who was described by his lawyer as being in tears today.
Every few minutes, officials said, a deputy peered through a window into his cell to make sure he did not kill himself.


Dancing, Prancing, Singing
Uptown -- Wrapped in faux pearls and a glittering gown, Alvarine Powell, a tall, soft-spoken 21-year-old single mother from the Bronx, was eating her breast of guinea hen in the Delegates' Dining Room of the United Nations on June 8.
She wasn't the least bit nervous about having to make a speech after dinner about her success as a client at Inwood House, the evening's beneficiary.
Four years ago, Ms.
Powell arrived at Inwood House, an Upper East Side residence for pregnant teen-agers, looking for medical care.
She received not only that, but also counseling and a temporary place to live.
Since then, she has given birth to her daughter, has finished high school, has held down a job and has earned a scholarship to Marymount Manhattan College, where she is to be a freshman this fall.


Rachel S. Moore, Robert M. Ryan
Rachel Suzanne Moore, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles V. Moore of Davis, Calif., was married yesterday to Robert Michael Ryan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael R. Ryan of Grosse Pointe, Mich.
The Rev.
Janelle Curlin performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Beaulieu Gardens in Rutherford, Calif.
The bride and the bridegroom graduated from Brown University.


Suzanne Weiss And Jacob Doft
Suzanne R. Weiss, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Weiss of Englewood, N.J., is to be married today to Jacob W. Doft, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Avrom I. Doft of New York.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein is to officiate at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.


Tally Chamberlin, C. H. Harris
Lisa Talbot Chamberlin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Lee Chamberlin of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was married there yesterday to Christopher Hardy Harris, the son of Dianne Trautmann of Fairfax, Va., and William Gibson Harris 2d of Riverside, Conn.
The Episcopal ceremony was performed by the Rev.
William Hale at St.
John's Church.
Mrs.
Harris, 24, is known as Tally.
She graduated from Hamilton College and is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
Her father is a partner in CCM Capital, an investment concern in New York.


Jennifer E. Pierce, Edward E. Barr 3d
Jennifer Emmet Pierce, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald S. Pierce of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday to Edward Evan Barr 3d, the son of Erika Barr and Edward E. Barr, both of Englewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Stephen J. White performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Redeemer in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The bride, 27, is an editor and writer in the features department at Vogue magazine in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Colby College, she cum laude.
Her father is a clinical associate professor of orthopedic surgery at Harvard Medical School and a visiting orthopedic surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital, both in Boston.


Habitats/13-Room Handyman Special; A Rambling L.I. Wreck
THE big stucco house spreads out like a very solid white cloud, mostly hidden by trees, on the quiet street only a few blocks off this city's bustling main artery of Park Avenue.
The rambling 13-room house is now a picturesque wreck, inhabited by Robert and Mary Anne Mazzola, who bought it a month ago and plan to turn it into a showplace again.


Be It Resolved, the Rangers Won
Received last week from the office of State Senator Manfred Ohrenstein:
"WITH the New York Rangers last night, the Empire State struck back and won!" State Senator Manfred Ohrenstein (D-Manhattan) said today as the State Senate unanimously adopted his resolution congratulating the Rangers on their Stanley Cup championship win . . .


Arafat's Return Is a Call to Arms for Many Israelis
Yasir Arafat has Ankie Rekhess-Spitzer in emotional turmoil.
On one hand, Mrs.
Rekhess-Spitzer has a job to do, and it requires detachment.
She is an Israeli reporter for Dutch television and radio.
Her assignment: follow the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization when he arrives in the Palestinian self-rule areas of Jericho and the Gaza Strip.


Nell Ducker, David London
Penelope Cook Ducker, the daughter of Bruce and Jaren Ducker of Denver, was married yesterday to David Lord London, the son of Charlotte Lord London of New York and the late Jack London.
The Rev.
Nan Hobart, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Museum of Western Art in Denver.
The bride and the bridegroom graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.


Capturing the Pounding Pulse of New York City
EVEN IF YOU LISTEN HARD TO the music that begins "N.Y.P.D. Blue," you won't hear the sound of 1,000 Japanese men jumping up and down on a wooden floor, but Mike Post says they're there.
Not only floor stampers but also a cheese grater slowed down, anvils, an aluminum wall and a subway horn.
Mr.
Post's goal was to create a tom-tom sound even bigger than the one in Phil Collins's "In the Air Tonight," which for Mr.
Post is the tom-tom sound.
It took a team of recording engineers two days to get it right.
This search for the ultimate tom-tom was not simply an esthetic one; it was inspired by a script.
At a lunch to discuss music for the new show, Steven Bochco, the producer, simply said, "I'm thinking of drums." Gregory Hoblit, a director, was equally elliptical: "I'm thinking of subways." So Mr.
Post came up with his giant tom-tom groove and its uneven syncopations, reflecting, he said, "what's really happening in the streets right now: black dance street music, house music, hip-hop, the pulse of an urban environment that never sleeps."


New York, Gaslight Necropolis
THE WATERWORKS By E. L. Doctorow. 253 pp. New York: Random House. $23.


30 Years Later, It's Freedom Summer Again
THIS MONTH MARKS THE 30TH anniversary of the Freedom Summer, when 1,000 college students from the North traveled to Mississippi to register black voters.
The unbridled optimism of the movement, the cynicism that managed to stifle it at that summer's Democratic National Convention and its legacy in the lives of its participants are represented in the documentary "Freedom on My Mind," which opens Wednesday at Film Forum.
"Freedom on My Mind," which won the audience award for best documentary at this year's Sundance Film Festival, tells the story of the Mississippi Voter Registration Project.
The film begins in 1961 when Robert Moses, a Harvard University graduate student, registered the first black man, a farmer named Herbert Lee, to vote in Mississippi.
Soon thereafter, Mr.
Lee was shot and killed by a white segregationist state legislator with whom he had grown up.
The act would prove a grim portent of the violence to come, including the murders of the 14-year-old Emmett Till, the N.A.A.C.P. attorney Medgar Evers and the civil rights volunteers Michael Schwerner, James Chaney and Andrew Goodman.


A Son Grows a Little Older, a Father Grows a Little Younger
These are trash-talking, knee-whacking, buck-crazed times in the wide, worried world of sports.
Cynicism comes easy.
Disgust bites deep.
Call it the Tin Age of Athletics.
But I'm lucky.
In my house, where sports are an important part of a balanced breakfast, each day is as sweet and pure as a dewy daybreak at Churchill Downs.
That's because my 7-year-old son, Drew, has resurrected my age of innocence, has taught me to again watch sports with the heart of a child.


Gypsy-Cab Driver Slain on E. 106th St.
A gypsy-cab driver was shot dead in East Harlem as he tried to flee from robbers early yesterday, the police said.
The driver, Arthur A. Baker, 46, was wounded in the back as he tried to escape from two people in his cab, which was parked at 235 East 106th Street, the police added.
Mr.
Baker staggered 30 feet before collapsing and was pronounced dead at the scene.


Several Secret Lives
LOVERS AND LIARS By Sally Beauman. 582 pp. New York: Fawcett Columbine. $22.95.


Data Bank/June 19, 1994
Data Bank/June 19, 1994
Sales at Retail Outlets
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
-0.2
-0.1
1.8
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.1
0.6
Consumer Price Index
Percent change
0.2
0.1
0.3
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,510
1,472
1,519
Business Inventories
April
March
Feb.
Monthly percent change
0.2
-0.1
0.4
Weekly Jobless Claims
June 10
June 3
May 27
In thousands
348
359
358
Auto Production
In units, weekly total
125.9
125.0
120.2
Truck Production
In units, weekly total
119,576
97,274
114,093


How the Federal Reserve Sets Policy
To the Editor:
Next to national security, nothing affects Americans as much as decisions by the Federal Reserve.
Nothing has a more universal and compelling impact on the cost of living than do interest rates, but it is difficult to comprehend the Fed's decision-making process concerning rates.


Phoenix Company Offers 'The Glass Menagerie'
THE freshly evocative staging by Ellis Rabb for "The Glass Menagerie" by the Phoenix Theater Company may be just the pickup an overplayed classic can use.
Many come to Tennessee Williams's first masterpiece bearing off-putting associations -- of school lessons carelessly taught, of a claustrophobic film or two, of an amateurish stock production or a gloomy revival, of a dowdy Amanda Wingfield.
Few possess the real memory of Laurette Taylor, the first Amanda in 1945.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about a Supreme Court ruling in a death penalty case misidentified one of the Justices.
He is David H. Souter, not Robert.


Indians Enjoying a Rare View From the Top
Laquana Grant answered the telephone after the game at Jacobs Field Friday night.
"First-place Cleveland Indians," she said.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
JEWISH-INDIAN COOKING
The cuisines of the Jews of India are to be explored in two cooking demonstrations led by Copeland Marks, a food historian, lecturer and author of a baker's dozen of ethnic cookbooks.
While Mr.
Marks and his father were importers of exotic foods and textiles, he spent several years in Calcutta.
Then, about 10 years ago, his interest in local cookery blossomed, and his vocation shifted entirely to cooking and writing about the foods of India, Burma, North Africa and Indonesia.
His cookbooks include "Sephardic Cooking" (Donald I. Fine) and "The Varied Kitchens of India" (Evans).


Lara Jakubowski, Sandeep Wadhwa
Lara Jakubowski, the daughter of Peter M. Jakubowski of Dunkirk, N.Y., and Dr.
Audrey Jakubowski Lazarus of Philadelphia, was married on Friday in Wilmington, Del., to Dr.
Sandeep Wadhwa, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bhushan L. Wadhwa of Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
A Hindu ceremony was performed by Pandit Tek Chand Kumar at the Grand Opera House, followed by a Roman Catholic ceremony, with Msgr.
Patrick Keleher officiating, at the Hotel du Pont.
The bride was until recently a financial analyst at Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where she is to begin studying for an M.B.A. in the fall.
Her father is the principal of the East Ferry Street School in Buffalo.
Her mother is the vice president of regulatory affairs at DuPont-Merck Pharmaceuticals in Wilmington.
The bride's stepfather, Dr.
Gerald S. Lazarus, is the dean of the school of medicine at the University of California at Davis.


NBC Angered Some Fans With Its Simpson Coverage
A caller yesterday to WFAN whimpered over NBC breaking away Friday night from the Knicks-Rockets game to show ongoing coverage of the O. J. Simpson story.
Any interested viewer could have switched to comprehensive coverage on ABC, CBS or CNN, he moaned.
Why leave a close finals game when most of the coverage consisted of police inconclusively chasing Simpson on a freeway?
In fact, NBC interrupted the Knicks' 91-84 victory seven times for reports.
The first six interruptions were for less than five minutes each, but the seventh lasted from 11:12 to 11:37 P.M., eating into the third and fourth quarter before returning with 6 minutes 49 seconds left in the game and the Knicks trying to take control. 'Substantial' Complaints
NBC's news breaks offended viewers, who may have grasped the weight of an ongoing drama, starring an armed Simpson, versus the fleeting value of sports, but still wanted to watch the Knicks and Rockets go at it.
A WNBC-TV/Channel 4 spokesman said the local station logged a "substantial" number of telephone complaints.


For David Byrne, There's Joyousness In Melancholy
WHEN DAVID BYRNE came to prominence as the lead singer for the seminal New York punk-era band Talking Heads, what distinguished him from the general run of rock vocalists was his unearthly detachment.
He had a kind of attitudinal gawkiness that was alternately goofily charming and eerily unsettling.
Back in the late 70's, Mr.
Byrne's blank face and intentional monotone frequently made him seem like a sensitive robot, and it was his ironic anomie that turned one of his creepiest songs, "Psycho Killer," into one of Talking Heads' first big crowd pleasers.
Nothing in Mr.
Byrne's early career was straightforward or, heaven forbid, personal.
Assiduously avoiding self-revelation, he and his colleagues weren't being droll when they called their second album "More Songs About Buildings and Food"; that was indeed pretty much what the songs were about.


SUNDAY, June 19, 1994; Best Postures
Who better than a group of chiropractors knows good posture when they see it?
That's why the American Chiropractic Association's list of "Notable Celebrity Postures" of 1994 has a veneer of validity that most other celebrity lists do not.
When People magazine, for example, presents the best and worst dressers of the year, or most beautiful people, it's a matter of fun and games.
But chiropractors are serious, right?


JUNE 12-18: More Uncertainty in Mexico; Rebels Reject Peace Plan, Leaving Elections in Doubt
In turning down a Government peace proposal they had tentatively accepted three months ago, rebels in Southern Mexico last week left not only peace in doubt, but also the outcome of the elections.
Leaders of the rebel Zapatista National Liberation Army rejected the offer, saying the Government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari had not done enough to insure democracy in Mexico.
The Zapatistas said they would not resume fighting or interfere with the Aug. 21 elections, and they offered to resume negotiations, but only if they focus on national concerns.
The rejected proposal had mostly addressed the poverty and inequity of Indians in the state of Chiapas.


Defending Lee
To the Sports Editor:
In defense of Spike Lee, New Yorkers should feel proud to have a man of his prominence rooting for the home team.
Exuberance has never been a sin, so I can't help wondering, if that had been Al Pacino doing the same thing, would there have been all this fuss?
CORA MORALES  Miami Beach, Fla.


Tina E. Malgiolio, M. C. Mastrangelo
Tina Ellen Malgiolio, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Malgiolio of Ridgewood, N.J., was married last evening to Matthew Callaghan Mastrangelo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo Mastrangelo of New Vernon, N.J.
The Rev.
Donal Fox, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University in New York.
The bride, 28, is an art director at BBDO Worldwide Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is a vice president and the chief scientific officer at Silonex Inc., manufacturers of photo cells in Montreal.


Religious Issue Roils Colombia On Eve of Vote
In an echo of Colombia's 19th-century religious wars, the presidential election on Sunday may be swayed by charges that the Liberal Party candidate secretly promised to name a Protestant as his Education Minister.
Facing "this alliance of Protestants," Liberal Catholics should cast blank ballots on Sunday, Dario Castrillon Hoyos, Archbishop of Bucaramanga, said last week.
A vote for the Liberal Party candidate, the Archbishop continued, "would damage the religious unity of the republic."


Rachel M. Cohen, Allan M. Goldstein
Rachel Margolit Cohen, a daughter of Drs.
Donald and Phyllis Cohen of Woodbridge, Conn., is to be married today to Dr.
Allan Moises Goldstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jacob Goldstein of Wyncote, Pa.
Rabbi David Avigdor is to perform the ceremony at Congregation B'nai Jacob in Woodbridge.
The bride, 24, is a research associate at the Fidelity Management and Research Company, a financial management firm in Boston.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is a professor of child psychiatry, pediatrics and psychology at the Yale School of Medicine and is the director of the Yale Child Study Center, where the bride's mother, a child psychoanalyst, is a professor of child development.


Maria Alford, Robert Suehnholz
Maria Ann Alford, a daughter of Ann Alford of Saddle River, N.J., and the late George E. Alford, was married yesterday to Robert Raymond Suehnholz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Suehnholz of Glen Rock, N.J.
The Rev.
Daniel Kreller performed the Episcopal ceremony at Saint Bartholomew's Church in Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J.
Mrs.
Suehnholz, 32, is the telecommunications liaison for Commercial Risks Services, an insurance data service in Parsippany, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Denver.
Her father was chairman of Citizens First National Bank in Glen Rock and chairman of the Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.


Roberts Wants to Learn If He Can Take Pressure
Until Loren Roberts won the Nestle Invitational this year, he was known as the PGA Tour golfer who had won the most prize money (more than $2 million) without having won a tournament.
But today he earned another distinction with a 7-under-par 64 in the United States Open at Oakmont Country Club.
In the seven Opens at Oakmont, only one golfer has shot a lower score: Johnny Miller's final-round 63 that won the championship in 1973.


Surprise! Kim Il Sung Smiles for the Camera
EVER since Stalin installed him as North Korea's leader nearly a half-century ago, Kim Il Sung has been portrayed in the West in many guises: a paranoid, a terrorist dictator, a Communist dreaming of again sending his troops over the border with South Korea, as he did 44 years ago this week.
Now, at age 82, he has taken on a new persona: a brilliant manipulator of television-age politics, who last week stage-managed an encounter with Jimmy Carter in a way that forced a direct dialogue with President Clinton.
It was just the latest example of how Mr.
Kim has alternately used charm and threats to force himself and his mysterious agenda onto the world stage.
Time and again he has exploited the world's overarching fear of another war on the Korean Peninsula, intimidating his neighbors and forcing them to wonder whether America's oft-stated goal -- halting the spread of nuclear weapons -- is worth the risk to peace and prosperity.


East Side Basics: Multicultural Mix
CAFFE GRAZIE ++  (212) 717-4407; 26 East 84th Street; $; AE
A few blocks away from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, this casual little place serves tasty and inexpensive Italian fare.
The setting is cheery, with bright yellow walls and flowery banquettes, and the staff is congenial.
The menu features a mix of salads, sandwiches, pastas and light entrees.
Virtually everything is pleasing, from the simple endive, radicchio and arugula salad tossed in a good balsamic vinaigrette to the cold antipasto plate holding wide rounds of Genoa salami, rich provolone, perfectly marinated artichoke hearts, just-ripe tomato, salty olives, prosciutto and arugula.
You can't go wrong with sandwiches like turkey and Black Forest ham on crusty white bread, and the pastas -- like the linguine verdura with oil, garlic, broccoli, mushrooms and zucchini -- are simple and fresh. ($25 and Under: 5/ 27/94)  HURRICANE ISLAND ++  (212) 717-6600; 1303 Third Avenue, near 75th Street; $; all major cards
If you are in the mood for lobster, Hurricane Island (named for an island off Camden, Me.) is a good place to try.
Lobsters here are meaty, sweet and flavorful, not to mention reasonably priced.
The barroom sports nautical accoutrements and historical photographs of the real island; in the informal back dining room, the tables are draped with black-and-white-checked cloths.
One might begin with a tasty New England fish chowder with chunks of cod and a taste of anise; full-flavored Manhattan clam chowder; plump pan-fried oysters on a bed of greens, and succulent roasted mussels in a white wine, lemon and tomato broth.
For the main event, steamed lobsters usually range from one and a half to four pounds, and come with excellent cole slaw and sweet potato fries.
Other preparations include a warm, peppery lobster salad with arugula and black beans; grilled tuna steak with wasabi, and grilled salmon on a bed of lentils.
For non-seafood eaters, there is a good steak, tasty and tender. ($25 and Under: 4/2/93)


'WE'RE ALL RACIST NOW'
As news, white flight is an old story.
The story for today is that of Oak Park, Ill., "just a stone's throw from Proviso Township." This hopeful example of integration at work ought to have been the centerpiece of your article.
JEAN CAREY BOND New York, N.Y.


New Twist on Barbecued Chicken Dinner
GRILLED chicken, potato salad and pie: these are the quintessential dishes of outdoor summer barbecues.
The following menu, however, gives these old favorites a new twist.
Chicken breasts are served with a salsa made from roasted tomatoes, deep-fried capers and ginger along with a salad of Yukon Gold potatoes with chives.
For dessert, there is tarte Tatin, made with apricots instead of apples, with vanilla ice cream.


Why the Jazz Festival Is Taking On a European Face
OVER THE PAST SEVERAL years, the JVC Jazz Festival has been anything but festive.
Instead, it has mostly been a series of high-priced concerts, featuring the last of a dwindling stock of big-name jazz musicians, in New York's most formal concert halls.
It has been desultory, and every year the musicians save it, pulling out great performances from the mouth of a tired lion.
True, the festival has come a long way since its inception, as the Newport Jazz Festival, in 1954.
The 1959 documentary "Jazz on a Summer's Day" captures the essence of the event's early years.
The film celebrates a pre-Vietnam optimism and beat-generation cool with a sparkling, and now depressing, veracity.
With its gorgeous scenery and sense of idyll, the documentary shows a world that shares nothing with New York, the festival's home since 1972.


Outlaws


Understanding and Care Help to Install Outdoor Outlets
INSTALLING an electrical outlet outdoors may not be much more difficult than installing an outlet indoors, which usually is rather easy.
People with minimum electrical experience and an ordinary assortment of home-repair tools may perform the work, provided that they work carefully and proceed only with a complete understanding of the job.
As with any electrical work, consult the authorities before starting.
Regulations may apply, and the work may require official inspections.


Correction
An article on May 29 about the role of Washington, D.C., in American history misstated the circumstances that produced the famous World War II photograph of the American flag being raised on Iwo Jima.
The photograph was not posed after the fact.
According to the Marine Corps Historical Center in Washington, it was the second time a flag was raised atop Mount Suribachi during the fighting that day.
An officer had decided that the first flag was too small to be seen from offshore, and had sent for a larger one.


WOULD YOU BAPTIZE AN EXTRATERRESTRIAL?
The work of the Jesuit astrophysicists so interestingly portrayed by Jack Hitt raises a question.
Why assume that God's only Son is necessarily an only child?
Maybe Jesus has a Sister?
On one of those billions of planets, she could be an incarnation of the same God worshiped by so many on Earth.


Dr. Neukermans and Mr. Burlinson
Dr.
Katrien Anja Neukermans, a daughter of Eliane Aernoudt Neukermans and Dr.
Armand P. Neukermans of Palo Alto, Calif., was married yesterday to Robert Francis Xavier Burlinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Burlinson of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Erps, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Stanford (Calif.) Memorial Church.


Ms. Haagenson And Mr. Kendall
Alexandra Lee Huch Haagenson, a medical student at Harvard University, is to be married today to Michael David Kendall, an assistant United States attorney in Boston.
Judge Mark Wolf of the United States District Court for Massachusetts is to officiate at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Boston.


Word for Word/Daddy Dearest; Remembering Father, With Pens Often Sharper Than Serpents' Teeth
TODAY being Father's Day, we turn to an enduring sub-genre of biography -- memoirs or biographies written by the offspring of famous Dads.
This literary niche has its detached, even stuffy side -- try Randolph S. Churchill's multi-volume chronicle of Sir Winston -- but more typically the form trades on the promise of intimate and juicy detail rather than author objectivity.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about restaurants in Maine omitted a list of addresses and telephone numbers.
It appears today on page 10.


Disbelieving Crowd Cheers the Juice
It was as though the Juice had once again broken into the secondary, slipped the safety and was running to daylight.
"The Juice is loose!" the crowd chanted. "Go! Go! Go!"


Opponents of Disney Park Find Allies in Congress
A festering dispute between advocates and foes of a theme park that the Walt Disney Company is planning to build near important Civil War battlegrounds has spilled out of Virginia and into Congress, turning what began as a local spat into a national debate.
Largely at the urging of environmentalists and historians who want to protect the region from urban sprawl, a bipartisan group of 16 House members this week introduced a resolution opposing the park, Disney's America, which would be built in Prince William County about 35 miles west of Washington.
In addition, a Senate subcommittee has been persuaded to hold a hearing, which is set for Tuesday.


Alexandra E. Holcomb, Andrew Bird
Alexandra Elizabeth Holcomb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles R. Holcomb of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Andrew Peter George Bird, the son of Anthony G. Bird of London and Margaret Dann of Sydney, Australia.
Judge Thomas C. Platt, the Chief Judge of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York, in Manhattan, officiated at the Piping Rock Club in Locust Valley, L.I.
The bride is an associate in Sydney for Booz-Allen Hamilton, the management consultants.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who was the director of communications in the administration of former Governor Hugh L. Carey, is the president of a corporate communications firm in Huntington, L.I., that bears his name.
Her mother, Joan Holcomb, is a partner in the firm.


Sound Bytes; The Polyglot Wordsmith of Ziff
IT'S never easy for any outsider to run a family-owned business, especially a $1 billion powerhouse in the personal computer industry.
Ask Eric Hippeau, chairman and chief executive of Ziff Communications Inc., who, like the rest of the publishing world, was surprised to learn that the company he had headed since November was up for sale.
Mr.
Hippeau, who is French, joined Ziff in 1989 to head up the company's flagship publication, PC Magazine, having been lured from the firm's chief rival in computer publishing, International Data Group, where he was publisher of Infoworld Magazine.
But Mr.
Hippeau's career in computer publishing actually began in Brazil, where he launched a small Portuguese-language computer newspaper that he eventually sold to Pat McGovern, chairman of IDG.


Vacation-Home Sales
Following is a sampling of second homes that recently changed hands in areas popular with residents of the New York metropolitan area.
THE BERKSHIRES
LENOX  $222,500
222 Old Stockbridge Road  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old, wood-frame Cape Cod, dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, 2-car garage, 1 acre, 2 1/2 miles from Tanglewood; taxes $1,953, listed at $239,000, 3 weeks on market (Brokers: BGH Realty; Ruffer-Arms Real Estate)


Detroit Struggles to Learn Another Lesson From Japan
CLOSE to half a million times a year, a freshly minted, glistening Altima sedan, Sentra subcompact or pickup truck rolls out the northern doors of the mammoth Nissan assembly plant here.
But to understand the continuing impact that Nissan and other Japanese transplants have on American auto making, it helps to start elsewhere, on the northeast side of the plant, where grimy tractor trailers back up to unload transmissions, truck frames, wiper blades and bucket seats.


Rachel Malina and Edwin Florentino
Dr.
Rachel Lynn Malina, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Malina of Scarsdale, N.Y., is to be married today to Edwin E. Florentino, the son of Dr.
Connie Florentino of Guatemala and the late Oliver Florentino.
Justice Phylis Skloot Bamberger of the New York State Court of Claims is to officiate at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
The bride, 33, graduated from Grinell College and received a medical degree from New York University.
She is a pediatrician at Bay Area Pediatric Group in Daly City, Calif.


Wall Street; A Trust Offering's Half-Told Story
THE perky little memo was put on company bulletin boards for the 300 brokers at Raymond James &amp; Associates Inc. back in July 1991.
"Terry turned in an order for 5,000 shares of the American Adjustable Rate Term Trust -- 1997!!!!!!!!!!!," it gushed of a broker's recent sale of an investment sponsored by Piper Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.
"This is $1,500.00 in gross for Terry on the ticket and more importantly, Terry's client will receive a high quality, monthly paying adjustable rate security."
And how could Terry's lucky client possibly lose?
Only hours earlier, brokers at the firm had seen this memo get posted: "Investors are $ very $ receptive to the trust's features," including "ability to $$ increase $$ dividend if rates rise!!!," the note said of the American Adjustable Rate Term Trust -- 1997, which the firm was pushing.


Immigrants Give More Than They Take
To the Editor:
"Stop Benefits for Aliens? It Wouldn't Be That Easy" (front page, June 8) calls attention to the considerable difference in availability of public assistance to different types of immigrants.
It is certainly true that there is a popular misconception that all immigrants, regardless of status, are entitled to the same welfare benefits as native-born citizens.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
A Manhattan Legend Comes Back to Town
Chock Full o' Nuts, the coffee company that won the hearts of many a New Yorker as a coffee shop, is returning to its roots.
The first shop o' that name in Manhattan since 1990 will open on June 28 at 422 Madison Avenue between 48th and 49th Streets, a former Chock location.
But it will be a far cry from the days of in-your-face waitresses and nutted cream cheese on raisin bread.


Scottish Mansion to Reopen After Face Lift
Culross Palace, a 16th-century mansion 30 miles from Edinburgh, is scheduled to reopen June 23 after a two-year renovation by the National Trust of Scotland.
Situated in Culross, a small town on the north shore of the River Forth, the palace is part of a complex of buildings from the 16th and 17th centuries owned by the National Trust.
Among those open to the public are the Town House, the Study, the Bessie Bar Hall and the Palace.
An exhibition and video on Culross is to be seen in the Town House.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, Culross, a town with cobbled streets and houses roofed with red tiles, was a thriving community trading in coal and salt.
It was largely developed under the laird, Sir George Bruce, a wealthy merchant, for whom the palace was built between 1597 and 1611.


Q and A
To Beijing From Hong Kong
Q.
I will be in Hong Kong during the first week in November and want to spend two nights in Beijing.
I would like a guide to meet me at the airport with a car, take me to my hotel and then give me a tour of the Great Wall.
He would also take me back to the airport.
Must I make these arrangements before I leave for Hong Kong? -- Mary Rex Grimes, Fairborn, Ohio


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Every summer comes the same advice: Use sunscreen, wear loose clothing, drink lots of liquids.
Not this year.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Stuart White has a song for every wedding-day disaster, a singer for every style. (Need a Sinatra?)


Boy, 15, Killed in Hit-and-Run
A 15-year-old boy, on his way to meet his brother at church, was struck and killed on Friday night by a hit-and-run driver drag racing on a busy Brooklyn street, the police said.
The boy, Marlon Omar Suarez, was crossing Linden Boulevard at Nostrand Avenue, a busy East Flatbush intersection, when a Toyota Cressida that had been racing with another car slammed into him.
He was thrown over a tree, a witness said, and landed 100 feet away.
He pronounced dead at the scene.


La Rochelle
To the Editor: Alice Furlaud's article on the old French city of La Rochelle ("A Stormy Port, Peaceful Today," May 1) was wonderful.
I have a special fondness for La Rochelle because my ancestor, Isaac Bedard, lived there during the 14-month siege in 1628.
He and Marie Girard were married in the Huguenot Reformed Church on March 20, 1644.
Later Isaac converted to Catholicism in order to be allowed to start a new life for his family in Quebec.
In November 1989 my husband and I visited the old port city.
The air still held a gentle warmth during the day and we were able to enjoy long walks through the city's picturesque narrow streets.
We stayed at an Ibis hotel near the old harbor.
We learned that the hotel had originally been the St.
Nicholas Church.
The street facade has been preserved and testifies to its origins.


Flora and Fauna With Fantasy Touches
THE flora and fauna at the Walker-Kornbluth Gallery are a delightful introduction to the idylls of summer gardens.
Paintings and photographs of lush blossoms line the walls with vibrant colors, while the craft selection includes peaceable animals in nearly every nook.
Several have plants sprouting from their backs.
The warm hues and occasional touches of fantasy and humor induce a mood of relaxation and pleasure.
Gardeners needn't be reminded that these flowers will never require weeding, and of course the small pets, fashioned from clay or metal, won't beg to be fed.


Religious Issue Roils Colombia On Eve of Vote
In an echo of Colombia's 19th-century religious wars, the presidential election on Sunday may be swayed by charges that the Liberal Party candidate secretly promised to name a Protestant as his Education Minister.
Facing "this alliance of Protestants," Liberal Catholics should cast blank ballots on Sunday, Dario Castrillon Hoyos, Archbishop of Bucaramanga, said last week.
A vote for the Liberal Party candidate, the Archbishop continued, "would damage the religious unity of the republic."


Margaret Talcott, Scott Scharer
Margaret McCurrach Talcott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hooker Talcott Jr. of Brookline, Mass., was married there yesterday to Leland Scott Scharer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence L. Scharer of New York.
The Rev.
Francis H. Geer, an Episcopal minister and a cousin of the bride, performed the ceremony in the garden of the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Talcott, 30, is keeping her name.
She is an associate in investor relations at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is a vice president of the Easton Vance Corporation, an investment management company in Boston.


Cutting Costs in A Condo
JUST as the budgets of so many condominiums and co-ops seem to have been pared to the very marrow to avoid an increase in monthly charges, new ideas are emerging for continued cost savings.
No wonder.
Either because they fear for their jobs or the value of their units, residents are becoming as cutthroat as corporate chieftains.
"At my conference last year the most heavily attended workshops were the ones on controlling costs," said Mary Ann Rothman, executive director of the Council of New York Cooperatives.


Some Come Out
ANONYMITY By Susan Bergman. 198 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.
THE FAMILY HEART  A Memoir of When Our Son Came Out.
By Robb Forman Dew. 229 pp.
New York:  Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.


Nina Kantor, Ralph Levene
Nina Elizabeth Kantor, a daughter of William and Susan Kantor of Larchmont, N.Y., was married last evening to Ralph Michael Levene, the son of David and Estelle Levene of Santa Fe, N.M.
Rabbi Balfour Brickner officiated at the Water Club in New York.
Mrs.
Levene, 30, is a sales director for Vision Apparel U.S.A., a sportswear manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.


Emissions Traced From Brookhaven
Martin Blume of the Brookhaven National Laboratory denies that B.N.L. emissions of nuclear-fission products could be linked to extremely high breast cancer incidence rates within 15 miles of B.N.L.  [ "Nuclear Critic and Flaws in Study," Letters, May 8 ] .
He pretends that the laboratory is located at its Upton postal address, but in reality, B.N.L., designated by E.P.A. as a Superfund waste site, takes up five square miles in central Suffolk.
He ignores the point we made that the highest single breast-cancer rate in Long Island was reported by the State Tumor Registry for the community group Brookhaven-Bellport, which is located south of B.N.L., in accordance with "Brookhaven Reactor Fire Raises Questions on Nuclear Hazards"  [ April 10 ] , referring to previous reports of radioactive contamination of B.N.L. ground water's flowing south.
The 200,000 women living within 15 miles of the B.N.L. reactor were reported to have rates 11 percent above the county average.
As the co-author with Dr.
E.
J.
Sternglass of an article soon to be published by the Long Island University School of Public Service exploring the reasons for this epidemiological anomaly, I can state as a professional statistician that the probability that the elevated rates in central Suffolk could be due to chance is less than one in 10,000.
So there must be some casual environmental factor.
Brookhaven can not forgive Dr.
Sternglass for publishing an article in 1972 pointing out that recorded B.N.L.  airborne and liquid emissions from 1950 to 1966 were equivalent to exposure to atmospheric fallout in those years and could be associated with anomalous increases in Long Island infant mortality in the 1960's.
Our hypothesis that the current high breast-cancer rates in central Suffolk may be a later manifestation of the same radioactive contamination is supported by another article of ours, in the October 1993 issue of The International Journal of Health Services, published by the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, which examines the role of fission products in the diet in the current epidemic rise of breast cancer in Long Island, Connecticut and Westchester County.
DR.
JAY M. GOULD Director, Radiation and Public Health Project Manhattan The writer was on the E.P.A. science advisory board and is co-author of "Deadly Deceit: Low-Level Radiation, High-Level Cover-Up" (1990).


Pierce Out of Wimbledon
The French Open finalist Mary Pierce, apparently still plagued by family strife, announced today that her long-awaited Wimbledon debut has been canceled.
"For reasons far beyond my control, I've decided not to participate in the most prestigious and traditional tournament in the world," the 19-year-old Pierce explained in the statement she released after a meeting with officials of the All England Club this afternoon at Wimbledon, where play begins Monday.
"Please accept the facts: Both my mother and I have reviewed all the circumstances, and without a doubt they clearly indicate that my absence and withdrawal would serve the best interests to the championships, the fans, and to my mother, brother and myself."


IN SHORT: FICTION
FIRST NOVEL
THE SHOEMAKER'S TALE  By Mark Ari.
Zephyr Press, 13 Robinson Street, Somerville, Mass. 02145, paper, $10.


Not Guilty, Huh? Tell It to the Lie Detector
FOR HIS APPEARANCE ON Spain's most popular television show this winter, John Wayne Bobbitt dressed in his Sunday best and spoke softly, almost shyly, about his gentle and loving personality.
"No, I never hit my wife," he assured the show's host.
"No, I never forced Lorena to have sex with me," he told a panel of seven "experts" during an hour of questioning about the incident that made him famous.
Then came the moment of truth.
"Professor Gelb!" called out the bearded host, Julian Lago.
A tall man in a dark suit came forth, took his place beside a lie detector and attached Mr.
Bobbitt to it.
"Are you ready?" Mr.
Lago asked.


'WE'RE ALL RACIST NOW'
Congratulations for reporting so frankly on racism in H. G. Bissinger's " 'We're All Racist Now' " (May 29).
It seems to me that educators could use some of your courage.


Nancy Russo, Darren Gordon
Nancy Renee Russo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Russo of Montvale, N.J., was married last evening to Darren Seth Gordon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Gordon of Marlboro, N.J.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at the Pegasus Suite of the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Gordon, 25, is an account coordinator at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide Advertising in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University.


From Aisle to Runway; Vera Wang
THE WOMAN ON THE BOX IS A bruiser.
Big shoulders, thick waist, maybe six feet tall.
If she wasn't captain of girls field hockey, it was lacrosse.
She stares at herself in the full-length mirror smiling nervously, trying to pretend that the almost graceful, almost lithe creature staring back is the same person she has been looking at all her life.
The sample wedding gown cuts her shoulders at just the right angle, diminishing their heft, the material of the bodice wraps her middle so it actually indents and whatever her legs' strong or weak points, they remain a mystery under the wide tulle skirt.
Her mother's mouth opens.


BEHIND THE WHEEL/BMW's M3; Germans Take Hot Recipe And Pour On More Spice
THERE is, I discover, more than one sort of purple mood.
There is the one that has turned Prozac into America's favorite vehicle for driving away funk.
And then there is the one provoked by that metallic plum in the driveway.
That mood manifests itself in a foolish grin.
The car is BMW's new M3 coupe, a second generation of a hot two-door that originally bowed in 1988 and, unfortunately, went away two years later.
What has been going on at BMW since then, however, makes the 1994 version worth the wait.
The hitch is that only 2,000 M3's will be coming to this country this year.


JUNE 12-18: Castle and Constitution; There's No Place Like Home For Speaking Your Mind
One's home is not only one's castle, according to a broad Supreme Court ruling last week; it can also serve as an extension of its owner's constitutionally protected voice.
The Court ruled unanimously that the city of Ladue, Mo., an upscale suburb of St.
Louis, violated the First Amendment by banning nearly all signs from the city's elegant lawns and homes.
The ban was challenged by a resident, Margaret P. Gilleo, who placed a small sign in an upstairs window protesting the Persian Gulf war.


How to Rest Easy: Turn Your Insurance Policy Into Bedtime Reading
Unless you speak insurance as a second language, your automobile policy may seem as incomprehensible as a repair manual for an intercontinental ballistic missile.
But while that sheaf of papers may not make for exciting reading, it's a good idea to curl up with your policy once a year, just to review your coverage and consider changes that may be worthwhile.
An automobile policy is actually a combination of many kinds of coverage, some mandatory and some optional, depending on the state in which you live.
Each coverage has its own premium, so the annual cost for an auto policy represent a total of the separate premiums.
The greater the amount of a coverage selected, the higher the overall cost.


SUNDAY, June 19, 1994; Canadian Hat Dance
What to do about Canada's hat thing?
When the Royal Canadian Mounted Police decided a few years ago to let Sikh officers wear turbans instead of Mountie hats, many hat-proud Canadians were in an uproar.
Now, the Royal Canadian Legion, the country's main veterans' group, has voted down a provision to allow religious headgear in legion halls.
Individual chapters may bar observant Sikhs and Jews, as a few do now, and many freedom-loving Canadians are in an uproar.
The remedy -- name a Minister of Hats.
John Cleese, former Monty Python Minister of Silly Walks, is the obvious choice.
Perhaps he could get Canada to get serious.


Rockets Hoping Home Cooking Will Help
To hear them tell it, the Houston Rockets prefer to be on the precipice.
"This team always plays better when we have our backs up against the wall," said Vernon Maxwell, the Rockets' shooting guard.
"I feel like that's the case right now."
After five grueling games of championship basketball, the Rockets are behind but say they are right where they want to be.


A Hudson Journey at the River's Edge
THE Hudson River Museum has, emblazoned on its facade, "The Hudson River Museum of Westchester," which makes it seem as if there were other Hudson River Museums.
Even if this were so, there could be no Hudson River Museum more dutiful to its namesake than the one in this city, which is now featuring a documentary about the Hudson and a solo by one of its most ardent contemporary admirers, Don Nice.
As might be expected of a show supported by the Republic Bank for Savings (or any other bank), "The River That Flows Both Ways: Hudson Stories" is didactic.
That it is not oppressively so may be because the facts are often as interesting as the images and objects used to illustrate them -- sometimes more so.


Welfare as We've Known It
President Clinton stood in a Kansas City bank lobby last week and vowed to bring radical change to the nation's system of public assistance.
The proposal he unveiled would expand training programs for the five million households that rely on Aid to Families with Dependent Children, the main Federal welfare program.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Jamesburg; A Down-Home, No-Frills Community
JAMESBURG is a community with no frills.
The Middlesex County borough of less than a square mile has no industry, no high school, no supermarket, two traffic lights and very few houses valued at more than $200,000.
Yet for its fiercely loyal residents it has the comfort of an old shoe.
"I stay because it feels like home," said Daria Brown, a 32-year-old secretary and mother of two who grew up in Jamesburg.
"Many of my school friends still live in Jamesburg and because the borough is so small you get to know everybody, and your neighbors become like family."


Samara Bernot, Adam Meshel
Samara Alyce Bernot and Adam Reid Meshel, graduates of Columbia University and law students -- she at Fordham University, he at Columbia -- were married last evening.
Cantor Richard Bottom officiated at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York House
1.
Racial Discrimination Statistics: Vote to instruct House-Senate conferees working on a compromise crime bill to oppose a provision of the House version that allows inmates to challenge death sentences by using statistics on racial discrimination.
Approved 264 to 149, June 16.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . N
3. DeLauro (D) . . . Y
4. Shays (R) . . . N
5. Franks (R) . . . Y
6. Johnson (R) . . . Y  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . N
2. Hughes (D) . . . Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . Y
4. Smith (R) . . . Y
5. Roukema (R) . . . Y
6. Pallone (D) . . . N
7. Franks (R) . . . Y
8. Klein (D) . . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
N  10.
Payne (D) . . .
N  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
N  New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . N
2. Lazio (R) . . . Y
3. King (R) . . . Y
4. Levy (R) . . . Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . . N
6. Flake (D) . . . N
7. Manton (D) . . . N
8. Nadler (D) . . . N
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
N  11.
Owens (D) . . .
N  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
N  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
Y  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
N  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
N  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
N  17.
Engel (D) . . .
N  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
A  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
N  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
Y  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
Y  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
N  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
N  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Hearings on Whitewater: Vote to hold limited public hearings into the Whitewater affair to begin no later than July 30.
Approved 56 to 43, June 14.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
N  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Sara C. Moorin, Peter R. Lang
Sara Cameron Moorin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert H. Moorin of Fairfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Peter Raymond Lang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Lang of Tucson, Ariz.
The Rev.
Raymond Smailowski, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the chapel at Trinity College in Hartford.
The Rev.
Olivia Holmes, a Unitarian minister, took part in the ceremony.


Blissed Out: How a Master Does It
Just the idea of allowing a stranger (or even a friend) at your throat with a razor blade is enough to send a shudder rippling up a sensitive spine.
But the truth is that a barber shave, properly administered, is one of the splendid gifts a man can give himself, a pampering on the order of a massage or a movie in the middle of the day.
Kay Demitriou, whose Broadway Barbershop in New York is a nostalgic reminder of the days when barbershops were devoted to masculine comforts, is one of the few barbers who still offers shaves.
"I love to shave," he said, a Rossini aria playing in the background.
"I put my heart and soul into it."


U.S. Ties For First Cup Point Since 1950
This was supposed to be the spark that started a soccer brush fire, the United States opening the World Cup with a victory and opening the eyes of an indifferent public.
Well, neither did the United States win today nor convert many nonbelievers in the first World Cup game ever played indoors.
But considering they were thoroughly outplayed in the midfield, their star forward, Eric Wynalda, was suffering from an allergic reaction, and they ran out of gas when the temperature reached 106 degrees on the floor of the un-air-conditioned Pontiac Silverdome, the Americans could have done a lot worse than a 1-1 draw with Switzerland.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-14  TWO KOREAS AGREE TO MEET  The Presidents of North and South Korea agreed to meet for the first time since the peninsula was divided, under a proposal delivered by former President Jimmy Carter.  1  The division of the Korean peninsula was an American design.  12


For Summer Fun
A benefit at Tavern on the Green for a camp that stresses education, June 9.


Empire Ex-Chief Sues Insurance Company
Albert A. Cardone, the former chief executive of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, is suing the insurance giant and its Board of Directors for more than $120 million, claiming they had cheated him of his employee benefits and defamed him, according to a lawsuit filed last week in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Mr.
Cardone was forced to retire as Empire's chief executive in May 1993 after extensive news reports and an internal inquiry detailed deep management and morale problems.


Assassination in Algiers
The president of the Algerian Human Rights League, an outspoken critic of both sides in Algeria's unrest, was assassinated today in his office, the police said.
Witnesses said several armed men shot the victim, Yousef Fathallah, 64, then escaped.
The police provided no immediate information about the killers, and no one took responsibility.


The Two Koreas: 5 Decades of Division
The division of the Korean peninsula, which may be breached slightly if the Presidents of North and South Korea meet for the first time, was invented by the Americans with Soviet help.
The divide was established on Sept. 3, 1945, shortly after the Japanese, who ruled Korea as a colony for 35 years, surrendered, ending World War II.
The Americans would run the South, it was decided, and the Russians the North.


On Sunday; Beauty Glistens In Asphalt Heat Of a Half Court
IT is after work in the Chinatown park back of Foley Square and the day's more yearned-for event is under way.
A man called Showtime is down, a black man glistening with sweat as he squats on the playground's green asphalt, panting and exhausted, on the edge of losing an impassioned basketball game in the day's accumulation of street heat.
Showtime looks furious because this is as big as big-time ball gets for him after the workday at the State Insurance Fund offices, across the square, where he is known as Thomas Singleton.
He is Showtime here on the half-court asphalt, the best pure shooter in a sweet rite of summer anguish known as the K.J. 3-on-3 Classic basketball tourney.
Six weeks of evening ball, of the real thing: half-court nasty with 31 other players on eight teams, all young black men from the job like himself who grew up on the city's half courts more than its streets.


'WE'RE ALL RACIST NOW'
I teach college students, some of whom are inmates at a medium-security prison.
I suspect my students had teachers like Bill Paterson in high school.


Indians Set Club Record With 17th Straight at Home
Indians 8, Red Sox 2
Nobody, not even their longtime nemesis, Roger Clemens, scares these Cleveland Indians.


Pamela Sortino, Myles Ridder
Pamela Marie Sortino, the daughter of Cathleen Sortino of Wantaugh, L.I., was married yesterday to Myles Amend Ridder, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Victor L. Ridder Sr.
The Rev.
Paul Wierichs performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church in Garden City, L.I.
The bride, 26, was until recently a senior case manager in East Meadow, L.I., for the Travelers Companies, the insurance concern.
She graduated cum laude from the State University College at Oswego, N.Y.
Her mother is the director of nursing services at the Montclair Nursing Facility, a nursing home in Glen Cove, L.I.


Getting Down to Business on the Net
LARRY GRANT doesn't own a personal computer.
He reluctantly bought his first facsimile machine early this year.
Yet Mr.
Grant, who manages Grant's Flowers and Greenhouses in Ann Arbor, Mich., is in the technology vanguard these days, with his own storefront in cyberspace.
"We've been on the Internet for only a few months, and we're already getting almost as many orders from it as we do from F.T.D. Mercury," Mr.
Grant said, referring to Florists' Transworld Delivery, the private electronic service that links florists around the world.
"We're getting orders from all over the country. We even got an order from someone in Japan."


Jacqueline Shire, Andrew Bazarko
Jacqueline Wentworth Shire, a foreign affairs officer for the State Department, was married yesterday to Andrew Orest Bazarko, a doctoral candidate in physics at Columbia University.
The Rev.
David F. Shire, a Congregational minister and the bride's uncle, and the Rev.
Leo Goldade, a Ukrainian Catholic priest, officiated at the Arlington Street Unitarian Church in Boston.
Ms.
Shire, who is keeping her name, is assigned to the United States Mission to the United Nations.
The bride graduated from Columbia, from which she also received a master's degree in international affairs.
She is a daughter of Lydia Shire, the Boston chef, and Thomas J. Shire Jr. of Marion, Mass.
Her mother owns two Boston restaurants, Biba and Pignoli.
Her father is a social studies teacher at the Clarence Edwards Middle School in Charlestown, Mass.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Alice Ohannessian.
Mr.
Bazarko, a son of Lydia and Volodymyr Bazarko of North Royalton, Ohio, graduated from Columbia.
His mother is the director of corporate planning for the Sherwin-Williams Company in Cleveland.
His father is a lawyer in Parma, Ohio.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Trade balance (with services), Apr., $ bils.
-7.5
-7.8
Current account, 1st qtr., $ billions
-31.5
-31.0
Treasury statement, May, $ billions
17.5
-33.0
Thursday
Durable-goods orders, May, pct. chg.
-0.1
0.5
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
348
350
This Week's Developments
Tuesday
Two-year Treasury note auction
Wednesday
Federal Reserve releases beige book
Five-year Treasury note auction
Greenspan to testify to House Budget Committee
Thursday
Bundesbank Council meeting


Lauren Rosenthal, Salvador C. Uy
Lauren Abby Rosenthal, the daughter of Dan and Pamela Rosenthal of East Hampton, L.I., was married there yesterday to Salvador Castro Uy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Antonio Uy of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Justice Katherine Cahill of the East Hampton Town and Village Court, officiated at the civil ceremony in the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Rosenthal, 26, will keep her name.
She graduated from the University of Chicago.
Her father is retired as a banker at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.
Her mother is an insurance manager for CPC International in Engelwood Cliffs, N.J.
Mr.
Uy, 29, graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
He is a special assistant on administrative and regulatory affairs to Deputy Mayor Peter J. Powers of New York.
His mother, Bernardina Uy, retired as a medical records abstractor for Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
His father is the chief of investigations for the United Nations in New York.


The Executive Computer; Need Timely S.E.C. Corporate Filings? Look on Internet
EVEN as the Internet has become a place where businesses are afraid not to be represented, it is also quickly becoming one of the richest sources of the hard financial data on which businesses thrive.
Thanks to the National Science Foundation and the efforts of a few noisy consumer groups, the electronic filings of the Securities and Exchange Commission -- arguably the world's most valuable collection of financial data -- are now available to anyone with a PC and a modem.


City Council Stalls in Bid to Reach Budget Deal
The City Council abandoned its effort yesterday to reach an agreement this weekend with Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani on a budget for New York City.
The talks over the Mayor's proposed $31.6 billion budget stalled over the last details of spending cuts, capital projects and the proposed merger of the city's three police forces.
After a morning of negotiations with the Mayor's aides, the Council's leaders abruptly announced yesterday afternoon that Council members would go home until 9 o'clock on Monday morning, putting off a final budget deal at least until then.


How to Rest Easy: Turn Your Insurance Policy Into Bedtime Reading
Unless you speak insurance as a second language, your automobile policy may seem as incomprehensible as a repair manual for an intercontinental ballistic missile.
But while that sheaf of papers may not make for exciting reading, it's a good idea to curl up with your policy once a year, just to review your coverage and consider changes that may be worthwhile.
An automobile policy is actually a combination of many kinds of coverage, some mandatory and some optional, depending on the state in which you live.
Each coverage has its own premium, so the annual cost for an auto policy represent a total of the separate premiums.
The greater the amount of a coverage selected, the higher the overall cost.


Ms. Rose, Mr. Weintraub
Susan Caroline Rose, an associate director of development at Phoenix House in New York, is to be married today to Jonathan Mark Weintraub, a vice president of Harmon Publishing, a publisher of real estate periodicals in New York.
Rabbi Peter I. Rubenstein is to perform the ceremony at the Cosmopolitan Club in New York.
The bride, 33, graduated from the University of Washington.
She is a daughter of Florence Rose of Seattle and the late Sam Rose.
Her mother is the vice president of New World International, a fishery in Seattle.


Astronauts


Martinique
To the Editor: Susan Spano's piece on Martinique ("Finding Martinique's Quieter Side in High Season," April 10) was much too generous in suggesting its people are "less than hospitable" to Americans who do not speak French.
Not speaking French is not the problem.
Born in Paris and having lived there for the first 20 years of my life, I have no difficulty with the language.
But in a 10-day stay on the island two years ago my husband and I found most shop attendants, bank and restaurant personnel, even the rental car agent, chilly to the point of insolence.
One exception stays in my mind.
Shopping in a small grocery in St.
Anne, I expressed my disappointment to the elderly manager that the tray for boudin noir was empty.
She insisted we go to her apartment upstairs, she gave me a handsome portion out of her refrigerator, and smilingly declined any payment.


SUNDAY, June 19, 1994; Wolf Pack Pursues Poodle Woman
Robert Bly's men's movement treatise, "Iron John," was parodied in both "Ironing John" and "Fire in the John." Now, the best-selling "Women Who Run With the Wolves," by Clarissa Pinkola Estes, a Jungian analyst, is fair game.
Or so Barbara Graham thought.
She wrote "Women Who Run With the Poodles," with topics like "Heeling into Wholeness" and "Empowerment Through Accessories" in contrast to Estes's "Facing the Wild Hag" and "Standing on All Fours." Suddenly, even before publication of Graham's book, her publisher, HarperSanFrancisco, was receiving calls and faxes from some of its other female authors attacking Graham and her manuscript.


Site for Airport Link Is Disputed
The corner of 59th Street and Lexington Avenue is such a prime site that even the space beneath the Alexander's building is in demand -- and a subject of dispute.
Port Authority planners want to use that underground space for the Manhattan terminal of a new rail line to La Guardia and Kennedy Airports.
But some local leaders object to the prospect of traffic congestion.


New York Shaving 5% Off $100 Hotel Rooms


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
UPPER WEST SIDE  Solstice at Dawn, And at Dusk
The Cathedral of St.
John the Divine will celebrate the summer soltice with two concerts, one at sunrise, the other at sunset.
Performers at both concerts will be the saxophonist Paul Winter; Noirin Ni Riain, an Irish soprano; Paul Halley, a former organist at the cathedral, and Dorothy Papadakos, the current organist.
"We'll get up about 3:30 A.M.," Mr.
Winter said, "so we can be there to see the first rays of the summer come through the stained glass windows at the east end of the cathedral." He said he had experienced sunrise in the cathedral many times after all-night recording sessions there and called it "a very special, precious kind of time."


Journal; Straight At Stonewall
In which New York newspaper or magazine gay-people-are-everywhere story did you read the following last week?
"They acquired unprecedented prominence throughout the city. . . . They became the subject of newspaper headlines, Broadway dramas, films and novels."
None.
The passage was written by George Chauncey, a historian at the University of Chicago, in an extraordinary new book, "Gay New York." And Mr.
Chauncey is not talking about the New York of 1994, where as many as a million gay men and lesbians are gathering for this weekend's Gay Games and next weekend's 25th anniversary of the fabled Stonewall rebellion, the politically liberating Greenwich Village riot prompted by a police raid on a gay bar.


Truck Traffic at Waste Site Raises Concerns
For 11 years, the ramshackle warehouses and storage tanks of a former waste-oil reserve and processing company on Review Avenue in Long Island City have gone unused as the property, which is on the state's long list of hazardous-waste sites, awaited cleanup.
Residents of the area have waited, too, although unwillingly.
But recent use of the land by a trucking company has spurred new calls for a cleanup at the site, operated by Quanta Resources for 21 years before the company abandoned it in 1981.


Jennifer Guss and Michel Siegel Bugan
Jennifer Eve Guss and Michel Siegel Bugan, medical students at George Washington University, were married last evening at the Morristown (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Rabbi David Nesson officiated.
The bride, 24, graduated from Yale University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stephen B. Guss of Morristown.
Her father is a cardiologist, and her mother, Toni Guss, is the director of Power Presentations, a communications consulting company, both in Morristown.


It's a Fine Time for Taking Inventory
THIS is a great time to make a serious garden inventory.
What is going to come up, or out, or has done so.
Walk around with keen eyes and maybe even a notebook and pencil in hand.
It will be important to know where any gaps are, where there might be a need for some redoing or fill-in planting.
Or, rarely, it may be that everything in the garden appears to be just right.


Our Vietnam Blunder
To the Editor:
Congratulations and gratitude to Frank Rich for his brilliant and courageous "Clinton's War Story" (column, June 5).
By now, it is historically and universally acknowledged that our action in Vietnam was a self-indulgent and irresponsible (50,000 Americans killed) piece of macho nonsense.
The sooner and more widely publicized we can make this, the better we will be.
President Clinton should be proud of his disassociation from it; and his efforts to prevent it, and to end it.
TERRY SOUTHERN East Canaan, Conn., June 7, 1994


New Twist on Barbecued Chicken Dinner
GRILLED chicken, potato salad and pie: these are the quintessential dishes of outdoor summer barbecues.
The following menu, however, gives these old favorites a new twist.
Chicken breasts are served with a salsa made from roasted tomatoes, deep-fried capers and ginger along with a salad of Yukon Gold potatoes with chives.
For dessert, there is tarte Tatin, made with apricots instead of apples, with vanilla ice cream.


Streetscapes/The American Museum of Natural History; A Vaux Masterpiece Eroded and, Now, Ignored
"THE name Calvert Vaux is about to emerge from the shadows of American history," begins William Alex's exhaustive monograph "Calvert Vaux Architect &amp; Planner," published this month by Ink Inc. ($100).
Although both Vaux's country houses and his parks -- designed with Frederick Law Olmsted -- are gaining increasing recognition, his two biggest New York City works, the original sections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the American Museum of Natural History, have been gradually obscured for a century.


When a Prussian King Played Decorator
CAST-IRON OBJECTS WERE never glamorous -- even when they were new at the beginning of the 19th century.
So King Friedrich Wilhelm III of Prussia decided he would try to make his nation, if not rich, at least solvent by encouraging their sale.
An assortment of the weighty trinkets was prominently installed in a parlor in one of his Potsdam palaces.
No one knows which pieces he chose or how long the room was left intact.
But the style remained popular in decorating for decades, the iron foundries flourished, and production spread throughout Central Europe.
Today such exquisitely detailed matte-black objects are little in fashion beyond the borders of where they were produced, in the lands now known as Germany, Austria, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia.
Many gimmicky if charming curiosities abound among the diverse artifacts assembled in "Cast Iron From Central Europe, 1800-1850," an exhibition at the Bard Graduate Center for Studies in the Decorative Arts in Manhattan, through Aug. 7.


Caryl S. Fergang, Bruce T. Spector
Caryl Susan Fergang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen S. Fergang of New York, is to be married today to Bruce Todd Spector, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irving R. Spector of Hewlett, L.I.
Rabbi Richard Thayler is to officiate at the Pierre in New York.


Some Schools Won't Take No for an Answer
AS the last mortarboards are flung like Frisbees into the air and the last speaker winds up a peroration on endings and beginnings, at least one campus office marches on into summer on an unending mission: raising money.
The task is ancient but the tools get more modern all the time.
Colleges and universities, long seen as aloof from the commercial crush of life, are increasingly willing to pull out all the stops in getting alumni to give.
It's still called fund-raising -- or development or even institutional advancement.
But it's getting to look a lot like marketing.


MUTE DANCERS
I enjoyed Diane Ackerman's article "Mute Dancers" (May 29), in part because of my own recent hummingbird encounter.
Following the recent Los Angeles earthquake, I was returning to my apartment from a neighbor's when I came upon a dead hummingbird.
I reached down to take a closer look at its beautiful iridescent green and fuchsia body and it flipped onto my arm!
I took it home and set a bowl of sugar water next to it.
It made no effort to drink, so I dipped my finger in the water and held it to the tiny creature's needlelike beak.
To my amazement, a thread of a tongue emerged to drink from my finger.
Shortly, it began to eat in this way voraciously.
A few minutes later, it flew off.


Children Finally Get Day In Family Court
WHEN 4-year-old Ritchie arrived at the new child- care center in Yonkers Family Court recently, his arms were pinned around his mother's neck in a desperate embrace, and he was wailing at full throttle.
"I want to give Daddy a kiss!" cried Ritchie, whose last name is being withheld to protect his family's privacy.
"I want to give you a hug, Mommy!"


Corrections
The Correspondent's Report column last Sunday, about the new potato-famine museum in Ireland, omitted a byline in some copies.
It was by James F. Clarity.


History According To . . .
To the Editor:
My reaction to Michael Wines's article on the Walt Disney Company's plans to build a theme park near the capital  [ "Step Up, Folks! Check It Out! Nationhood!," May 29 ]  was: How cynical!
O.K., history is not history.
History creates its own reality.
There is no genuine history, just reconstructions.
Events occur only once; the rest is interpretation.


Who Says a Movie Sequel Can't Be Made for Home Video?
WITH THE directto-video release of "The Return of Jafar" last month, it's a whole new -- and highly profitable -- world for the Walt Disney Company.
While "The Lion King" might prove to be box-office royalty this summer, Disney already has been granted its wish for the made-for-video "Jafar": Since its release, the sequel to "Aladdin," estimated to have cost $6 million or less to produce, has sold more than seven million copies and is now, according to Variety, among the 10 best-selling videos ever.
Seven million, to be sure, is less than a third of the estimated 24 million copies of "Aladdin," in the stores since October, but it's millions more than many feature films that have played in theaters.
Seven million, for example, beats the early figures recorded by Disney's "Fox and the Hound," released on tape in March, and the most recent re-release of "Pinocchio."


Innovative Sondheim, Past and Present
THE WHOOPERS WERE OUT AT the final preview of "Merrily We Roll Along," the York Theater Company's smart-looking revival of the 1981 Stephen Sondheim-George Furth musical, which is now at St.
Peter's Church.
You may not know what whoopers are, but you've heard them.
They're those members of the audience who seem to try to orchestrate curtain calls, most often at previews, revealing themselves with short, shrill yips that sound like rebel yells, sometimes like broncobusters in heat.
They couldn't quite whoop up a standing ovation for "Merrily We Roll Along," but they came close.
The other members of that preview audience held on to their sanity.
They recognized and thoroughly enjoyed the vintage Sondheim score when they heard it, but they weren't about to be bamboozled into hats-off enthusiasm for a work that in its entirety still seems to be heavy water trying to flow uphill.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Unexpected Volunteers
WHEN the Long Island Volunteer Enterprise group decided to put together nine days of intensive volunteer effort, officials divided the Long Island populace into who would give and who would receive.
"We put out invitations to the corporate community for volunteers," said John P. Renyhart of the United Way and the LIVE committee, "and the health and social-service agencies for projects that needed to be done."


An Unlikely Hero's Shot Has Impact of a Rocket
With 3 minutes 18 seconds left to play and Houston clinging to 81-77 lead, Kenny Smith, the most unlikely hero of the championship series, uncorked and sank a 3-point shot.
Smith's basket all but locked up Game 6 and set up a seventh and deciding Game 7 on Wednesday.


Knicks Miss the Last Shot but Now Get a Final One in Game 7
The door that led to a championship was open for the Knicks, and John Starks was about to walk through it.
Hakeem Olajuwon slammed the door shut.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Donna Karan's fashion empire is now plagued by turmoil: partners want to sell out, retailers are complaining, bankers are worried.
Her rapid success and the recent problems afflicting her company compose a familiar pattern in the American fashion industry, where family businesses frequently grow beyond the founders' ability to manage them.  [ Page A1. ]


Some Doctors Face Computer Age Warily
The computer age may have arrived at St.
Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center, but the bits and bytes have not changed a basic truth of hospital life: there are doctors, and there is everybody else.
Hospital administrators, in putting a new computerized hospital-records network on line here in April, decided early not to require physicians to type their orders into the computers.
It would doom the effort, they said.
That has put clerical workers like Alisa McClendon, a unit receptionist in the first-floor geriatric ward, in the vanguard of the hospital's march toward automation.
An alternative point of view is that clerks and nurses have simply been saddled with the work.


Preserving the History That Lies Underfoot; Bluestone Sidewalks on Comeback Trail
John Buscarello of Brooklyn learned about bricks and stones and mortar from his father, Jack, following him into the family masonry business.
As a matter of course, he learned how to install the massive slabs of bluestone, many the size of dining room tables, that a century ago were the city's dominant sidewalk material.
But the bluestone trade faded to almost nothing over his father's generation, and for years the only sidewalks Mr.
Buscarello installed were concrete.
The giant slabs of gray rock, which over time subtly show colors like red and green and azure, appeared to be going the way of gaslights, bowler hats and the 3-cent cigar.


First Trial for Whitewater Prosecutor
For months, a special prosecutor has worked with little public display on a variety of questions involving the Whitewater case.
But on Monday, one aspect of that investigation will assume a more visible role as the prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske Jr., and his team of lawyers conduct their first trial.
The case involves two men accused of conspiring to defraud the Small Business Administration.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
An Accordion Virtuoso In a Variation on the Norm  Tenri Gallery
William Schimmel is a remarkable virtuoso on accordion and has done much to put his rustic instrument on the map as a serious concert vehicle.
It is a pleasure to hear him play anything.


A Touch of the Old West on the East Side


New York Festivals Awards Eight Prizes
The New York Festivals has awarded eight grand prizes in its 1994 international print and radio competition.


TV News Displays Air Power In Chase
As O. J. Simpson fled on the Southern California freeways on Friday, followed by a phalanx of police cars, the almost surreal chase took on a particularly Los Angeles stamp: seven helicopters leased by local television stations transmitted the pursuit live to viewers nationwide.
Televised highway chases are rare elsewhere, but Los Angeles television crews -- and viewers here -- are accustomed to them.
There was, for example, a 300-mile car chase in January 1992 that ended with a murder suspect shot dead on live television.
Numerous other chases have perfected the skills of television crews.


IN PERFORMANCE: RECORDINGS
Experiments in Folklore: An Afro-Hispanic Classic  "Concepts in Unity" (CD only/$15.98/available from Descarga, 328 Flatbush Avenue Suite 180, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11238; (800) 377-2645.
Originally recorded in 1975, this album is a paradigm for experimental Afro-Hispanic music that's being carried on to this day.
The performers, Grupo Folklorico y Experimental Nuevayorquino, included Andy and Jerry Gonzalez, the great trumpeter Chocolate Armenteros, Milton Cardona and many others; they successfully surveyed both older, more folkloric styles of Cuban and Puerto Rican music (innovative in itself), but also brought it all up to date.
It's also an album that could only be made in New York, where all this music could be mulled over and reconstructed without the chauvinism that often plagues regional music.
And it jumps out with its power.
The album gives up a lot of space to improvisation, and it rocks with riffs.
Unfortunately, there are virtually no liner notes, and the original two-volume classic album, when transferred to CD, is now missing two tracks.
But what's there is exquisite, capturing a moment where experimentation seemed fresh, a justified response to both commercialism and classicism.
PETER WATROUS


CHRONICLE
ANDRE WEIL, an 88-year-old emeritus professor of mathematics at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., will receive the Kyoto Prize in Basic Science, often called the Nobel Prize of Japan, and a $430,000 award from the Inamori Foundation of Kyoto, Japan.
Dr.
Weil, who is especially known for his work in number theory and algebraic geometry, was cited by the foundation for having helped shape "the very course of 20th-century thought in mathematics."


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Activated Mark McGwire, first baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Scott Hemond, catcher, to Tacoma of the Pacific Coast League.


People
*
Steven J. Cody was named president of Brouillard Communications, New York, succeeding James H. Foster, the chief executive, who added the new position of chairman.
Mr.
Cody was previously executive vice president and general manager for public relations at Earle Palmer Brown, New York. *
Russ Klein was named senior vice president and group account director on the Boston Chicken account at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago.
He was previously senior vice president of marketing at the Seven-Up Co., Dallas.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Queens and L.I.
Athletes Win at Raleigh  Jawauna McMullen, a Christ the King High School sophomore from Queens, and Greg Hines, a senior from Walt Whitman in Huntington Station, L.I., won titles yesterday at the fourth annual American Airlines National Scholastic Outdoor championships at North Carolina State University in Raleigh, N.C.
More than 500 athletes from 43 states took part in the meet.
McMullen, not fazed by the 95-degree heat, sprinted to the lead 300 meters into the 800-meter race, then ran the rest of the distance to win in 2 minutes 6.41 seconds, fastest in the United States this year.
Hines repeated as the 400-meter intermediate hurdle titleholder in 51.88 seconds, but was fortunate to do so.
Rod Pfister of Washington had a 5-meter lead on Hines going over the last hurdle but Pfister tripped and fell over the barrier and Hines went past him for the victory.
McMullen also anchored the Jeuness T.C. of Brooklyn to victory in the 1,600-meter relay.
She ran a 54.2 400-split as the team won in 3:44.13.
Another highlight was an impressive distance double triumph by Mebrathom Keflizighi of San Diego, an Eritrean national, who won the one mile in 4:05.58 and the 3,000 meters in 8:25.07.
Both times are national bests this year and were meet records.
GOLF


That's So Like Oakley To Go Out of His Way
When Charles Oakley tumbled out of bounds going after a loose ball in the fourth quarter of Game 4 against the Houston Rockets on Wednesday night, then flicked the ball back in to John Starks, who sank a 3-pointer that put the Knicks up, 80-74, with 2 minutes 32 seconds left, Starks suggested it was a set play.
"I had my hands up when the ball came to me and I had already flexed my knees to shoot the 3," Starks said after the game, which the Knicks won, 91-82.


3 Children Injured by an Unlicensed Driver in the Bronx
Three children were injured yesterday morning when a car driven by an unlicensed motorist went out of control onto a Bronx sidewalk and struck them while they were playing, the police said.
The driver was arrested on a charge of speeding and aggravated unlicensed operation of a vehicle.
Witnesses said the most seriously injured child, a 5-year-old boy whose mother was in a nearby Laundromat, and a 2-year-old boy and his 3-year-old sister, whose mother was with them, were playing on a stoop of a city health center on Arthur Avenue between 175th and 176th Streets in the Belmont section, a strip near the Cross Bronx Expressway that attracts speeders.


After Six Killings, the Old Sadness in Ulster
On the day after a Protestant paramilitary group shot and killed six Roman Catholics and wounded 10 others who were watching Ireland defeat Italy in a World Cup soccer game on television in a pub in a rural town southeast of here, Northern Ireland seemed to regain its normal state of sadness, anger and anxiety.
Politicians and clergymen condemned the killings, in O'Toole's pub in Loughlinisland; the police searched the countryside in County Down for the killers and their weapons; the Protestant-dominated British province waited for reprisals by Catholic guerrillas.


Essay; 'Like a Battered Husband'
The moving images in our minds of O. J. Simpson breaking through tackle or racing through an airport have slammed to stillness in a mug shot issued by the Los Angeles police.
For the first time, we are faced with this question: How do we react to the charge that someone famed for his winning ways may be a knife-wielding murderer of two people?


Paying for Health Care
To the Editor:
As President Clinton negotiates a modified health care plan with Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, they should not rule out the employer mandate.
As a small employer, I pay the full cost of health insurance for my 17 employees without undue hardship.
It is only frustrating to those who do so that all our competitors are not required to do the same, allowing them to cut the cost of services or take higher profits.
If national legislation creates a level playing field, and reasonable, managed health care policies are available, it is not too much to ask employers to pay for health insurance.
CAROLYN S. KONHEIM  Brooklyn, June 13, 1994


N.B.A. Finals: Game 6
The Knicks, down by 7 points in the final minutes, rallied but fell short last night in their bid to capture the National Basketball Association championship.
The Rockets evened the series with three games apiece, with the decisive game 7 Wednesday in Houston.


Learning the Power of Tax Cuts
Democratic Party leaders, alarmed by the growing popularity of Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman's income tax cuts, admit that, for the time being, they have lost their campaign to convince the public that the Governor's program will lead to dramatically higher local property taxes.
Assembly Minority Leader Joseph V. Doria said last week that Mrs.
Whitman has done a remarkable job of hiding what Democrats call the downside of her tax program.


And It Isn't Summer Yet


In Death of Rain Forests, We're All Accomplices
To the Editor:
"Last Rain Forest: Timber vs. a Culture," your special report on Papua New Guinea (front page, June 5), provides an excellent overview of threats to that remote Pacific island country's forests and communities.
You also identify community-based efforts to use forests in an ecologically responsible way as an alternative to the corrupt and destructive practices of foreign loggers.
Unfortunately, you leave the mistaken impression that the reforms supported by the Minister for Forests, Tim Neville, will remedy the situation and create space for more community-based, ecologically sustainable forest management.


All Dressed Up and Ready to Go


U.S. Treasury to Offer $68.5 Billion in Debt This Week
The Treasury's financings this week are scheduled to bring a large supply of Government paper to market, but analysts said on Friday that they did not expect the move to weigh too heavily on prices.
On the contrary, the analysts noted, during the last month investors had shown interest in the short to intermediate maturities, as yields were down as much as 15 basis points on some maturities and nearly unchanged on the longer end.
The total amount of Government debt being offered this week is $68.5 billion, including today's $24 billion auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Tuesday, the Treasury will auction $17 billion of two-year notes, and on Wednesday it will auction $11 billion in five-year notes.
On Thursday, $16.5 billion of one-year bills will complete the week's supply of new issues.


Patents
MOST damage to underground telephone cables occurs when construction workers or landscapers hit buried lines, accidents that can leave people and businesses without phone service for hours or days.
Now AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories has patented a magnetic tape that wraps around optical fiber cable before it is buried so the lines can be easily found later.


Exile in Style Being Offered To Haiti Chiefs
To avoid an invasion of Haiti, the United States is trying to induce the three top military leaders of the Caribbean nation to leave for a comfortable life in exile, perhaps by arranging for them to be paid off, senior Administration officials say.
As part of that strategy, much of the country's 7,000-member armed forces and military police would also stand to avoid punishment after the return of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the popularly elected President who was ousted in a military coup in 1991.


For a Festival, Rain or Shine?
This week at Waterloo, a restored colonial village near Stanhope, N.J., student musicians are getting their bearings, and groundskeepers are getting the 2,000-seat concert tent and the surrounding picnic area ready for the opening of the 19th Waterloo Festival on Saturday evening, when Catherine Comet will conduct a program of Russian music with Andre Watts as the soloist in the Rachmaninoff Second Piano Concerto.
But if the preparations seem to be business as usual for the hybrid music school and concert series, they come after an unusually tumultuous year.
Administrative and artistic shakeups at the festival have yielded a shift toward more conservative programming.
And in a way, the festival has been eclipsed by plans for the future of Waterloo itself.


Let World Remember Holocaust Rescuers
To the Editor:
"Good Germans: Honoring the Heroes. And Hiding the Holocaust" (The Week in Review, June 12) reflects a concern of some Holocaust survivors that the focus on Christian rescuers of Jews may be used to mitigate the horrors of the Holocaust.


Betsy Gotbaum Heads Troubled Historical Society
The New-York Historical Society has named Betsy Gotbaum as its executive director.
The appointment of Ms.
Gotbaum, who served as Parks and Recreation Commissioner under Mayor David N. Dinkins, is to be announced this morning on the steps of City Hall.
Ms.
Gotbaum, who starts her new job today, takes over a venerable but battered institution.
Founded 190 years ago, the society has an outstanding collection of prints, photographs, architectural drawings and books.
But in recent years, which have been marked by budget cuts, staff reductions and shortened hours, it has teetered on the brink of extinction.


Accounts
*
Genesco Inc., Nashville, to Frankfurt Balkind Partners, New York, for its Greif Cos. division, which sells men's tailored fashions under labels like Metropolis.
Frankfurt Balkind, which also handles Genesco's University Brands account, did not disclose billings, but Advertising Age estimated them to be $2 million. *
Virotex Corp., Houston, to Tatham Euro RSCG, Chicago, to handle the account of the manufacturer of topical over-the-counter pharmaceuticals like Viractin, a cold sore medication.
Billings were not disclosed.


METRO DIGEST
LABOR WINS ONE ON LONG ISLAND
The Long Island Rail Road was running again after negotiators for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, under relentless pressure from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, abandoned their central demand for changes in employees' work rules and ended a two-day strike.
The outcome angered the railroad's negotiators, who viewed the Governor as undermining their position in long-stalemated contract talks.
But the turnabout thrilled leaders of the 2,300-member United Transportation Union, who called the agreement a victory for organized labor.
A1.


Introducing a Life Style Symbol On the Court: Pink Triangles
On a day when much of New York prepared to watch the Knicks and Rockets from Houston last night, there was basketball played in the Bronx.
Many of the players in that competition wore wore pink triangles, the symbol of gay pride.
A total of 25 men's and women's basketball teams began Day 1 of the Gay Games at Lehman College.
Some teams have former college players and coaches, others have players who have never been in a basketball tournament.
There are teams from all over the United States and squads from Germany, the Netherlands and France.


Building a Case for a Beloved Figure


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Martinis and Cole Porter Underscore a Relationship  Perry Street Theater
A sleek young couple of the 1930's decide to forgo their usual round of parties and spend the evening together in their Art Deco apartment.
While she mixes martinis, he sits at the grand piano and plays Cole Porter songs, which they perform separately and together.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
Rendering Emotions Through Movement  St. Mark's Church
One of the pieces presented by Gina Gibney's Full Circle Dance company on Friday night was called "Calibrations." That is a perfect description for much of Ms.
Gibney's work, which measures the movement of the heart and soul in small, precise units of body movement.


Moynihan Sees Danger in Delay on Health
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, tried today to make the case for compromising on the goal of universal health insurance.
He also warned that unless a breakthrough on health care legislation came in the next two weeks, "it's going to be too late."
Mr.
Moynihan, a New York Democrat whose committee has been stalled on health care legislation for weeks, spent much of his time on the NBC News program "Meet the Press" praising a bill sponsored by Senators John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana, and Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, in the Senate and by Representative Jim Cooper, Democrat of Tennessee, in the House.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Names A Managing Director
Charlie Claggett, the deputy managing director and chief creative officer of the D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles office in St.
Louis, has been named managing director.
He succeeds William C. Melzer, who resigned last month because of what he called "philosophical differences about the future direction of the organization."


Philip Morris Chairman Unexpectedly Resigns
Michael A. Miles, the chairman and chief executive of the Philip Morris Companies, resigned unexpectedly over the weekend, the company announced yesterday.
Mr.
Miles, in a statement released by the company, simply said that he felt it was time for the $50 billion consumer products giant to be led by a career Philip Morris executive with a background in tobacco.
Mr.
Miles was chairman and chief executive of Kraft General Foods, when Philip Morris acquired it in 1988.
He was named chairman and chief executive of Philip Morris in August 1991, the first leader of the company from outside the tobacco industry.


Ads Back Bill to Extend Bias Protection to Homosexuals
Seeking to focus political pressure on a handful of Republican state senators from Long Island, two gay-rights groups have begun a $75,000 advertising campaign promoting legislation that would extend civil rights protection to homosexuals.
The groups also released a score card showing that they have 28 votes in the Republican-controlled State Senate supporting the bill.
That is three votes short of a majority to pass the measure, and one more than last year at this time, when opponents of the bill succeeded in blocking a vote on the Senate floor.


Three Killed In a Day Spent Escaping Heat
A combination of record-setting heat and wet, heavy air sagged down on New York and much of the region yesterday, and it was more than uncomfortable.
It was dangerous.
At least three people died trying to escape the heat, and thousands had to seek medical attention from the most miserable weather of the season.
With summer still two days away, New Yorkers sweltered under temperatures that reached 98 degrees in Central Park and at Kennedy Airport, a record for the date.
In Newark it hit 102, tying a record.


For Cuomo, Role in Strike Is Tied to Political Benefits
In brokering the deal that ended the Long Island Rail Road strike after two days, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo managed to appease two constituencies that will be vital to his re-election campaign -- Long Island suburbanites and organized labor.
In doing so, he undercut the bargaining position to some extent of the man he appointed as chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Peter E. Stangl.
The net result, according to Mr.
Stangl, will be heightened pressure for a fare increase on the Long Island Rail Road a year from now -- well after the gubernatorial election -- and an unwanted precedent for coming negotiations with workers at the Transit Authority and Metro-North.


Bench Presses the Issue For Rockets in Game 6
Sure, the Summit crowd screamed "m.v.p.! m.v.p.!" every time Hakeem Olajuwon came to the line (from where he happened to hit 8 of 8 free throws).
But for the Houston Rockets tonight, perhaps the most valuable play of all came from the bench.
Facing elimination in the National Basketball Association finals, the Rockets certainly needed help on all fronts, and they got it: Olajuwon leading all scorers with 30 points, Kenny Smith sinking a critical 3-pointer with 3 minutes 17 seconds to go for what Coach Rudy Tomjanovich called "probably the biggest shot in his career." And the fans probably helped, wearing all that red and making noise and waving banners: "Spike the Knicks." "Clutch City." "Believe It!"


Terence de Vere White Is Dead; Irish Writer and Editor Was 82
Terence de Vere White, an Irish author and former editor, died on Friday in London.
He was 82 and had lived in London since 1977.
He had Parkinson's disease, British newspapers reported.


What Mayor's Homeless Plan Needs to Work
To the Editor:
While it is flattering for our organization to get credit, with the Coalition for the Homeless, for forming public perception of New York City's homeless population, Heather MacDonald greatly misstates in your "Hope for the Homeless" dialogue (Op-Ed, June 9) our position on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's new homeless plan.


Books of The Times; The Wet Underbelly of Chicago
Tunnel Vision  By Sara Paretsky  432 pages. Delacorte Press. $21.95.
As usual, life is a sea of troubles for V. I. (Vic) Warshawski in "Tunnel Vision," Sara Paretsky's eighth novel featuring her Chicago-based private investigator.
The building where Vic rents her office is being vacated, so the landlord no longer cares about maintaining it.


N.B.A. Playoff Series Can't Rise to Occasion
These rock-'em, sock-'em National Basketball Association finals have never seemed like the finals.
After years of Magic, Bird, Jordan, Isiah, Barkley and Kareem starring in June amid hopes of repeating and three-peating, NBC has not possessed the power to turn Hakeem vs.
Patrick into the magic it hasn't been.
The finals' transformative moments came Friday night when NBC shuttled seven times between Game 5 and updates from the surreal O. J. Simpson slow-motion chase to Brentwood, live from Interstate 5.
Last night was an O. J.-free zone on NBC.
The hardest news reported during the game was, pick one: (a) Darryl Strawberry signing with the Giants, (b) Hannah Storm's report on Rocket center Hakeem Olajuwon's scratched fingernail, or (c) Charles Barkley's live tidbit at halftime that he has ruled out back surgery.


Billie Kotlowitz, 67, John Jay Official
Billie Leibowitz Kotlowitz, an administrator at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
She was 67 and lived on the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
The cause was lung cancer, said her husband, Robert Kotlowitz.


BACK FROM KOREA, CARTER DECLARES THE CRISIS IS OVER
Former President Jimmy Carter, back from meetings with the leaders of North and South Korea, went to the White House today and proclaimed that the crisis regarding North Korea's suspected effort to build nuclear weapons was over.
But the Clinton Administration immediately sought to distance itself from Mr.
Carter's upbeat assessment, saying that important details of the North Korean negotiating positions still needed to be clarified.


INSIDE
A Measure of Risk
The Securities and Exchange Commission may require mutual funds to include a Government-devised rating of their volatility alongside their boasts of past performance.
Page D1.
A Departure at Philip Morris
Michael A. Miles resigned unexpectedly as chairman and chief executive after corporate directors decided not to split the company.
Page D1.
New Historical Society Head
Betsy Gotbaum, who was Parks and Recreation Commissioner under Mayor David N. Dinkins, is to be named executive director of the New-York Historical Society.
Page C15. 3-Way Golf Playoff
Loren Roberts, Ernie Els and Colin Montgomerie tied for the U.S.
Open lead and will compete in an 18-hole playoff today.
SportsMonday, C1.


Market Place; Why its auditors might have tired of arguing with IDB.
IF the bottom line is the most important one, why not start with it and work backward?
Rarely have a company's efforts to come up with a preordained profit figure been laid out in more excruciating detail than in the case of IDB Communications, whose very public split with its auditors from Deloitte &amp; Touche caused the company's stock price to plunge earlier this month.


In Poor, Decolonized Africa, Bankers Are New Overlords
For more than a decade the economies of Africa have been caught in a relentless downward spiral.
As a result, countries that are proud of their independence and prickly about sovereignty are finding themselves more than ever under the thumb of outside powers.
Only now the powers are not the old colonial masters -- Britain, France and the other would-be exploiters who carved up Africa in European drawing rooms and conference halls in the 1880's.


In Death of Rain Forests, We're All Accomplices; Up-to-Date Papuans
To the Editor:
I was thrilled to see your June 5 front-page special report on Papua New Guinea.
Having lived in the country two years, I have seen the degradation of the forests and heard bizarre stories of flagrant timber theft.
I have also talked to refugees from the civil war festering on nearby Bougainville Island, a war that was born of bitterness and disillusionment with the callous extraction of copper from a sacred mountain.


The City Game: The Old Pipeline Is Still Open and New Talent Is Flowing
Felipe Lopez is the can't-miss-kid of New York City basketball this year.
But the strength of a college recruiting year among the city's high school players is its potential for sleepers.
And the name in this year's class is Duane Woodward.
"I was unknown, really," said the lanky, late-blooming Woodward, who was a first-team all-city and second-team all-state guard this winter for Cardozo High School in Queens.
"When we played last year, I averaged 22 points as a junior. But I didn't get the hype."


From Magazines, Flashes of Fiction
The ancient art of storytelling just doesn't sell magazines anymore.
With few exceptions, fiction has virtually disappeared from mainstream publications.
This week, however, The New Yorker is coming out with a fat double issue devoted entirely to fiction.
But having reduced its traditional commitment to fiction by cutting the output in half since Tina Brown became editor in 1992, the magazine is leaving nothing to chance, and even less to pure literary merit.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
The Comcast Corporation said yesterday that its $1.27 billion offer had won a bidding war for the United States cable television systems of Maclean Hunter Ltd.
The acquisition would make Comcast the third-largest cable company in the United States with 3.5 million subscribers, behind Time Warner, with 7.3 million subscribers, and Tele-Communications, with 10.4 million.


Abroad at Home; Opponents Of Peace
Gaza and Jericho are under Palestinian rule now.
But hope for a general settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is clouded by events that have renewed old suspicions, among them the Hebron massacre, other deaths on both sides and Yasir Arafat's talk of a jihad for Jerusalem.
In Israel, the political right has seized on the strains of implementation to intensify its attacks on the declaration signed last September on the White House lawn.
The criticism is worth a careful look, for it discloses more than it surely intended to.


GOLF: Sports of The Times; Roberts Won't Need To Sneak In Today
IN today's United States Open playoff, Loren Roberts will be representing American golf.
He also will be representing everybody who ever sneaked onto a golf course.
When he was growing up in San Luis Obispo, Calif., the now 38-year-old touring pro occasionally climbed the fence at the local country club or hurried through the trees along a nearby highway to play a few holes.
And one day, dressed in their best golf shirts and slacks, he and a friend dared to dare.


Aspiring Immigrants Misled On Chances in Visa Lottery
A man wearing headphones passed out pink fliers last week in front of the Immigration and Naturalization Service headquarters in lower Manhattan, mumbling "Green card, green card" in accented English.
When a passer-by expressed interest, he escorted her across Broadway and into a seventh floor office with a brass nameplate that said, "Ola Mata-Mazel, Diplomat."
Inside the scruffy office, Ms.
Mata-Mazel promised help for anyone interested in getting a green card through a State Department visa lottery that began June 1 and ends June 30.
For $100, she said, she would make sure an applicant had the best possible chance of winning.
But until the fee was paid, she said, she would not reveal "the secret."


Sky Beauty, 128, Wins
Sky Beauty showed once again yesterday why she is called the Queen of Belmont, as she held off a game You'd Be Surprised on a hot, humid afternoon to win the 26th running of the Grade I $150,000 Hempstead Handicap for fillies and mares by a neck after a rousing stretch duel.
Carrying jockey Mike Smith and 128 pounds -- an almost unheard of weight for a filly and 10 more than You'd Be Surprised -- Sky Beauty won her 10th race in 10 attempts over the Belmont oval and her 12th race in 15 career starts.
She covered the mile and an eighth in 1:472/5 , two ticks off the stakes record.
The winner's share of $90,000 pushed the 4-year-old's earnings over a million dollars.


Gooden's Gift to Father: A Victory Wrapped Up
Dwight Gooden forgot to buy his father, Dan, a present for Father's Day.
Gooden is not good about these things -- on Mother's Day, he was in the visitors' clubhouse in St.
Louis at noon trying to find a way to get flowers delivered to his mother, Ella, in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He got a special delivery a day late.
This time, Gooden made up for his memory lapse with his right arm rather than his credit card.
With his father in the stands to see him pitch for the first time in nearly six years, Gooden put together one of his most dominating starts in recent memory, three-hitting the Florida Marlins across eight innings to lead the Mets to a 6-1 victory.


Towers Investors Try Aggressive New Legal Tack
Thanks to a precedent-smashing Supreme Court decision in April, the heat has been turned up in the fiery courthouse battle being waged by aggrieved investors in the Towers Financial Corporation of New York, a bankrupt conglomerate that Federal prosecutors have charged was the vehicle by which the financier Steven Hoffenberg defrauded investors of more than $450 million between 1988 and 1993.
A sharply divided court reversed decades of practice by barring investors from filing "aiding and abetting" accusations against accountants, lawyers and other financial professionals whose clients had committed securities fraud.


Review/Music; Instrumentalists Gather, With One Thing on Their Minds
Oboists are a strange and wonderful lot whose existence seems to center on the merest part of their instrument, the reed.
The average player knows as well as any panda the taste and elusive charms of cane, and most professionals painstakingly carve and shave their own reeds.
So at a gathering of the clan over the weekend, Oboe Blow-Out New York at the New School, an outsider understood at least some of what Allan Vogel meant when he introduced Makoto Shinohara's 1960 work "Obsession" with cryptic reference to "the typical oboist's obsession, which we all share." One player spent much of another's recital inspecting and picking over a reed of his own, and eventually stashed it out of harm's way, in his ear.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The World Cup campaigns aren't exactly brimming over with imagination and creativity.
STOP the World Cup, I want to get off.
World Cup '94, the first ever to be played in this country, has barely begun.
But the advertising blitz that started weeks ago has already proved pretty dreadful, almost as boring as watching a soccer field's grass grow.


No Headline
"You can see Barney five times a day, but you can't  see C-Span." -- BRIAN LAMB, about an Ohio cable system carrying five public television stations.  [ D5:5. ]


Top Executive Quits Lord, Dentsu Office
Leonard Pearlstein, who joined Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles as the president and chief operating officer in August 1991, has unexpectedly left the agency.
"I am leaving because the owners apparently wanted to go in another direction," Mr.
Pearlstein, who is 53, said Friday in a telephone interview.
"It is their money and their call."


CUOMO'S PRESSURE BREAKS DEADLOCK IN L.I. RAIL STRIKE
The Long Island Rail Road was running again yesterday after negotiators for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, under relentless pressure from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, abandoned their central demand for changes in employees' work rules and ended a two-day strike.
Mr.
Cuomo was anxious for a quick end to the strike and worried that Congress would not intervene.
But the outcome angered the railroad's negotiators, who viewed the Governor as undermining their position in long-stalemated contract talks.


Giants Take Chance and Sign Strawberry
His power numbers counted little, they said.
His uncanny knack for changing a game with one dramatic swing was left out of the equation.
When the struggling San Francisco Giants sat Darryl Strawberry down for a chat last Thursday at a hotel adjacent to the airport, they were interested in one crucial aspect of his life: Change, and whether the troubled slugger had made enough to play baseball again.


Albany Falters in Effort To Earmark School Aid
It is an idea lawmakers say they like: state money for city schools should be used only for schools, not to close budget gaps.
But a bill to do just that may be headed for a quiet death -- and an important victory for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York City.
If passed, the law would mean up to $70 million less this year in state assistance that the city had counted on to fill its estimated $2.3 billion shortfall.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  NEW OVERLORDS IN AFRICA
Because of their weak economies, many African countries that finally succeeded in throwing off colonial powers are now subject to outside control by financial organizations to which they are indebted.
A1


States Rush To Dispose Of Waste
Each day 20 trucks travel down the isolated blacktop road that leads to the nation's biggest dump for low-level radioactive waste.
They are enough to create a traffic jam.
It can take a day or more before one of the tractor trailers loaded with steel boxes and 55-gallon metal drums or the flatbed trucks laden with tall carbon-steel boxes, lead-lined casks built to withstand 80-mile-an-hour crashes, gets its turn to drop off its radioactive cargo.


Universal Coverage at Risk
The debate over health care reform has stalled over the issue of employer mandates -- the requirement, as proposed by President Clinton, that employers pay most of the cost of policies chosen by their employees.
At stake is a primary purpose of health care reform -- universal coverage
The President is insisting on the mandate because he believes it is the only realistic way of moving to universal coverage.
Small employers are fighting back hard because many fear a mandate will drive them out of business.
And conservatives are fighting the mandate because, to them, it is the opening through which the Government will creep into every corner of health care.


Don't Throw History In With the Paper Clips
To the Editor:
You report June 12 that the post-administration papers of recent New York City mayors are being carefully preserved at the La Guardia and Wagner Archives of La Guardia Community College.
How ironic that the records of their time in office, which made their name in history, are at risk.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's budget calls for elimination of the Department of Records and Information Services as a separate agency and transfer of its functions, including the Municipal Archives, to the Department of General Services, Division of Municipal Supplies.


France Says Allies Support Rwanda Plan
Moving ahead with its plan to send soldiers to try to stop the killing in Rwanda, France sought United Nations backing today for a military-led relief mission and said that its main European allies had agreed to the plan in principle.
Foreign Minister Alain Juppe, who returned from Africa late today after a trip to enlist support among France's former colonies, said Senegal had agreed to join France and to provide troops.
He said that the intervention would be "strictly humanitarian" and that the reaction of African countries had been "unanimously favorable."


CHRONICLE
JASPER JOHNS has been named the winner of the 1994 Edward MacDowell Medal for his contributions to the nation's culture.


Belgium Triumphs To Survive Hot Spot
Forced to contend with an American version of that old Mexico City World Cup double-team -- heat and humidity -- Belgium found a formula to barely survive the increasingly dangerous challenge of Morocco this afternoon.
A goal by Marc Degryse in the 11th minute, an extra defender in the second half and shots that struck two crossbars helped the Red Devils to a 1-0 victory at the Citrus Bowl.
A deflection by Belgium goalkeeper Michel Preud'homme in the 70th minute became the difference between a victory and a tie before a crowd of 60,790, 429 less than capacity.
Mohammed Chaouch, a Moroccan forward whose right-footed drive had hit the left side of the crossbar in the 42d minute of play, had another chance to tie the game.
After a centering pass from substitute forward Ahmed Bahja, Chaouch's header, beyond the leap of Belgium Captain Georges Grun, was headed beneath the crossbar.


Fresh Face Makes Norway a Winner
Norway made its first World Cup appearance in 56 years a memorable one today, defeating Mexico, 1-0, in the festive cauldron of Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.
Mexican fans may have outnumbered Norwegian supporters in the crowd of 52,395, and certainly outcheered them, but it was the Norwegians who had something to sing about at the end.
And sing they did -- whole sections remained in the stadium after the game, flapping their big red flags and waving to the players, who came back out, barefoot or wearing socks, to take a victory lap.


U.S.-Switzerland a Hit on TV
The United States-Switzerland World Cup game Saturday on ABC produced a surprisingly high overnight rating of 5.8, which surpassed the 5.0 for the third round of the United States Open golf championship, and more than doubled the 2.8 for the U.S.-Germany soccer game that ABC aired a year ago, on June 13, 1993.
For each half-hour of the U.S.-Switzerland game, the rating increased, starting at a 4.5 from 11:30 A.M.-noon and ending with a 7.2 from 1-1:30 P.M.
One overnight rating point is the equivalent of 472,100 TV households.


Mexico Faces Reality
Americans who criticized Mexico's one-sided campaigns and improbable vote counts used to be answered with boasts about the "stability" brought by 65 years of one-party rule.
No more.
The last six months show how superficial that stability was.
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, has been jolted by an armed peasant revolt, still unresolved, the assassination of its presidential candidate, still unexplained, and seismic internal rifts, still producing aftershocks.
But with Mexico's least predictable presidential election of modern times just two months away, Mexicans have a chance to move toward real democracy.
Some polls now show Diego Fernandez de Cevallos of the opposition National Action Party running almost even with the PRI candidate, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon.
Mr.
Fernandez's campaign caught fire last month after Mexico's first televised presidential debate.


Wynalda: From a Red Card To a Red-Letter Soccer Day
The three Americans stood over the ball, deciding which one would take the free kick.
Tab Ramos decided that the cannons in his legs were just out of range at 28 yards.
John Harkes volunteered.
Ramos suggested Eric Wynalda.
"I think it was the right decision," Ramos said.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Australian Folk Band Takes a Jazzlike Stance  Mercury Lounge
"Sorry to put you on the spot," Angie Hart, the singer for the Australian band Frente!, apologized with an embarrassed grin on Saturday night.
Frente! had stepped onstage for an encore and asked the audience members what they wanted to hear.
The band was met with silence.


On Health, Congress Moves to Take Bold Action Subtly
If Congress passes a comprehensive health care bill this year, it will require a grand compromise to finesse some tough decisions.
The latest idea for a political compromise on health care legislation calls for a device known as a trigger mechanism.
Such a device would defer any requirement that employers provide coverage to their workers for at least several years.


Visit to the Mild West For Japan's Emperor
Peggy Baran trained her binoculars on a rise above the muddy lake that each summer draws bighorn sheep down from the hills here to sup minerals from the mud.
"We came for the sheep," the Houston tourist remarked with a shrug.
"But we got the Emperor instead. There are no sheep." She sounded disappointed.
Beverly and Lawrence Eady, who were visiting Rocky Mountain National Park from Prescott, Ariz., wondered aloud if there might be coyotes around, driving all the sheep away.
Then they turned toward the royal party to provide a running commentary as a motorcade of police cars, black limousines, white Cadillacs and vans of Secret Service agents tied up traffic in the mountains.


IN PERFORMANCE: THEATER
Jewish Life, The Musical Version  Playhouse 91
In the 20 seasons of the Jewish Repertory Theater, has there ever been a more mirthful, more melodic, more trenchant, more touching show than its new musical "That's Life!"?


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Balance of Trade . . .
April  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Durable-Goods Orders . . .
May  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Sarajevo Journal; In the Very Ashes of War, a Requiem for 10,000
Some 10,000 people, the vast majority civilians and many of them children, have died or disappeared during the Serbian nationalists' bombardment of Sarajevo since the Bosnian war began more than two years ago.
Tonight, in the charred shell of the National Library, which was destroyed by Serbian gunners, Zubin Mehta conducted Sarajevo's orchestra and chorus in a televised benefit performance of Mozart's Requiem, his Mass for the dead.


Review/Dance; Spirited, Wide-Ranging Tribute To Modern Choreographers
The American Dance Festival accomplished an extraordinary number of things in one single evening.
The program on Saturday night at Page Auditorium of Duke University here emphasized the richness of American modern dance and called attention to the accomplishments of black choreographers.
The event featured two talented and versatile groups, one from Ohio, the other from Colorado.
The Dayton Contemporary Dance Company dates from 1960.
The Denver-based Cleo Parker Robinson Dance Ensemble was established in 1970.
Their productions included two major revivals, a world premiere and pieces by three other choreographers.


Carter, His Own Emissary, Outpaces White House
Jimmy Carter was not exactly a submissive emissary.
Indeed, the former President said today that he would never have sought permission to go to North Korea if he had supported the Clinton Administration's plan to use economic sanctions against its Government in the dispute over its nuclear program.


Professors in 14-Nation Study Say Their Ideas Are Ignored
Most professors in the United States and 13 other nations believe that they have a responsibility to help solve social problems, but think that their ideas and recommendations are often ignored outside the classroom.
This dichotomy is among the findings in one of the first large-scale international studies of professors, undertaken by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
The report, called "The Academic Profession: An International Perspective," was based on a two-year study of questionnaires answered by some 20,000 professors in 14 nations.


Zulu Royalists Win Fight for Region, But Forfeit Their King's Allegiance
The Zulu royalists who trickled in from the yellow hills on Saturday to squat on the dry grass and savor their victory could rightly assert that they had much to celebrate.
In a 10-year struggle for control of this, South Africa's most flammable province, they had gunned supporters of Nelson Mandela to a standoff.
Then in the elections in April, a stunningly effective Zulu vote-mustering machine confounded all the experts, bucking the national trend and delivering the provincial government to Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi's Inkatha Freedom Party.


U.S. Seeking Mutual Fund Risk Gauge
The Securities and Exchange Commission is trying to develop a simple yardstick that would help investors assess the risks of mutual funds.
Fund advertisements currently trumpet their past returns in bold type, while tiny footnotes caution, "Past performance cannot guarantee future results."


N.B.A. FINALS: Sports of The Times; Harper Delivers a Message for Starks
DEREK HARPER was talking to the press.
Derek Harper was talking to John Starks.
Derek Harper was talking to the press and to John Starks.
That was the scene in the Knicks' locker room last night after the Rockets held on for an 86-84 victory that sends this series, inevitably, into the seventh and final game in the championships of the toughest basketball league in the world.


Morris and Indians Continue to Roll at Expense of Sinking Red Sox
Indians 6, Red Sox 5
Jack Morris got his 250th career victory and the Cleveland Indians won their 18th straight home game yesterday, coming from behind to beat the skidding Boston Red Sox, 6-5.


Center Court: So Green, So Natural and Oh So Deceptive
The grass has been given a final brush cut and, like a chef checking for the exact level of airiness in an important souffle, Martina Navratilova, the nine-time Wimbledon champion, has touched a sneaker to the dense Center Court lawn and pronounced it done to perfection.
So has the five-time champion Steffi Graf, encouraged to find herself back on grass instead of clay, a surface she has accused of bringing out the worst in her game at the French Open earlier this month, where she lost to Mary Pierce in the semifinals.


CHRONICLE
The commencements are largely over, the honorary degrees dispensed.
Most organizations are winding down their year's activities, and still honors are being presented for all sorts of accomplishments.
The New York Civil Liberties Union, for example, is waiting until June 29 to present its 1994 Florina Lasker Civil Liberties Award to the Weavers, the folk singing group.


Mulholland Unraveled By Another Big Inning
If bad things really do come in threes, then Terry Mulholland has become the epitome of the phenomenon.
Mulholland, continuing to have his fate decided by the big inning, saw his 15th start as a Yankee disintegrate yesterday under the weight of a three-run Brewers fourth inning.
That outburst -- marking the ninth starting effort in which Mullholland has been touched for at least three runs in an inning -- drove him from the game and started Milwaukee toward a 10-7 victory over the Yankees.


Armenian Enclave Battles in Self-Defense
To the Editor:
"In Azerbaijan, Armenia Is the Aggressor" by William H. Schaap (letter, June 9) is in error both in interpreting Transcaucasian history and on the work of the Security Council.


Saturn Invites the 'Family' to a Party
Bill Bierman, who lives in Cottage Grove, Wis., said he would be "going home" when he drives with his family to Spring Hill, Tenn., later this week.
In fact, Mr.
Bierman will be going to an automobile factory.
Debbie Manowski of Juneau, Alaska, said she would attend "a family get-together." In fact, she will be joining a celebration with some 25,000 strangers, including Mr.
Bierman.


City Police
The Giuliani administration want to merge the three New York City poloice forces - the N.Y.P.D. would absorb the housing police on Oct. 1 and the transit police on Jan. 1.
The Mayor and the Police Commissioner, William J. Bratton, say a merger would streamline administration, save money on management and allow civilians to assume more work now done by officers.
Opponents of the plan include many members of the transit and housing police forces and unions and some Democrats in the City Council.
They say the move would cost the city about $30 million in pension adjustments, demoralize the housing and transit forces and foster subway crime.
The merger is part of the Mayor's budget plan, which is subject to City Council approval.


American Gladiator
Landing at Los Angeles Airport Friday evening, on assignment to observe a taping of the bizarre TV spectacle "American Gladiators," I was immediately informed by an airline representative that O. J. Simpson was at that moment cruising the L.A. freeway system in the back seat of his car, pointing a gun to his head.
The last time a stranger rushed up to me and blurted out news of current events was when President Kennedy was shot.
How did the airline person know about O. J.?
"The whole thing's on TV," she said.
"Everybody's back there watching it." At 7 on a Friday evening LAX was almost completely empty -- no ticket lines, nobody being dropped off.


For Want of an Ambulance, The Triathlon Was Canceled
The Gay Games got off to a rocky start yesterday morning when a triathlon was canceled at Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx because the city failed to provide an ambulance, city and games officials said.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who has been critical of the city's Emergency Medical Service in the past, apologized to the games organizers and ordered an investigation into a mix-up that left one of the games' first major events without paramedics for a crucial hour, mayoral aides said.


Building New Roads for El Diario
Back when Peter W. Davidson was a young president of a newspaper company -- or, more precisely, when he was a younger one, since he is only 35 now -- he thought newspaper publishing was a relatively simple and lucrative business.
But listen to him now.


Prosecutor Sees Simpson Case As 'Solid' One
The Los Angeles County District Attorney, Gil Garcetti, said today that he had not decided whether to seek the death penalty in the trial of O. J. Simpson, the former football great accused of slaying his former wife and her friend.
But Mr.
Garcetti said he was confident that the evidence he had compiled would establish "beyond the necessary burden of proof" that Mr.
Simpson, who was being held without bail in the Men's Central Jail here, was guilty of murder.


Fortunes Turn for a Fast-Rising Fashion Star
Her story lends itself to hyperbole: a shy, gawky girl from Queens defies overwhelming odds and becomes an overnight fashion phenomenon.
After years of being dressed by Ralph and Calvin, Perry and Bill, the women of America embraced Donna.
Building on a simple seven-piece wardrobe whose fluid lines met the much-misunderstood needs of the working woman, Donna Karan constructed a $364 million empire in less than a decade.
With her pear-shaped figure, lop-sided ponytail and harried demeanor, she was Everywoman.


Some Cable Systems Are Cutting C-Span For Other Channels
C-Span, the television channel lawmakers love the most, has become an unintended victim of the cable law passed by Congress two years ago to increase competition and lower rates.
In the nine months since the main provisions of the law took effect, C-Span and its sister channel, C-Span 2, have been cut back on cable systems serving more than four million households, and in some cases dropped altogether.
In some instances, the cuts have prompted protests from viewers accustomed to watching the antics of the Federal Government live and unedited.


Towers Investors Try Aggressive New Legal Tack
Thanks to a precedent-smashing Supreme Court decision in April, the heat has been turned up in the fiery courthouse battle being waged by aggrieved investors in the Towers Financial Corporation of New York, a bankrupt conglomerate that Federal prosecutors have charged was the vehicle by which the financier Steven Hoffenberg defrauded investors of more than $450 million between 1988 and 1993.
A sharply divided court reversed decades of practice by barring investors from filing "aiding and abetting" accusations against accountants, lawyers and other financial professionals whose clients had committed securities fraud.


3-Way Jam: Els, Roberts and Montgomerie Set for Playoff
It was a bizarre final round of the United States Open today, one that featured a questionable ruling, countless improbable bounces and one very unfortunate break.
By the time the final bogey was made on a steamy day at Oakmont Country Club, the result was -- no result.
After a tumultuous struggle for survival, a brutal war of attrition on a golf course baked hard and fast, the Open will be decided by an 18-hole playoff on Monday, beginning at 10 A.M.


Bridge
An unusual requirement of the two Generali individual tournaments played in Paris late in April was that the invited players use identical conventions.
One expert who could not remember a detail of the prescribed methods asked the director for permission to look at his own convention card.
"You may not," came the tongue-in-cheek answer.
"But you may look at your opponent's card."
In the women's division, with one Chinese player, one American and 26 Europeans, Nicola Smith of Britain won easily with a 61.21 percent score after four sessions.
The runner-up was Pyttsi Flodqvist of Sweden with 57.51 percent.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:  MONDAY  NBD Bancorp TUESDAY  ABM Inds Inc Bankers Tr NY CPC Intl Inc Oklahoma Gas &amp; Elec Co Premier Indl Corp Toro Co Upjohn Co WEDNESDAY  First Amern Finl Corp THURSDAY  Boston Edison Campbell Soup Cascade Nat Gas Corp Cyprus Amax Minerals Co 1838 Bd-Deb Trading Fd Grow Group Manor Care Inc Morton Intl Inc Pier 1 Imports Tektronix Inc Univar Corp FRIDAY  Graco Inc Pacific Telesis Gr Snap-On Tools Corp Southwestern Bell Corp


Free Concert by I Cantori
The chamber choir I Cantori is to present a free concert of works by Monteverdi, Debussy, Carter, Barber, Britten, Rorem and others on June 28 at 8 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
Mark Shapiro, the ensemble's artistic director, is to conduct.
Information: (212) 439-4758.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
G. Love Out on the Porch: Fried Chicken and Wet Guitar  CB's 313
If Vanilla Ice is the Pat Boone of hip-hop, watering down a vibrant black musical form to make it appeal to a generic pop audience, then G. Love is its Elvis Presley.
He appropriates several black styles to create a new and urgent hybrid.
On Wednesday night, G. Love, whose real name is Garrett Dutton 3d, and his band, Special Sauce, combined blues and hip-hop, updating both genres.


Liberal Is Elected President In a Tight Race in Colombia
Colombian voters elected Ernesto Samper Pizano today in the nation's tightest presidential race in 24 years.
Wth 97 percent of the ballots counted, Mr.
Samper, candidate of the Liberal Party, had a slim lead over the Andres Pastrana Arango of the Conservative Party, the elections board announced.
Mr.
Samper had 50 percent, Mr.
Pastrana had 48.4 percent, and 1.6 percent of the ballots were declared invalid.


Keeping Pace With Their Parents


From the War Room: Riley's Set for Game 7
There couldn't be a storybook ending, because these are Pat Riley's Knicks, not Michael Jordan's Bulls.
A year ago in Game 6 on Sunday night, every Chicago player touched the ball before an aging guard with worn-out knees named John Paxson squared up on the left side behind the 3-point circle, and buried the season that sometimes refuses to die.
It was a brilliant piece of basketball poetry, but there is nothing so rhythmic about the Knicks, who are always gut-wrenching, a creation of Riley, the furious competitor beneath the slicked-back hair and expensive suits.


French Socialist Leader Resigns
After a humiliating vote of no-confidence, Michel Rocard resigned today as the leader of France's Socialist Party, causing further disarray in the country's weakened and fractured left.
Mr.
Rocard announced he was stepping down after the Socialists' National Council rejected his plan to revitalize the party after its poor performance last week in elections for the European Parliament.
The Socialists gained less than 15 percent of the vote, their worst showing in two decades.


Towers Investors Try Aggressive New Legal Tack
Thanks to a precedent-smashing Supreme Court decision in April, the heat has been turned up in the fiery courthouse battle being waged by aggrieved investors in the Towers Financial Corporation of New York, a bankrupt conglomerate that Federal prosecutors have charged was the vehicle by which the financier Steven Hoffenberg defrauded investors of more than $450 million between 1988 and 1993.
A sharply divided court reversed decades of practice by barring investors from filing "aiding and abetting" accusations against accountants, lawyers and other financial professionals whose clients had committed securities fraud.


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B6-7.


Superstore Stirs Up an Old Debate on Cape Cod
On the one hand, there is Russell B. Norton, who spent the hazy afternoon on Saturday digging on a Cape Cod beach for a pack of plump quahogs and then eating some of the tasty, hard-shell clams, steamed and dipped in butter.
Sated from the feast of quahogs (pronounced in New England as "kwahg"), Mr.
Norton, the 47-year-old principal of Sandwich High School, drove with his wife and two of their three children 21 miles to a store off the Cape that sells groceries at discount prices.
"I husband my money," he said.
"I have to."


Review/Television; Disputing the View That Homosexuality Is an Illness
The sarcastically titled "One Nation Under God" tells of efforts to cure or redeem homosexuals by those who have believed or still believe that homosexuality is an ailment or a sin.
Particular attention is given to Exodus International, an organization of former homosexuals dedicated to the proposition that it is possible and desirable to move from homosexuality to heterosexuality.
Assertions of success by Exodus officials are disputed on the program.
Tonight's 90-minute report comes largely via a male couple, who left Exodus and went public as avowed homosexuals.
They tell of their past efforts to lead other homosexuals into the light of Christian heterosexuality and of their own exodus from Exodus.
That subject alone might have made for a short, sharp report, but this 90-minute offering in the "P.O.V." ("Point of View") series is more ambitious.
With the guidance of the historian Martin Duberman, the program recalls the stigma that attached to homosexuality in the 1950's and 60's and the methods used by psychologists and others to talk or shock people into sexual and social conformity.
The spirit of the time is captured by pictures of aversive therapy in action, like a jolt of electricity to discourage a man's enjoyment of a nude male body.


M.T.A. Chief Forced to Bow To the Wishes Of Politicians
Peter E. Stangl, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority chairman, has spent his career rescuing aging public transit systems from neglect and decay.
He is known for making the best of a bad situation.
But that reputation has been sorely tested in recent weeks, as Mr.
Stangl has been twice embarrassed publicly and forced to bow to the wishes of New York's two most powerful politicians, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Separate Media Unit Is Created by Ayer
Joining the ranks of agencies recognizing that many clients are choosing to buy advertising services a la carte, Ayer Inc. is spinning off its media department into a separate, autonomous company.
The new unit, called the Media Edge, is made up of the 104 media department employees of Ayer.
It will continue to serve the agency's clients like AT&amp;T and Gillette, and will seek business from smaller shops that offer clients creative services but not media planning and buying.


How a Deal Emerged
The settlement of the two-day strike on the Long Island Rail Road covers 2,341 members of the United Transportation Union - conductors, track workers, carmen, and other train and trackservice workers.
They had worked without a contract since Jan. 1, 1992.
The Federal Railray Labor Act permitted a strike after two 120-day cooling-off periods expired and two Presidential Emergency Boards failed to resolve the dispute.
JOHN T. McQUISTON


Equity and Debt Issues Set for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Agco Corp., Atlanta, 3.25 million shares. CS First Boston.


A Smart Move for New York Justice
After three decades of drift and inefficiency, New York City is moving smartly to shore up a vital function: legal assistance to defendants too poor to hire a lawyer.
The action, a disarmingly simple policy change, owes much to Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's criminal justice office and his conspicuous search for places to streamline the city budget.
The city and the Legal Aid Society, which delivers defense services under contract, have agreed to reduce sharply the flow of cases from Legal Aid to generally less reliable outside private defense lawyers.
This promises a substantial saving and the strong possibility of better justice, a rare combination.


World Economies


The Italians Are Bluer Than Blue
While Coach Jack Charlton and the Irish team were in Florida this morning, savoring victory, Coach Arrigo Sacchi and the Italians had a lot to answer for at their training center here.
Every soccer fan around the globe with a trace of Irish blood has been in ecstacy since Saturday's 1-0 triumph by Ireland over Italy.
But Italian fans have been gloomy since the 12th minute of Saturday's World Cup game at Giants Stadium, when Ray Houghton, a 32-year-old midfielder, scored for Ireland.
A Day Off for the Lads
While Sacchi and his national team, the Azzurri (the Blues), went through 40 minutes of practice here this morning, Jack and his Lads, as the Irish call their team, enjoyed a day off.


Japan Faces a Difficult Goal on Auto Parts
Figures released today suggest that Japan's auto makers will have difficulty meeting their voluntary goal of buying $19 billion of American automobile parts in the current fiscal year, industry officials said.
The Japanese manufacturers bought $15.54 billion of American parts in the fiscal year that ended in March, a gain of 14.1 percent from a year earlier, an official at the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association said today.
The year before, purchases increased 30 percent.


Cabletron Systems Inc.(CS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Majority of Vietnam Vets Enlisted
To the Editor:
As a Vietnam veteran I read "Clinton's War Story" by Frank Rich (column, June 5) with interest, especially where he writes of the "dirty little secret," that the Vietnam War was "America's most blatant class war since the Civil War."


In Light of Summer; June Intercede In the Garden of Roses
There is no hurry -- no hurry today.
No one you love is going to die.
The huddled gold roses.
The showy pink ones, bright-  pink, under a mackerel sky.


Hillary Clinton Says Veto Is Possible on Health Bill
Hillary Rodham Clinton demanded today that supporters of national health insurance stop focusing on their own particular concerns and start telling members of Congress that they want legislation with nothing short of guaranteed universal insurance coverage.
She told health care advocates that President Clinton would veto legislation that provided less than universal coverage, like the 91 percent coverage anticipated for a plan offered by Representative Jim Cooper of Tennessee and Senator Dave Durenberger of Minnesota.
That proposal requires employers to offer workers insurance but does not make them pay for it.


Blount Inc.(BLT.B,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Dance; A Chance For the Men To Step Out
George Balanchine once said that "ballet is woman," and no one ever let him forget that.
But there are Balanchine ballets in which male dancers play important and distinctive roles, beyond the job of partnering the ballerina.
One of those ballets is "Mozartiana" in its 1981 version, a rendering in dance of Tchaikovsky's "Mozartiana" suite in all its shifts of mood and pace, which the New York City Ballet presented on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
The ballerina must move from large prayerful stances, hands and head cast slightly upward, to edgily precise pure dance with frequent changes of direction.
The shifts come quicker and with less preparation for the man in the Theme et Variations or pas de deux section.
But Nikolaj Hubbe, new in the role, was a model of clarity and deftness.


Frances Corey, Top Executive In the Fashion Business, Was 91
Frances Corey, a fashion executive whose career of six decades began before the era of the flappers and took in space-age fabrics developed for astronauts, died on Thursday at her home in Beverly Hills, Calif.
She was 91.
She suffered a brief illness, said Keven Bellows of Los Angeles, a family friend.


Review/Pop; Brazilian Sings for Sensuality in a Belated Debut
Jorge Ben Jor offered a statement of purpose when he performed on Sunday afternoon at Summerstage in Central Park.
Over the relaxed, jazzy vamp of "Cowboy Jorge" from his album "23" (Tropical Storm), he proclaimed that he sang for joy and sensuality, for hope and love, and for the pantheon of Afro-Brazilian deities.
Mr.
Ben, a major songwriter and singer in Brazil since the 1960's, was making a very belated New York debut.
Through the years, Mr.
Ben has come up with his share of serpentine melodies and subtle chromatic harmonies, for example he wrote the widely recorded "Mas Que Nada." But he lives for the groove.
His repertory delves into rhythms from across Brazil, the Caribbean, the United States and Africa.
At Summerstage, he played sambas and funk, jazzy vamps and carnival marches, stoking a tropical party in Sunday's tropical heat.


Infrared Evidence Is Strongest Yet For Black Hole in Milky Way's Core
NEW infrared observations have produced much stronger evidence that a massive black hole, with a density so great that its gravity prevents the escape of light, exists near the center of the Milky Way, the solar system's home galaxy.
The results of the observations, announced last week by astronomers of the University of Arizona, added to the growing body of evidence that black holes may be common phenomena at the cores of galaxies throughout the universe.


Fish Are Jumping in Harlem Meer


The Carter Opening
Granted, it was not a masterpiece of clarity and coordination.
But former President Jimmy Carter and the Clinton Administration, which approved his trip, appear to have moved the crisis over the North Korean nuclear program back toward the negotiating table.
Mr.
Carter's personal diplomacy, conducted with North Korea's President, Kim Il Sung, may well provide a face-saving way for both sides to pull back from confrontation.
Mr.
Carter says he won Mr.
Kim's consent to freeze his nuclear program in a verifiable way while high-level talks are resumed between the United States and North Korea to resolve the nuclear issue.
If the specifics of the Korean offer are confirmed, it offers a promising route toward a deal.


Right Now, There's Still A Tomorrow
The season has come down to one game.
And both the Knicks and the Houston Rockets will feel the pressure and anticipation until the outcome is decided Wednesday night at the Summit.
For the Rockets, there was relief today that they had forced Game 7 by winning a memorable Game 6 that was decided when Hakeem Olajuwon blocked John Starks's potential game-winning 3-point jumper with two seconds to play.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about former President Jimmy Carter's visit to North Korea misidentified the person to whom he referred when he said, "He told me he was very grateful I had gone, and thought it was a very fine accomplishment." It was President Clinton, not President Kim Il Sung of North Korea.


Norstan Inc.(NRRD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Crack Down on Student Aid Abuse
The U.S.
Government spends about $20 billion a year on student aid -- and loses as much as 20 percent of it to fraud and abuse.
In 1992 Congress got tougher on waste in student aid programs, but it could undermine its own actions in a House Appropriations Committee vote today.
An amendment of the Higher Education Act eliminates schools from participation in student aid programs if more than 85 percent of their revenue comes from student aid.
The amendment, sponsored by Representative Maxine Waters of California, is aimed at for-profit schools that account for many abuses in student loan and grant programs.


International Jensen Inc.(IJIN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Graduation Day Signals Summer Is Here


Cabletron Systems Inc.(CS,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


With Jabs at M.T.A., Cuomo and Aides Defend Pact in Rail Strike
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his aides today defended the contract settlement they imposed on the management of the Long Island Rail Road to end a two-day strike, and they again criticized the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Peter E. Stangl.
They dismissed remarks by Mr.
Stangl suggesting that the settlement could mean a fare increase next year, and they chastised him for calling the agreement a "ransom."


Corrections
An entry in the listing of new equity issues in Business Day yesterday misidentified the lead underwriter for a three-million-share offering by New Plan Realty Trust.
It is Merrill Lynch, not Smith Barney.


Sports of The Times; Where Are America's Golfers?
ERNIE ELS didn't win the United States Open; Oakmont did.
But the 24-year-old South African is holding the Open's big silver trophy now, the latest embarrassing evidence that the United States no longer produces the world's best golfers.
With the emphasis on best.


Paint, Don't Paint


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.(SHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 21


CLINTON PLANNING TO SOLICIT MONEY FOR HIS LEGAL AID
The White House is planning to ask thousands of Americans to contribute up to $500 apiece to help pay the soaring legal bills of President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, Presidential aides said today.
The fund would be the first ever set up by a sitting President, and its creation would reflect the degree to which the Clintons' legal troubles in the Whitewater matter and a pending sexual harassment suit against Mr.
Clinton have proven costly financially as well as politically.


Europe's Case of Jitters Worsens
Europe's financial markets were racked by another spasm of anxiety today as stocks and bonds tumbled in value in all the major financial centers and the dollar, the linchpin of the international financial system, slid to ominously low levels.
Although Europe has seen steady signs in recent weeks that its long recession is ending, today's financial carnage left investors shaken and worried that the broad-based selloff would continue.
The turmoil also added to uncertainty in the United States, where worries at the end of last week about inflation and predictions of a weakening dollar had set off a round-the-world wave of selling that failed to subside over the weekend.


Q&amp;A
Pantry Pests
Q.
Despite cleaning my tightly closed kitchen cabinet I am still beset by moths and (shudder) worms in my cracker boxes, etc.
What are they and where can they be coming from?
Is there any solution?


Atlas of Radio Stars Releases First Segment
THE first installment of a monumental catalogue of radio-emitting stars and other celestial objects has been electronically published.
Its authors say that by using the catalogue, amateurs and students will be able to make significant scientific discoveries.
The radio sky catalogue is being prepared from observations that began last September by the Very Large Array, a Y-shaped array of 27 huge radio dish antennas mounted on railroad tracks stretching across the desert near Socorro, N.M.


Mayor's Report Card
By a 5-to-3 margin, New Yorkers approve of the performance of Rudolph W. Giuliani, and most back his stance that the police budget should be protected.
Page B1.


Caned Teen-Ager Freed Early


Editors' Note
A front-page article yesterday about consultants who advise immigrants hoping to win a special visa lottery described the services of Ola Mata-Mazel, whose office nameplate describes her as a diplomat.
Because the lottery winners will be selected at random, the article raised questions about whether services like hers were necessary and challenged her contention of having "secrets" that would improve an immigrant's chances of selection.


Co-op Board Files Suit Against Management Company
In the latest fallout from a wide-ranging real-estate corruption scandal, the board of an East Side cooperative has filed a civil lawsuit in Federal District Court in Manhattan claiming that "hundreds" of residents were cheated out of "tens of millions of dollars" by one of the city's most prominent management companies.
The class action suit, filed on Thursday against Brown Harris Stevens, came one day after more than 80 New York real-estate managers and management companies were charged or pleaded guilty in connection with bribery in the maintenance of some of New York City's most prestigious cooperative and condominium apartment buildings.


Boston's One Swing Is the One He Wanted
Kirby Puckett and Dave Winfield are superstars whose plaques will be in Cooperstown after they retire.
Daryl Boston is a reserve player who will be just another visitor when he is in Cooperstown.
But Boston hit the biggest homer of the three last night to help catapult the Yankees to a dramatic 7-5 victory over the Minnesota Twins at Yankee Stadium.
With the Yankees trailing by 5-4 in the bottom of the eighth, runners on first and third and Minnesota's closer, Rick Aguilera, fresh in the game, Boston stepped up as a pinch-hitter and powered the first pitch into the right-field seats for a stunning three-run homer.
Instead of losing because Puckett and Winfield homered off Jim Abbott during a three-run sixth inning, the Yankees won because Boston surprised Aguilera with precise power and splendid timing.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Betsy Gotbaum's appointment as executive director of the New-York Historical Society omitted the identity and surname of an officer who described the coming year's deficit budget, while misspelling his given name.
He was the society's chairman; as noted later in the article, his name is Minor H. Warner.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A falling dollar put new pressure on the Federal Reserve to consider a fifth interest rate increase this year.
Though Fed officials were unwilling to say so publicly, they have signaled a resolve to keep the dollar from slumping by raising short-term rates again -- even if the American economy suffers.  [ Page A1. ]


Robert Currie Memorial
A memorial service for Robert Currie, an interior designer who also designed sets for television, will be held at 6 P.M. tomorrow in the amphitheater of the Fashion Institute of Technology, Seventh Avenue at 27th Street.
Mr.
Currie died on June 30, 1993.


Of Princes, Paupers And Balance Afield
Among other reasons, the owners want to impose a salary cap on their players in the name of competitive balance.
Eighteen years ago Bowie Kuhn, then the commissioner, loudly issued management's dire warning that free agency would doom competitive balance.
What exactly is competitive balance?
Does it mean parity, where every team is a .500 team and everyone suffers a severe case of boredom?
Does it mean that one team doesn't dominate year after year the way the Yankees did from 1936 through 1964, when they won 22 pennants in 29 seasons?
Or does it mean a circumstance where any team has a chance to win in any given season, as in the past 14 seasons, in which 23 of the 26 pre-expansion teams won division titles.


Executive Changes
ABBEY HEALTHCARE GROUP INC., Costa Mesa, Calif., named Jerilyn P. Asher president and Steven T. Plochocki chief operating officer.
COMSHARE INC., Ann Arbor, Mich., a software maker, named Kathryn A. Jehle senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Yuri M. Nagibin, 74; Russian Who Wrote Lyrical Short Stories
Yuri Markovich Nagibin, the author of understated, lyrical short stories in the tradition of Turgenev, Chekhov and Bunin, died on Friday at his home in Moscow.
He was 74.
The Associated Press reported that the cause was heart failure.


Dueling Magazine Covers: A Police Photo vs. a 'Photo-Illustration'
One mug shot, two magazine covers.
O.
J.
Simpson's photograph, taken by the Los Angeles Police Department when he was booked on Saturday, was on the cover of Time and Newsweek magazines this week.


Accounts
*
National Information Bureau Ltd., Princeton, N.J., to Gillespie, Princeton, for its national advertising, direct response, relationship marketing and public relations accounts.
There was no previous agency.
Billings are estimated to exceed $2 million. *
Chicago Wolves, an International Hockey League expansion team scheduled to begin play in the 1994-95 season, to Cramer-Krasselt, Chicago, to handle the creative portion of its advertising account and its public relations.
Billings were not disclosed.


Methode Electronics Inc.(METHB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Africa Tries Democracy, Finding Hope and Peril
Despite economic collapse, countries are proclaiming democracy throughout Africa.
With a raft of elections and sometimes a multitude of parties, their governments are beginning to tolerate a once forbidden sound -- that of the political opponent.
Already the drive for political rights south of the Sahara has consigned the archetypal autocrat -- the "president for life" who rules with a fly whisk and a squadron of secret police -- to the same graveyard as apartheid, African socialism and the ships that brought the first European colonizers 500 years ago.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.(SHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 21


Poll Shows Support for Giuliani on Not Cutting Police Budget
As Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani negotiates a budget with the City Council, a New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll shows that a solid majority of New Yorkers supports his stance that the Police Department should be spared from the spending cuts that he is demanding of other agencies.
Reflecting their belief that crime is by far the most pressing problem that the Mayor should concentrate on, two out of three of those polled said Mr.
Giuliani should continue to insulate the Police Department from personnel cuts and other economies that critics in the Council and elsewhere have said would help close the city budget gap without gutting other agencies.
Women were most adamant in their support for police spending.


Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc.(CKR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 23


INSIDE
A Fusion Dream Machine
A proposed $1 billion fusion machine could heat a tiny fuel pellet to 200 million degrees.
If approved, it could also save jobs for American weapons scientists.
Science Times, page C1.
Cuomo Defends L.I.R.R.
Deal
The Governor defended the settlement that ended a two-day Long Island Rail Road strike, and criticized the chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Page B1.
Allies Seek Bosnia Pact
The United States, Russia and the European Union plan to endorse a territorial pact for Bosnia and then to press both sides to accept it.
Page A3.
Free Trade?
Not Always
Business executives on both sides of the U.S.-Mexico border who expected to benefit from the North American Free Trade Agreement say it is fraught with costs.
Page D1.
An Extra Round, and More
After an 18-hole playoff with Loren Roberts and Colin Montgomerie, Ernie Els beat Roberts in sudden death to win the U.S.
Open.
Page B11.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sunday about Allied soldiers who marched in Berlin misidentified the boulevard shown, with the Brandenburg Gate in the background.
It was the Strasse des 17 Juni, not Unter den Linden.


1-2 Kick: Brazil Sambas to Own Beat
The samba drums never stopped beating today, nor did the Brazilian team lose for a second its jubilant, fluid rhythm in dominating Russia, 2-0, in its World Cup opener.
There is no way to overstate the control that Brazil, a pre-tournament favorite, demonstrated in this match with its intricate passing, relentless scoring threats and predatory defense.
Two goals could have easily become eight.
But on a majestic, breezy afternoon at Stanford Stadium, a half-volley by Romario, the arrogant striker, and a penalty kick by Rai, the disparaged midfielder, were more than sufficient.


Emergency Medical Service Workers Mourn a Colleague


Topics of The Times; Hot Enough? Apparently.
Perhaps in the interest of a full-employment economy, the National Weather Service has enlisted in the effort by giving television weatherpeople a new piece of quasi-information to pass along.
Welcome to the world of "apparent temperature," the hot-weather counterpart of the "wind-chill factor," whose mere recitation by TV weatherfolk makes cold weather feel even more frigid.


Hunt Mfg. Co.(HUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Market Place; Buy I.B.M., some analysts say. Don't buy it, say others.
ANYONE wondering how the brief tenure of Louis V. Gerstner Jr. as I.B.M.'s chairman and chief executive is being viewed on Wall Street need only look at the company's share price.
A few months after Mr.
Gerstner took over in April 1993, I.B.M. stock plunged to a low of 41.
Since then, however, the price has risen almost 50 percent, closing yesterday at 61 5/8, down 3/4, on the New York Stock Exchange.
That wins Mr.
Gerstner a fair measure of respect, but he still has a long way to go.
While many strategists and analysts are touting I.B.M. as a buy, a number of others have cooled their ardor for the company, believing that the stock cannot maintain its current growth.


A Strike Wisely Ended
The Long Island Rail Road strike was settled in the context of a political year.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York, who pressed for a quick settlement, seeks re-election to a fourth term and needs to avoid offending important constituencies -- like labor unions and Long Island voters.
Similarly, President Clinton and the Democrats who control Congress, sensitive to the November elections nationwide, appeared unwilling to invoke Federal law to stop the strike.
In those circumstances, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's reluctant agreement to higher wages with no gains in productivity may prove wiser than taking an open-ended strike.
The new contract expires at the end of December, three years after the old contract expired.
By then the election pressure will be past, and elected officials will be able to deal with the unions in a more muscular way.


Forget Finesse, Remember a Name: Els Wins Open
It isn't often that a golfer can drive his ball all over the state of Pennsylvania and still win the United States Open.
Then again, it isn't often that a golfer like Ernie Els comes along.
Els, 24 years old and brimming with youthful power and aplomb, did the seemingly impossible today in a three-way playoff for the 94th United States Open at Oakmont Country Club.
The big South African muscled his way to a title that usually rewards finesse, ripping his way out of the rough and putting a foreign grip on the Open trophy for the first time since 1981.


Guilty Plea In a Killing In a Mob Case
A supermarket executive reputed to be a top Mafia figure pleaded guilty yesterday to conspiring to murder a man whose bullet-riddled body was found in a World Trade Center garage four years ago.
Pasquale Conte, 69, who prosecutors say is a powerful captain in the crime group headed by the imprisoned John Gotti, entered his plea in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Methode Electronics Inc.(METHB,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Guideposts For Hikers On Internet Pathways
THE Internet began life 25 years ago as an exclusive club, the Arpanet, for military research people.
Now, with perhaps 20 million individuals in it worldwide, the Internet is a municipal golf course on a summer Sunday, with players yelling "fore.ac.gla" all over the place.
So how do you join the club?
One way is to connect through your company or college, if they are connected.
Another way is to pay one of the commercial outfits that serve as gateways to the infobahn.
Still another is to search bookshelves.


Big Investors Pressing Philip Morris
As the newly appointed leaders of the Philip Morris Companies affirmed their commitment to all the company's businesses, some of the concern's biggest investors expressed unhappiness yesterday with its recent decision not to split its cigarette business from its other operations.
These investors, led by New York City's pension fund, are trying to force the company to meet with them soon to discuss "how to create a fire wall around tobacco," said Jon Lukomnik, the deputy comptroller in charge of the city's pension fund, which owns 5.7 million Philip Morris shares.


Review/Fashion; Hemlines and Knees To Winter Together
Hemlines that graze, bisect or cover the knees may supplant the flippy flaring thigh-high skating skirts as the fashionable length by the end of this year.
The knee-length skirt, which dominated Calvin Klein's fall collection, shows up significantly in the resort collection of CK, his moderate-price line.


Books of The Times; Border Crossings, Real and Symbolic
The Crossing  The Border Trilogy, Volume II  By Cormac McCarthy  426 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Iceman's Stone Age Outfit Offers Clues to a Culture
STILL no one knows who he was or what he was doing high in the Tyrolean Alps that day some 5,300 years ago, the day he died.
No one can be sure of the quirks of nature that somehow mummified the corpse, then entombed it in a glacier and preserved it and his possessions so long in a semblance of a life only lately departed.
Of one thing scientists are now certain about the naturally mummified Alpine Iceman, whom hikers discovered in September 1991 in the melting ice on the Austrian-Italian border at an elevation of 10,530 feet.
In the first genetic analysis of the body, reported last week, they determined that he was European born and bred, closely related to modern northern and Alpine Europeans.


Never Doubt That Abuse of Children Is Real
To the Editor:
"When It All Comes Back" (Op-Ed, June 8) by Karen Hopenwasser basically misrepresents those of us who believe that in addition to the widespread phenomenon of bona fide child sex abuse there is a parallel phenomenon, namely, people are being convinced by their therapists to believe that they were sexually abused when there is absolutely no good reason to believe that they were.
She states: "The public has been led to believe that much recovered memory is simply false." She does not state exactly who the people are who have allegedly duped the public.


Rent Board Sets Increase Of 2 Percent
The New York City Rent Guidelines Board last night granted the smallest increase for rent-stabilized apartments in the board's 25-year history.
The board voted to allow landlords an increase of 2 percent on one-year leases and 4 percent on two-year leases of some 800,000 rent-stabilized apartments.


Applied Power Inc.(APW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Trisha Brown Receives Dance Award
Trisha Brown received the 14th annual Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award on Sunday night in Page Auditorium at Duke University here.
This $25,000 award honors lifetime achievement in dance and is believed to be the largest single award in dance.
Ms.
Brown, a choreographer known for her ability to invest rigorous formal structures with wit and lyricism, was presented the award by the artist Robert Rauschenberg, who has designed several of her productions over the years.


Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc.(CKR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 23


When the Trade Winds Fill a Dhow's Sail
To the Editor:
Re your Djibouti Journal, "By Ancient, Languorous Boat to a Frightening City" (news article, June 3), on dhows sailing to Aden, site of Yemeni separatist revolution:


Rite Aid Corp.(RAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Prices Rebound From Day's Lows
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, rebounding from their lows of the day to trim earlier losses attributed to the weak dollar.
A steep drop in commodity prices that eased investor fears about inflation brought the market back.
With no economic news yesterday, the market was also looking at a large supply of new Treasury issues this week, which added some anxiety.
The supply is coming as traders adjust positions before the quarter ends.


Fashion Bug Selects Grace &amp; Rothschild
Fashion Bug, a women's clothing manufacturer and retailer, said yesterday that it had awarded its account to Grace &amp; Rothschild of New York.
Though the company, based in Salem, Pa., would not discuss billings, Adweek estimated them at $10 million.


Norstan Inc.(NRRD,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Dow Drops 34.88 After the Dollar Tumbles
The stock market fell sharply yesterday for the second consecutive session, after a steep drop in the dollar and a selloff in European stocks.
The dollar tumbled to an eight-month low against the German mark.
A weak dollar typically depresses the price of stocks in this country because of expected cost and price increases.


Doubleday Unit Chief
Markus Wilhelm, president of Doubleday Book and Music Clubs Inc., has been promoted to chief executive.
The promotion, which is to take effect on July 1, was announced yesterday by Frank Woessner, president of the Bertelsmann Book Group A.G., the book and music club's parent company.
Mr.
Wilhelm, 37, replaces Gerhard Greiner, who is to work as an adviser to the book group until his retirement next year.
The Doubleday Book and Music Clubs use direct mail to sell books to millions of customers in North America who belong to the Literary Guild, the Doubleday Book Club and eight specialty clubs.


Arafat Aide Puts Off a Delicate Trip to Jerusalem
For those interested in Yasir Arafat's travel plans, which means just about everyone here, a nonevent today gave some insights into how hard he may press Israeli leaders whenever he makes his much-awaited journey to the Gaza Strip and Jericho.
A looming question -- aside from the obvious one of when the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization plans to show up -- is whether he will insist on also going to Jerusalem to pray at Al Aksa mosque, one of Islam's holiest shrines.


Court Backs Tax Method Of California
California dodged a potentially costly constitutional bullet today when the Supreme Court upheld the state's method of taxing the California income of foreign-based multinational corporations.
California could have faced a $4 billion liability for tax refunds had the Justices not rejected a British bank's challenge to the corporate accounting system the state used for years before effectively abandoning it five months ago.


Dr. John Romano, 85, Is Dead; Trained Physicians in Psychiatry
Dr.
John Romano, an influential voice in American psychiatry and medicine who taught generations of aspiring physicians, died on Sunday at Strong Memorial Hospital in Rochester, N.Y.
He was 85 and lived in suburban Brighton.
The cause was a stroke, according to the University of Rochester Medical Center.


Wimbledon Starts, and the Stars Begin to Shine
Under a chilly sky that presented an impressionist's assortment of grays and made life uncomfortable for those shirt-sleeved spectators hoping for a summery start, Wimbledon got under way this afternoon by presenting an assortment of former champions, all of whom escaped the danger of a first-round upset.
The defending champion Pete Sampras, his predecessor Andre Agassi, the three-time champion Boris Becker, the two-time champion Stefan Edberg, and the nine-time champion Martina Navratilova -- this is her 22d and final Wimbledon campaign -- all advanced to the second round without trauma.


Eli Lilly Will Spin Off Medical Units
Eli Lilly &amp; Company, which is slimming down to its core pharmaceutical business, said yesterday that it would spin off five units that made medical devices to a new company, the Guidant Corporation.
It plans to sell 20 percent of the Guidant shares in a public offering later in 1994.
The rest would be distributed to Lilly shareholders next year.


Maradona Prepares His Way
Diego Maradona has been trying to get in shape for the World Cup and the heat and humidity that goes with it.
People around the Argentine star have been saying he has been practicing hard toward that goal.
But on the eve of his first game in his third World Cup, Maradona hardly fit the description of someone getting fit.
He spent most of his time talking to people with microphones and notebooks on the sideline while his teammates were working in preparation for today's game with Greece at Foxboro, Mass.


Corrections
An article on Friday about an investment in Computer Marketplace that earned Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato $37,125 in one day of trading described the investment incorrectly.
The initial public offering consisted of units of one share of stock and two warrants, which Mr.
D'Amato bought for $4 a unit and sold for $12.25 a unit; the offering was not just stock.
In addition, the article described the subsequent price of Computer Marketplace shares incorrectly.
Since Mr.
D'Amato's investment, the stock has traded at a low of $6 a share, not $1 a share.


Charlottetown Journal; Keep Your Bridge! They'll Keep Their Distance
They have argued about it for at least a century -- whether there should be a bridge or tunnel between this verdant crescent-shaped island province and mainland Canada.
Some said a "fixed link" was needed to spur economic growth and create jobs; others said it would damage a delicate ecology and destroy the idyllic "island way of life."


Corrections
An article in Styles of The Times on Sunday about the decline of the barbershop shave misstated the location of the shop where Franco Lombardi works.
It is at the Harvard Club, not the Yale Club.


Clinton Is Hopeful Yet Cautious About Carter's North Korea Trip
President Clinton said today that he welcomed "hopeful signs" that a clash over North Korea's nuclear weapons program could be averted.
But he maintained an air of skepticism about the pledges former President Jimmy Carter won from the North.
Mr.
Clinton's comments were his first on the matter since Mr.
Carter returned from his visit to the Korean peninsula, and they reflected an insistence by the Administration that the Communist Government do more to demonstrate its willingness to halt its nuclear program.


Dollar's Slump May Push Fed To Raise Rates
The continued fall of the dollar in international currency markets today put new pressure on the Federal Reserve to consider a fifth interest rate increase this year, as stock markets dropped sharply around the world.
Even though Federal Reserve officials were unwilling to say so publicly today, they have privately signaled this spring their willingness to stop any steep slumps in the dollar's value by raising short-term interest rates again -- even if that further slows the pace of American economic growth.


Rite Aid Corp.(RAD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Gay Officers Get Their Turn to Present a Heritage Exhibit
Every few months, a Police Department fraternal organization sets up an exhibit at One Police Plaza to call attention to its members' heritage and to take note of their accomplishments.
Irish, Italian, Hispanic, Polish, Asian, black and Jewish officers -- all have celebrated themselves through photographs, artwork and artifacts.
Now, for the first time in the New York Police Department's history, gay officers will have their turn.


Chess
The winners of the quarterfinals to select a world title challenger for Gary Kasparov, sponsored by the Professional Chess Association and Intel, are Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn, Viswanathan Anand of India, and Nigel Short and Michael Adams of England.
Kamsky was the first to finish, walking away with his eight-game match against Vladimir Kramnik of Russia, 4 1/2 to 1 1/2.
Anand, requiring seven games to defeat Oleg Romanishin of Ukraine 5 to 2, was next, while Short and Adams went the distance to 4-to-4 ties against Boris Gulko of Fair Lawn, N.J., and Sergei Tiviakov of Russia, respectively, and then won their speeded-up tiebreak games on Saturday in Trump Tower in Manhattan.


The Third Man: Where's Blackman?
The interview session begins, and the crowd immediately forms around Derek Harper in the far corner of the Summit floor.
From his station by the runway leading to the locker rooms, Rolando Blackman can't get so much as a glimpse of Harper's face.
There is no mad rush to get at Blackman, though.
One reporter stands to his left, another holds a small tape recorder up near his mouth.
The first question is what Blackman thinks of Harper's chances to be most valuable player if the Knicks beat the Houston Rockets to win the championship here tomorrow night.


Warming Moves Plants Up Peaks, Threatening Extinction
PLANT species living high in the Alps are climbing farther up their summits to escape the heat of a warming climate, but they risk going extinct when they run out of mountain, a study has found.
While climate modelers and theoreticians have long predicted migrations of mountain plants upward into cooler zones, researchers say that this is the first comprehensive study to document such wholesale movement of plants.


Music Notes
New From Mendelssohn
A reconstructed Third Piano Concerto by Felix Mendelssohn is about to have its first professional performance and its debut recording.
Sayard Stone will conduct the Connecticut Chamber Orchestra and Helene Wickett, pianist, in the premiere of the work at the opening of a new arts center in Cuenca, Spain, on July 2, the first stop in the group's tour of the country.
Mr.
Stone will also record the work in August with the English Chamber Orchestra and Jennifer Eley.
The concerto, for which Mendelssohn completed two movements before abandoning it in 1844, is in E minor, the same key as his Violin Concerto, with which it is said to have some qualities in common.
The piece was uncovered by R. Larry Todd, who found it in an uncatalogued collection of miscellaneous fragments at the Bodleian Library, at Oxford, in the late 1970's.


Ogilvy Quits Review For Smith Barney
Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York said yesterday that it would withdraw from a review on its Smith Barney account that began in February.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $20 million.
Nora Slattery, a spokeswoman at Ogilvy New York, confirmed a report of the withdrawal this week in Adweek, adding that the decision was made so the agency could focus on its new I.B.M. account, with billings of $400 million to $500 million.
The account was consolidated at Ogilvy New York in July when Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, which had used the agency since 1979, merged with Shearson Lehman Brothers, which had been at Ayer Inc.


Hunt Mfg. Co.(HUN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


METRO DIGEST
TOUGHER LAWS ASKED ON JUVENILE CRIME
A commission appointed by Governor Cuomo to study the problem of rising violence by young offenders urged changes in virtually all phases of the state's juvenile justice system, including tougher penalties for young criminals.
A1.


American Greetings Corp.(AGREA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


29 Haitians, Rejected, Return Home
The gleaming white Coast Guard cutter Vindicator pulled into the harbor here today, barely visible through a thick haze, and delivered its cargo of 29 Haitian boat people.
The 29, who included two pregnant women and a baby, were the first to be returned since American officials began interviewing Haitian boat people to determine whether they should be sent back or granted refugee status because of a "well-founded fear of persecution" at home.


Blount Inc.(BLT.B,A) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Free Trade With Mexico? Not for All
A free trade agreement, politicians proudly called it.
The North American Free Trade Agreement.
Since it took effect on Jan. 1, trade between Mexico and the United States has set records.
But, United States meatpackers want to know, why are the Mexicans preparing to turn what had been snappy, routine inspections of their shipments into lengthy ordeals?


Review/Dance; Revealing the Universal Amid Specifics
Those familiar with Bill T. Jones as performer and choreographer would not have been surprised on Sunday by his explanation, during a solo, of why he became a dancer.
"I started dancing because I thought I wouldn't be able to do anything beautiful," he said, adding that "19-year-old black boys" like himself were not supposed to be concerned with atomic submarines.
"Beauty" is what he was after and, as Mr.
Jones pronounced the word, the painted white disks behind him turned red.
Yes, Bill is beautiful, as persuasive as he is hyperbolic, an eloquent dancer whose every gesture suggests a heightened truth.


Ex-Perot Supporters Endorse Republicans Against Cuomo
A group of disaffected Ross Perot supporters gave its endorsement yesterday to Republican candidates for governor and United States senator, potentially offering voters another vehicle to express discontent with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo in November.
The group, United We Stand, America, New York, which was formed by Perot supporters who later disassociated themselves from his 1992 Presidential campaign, announced at a Manhattan news conference that it would back State Senator George E. Pataki for governor and Bernadette Castro for senator.
It did not endorse candidates in other statewide races.


Louganis Still Performs Like Gold Both Off the Board and on the Mike
Greg Louganis, the legendary diver and two-time Olympic gold medalist, gave a flawless exhibition last night at the Gay Games in New York City, where earlier this week he publicly acknowledged for the first time that he is gay.
Louganis, who dominated the sport for more than a decade and won gold medals in both platform and springboard diving in the 1984 and 1988 Olympics, stood on a 3-meter board at Asphalt Green in Manhattan, grinned broadly, waved and accepted with a jittery grace a standing ovation from nearly 700 people.


Ripples of L.I.R.R. Pact Not Likely to Reach City
Even though the Long Island Rail Road failed to win changes in employees' work rules, transit and municipal officials said yesterday that they would continue to press for such concessions in other labor negotiations.
Labor accords on the Long Island line have seldom had much impact on New York City's labor negotiations, officials said, or on contract talks for the city's bus and subway workers.
By contrast, they predicted, the settlement of the two-day railroad strike Saturday night will likely influence the stalled talks between the Metro-North Commuter Railroad and its employees.


State Senate Seat Is Sought by Abate
Catherine M. Abate, the former City Correction Commissioner, yesterday announced her candidacy for the State Senate seat currently held by the Democrat Manfred Ohrenstein, the Senate minority leader who is retiring at the end of this year.
At a news conference on the steps of City Hall, Ms.
Abate, a Democrat who also served as Commissioner of Probation under former Mayor David N. Dinkins, said she was running "to be a vigorous and strong spokesperson for reproductive rights, for getting violence off of our streets, for quality health care and education and jobs."


Dutch Narrowly Escape Hard-Charging Saudis
In a highly entertaining game that was part horror show, part David-and-Goliath story and ended with an O. Henry twist, the Netherlands defeated Saudi Arabia, 2-1, tonight before more than 50,000 fans at R.F.K.
Stadium.
The horror for the vastly favored Dutch came when the Saudis scored the first goal, and played as if they could make it hold up in this Group F World Cup opener.
After the Netherlands tied the score on Wim Jonk's line-drive goal just six minutes into the second half, it still had the makings of an underdog's victory tale.
The Saudis, after all, were making their first appearance in the World Cup, and a tie would have been glorious for them and for their biggest fan, Prince Bandar, Ambassador to the United States and a nephew of King Fahd.


Cobra Golf
Cobra Golf Inc., the manufacturer of the King Cobra line of oversized golf clubs, continued to show strength last week before selling off on Friday and yesterday in the sharp market decline.
The company's sales and earnings have been rising sharply as demand for its premium-priced clubs continues to be strong.


Patterns
Call It Reconstruction
"Do not bother me with your politics," the German painter Otto Dix once said when asked to join the Communist Party.
"I would rather go to a whorehouse."


A Title In Houston Is Mission Possible
The longer he lives in this city, and it goes back two decades now, the more Rudy Tomjanovich notices the logos of the Los Angeles Raiders, the Detroit Pistons, the Chicago White Sox, worn by the sports fans of Houston.
"It bothers me, seeing the jerseys from other teams," Tomjanovich said today as he and the Houston Rockets prepared for the seventh and final game of the National Basketball Association championships, against the Knicks.
"I want people to wear our jerseys, for people to say, 'That's our team.' We're there now."


European Style Proves Suitable
Opening weekend of the 15th World Cup came and went without the gush of goals organizers had hoped for, but with enough exciting play and near-goals to more than satisfy the sport's universalist fans.
For fans of Latin-style soccer, though, it was a disaster.
Of the five games that ended with a winner (three were ties) in the tournament's first three days, all five featured a European-style team defeating a Latin-style team.


2 Men Are Shot to Death and a 3d Is Wounded in Attack at Bronx Apartment
A man who had moonlighted as a disk jockey at a birthday party and two friends helping him carry his equipment into his Bronx apartment were shot in the head by four men who ambushed them early yesterday, the police said.
The ambushers forced their way into the disk jockey's apartment and killed him and one of his friends.
A third victim clung to life in a hospital.


Cuomo Seeks Sterner Laws For Juveniles
A commission appointed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to study the problem of rising violence by young offenders yesterday urged changes in virtually all phases of the state's juvenile justice system, including tougher penalties for youthful criminals.
The panel also recommended a number of changes to prevent young offenders from slipping through the cracks of the legal system.
It called for fingerprinting of all juveniles charged with serious crimes, which is done only in some cases now, and for wider access by probation and court officials to records of young offenders, which now are often sealed.


Topics of The Times; More Skaters, More Injuries
In-line skating is fun, hip, social and non-discriminatory.
Just about anyone can do it.
But is it safe?
Earlier this month the Consumer Product Safety Commission said maybe not.
The commission also said it was not the skates but carelessness that caused injury.
The Product Safety Commission forecasts 83,000 emergency-room cases this year from skating injuries, more than double last year's figure.
Sixty percent will be children under age 15.
Wrist injuries are the most common, followed by lower arm, leg and head injuries.
What makes in-line skating (or Rollerblading, from the name of a popular brand) dangerous is failure to wear protective gear, lack of instruction and possibly what the commission calls "high-risk behavior," or what daredevils call hot-dogging.


White House Offers First Grants In Its Youth Volunteer Program
The Clinton Administration has named the first programs to participate in Americorps, a "domestic peace corps" in which young Americans will receive educational grants in exchange for their national service work.
The first wave of grants, totaling $46 million, will pay for about 7,000 corps members working in education, public safety, human needs (health and homelessness) and the environment.


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries(DWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Supreme Court to Decide if States Can Set Term Limits for Congress
Moving quickly to resolve a constitutional debate with high political stakes, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether states can limit the terms that members of Congress may serve.
The Justices will hear an appeal from a decision of the Arkansas Supreme Court, which ruled in March that a term-limits amendment that the state's voters added to the Arkansas Constitution in a 1992 referendum violated the Federal Constitution, which lays out the qualifications for Federal lawmakers.


Clarcor Inc.(CLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


CHRONICLE
Uptown, TINA RAMIREZ, the founder and artistic director of Ballet Hispanico, has something to cheer about, too.
The mortgage on the building that houses the dance company and its school, at 167 West 89th Street, has been paid, and Ms.
Ramirez plans to burn a replica of the document at a party tonight.
The company purchased the four-story building in 1978 and received a city-financed mortgage in 1984.


Lotus Says Profit Will Disappoint
The Lotus Development Corporation stunned Wall Street analysts yesterday by announcing that its financial results for the current fiscal quarter would not meet previous estimates.
Though the company made its announcement after the stock market closed, Lotus stock plunged $8.875 a share in after-hours trading, to $42.50, as institutional investors reacted sharply to the news.
Earlier, the stock closed at $51.375 in Nasdaq trading, down 25 cents.


Sports of The Times; Who Wants the Title? Who Deserves It?
COACHES always talk about victory going to the team that "wants it more." But what happens when two teams of equal strength, equal desire -- and who are equally hungry for victory -- meet in the final game of a close series?
We're about to find out.
After a nine-month climb up the steepest of mountains, the Houston Rockets and New York Knicks will play for the National Basketball Association championship.
The hopes, aspirations and even the pride of two cities has come down to a seventh and deciding game between two teams who have weathered criticism and earned grudging, but new-found respect.
Houston has proven to be a lot tougher physically than everyone thought; the Knicks a more ingenious team than many imagined.


Former Philip Morris Chief Leaves Name-Brand Legacy
Whatever happens to Michael A. Miles after his unexpected resignation as the chairman and chief executive of the Philip Morris Companies, one huge gamble he made will continue to fundamentally reshape American consumer-product marketing.
Mr.
Miles may be no Julius Caesar, but there was widespread agreement yesterday that his most surprising decision will live on after him rather than be interred with his Philip Morris career.
That was, of course, his move on Friday, April 2, 1993, to sharply cut the price of the company's flagship cigarette brand, Marlboro, to stem the loss of sales to cheaper competitors.


Unconventional Methods Lead to Elusive Blood-Cell Hormone
IT was a race with stakes as high as they get in the beleaguered biotechnology industry.
The clue was there to find an elusive blood-cell hormone, and the prize for the company that got it first could be a patent for a billion-dollar-a-year drug.
The many losers would get nothing.
And the trick to finding the hormone would be to use methods that had never before succeeded in molecular biology.
Last week, the race seemed to be neck and neck.
Teams for two biotechnology companies, reporting separately in the British science journal Nature, described how they had managed to isolate the hormone, thrombopoietin, which sets off the production of blood-clotting cells.


Bouts of Poetry (the Stress Is on Beat)
In the left corner of the ring was the 5-foot, 6-inch, 150-pound defending champion, Simon Ortiz; in the right corner, the 6-foot, 2-inch, 250-pound challenger, Quincy Troupe.
It might seem, at first glance, that the slight Mr.
Ortiz would have little chance of making it past the first round.
But he was on home turf, with cheering supporters at ringside.
Then, the bell rang.
Mr.
Ortiz stepped forward, took a deep breath -- and recited a poem.


Critic's Notebook; Orchestra League Peers Into Its Future
"Celebrate Excellence," was the declaration on the banners and program books at the four-day national conference of the American Symphony Orchestra League here.
And 1,700 representatives of 299 orchestras gathered to mourn its absence, chart its costs, debate its relevance and catalogue its virtues.
These annual meetings have, in recent years, become a chronicle of a field in crisis, and this one was no exception.
Two years ago, the league -- the national organization serving orchestras -- presented a report documenting the causes of failing orchestras, offering explanations for dwindling audiences and drawing attention to increasing racial pressures against all-white orchestras in largely black cities.
The statistics were sobering (though there are some who still disagree with the report's analyses and apocalyptic tone).
Last year, a sweeping series of proposals were made in a study called "Americanizing the American Orchestra." That report became the most controversial document in the history of the orchestra.


Core Industries(CRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Versatile First Ladies
To the Editor:
Your June 15 report on Hillary Rodham Clinton's telling a lunch audience that she once looked into joining the Marines strikes an oddly reductionist note.
You deplore Mrs.
Clinton's "intriguing shape-shifting." This is the mind-set of the 1950's, when a wife and mother was assumed to have a single approved identity -- housewife.
Are we still, at this stage in the modern phase of feminism, to define a grown woman by one role only, and decry her ability to shift roles according to circumstances?


By Design; Dresses of Summer
The dress has made a major fashion comeback, and not a nanosecond too soon.
It's the coolest thing to wear on a hot summer day and makes getting dressed blessedly simple.
The only accessories required are bare legs and sandals.
Henri Bendel has a good selection, including Jill Stuart's seersucker slip dress with blue or gray stripes ($135) and Cynthia Rowley's minichecked slip dresses in crinkled rayon with their own white T-shirts ($175).


Flaws Found in Insuring Safety of Nuclear Bomb Plants
The ability of the Energy Department to identify nuclear safety problems at its bomb plants and bring them to the attention of top officials was significantly reduced by a reorganization last year, Congressional investigators have reported.
The department contends that the reorganization under Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary made operations more efficient and created a more cooperative atmosphere.
But a report by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, said the reorganization had ended the arms-length, independent position of internal safety regulators.


Clarcor Inc.(CLC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Never Doubt That Abuse of Children Is Real; Rationing Therapy
To the Editor:
Karen Hopenwasser, in her sensitive "When It All Comes Back" (Op-Ed, June 8), about a case of recovered memory, worries if "a course of therapy like this could happen today." The cause of her worry is the doubt being raised about the validity of recovered memories.


On My Mind; Fresh Air for America
In Washington, some members of Congress have decided to remain faithful to themselves, their concept of what America means and their special constituency.
They bring fresh air to America.
For no political gain and at some risk, they have chosen to be constant to the hounded and battered constituency they selected for themselves -- the prisoners in the torture cells of China and Tibet and all the other political and religious victims of Beijing.


Review/Television; Looking at Movies As Reflections of Life
American Movie Classics, a cable service of Rainbow Programming Holdings, calls itself "television's only all-classic Hollywood movie network." Clever ads on network television are currently assuring viewers, in the style of an old black-and-white western, that AMC does not countenance coloring or commercial breaks.
But, of course, AMC is keenly interested in repackaging.
So a series of what it calls original specials have been using clips from the AMC lineup of Hollywood classics to illustrate documentaries on a single theme.
The first and still best was "Street Scenes: New York on Film." More recently there was "All Aboard! Riding the Rails of American Film." Tonight it's "Homeward Bound," a look at the American family as depicted by Hollywood over several decades.


Laotians' Arrest in Killing Bares a Generation Gap
Klaus and Gisela Pfleger, a retired German couple on vacation, were photographing spring flowers on a scenic hillside in May when three young men walked up to them, shot them in the head and drove away with Mrs.
Pfleger's purse.
The attack, which killed Mrs.
Pfleger and left her husband seriously injured, was the sort of gratuitous brutality that has become frighteningly common in Southern California among gangs, carjackers and thrill killers.
But in this case, the police arrested three teen-agers whose backgrounds bewildered them.


American Greetings Corp.(AGREA,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Dash of High Drama Needed in Soccer Booth
What did I learn from my weekend viewing of four World Cup games?
1. I can fit nearly all four on one videotape.


Japan Gives U.S. Cars a 2d Look
After years of being derided as overpriced, defect-prone gas guzzlers, something unexpected is happening to American cars in Japan.
They are starting to win some consumer acceptance.
Sales of passenger cars made in the United States by Ford, General Motors and Chrysler more than doubled here in the first five months of this year, compared with the period a year earlier, even as overall car sales declined amid an economic slump.
The gains follow a 37 percent increase in Big Three imports to Japan in 1993 from 1992.


U.S. and Russia to Back Bosnia Pact Jointly
The United States, Russia and the European Union aim to endorse a final territorial settlement for Bosnia at a three-day meeting of leaders of seven major industrial nations that begins July 8 in Naples, a senior United Nations official said today.
The settlement would assign 51 percent of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the federation of the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Croats, and the rest to the Bosnian Serbs.


Gone Fishin', On Fifth Avenue; A Fish Story at Harlem Meer
Nadia Williams, who is 10, tightly gripped her borrowed bamboo rod and, face bedecked with optimism, let fly into the semi-clear water.
She sensed resistance.
She pulled out seaweed and a sandwich bag.
"This is fun," she said. "It's nice. But I don't know why."


Werner Enterprises (WERN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Henning Takes Islanders Reins With Goal to Mix Fire and Ice
When Lorne Henning, an original member of the Islanders' franchise, was tabbed by Coach Al Arbour as a player/assistant coach 14 years ago, there was a good deal of surprise all around.
When Henning was named to succeed the Islanders' legendary head coach today, no one was surprised.
After all, Henning has been Arbour's right-hand man since 1989, and when Arbour announced his retirement as coach on June 1 and became vice president of hockey operations, Henning was his only recommendation for a successor.


Defense Secretary Violated Pentagon Rules, Report Says
Defense Secretary William J. Perry violated Pentagon rules last year, when he was Deputy Defense Secretary, by favoring one American military contractor over others in talks with Swiss and Finnish officials interested in buying a radar-jamming device for fighter jets, the General Accounting Office said.
The Defense Department canceled the $2 billion jamming system for its own planes two years ago after it failed crucial flight tests.
But Mr.
Perry had offered to help several interested foreign buyers install the system if they bought it directly from the American manufacturers, divisions of the I.T.T.
Corporation and the Westinghouse Electric Corporation.


Bid to Include Gay Students in Anti-Bias Policy Stirs Little Protest
With hardly a whisper of protest, the school board in this Westchester County community stands ready to vote on Tuesday on a proposal that would prohibit discrimination against gay students.
The proposal would amend the school's current policy against bias to include a ban on discrimination based on sexual orientation.


Feminists And Darwin: Scientists Try Closing the Gap
IF there is any merit to F. Scott Fitzgerald's familiar observation that the mark of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to hold two contradictory ideas in your head without cracking up, then there were a lot of very sane prodigies walking the halls of the University of Georgia last week.
They were the participants in an unusual scientific conference called "Evolutionary Biology and Feminism," two terms that the meeting's organizer said had never before been paired under a single symposium rubric.
And small wonder, for the disciplines have often been at loggerheads.
Many feminists have eyed certain aspects of Darwinian thought with deep suspicion, particularly when evolutionary explanations have been marshaled to explain human characteristics like the inequality of the sexes in most cultures around the world, or boys' supposed superiority over girls in mathematics.
To many feminists, the relentless search for an innate basis to complex human behaviors smacks of a quest for easy answers -- and handy excuses for the status quo.


Macy Board To Hear Plan Of Federated
The directors of R. H. Macy &amp; Company have agreed to listen to Federated Department Stores' pitch to combine the two department store operators, according to people familiar with details of the board's meeting yesterday.
Those people said Allen I. Questrom, the chairman and chief executive of Federated, and other Federated executives were scheduled to meet with the board on July 1, a day after Macy has promised to file a plan of reorganization to leave bankruptcy as a stand-alone entity.
The meeting is subject to Macy and its directors receiving additional information from Federated.


Mets Lose on the Night of the Stone Hands
Jim Lindeman never has been considered an excellent defensive player.
And Dallas Green knows what to expect when he pencils him into the lineup: potential at the plate, passable play in the field.
Still, Green did not expect the turn of events that occurred tonight at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium.


Rosemarie Brancato, Soprano, 83
Rosemarie Brancato Rothman, a coloratura soprano, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Hospital.
She was 83 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, said her son, Dr. Peter M. Rothman.


Applied Power Inc.(APW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


GTE Introduces an Interactive Video Unit
The GTE Corporation, the nation's biggest operator of local telephone systems, introduced a new business unit today to develop interactive video games and multimedia computer programs.
The unit, GTE Interactive Media, represents a plunge for one of the more staid telephone companies into a quicksilver world dominated by companies like Nintendo, Sega and Electronic Arts.


Werner Enterprises (WERN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  AFRICA'S RISKY POLITICAL CHANGE  Many African countries are moving toward democracy, but the move toward reform is uneven and leaves uncertainties about what lies ahead, especially as it reveals longstanding ethnic tensions.
A1


CHRONICLE
CURTIS SLIWA, the founder of the Guardian Angels, brushed up against the law on Sunday in the name of defending the police and found himself and five followers under arrest.
Mr.
Sliwa and the Guardian Angels members objected to a work in an art exhibition in the Soldiers' and Sailors' Memorial Arch in Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn that graphically depicts the assassination of two police officers and a National Guard officer.
The multimedia installation, by Dread Scott, consists of three headless, uniformed figures who have been shot.


Fix New York Sidewalks, Not the Legal System
To the Editor:
Your June 5 report on Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's program to "reform" tort laws against New York City fails to note that the true agenda of the Mayor and other "tort reformers" is abolition of trial by jury and elimination of civil damage suits.
Their goal is the eventual return to the legal doctrine of sovereign immunity as a budget balancing gimmick.


International Jensen Inc.(IJIN,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Grim O. J. Simpson Pleads 'Not Guilty' in Two Murders
Looking haggard and grim, O. J. Simpson was arraigned in Municipal Court here today and pleaded not guilty to charges of murdering his ex-wife and one of her male friends.
He winced and hung his head as the court clerk read aloud the first-degree murder counts, alleging that on the night of June 12 he deliberately stabbed to death Nicole Brown Simpson, whom he divorced in 1992, and Ronald L. Goldman, a waiter who worked at a restaurant she frequented.


Observer; Than a Barrel Of People
Last weekend's fun was more intense than usual.
First there was Sam Donaldson interviewing Paula Jones.
Then the networks convicted O. J. Simpson of murder.
Afterward we went to the movies and saw Jack Nicholson turn into a werewolf.
Fun of this quality simply did not exist until now.
It makes you realize how lucky we are, funwise, to be living in this day and age.
Let me cannibalize my own family for material and tell you what my grandmother did for fun:


Review/Television; Filming the Life of a Troubled Family
What induces people to allow television cameras into their homes to make public their private embarrassments?
Is it exhibitionism or a craving to perform?
Hope of help with problems or just of adding a little zip to commonplace existences?
An inability to say no to a television personage who seems to think they are worth some attention?
Such questions, chewed over since the 1970's when the Loud family's real-life soap opera drew big audiences to public stations, present themselves again tonight on "The Trouble With Evan."
Evan is an 11-year-old boy in Hamilton, Ontario, given to picking on other children, smoking, setting fires, shoplifting and in general being a big headache to his mother, Karin, and stepfather, Mike.
They permitted a producer from the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation to install motion-activated cameras in their kitchen and recreation room, so tonight you can see the pair berating, accusing (sometimes unjustly), insulting, bullying, threatening and generally tormenting Evan, who sits quietly in his corner taking it.


Streisand Opens Concert Series in New York


Imagination Unconfined To the Movie Screen
Peter Greenaway's films, strict, formal, erotic and cruel, are often so bursting with ideas and props and fabrics and extras that they threaten to explode from the screen.
Now they have, in a 100-piece piece, 100-day outdoor installation here called "The Stairs: Location."
Mr.
Greenaway's films have a true touch of the megalomaniacal.
In his latest, "The Baby of Macon," which ends with a ritualized rape to the death of a woman by an entire regiment and which has not yet found American distribution, he used 4,000 extras.
And this for a supposedly low-budget art film.


Continental Homes Holding Corp.(CON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Gay Games Coverage Will Counter Prejudice
To the Editor:
The chairman of a conservative New York City group calling itself the Family Defense Council has been quoted as saying that the widespread coverage of the Gay Games will give children the impression that "being a homosexual is normal." And: "Millions of kids could watch these games and wonder what is wrong with it."


Davis Water &amp; Waste Industries(DWW,N) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Never Doubt That Abuse of Children Is Real; The Unheard Cry
To the Editor:
Thank you for the article by Karen Hopenwasser (Op-Ed, June 8), on the danger of stifling "recovered memory." As a priest to whom people sometimes turn when crisis occurs, I have heard the cries of people whose lives have been atrophied and damaged not only by the effects of physical and sexual abuse but also because, throughout their lives, no one would listen to that cry.


Get Your Hot Chips While They're Still Fast
SWIFT! Blazing! Meteoric! Turbocharged! Supersonic! Warp speed!
One wonderful thing about speedy computers is the way they make computer magazines grind out synonyms for the word "fast." Another is that fast computers let you install software so quickly (from CD-ROM, anyway) that you get extra time to figure out why it doesn't work.
And fast computers come with ironclad guarantees that they will seem embarrassingly slow within months.


A Tiger Streak Ends As Indians Roll On
Indians 7, Tigers 1
One streak ended and another continued last night as torrid Cleveland defeated Detroit, 7-1, at Tiger Stadium, ending the Tigers' consecutive-game home-run string at 25.
Detroit settled for a share of the major league record first set by the 1941 Yankees.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League  NEW YORK METS -- Placed David Segui, first baseman, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Rico Brogna, first baseman, from Norfolk of the International League.
Signed Kevin Manley, pitcher, and Daniel Engle, catcher, and assigned them to the Gulf Coast League Mets.
Northern League


Hope Lasts As Spotlight Grows Dim
JILL PERKINS opens the old One Spot Bowling Center at 9 A.M. on the nose, heading to the big poster of Sara with numbers underneath it, to count off another day.
The case of Sara Anne Wood, the missing 12-year-old, may be out of the limelight, in limbo.
The Sara Anne Wood Rescue Center carries on.


People
*
Max Gosling, chairman of Lintas Australia, Sydney, and deputy chairman of the Asia-Pacific zone for Lintas Worldwide, was promoted to chairman, succeeding the late Kamthorn Kamolvarinthip.
Mr.
Gosling, who will relocate to Bangkok, will be succeeded in Sydney by Leigh Clapham, formerly managing director of Lintas Sydney, who will take the new title of managing director of Lintas's Australia agency group. *
Brian Tucker, chief executive of Asia/Pacific operations for Bozell Worldwide, Hong Kong, was named vice chairman and president of Bozell International, London.
He succeeds Murray Smith, who was president of Bozell International and takes the new position of president and chief executive of CSS/U.S.A., New York, a joint venture between Bozell and CSS, an event consulting company.


Vast Laser Plan Would Further Fusion and Keep Bomb Experts
FOR a billionth of a second or so, dazzling light from 192 laser beams would flash down a labyrinth of mirrors, shooting a titanic bolt of energy a thousand times the output of all the power stations in the United States onto a single tiny pellet of super-cold hydrogen fuel.
Squeezed to 20 times the density of lead and heated to a searing 200 million degrees Fahrenheit, hotter than the surface of the sun, the atoms in the pellet would fuse together, releasing a miniature thermonuclear blast of fusion energy.
Such a device could materialize by the year 2002 if the dream machine gets approval from the Department of Energy.
It would cost $1 billion to build and about $250 million a year to operate -- no small sum over a 30-year lifetime -- and Congress may well balk at its cost.
It would be the world's first device to produce controlled thermonuclear ignition, a phenomenon better known for lighting stars and powering hydrogen bombs.


Mary A. Devanna; Business Professor And Dean Was 55
Mary Anne Devanna, an associate dean at the Columbia University Business School, died on Saturday at her home in Ardsley, N.Y.
She was 55.
The cause was leukemia, said Maryann Hedaa, an associate professor at the business school.


George Schultz, Philanthropist And Manufacturing Chief, 77
George L. Schultz, a philanthropist and former president of the toiletries manufacturer Shulton Inc., died on Friday at his summer home in Essex Fells, N.J.
He was 77 and lived in Vero Beach, Fla.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter Margaret S. Bilotti.


Continental Homes Holding Corp.(CON,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
QUENTIN CRISP, the 85-year-old writer and raconteur, who prides himself on being outrageous, will receive unusual recognition for his flamboyance tonight.
He will be proclaimed the "Grand Pooh-Bah of the Cutting Edge" at the 10th anniversary party of Paper Magazine, itself considered the cutting-edge commentator on culture, fashion, politics and society.


COMPANY BRIEFS
STERLING WINTHROP INC., New York, announced it had sold the rights to manufacture its Phisoderm skin care products in the United States to Chattem Inc., a Chattanooga, Tenn., manufacturer of health and beauty aids and specialty chemicals.
Terms were not disclosed.


No Headline
"I don't think I'll catch anything. My worm got dirty. I don't know if the fish will like it." -- VINCENT MORALES, a 12-year-old on his first fishing trip, to Central Park.  [ B1:4. ]


Core Industries(CRI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Batistuta Scores 3 Goals To Pace the Argentines
A vastly superior Argentine team gave an obviously awed Greek team a crisp lesson today in what it takes to be competitive in the World Cup.
Argentina, which has won two World Cups, made Greece's maiden appearance in the tournament a miserable experience in the form of a 4-0 spanking amid a persistent drizzle at Foxboro Stadium.
Gabriel Batistuta, a 25-year-old striker who plays for Fiorentina in the Italian League, registered three goals, the first one only 84 seconds into the game.
It was the first hat trick in the World Cup since June 23, 1990, in Italy, when Tomas Skuhravy of Czechoslovakia accomplished the feat against Costa Rica.


And the Disabled?
To the Editor:
In watching television's coverage of the solemn commemoration of D-Day, I saw the camera switch from those gallant aged men to the rows of crosses and Stars of David, and wondered why there were no interviews or scenes from veterans hospitals or other facilities for disabled veterans.


Rebuke and Revenge at Met Life
Rick Sabo came from a family in which all three sons went to work selling life insurance for the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
So immersed were the three brothers in the business that they joked about tattooing themselves with the Met Life logo, and their parents in this town near Pittsburgh began collecting Met Life memorabilia.
The work offered a good living.
"The money kind of lured me into the industry," recalled Mr.
Sabo, now 30 years old.
"My brother was driving a Mercedes and bought a five-bedroom house."


Review/Pop; Local Girl Makes Good, Sings
It was star time at Madison Square Garden when Barbra Streisand arrived on Monday for her first of five nights in New York.
Limousines ringed the block; her fans, who had paid $50 and much more for tickets, arrived in tuxedos, suits and evening dresses.
Ms.
Streisand hadn't given a concert in New York since 1967, and her tour ends here.
For admirers, it's now or never.
At the Garden, the metal detectors were routine, but not the no-smoking rule, the gray carpeting under the orchestra seats (though the bleachers still had sticky floors), the champagne and roses for sale alongside the onion-rings concession, or the souvenirs like white dress shirts ($75) emblazoned with "Barbra Streisand: the Concert." Once in the arena, heads craned in search of celebrities: Alan King!
Liza Minnelli!


New Knicks Serve Up Some Populist Hoops With Sharp Elbows
With all due respect, enough about the Old Knicks.
Enough about how superior their brand of playoff basketball was, how these unskilled and uncharismatic Knicks don't measure up.
They don't have to.
They are competing against Hakeem Olajuwon and Kenny Smith, not Walt Frazier and Willis Reed.
Let it rest.
Give the New Knicks their night of comparative independence.
If they can break the 19-game, decade-old Game 7 road team losing streak by defeating the Houston Rockets tonight, they will give New York a different kind of championship from what it received from the Knicks of 1970 and 1973.
Offensively speaking, Red Holzman's Knicks played chess.
Pat Riley's Knicks play checkers.
That's all right.
There are more people in Greater New York who play checkers than there are who play chess.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Broadway Theater Institute, New York, to Borejko Leibler, New York. *
Make-a-Wish Foundation of Metro New York, Port Washington, L.I., to F&amp; D Advertising, Westbury, L.I. *
Y.W.C.A. of the City of New York, to DDB Needham New York.


Clinton Panel Urges Blocking Haitians' Bank Accounts
The United States is moving forward to tighten economic sanctions against Haiti even further by closing a loophole that allows Haitians access tomoney in American bank accounts, Administration officials said today.
That step is being recommended by President Clinton's top experts on Haiti, including his special adviser, William H. Gray 3d.
But Treasury and Justice Department officials are reviewing such a move, and Mr.
Clinton's approval is not certain.


AT WORK WITH: Susie Cox; Even Stars Need a Map To the Galaxy
JUST try tempting Susie Cox to name the film stars, politicians and members of the British royal family whose charts she reads.
As the astrologer at the Canyon Ranch Health and Fitness Resort in Tucson, Ariz., she refuses to comment when asked to confirm reports that she saw Julia Roberts just before she broke her engagement to Kiefer Sutherland.
And that's without even asking about the dirt.
Just the names would be enough.
"From a professional viewpoint, it is unacceptable," Ms.
Cox insists.
"It's the same as a psychiatrist: a breach of ethics."


Daniel Willis, 41, Real-Estate Official
Daniel E. Willis, a real-estate development executive, died on June 13 at the University of California Mount Zion Hospital in San Francisco.
He was 41 and lived in both San Francisco and Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS-related, Sam Sanchez, his companion, said yesterday.


Thomas M. Palmer, A Met Baritone, 59
Thomas M. Palmer, a baritone who sang with the Metropolitan Opera, died on June 11 at Central Park Lodge, a nursing center in Clearwater, Fla.
He was 59 and lived in Largo, Fla.
The cause was cancer, said his companion and accompanist, Mary Jane Linzalone.


Corrections
A sports article in some editions yesterday about Greg Louganis's appearance in a diving exhibition at the Gay Games referred incorrectly to his acting experience in New York.
He acted the role of a chorus boy in "Cats" as part of the Off Broadway show "Jeffrey." He has never performed in "Cats" itself.


Executive Changes
DU PONT MERCK PHARMACEUTICAL CO., Wilmington, Del., named Richard J. Davis vice president for quality assurance and regulatory compliance.
Du Pont Merck is a partnership between E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co. and Merck &amp; Co.
EXERGY INC., Hayward, Calif., an energy technology company, named Lawrence Goldfarb executive vice president and chief financial officer.


Givers' Largess Is Putting Heat on Clinton
Thirteen months after he proposed curbing the dominance of national politics by monied interests and 16 months after his party chairman proposed relying "less on black-tie dinners and more on brown-bag lunches" for fund raising, President Clinton will dine Wednesday evening with 1,800 of the Democratic Party's most prosperous patrons.
His party is expected to gain $2 million in fresh donations from them in the process.
The event has proved to be the last straw for the nation's most prominent clean-government group, Common Cause, which has endorsed the same fund-raising restrictions that Mr.
Clinton pledged.
On Wednesday, the group will make public a study showing that since mid-1992, the President and other Democrats have raised $40.5 million in such big-money contributions.
Virtually all of it came from wealthy companies and citizens who gave directly to the Democratic Party, bypassing the legal ceilings on gifts to political campaigns.


Fiona Baan, 55, Trainer for Equestrian Team
Fiona Baan, the director of dressage and driving programs for the United States Equestrian Team, died on Sunday at her home in Chester, N.J.
She was 55.
The cause was cancer, a team spokeswoman said.


No Headline
"These findings lay to rest any notion that there is no manipulation and control of nicotine undertaken in the tobacco industry." DR.
DAVID A. KESSLER, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.  [ A1:3. ]


Clinton May Gain as Counsel Bill Clears Congress
The House of Representatives gave final Congressional approval today to a bill reinstating the independent counsel law, which expired two years ago.
One consequence of the measure is that President Clinton and others in his Administration may become entitled to reimbursement for part of their legal fees growing out of the Whitewater investigation.
The House approved the final version of the bill by a vote of 317 to 105.
It cleared the Senate with bipartisan support last month and now goes to the President, who has promised to sign it.


Jerry Ball Joins the Silver and Black
Defensive lineman JERRY BALL, a three-time Pro Bowler, signed with the Los Angeles Raiders yesterday.
Ball, 29, played six seasons with the Detroit Lions before being traded to the Cleveland Browns last season.
Terms of the deal were not announced. (AP)


Kemp Agrees to Pay Campaign Penalties
Jack F. Kemp's 1988 campaign for President has agreed to pay $120,000 in civil penalties for election law violations, matching record penalties assessed against Senator Bob Dole's campaign in the same year.
In a settlement announced today, the Federal Election Commission also ordered the Kemp campaign to refund $111,000 in excessive contributions as well as improper donations from corporations.


Cigarette Company Developed Tobacco With Stronger Nicotine; Head of F.D.A. Tells of Chemical Manipulation
A major cigarette manufacturer secretly developed a genetically engineered tobacco that would more than double the amount of nicotine delivered in some cigarettes, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs said today.
The Commissioner, Dr.
David A. Kessler, told a Congressional hearing that the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation developed the tobacco, grew it in Brazil and last year used it in five domestic brands of cigarettes, including three labeled "light."


Corrections
The headline of a brief report in the Company News column in some editions of Business Day yesterday, about impending layoffs by the Hughes Aerospace and Electronics Company, overstated the extent.
The company intends to eliminate at least 10 percent of its 35,000 jobs, not all 35,000.


Study Finds That Education Does Not Ease Welfare Rolls
A closely watched experiment in which teen-age mothers were showered with education and social services had no effect in moving them from welfare into the job market, according to a study made public today.
The study is being widely discussed among welfare experts, some of whom believe it casts doubts on a central feature of the Clinton Administration's welfare plan: the decision to focus its training and work programs on young mothers.


Price, Not Safety, Drives Yankee Fans Away; Fix What's Wrong
To the Editor:
George M. Steinbrenner, owner of the Yankees, is less than candid when he blames the neighborhood for poor attendance at Yankee games.
Some of the reasons for not attending games occur within the walls of the stadium, not in the parking areas.


Bond Yields Increase as Dollar Falls
Yields on Treasury securities rose modestly yesterday amid rising market expectations of another Federal Reserve move to raise short-term interest rates.
The dollar plunged in international currency markets.
In New York trading, the dollar plunged to 99.90 Japanese yen, the lowest level since World War II, before rebounding to close at 100.30 yen, the lowest postwar close.
The dollar also fell against the German mark.
Fed officials have said that a sharp drop in the dollar's value might prompt them to strongly consider an increase in interest rates.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration and the Federal Reserve are in a bind after the dollar traded at less than 100 Japanese yen for the first time in the postwar period.
A falling dollar is inflationary, because it makes imports more expensive.
But changing the market's direction by intervening is only a short-term solution.
And the long-term option -- having the Fed raise interest rates -- risks choking an economic rebound.  [ Page A1. ]


Pentagon Funds for U.N. Peacekeeping
The House has deleted $300 million for United Nations peacekeeping from the Pentagon budget.
The Senate should vote this week to restore funding.
The cost of peacekeeping to the Pentagon is quite modest -- about one-tenth of 1 percent of its total budget.
And the benefits could be great.
U.N. operations that meet the Clinton Administration's strict new peacekeeping standards can strengthen American security without the need to commit many American troops.
That ultimately saves the Pentagon money.


Dow Plunges 33.93 on Dollar's Fall
The stock market suffered a sharp decline yesterday for the third consecutive session as traders continued to be roiled by the turmoil in the international currency markets.
Stocks plummeted as analysts again cited the fall of the dollar, which sank to a postwar low against the Japanese yen.
The wilting dollar puts more pressure on the Federal Reserve to consider another interest rate increase when its policy-making committee meets next on July 5 and 6.
Higher interest rates would slow the United States economy and make bonds more attractive to investors relative to equities.


In Face-Saving Turn, Japan Denies Nuclear Know-How
Backtracking from an embarrassing slip of the tongue by Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata, the Japanese Government tried today to argue that while it may be one of the world's technological superpowers, its legions of physicists and engineers have no idea how to build an atomic bomb.
The statement was prompted by Mr.
Hata's comment last week that "it is certainly the case that Japan has the capability to possess nuclear weapons, but has not made them."


Inflation Concerns Rise With Commodities Prices
Many commodity prices are up sharply this year, ranging from coffee and cotton to crude oil, copper and aluminum.
The trend toward rising prices fits neatly into the traditional models of what economists expect at this stage of an economic recovery and, if the past is a guide, the prices consumers pay for many goods and services could rise, too.
What is the main force driving up prices, the fear of shortages or an actual tightening of supplies?
And can consumers and manufacturers count on economic models to predict how commodity prices will affect the economy?
Such questions, which have no definitive answers, are clinging like the summer humidity to the debate about how strong inflationary pressures are becoming and whether the Federal Reserve needs to raise interest rates again to prevent the economy from overheating.
A Sense of Complacency
Inflation hawks say investors and business executives have been lulled into a sense of complacency recently by the failure of inflation rates to rise along with intermittent run-ups in commodity prices.
They say inflation is bound to gather speed because all the broad measures of commodity prices are rising, not just the most volatile ones like the Commodity Research Bureau's 21-commodity index, which is dominated by agricultural products.


Getting It Right in Whitewater Hearings
To the Editor:
"Running for Cover on Whitewater" (editorial, June 17) asserts that "Senate Democrats are rushing toward a partisan cover-up of the Whitewater affair." The facts simply do not support such a conclusion.


Court Is Asked to Name Trustee to Run Union Local Tied to Gotti
Prosecutors asked a Federal court yesterday to appoint a trustee to run the New York metropolitan region's most powerful construction-industry union, saying that repeated criminal convictions of its leaders had failed to end corruption.
The trustee would be given power to oust officers and employees said to remain under the control of John Gotti's Mafia family.


A Cool Chase of Culture on the First Day of Summer


Senate Committee Is Set To Vote on Antitrust Bill
The Senate Judiciary Committee is scheduled to vote tomorrow on a bill that would strip baseball of part of its exemption from antitrust laws.
The bill before the committee, however, will be a revised version of the original, applying only to labor relations between major league club owners and players.
Senator Howard Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, who has spearheaded the bill on the committee, said if it becomes law, it could help avert a threatened players' strike later this season.
Nevertheless, he said, the owners continue to fight the bill.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
A few weekends ago I was invited to serve as maid of honor at a friend's wedding.
The reception was held in the Rainbow Room and at some point in the festivities, a group including the bride and the bridegroom decided to go out and take some pictures in front of the statue of Prometheus in Rockefeller Plaza.
The bride, in her flowing white Vera Wang, and her husband, in white tie and tails, attracted attention and smiles.
Passers-by called out "Congratulations," "Great gown," the usual.


Borrowing a Page (and Recipes) From Cooks in Hot Climates
THE cookbook publishers certainly got it right this time.
Food from steamy southern India, the sun-baked American Southwest, the torrid Arabian deserts and the entire Mediterranean basin from the Costa del Sol to North Africa might just whet the appetite when temperatures soar into the 90's.
Five new books explore some or all of the Mediterranean region; all were started two to five years ago as the health benefits of a diet based on olive oil began making headlines.


2 Opposites Share One Center Attraction
Hakeem Olajuwon and Patrick Ewing are opposites at virtually every turn.
Olajuwon is expansive and talkative, Ewing abbreviated and reserved.
Olajuwon epitomizes versatility, spinning and whirling to the basket; Ewing is the classic center who shoots a jump shot or makes a power move.
Olajuwon is Muslim, Ewing Catholic.


Greece Yields Europe's Helm On Sour Note
When Greece took over the rotating presidency of the European Union six months ago, officials here insisted that their turn at the tiller would be a steady one, confirming this country's Socialist leaders as solid Europeans.
Instead, as the Greek term comes to an end at the 12-nation summit meeting on the island of Corfu this weekend, Greece has enraged its partners by blockading neighboring Macedonia, threatening what one European official called new instability in the Balkans and the "nightmare" of the Bosnian war's spreading farther south.


Jacob's Pillow Director To Head a Foundation
Samuel A. Miller, the executive director and president of the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, has been named director of the New England Foundation for the Arts, the area's largest arts service organization.
The nomination becomes effective in October.


Will Yanks Spoil All-Star Pitching?
Tommy John returned to Yankee Stadium this week.
No, the Yankees were not asking him to bolster a sagging starting rotation, though at the age of 51 he probably could pitch as well as a much younger left-hander in the rotation has this season.
John was there in his new role as a member of the Minnesota Twins' television team.
His presence was timely because the subject of All-Star Games and Yankee pitchers has come up.


Correction Officer Wounded, Prisoner Killed in a Hospital Gun Battle
In a bizarre gun battle in a Brooklyn hospital clinic crowded with mothers and children, a correction officer shot and killed a prisoner yesterday after the inmate snatched the officer's revolver and fired and critically wounded her partner, officials said.
The suspect had previously dashed down a hallway, even though his legs were shackled, as horror-struck parents shoved their youngsters to safety under waiting-room chairs or into examining rooms.


Books of The Times; 3 Generations of Misery and Regret
The Armstrong Trilogy
From the Heat of the Day, One Generation, Genetha
By Roy Heath
552 pages. Persea Books. $15.
Unhappy families may not be alike, but they do have this in common: The parents tend to wish they had never married and the children tend to wish they had never been born.
No one has to say it, they just live it.
The parents trade insults and blows and occasional tenderness; the children look and listen.
Then one day they are grown up.
They are expected to leave home, learn new lines and make new lives for themselves.


CURRENCY TRADERS PUSH THE DOLLAR BENEATH 100 YEN
The dollar fell below 100 Japanese yen today for the first time in the post-World War II history of currency trading.
The fact that the dollar broke through the psychological barrier of 100 yen after taking a battering on Monday against the German mark is both economically troubling and politically embarrassing for the Clinton Administration.
No President likes to preside over the fall of the dollar to record lows.


Corrections
An article on Monday about Betsy Gotbaum's appointment as executive director of the New-York Historical Society, and a correction in this space yesterday, misspelled the given name of the society's chairman.
He is Miner H. Warner.


Trade-School Law on Hold
The House Appropriations Committee voted yesterday for a year's delay in the effective date of a law placing tougher fiscal controls on for-profit trade schools.
The schools account for most loan defaults and fraud cases in Federal student aid programs.
The law, known as "85-15," was enacted in 1992 and is scheduled to take effect July 1.
It would require that a school receive no more than 85 percent of its revenue from Federal student aid programs.


Arson in Brooklyn Kills 2


Albany Set to Require Arrest In Domestic Violence Cases
State legislative leaders announced agreement today on a bill that would require police officers to arrest anyone suspected of seriously beating a spouse, a change the bill's sponsors said would sharply reduce police discretion in such cases and remedy spotty enforcement of domestic violence laws.
Experts in domestic violence say police officers now often fail to arrest abusive spouses because victims decline to press charges or because officers do not view the crime as serious.
In either case, lax enforcement often opens the door to future violence, the experts say.


Jets Sign Anthony Johnson and Two Picks
The Jets yesterday signed running back ANTHONY JOHNSON, an unrestricted free agent from Indianapolis, and came to terms with two of their draft picks, receiver RYAN YARBOROUGH, who was taken in the second round, and quarterback GLENN FOLEY, taken in the seventh.
None of the terms were disclosed.
The Jets' general manager, DICK STEINBERG, said none of the signings would cause the team to make room under their salary cap by releasing other players.


Museum Connects Dinosaur Bones to Donors
A dinosaur body-parts sale is under way at the Museum of Paleontology at the University of California at Berkeley.
In a fund drive akin to an opera house selling individual seats to benefactors, the museum is asking contributors to sponsor parts of a Tyrannosaurus rex that is to be assembled later this year.
Prices range from $20 for a chevron tail bone to $5,000 for the skull and jaws.


Nigeria's Super Eagles Sparkle
There was just one thing that the Nigeria national team, the Super Eagles, failed to accomplish in its first appearance in the World Cup finals.
Keep a secret.
Nigeria's debut, a 3-0 victory over Bulgaria this evening in which it overcame some early mistakes, created the possibilities that the Eagles could duplicate the accomplishments of Cameroon four years ago.
Rashidi Yekini's goal, in the 21st minute, showed the precision and passion that the Nigerians have brought to the competition.
After Yekini converted a centering pass from George Finidi, he kept running until he reached the rear of the net.
Yekini held the netting with both hands, his eyes pressed shut with the setting sun shining on his face, as he screamed with joy.


Philip Morris Goes on the Offensive
Philip Morris is out to convince Wall Street that cigarette smoking can be good for its financial health.
In just their second day on the job, the new leaders of the Philip Morris Companies met yesterday with about two dozen reporters to emphasize their enthusiasm for all the company's businesses -- including tobacco -- and promised new advertising and other efforts to rebut smoking's critics.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CELLULAR GROUP INC., Sarasota, Fla., has completed an agreement to acquire Voice Data Communications Inc., from Communications Associates Ltd.
The terms were not disclosed.
HARRIS CORP., Melbourne, Fla., said it had won an Air Force contract, worth as much as $51 million in the next 10 years, to make portable terminal systems that would allow ground troops to obtain weather information.


Microsoft In Accord On Patent
The Microsoft Corporation, having emerged as the loser in a closely watched patent infringement suit brought by tiny Stac Electronics Inc., made its first big settlement in a patent case today by agreeing to license Stac's technology and acquire a minority equity stake in Stac.
On Feb. 23, a jury in Federal District Court in Los Angeles found that a feature included in Microsoft's MS-DOS versions 6.0 and 6.2 computer operating system software infringed Stac's patents for data compression, which is a popular technology for doubling the data storage capacity of personal computer disks.


Advance Unit of French Troops Sent to Rwandan Border
France moved an advance party of troops to the Rwandan border today to prepare the ground work for an eventual dispatch of as many as 2,000 troops once the United Nations Security Council votes support for the French intervention.
In Paris, the French Government has stressed that it would not send the forces into Rwanda if the opposing Government and rebel forces do not agree.
France had previously been a major supporter of the Government, and because of this the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front has opposed the French entry.


Deckhands on the Mets Seem Ready to Mutiny
Bret Saberhagen set the stage before the game, when he sat in front of his locker and ripped both the Mets' coaching staff and Mets' management.
Saberhagen started with an indictment of the way the Mets had handled him personally, then moved to indict all Met management for failing to do anything to improve the fast-sinking Mets' ship.
Bobby Bonilla and John Franco took it from there.


Book Notes
Good Bets
Publishing books by politicians can be risky for several reasons.
For one thing, the lag between a politician's moment in history and the subsequent book is often ample for the public to forget the person or lose interest.
For another, publishers are so susceptible to famous people -- even if the people are famous simply because they did some relatively minor thing during some administration or other -- that they often pay too high an advance, print too many copies and end up with too many unsold books.
"It is indeed a tough judgment call, and we've all made mistakes," said Caroline K. Reidy, president and publisher of Simon &amp; Schuster's adult trade division.
But this month, publishers who bet lots of money on books by politicians have good reason to be pleased with themselves.
In a curious confluence of events, three political books are enjoying long runs on the nonfiction best-seller lists.
These are "Standing Firm" (HarperCollins/Zondervan), by Dan Quayle; "Beyond Peace" (Random House), by Richard Nixon, and "The Haldeman Diaries" (Putnam), by H. R. Haldeman.
"All these books are selling much better than we expected," said Susie Russenberger, director of trade books at Ingram, a book wholesaler.
The company, she said, has sold 21,000 copies of Mr.
Quayle's book, 22,000 of Mr.
Nixon's, and 11,000 of Mr.
Haldeman's.


Wine Talk
"IN my 25 years at Ridge Vineyards," Paul Draper said, "I've made 30 different single-vineyard zinfandels."
To a dedicated zinfandel fan or another wine maker, that's a remarkable statement; anyone else will require a little explanation.


Sports of The Times; The Knicks: Too Mean To Go Down
BACK up in the mountains of eastern Kentucky, they use the word "mean" a lot.
It's got almost an extra syllable in it, like "muh-een." It doesn't have the citified connotation of intentionally cruel or vicious, but rather it suggests "adamant, dedicated, inexorable, inflexible, obstinate, resolute, rigid, unbending, hard-headed, refractory, tenacious, willful," and many other words in my computer's handy-dandy thesaurus.
"Too mean to die." That's about right.
"Meaner'n a snake." That's another one.
The Knicks are so mean, Anthony Mason and John Starks were willing to pay fines of $10,000 each not to talk to the press at practice yesterday.
They could have saved the money by winning the sixth game and getting us out of here, but nothing comes easy for these guys.


Honors
*
Reginald K. Brack Jr., president and chief executive of Time Inc., has been named the 1994-95 chairman of the Advertising Council, New York.
He succeeds Philip H. Geier Jr., chairman and chief executive of the Interpublic Group of Companies. *
Val Appel, a co-founder and past president of AHF Marketing Research, and Arthur Nielsen Jr., the former chairman of A. C. Nielsen Co., have been elected to the Market Research Council Hall of Fame.


A New Battle of Manassas Is Under Way in the Senate
Sounding at times like a local planning commission, a Senate panel today took up the dispute over the Walt Disney Company's plans to build a 3,000-acre theme park and commercial complex in the midst of historic Civil War battlefields in Virginia.
Until today, the dispute had been confined to Virginia.
But at the prompting of several historians and preservationists, Senator Dale Bumpers, an Arkansas Democrat who opposes the project, used his position as chairman of a subcommittee on public lands to convene a hearing and put the issue on the national stage.


Desperate Colombia Stalks the U.S.
Francisco Maturana, Colombia's national team coach, is a dentist by trade.
So far, this World Cup has felt exactly like pulling teeth.
Colombia is one of the favorites to win soccer's world championship, so its shocking 3-1 loss to Romania last Saturday did not endear Maturana to his country's expectant fans and news media.
"Nightmare" screamed the headline in one paper.
If the United States loses a soccer match, most people don't care.
If Colombia suffers a rare loss, a nation convulses.


Miscellany
*
Ketchum Public Relations Worldwide has acquired Mangus/Catanzano, Pittsburgh.
The terms were not disclosed.
Of the company's three partners, Pat Mangus will join Ketchum as a senior vice president, Daryl Clemmens will join Ketchum as a vice president and Frank Catanzano will form his own agency, Catanzano Marketing Communications.


King Manor Museum Is Rededicated in Queens


In Performance: Recordings
Beethoven and Grieg From a Promising Ensemble  Shanghai Quartet
The Shanghai Quartet, formed at the Shanghai Conservatory in 1983 and first heard in New York in 1987, has gained a reputation as one of the more promising of today's innumerable promising young quartets.
A new disk on Delos (Delos DE 3153, CD) shows something more: a group with a warm, richly expressive tone that departs from the hard-bitten attack currently in favor and instead recalls the aristocratic style of prewar European quartets.
Weigang Li, the first violinist, provides a consummately polished lead.


Open U.S. Health Plan, Dole Urges
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, said tonight that all Americans ought to be able to participate in the Federal Employees Health Benefit Program, the system that insures all Federal employees, including members of Congress.
The program now covers about nine million Americans, with the Federal Government paying about 72 percent of the cost and employees paying the rest.
Federal employees have a wide choice of insurance plans.
Most members of Congress choose a Blue Cross-Blue Shield plan under which they pay $101 a month themselves and the Government pays $303.


Review/Film: Freedom on My Mind; Memories Of a Hot Summer Long Ago
The idealism of the 1960's can seem like a cultural artifact now, as distant from the 90's as those quaint black-and-white television reports are from today's high-tech, second-to-second coverage.
"Freedom on My Mind," the story of the volatile battle to register black voters in Mississippi during the summer of 1964, makes provocative use of that old film to situate viewers in a blatantly racist time and place.
"I am a Mississippi segregationist and proud of it," says Ross Barnett, the Governor of the state.
A well-dressed white man sitting in a little cafe says, "The colored people are very happy in Mississippi." Among the clips are scenes of the idealistic civil rights volunteers, black and white, who gave the lie to statements like that.
Interwoven with the archival material are recent interviews with many who were active in the civil rights movement: L. C. Dorsey, a sharecropper's daughter from Mississippi; Bob Moses, a black graduate student from Harvard; Marshall Ganz, one of many white, middle-class college students bused in to register black voters and to attract the kind of news-media attention that Southern blacks would have been unlikely to draw on their own.
As they look back 30 years to what was called Freedom Summer, their testimony adds a complex layer to the film.
An absorbing work of historical preservation and strong ideas, "Freedom on My Mind" won the grand jury prize for documentary at this year's Sundance Film Festival.
It opens today at Film Forum 1.


Off the Menu
New Chock Full o' Nuts
A visit to the new Chock Full o' Nuts, at 422 Madison Avenue (48th Street), is not quite a trip down memory lane.
The look is different.
And so are the prices.
The tasty, slightly crunchy whole-wheat doughnuts, which cost all of 5 cents each in the late 1940's, are 95 cents each, and the nutted cheese sandwich (cream cheese and walnuts on whole wheat raisin bread) is $3.95, compared with 25 cents four decades ago, and is made with low-fat cream cheese.
The menu includes new items like a salmon paillard sandwich on brioche ($6.75) and espresso macchiato ($1.25 small, $1.50 medium).
But at least Chock Full o' Nuts, which was once a chain of more than 100 coffee and sandwich shops in Manhattan, Brooklyn, Long Island, Newark and Philadelphia, is back.
The last of the former stores closed in 1990.


Price, Not Safety, Drives Yankee Fans Away; Resist His Blackmail
To the Editor:
We must keep the Yankees in New York City.
But it makes little economic sense to spend hundreds of millions on a business that was recently valued at $160 million.
The Yankees represent social and political values that ought to be protected if reasonable compromise can be reached, including public expenditures.
The amount must be related to value, especially when schools, police and infrastructure are under attack.
We ought to keep the Yankees, we ought to pay a rational price, and we ought not let George Steinbrenner blackmail us.


METRO DIGEST
COUNCIL CHIEFS BACK GIULIANI'S BUDGET
Mayor Giuliani and the leaders of the City Council agreed on a $31.6 billion budget that would curtail growth in spending for the first time since the city fiscal crisis of the 1970's and begin to wrench down the size of city government.
A1.
The first major test of a Republican Mayor surrounded by Democrats barely rose to the level of a confrontation.
News analysis, A1.
From longer lines to reduced service, the budget will cause significant pain for New Yorkers.
B4.


George Michael Loses Lawsuit Against Sony
In a case that mixed questions about artistic freedom, money and ego, a British judge today rejected a bid by the pop singer George Michael to be freed from his long-term recording contract with the Sony Corporation.
The ruling was welcomed by industry executives, who saw in Mr.
Michael's case a challenge to the traditional practice of signing artists to multi-album deals as a way to offset their heavy investments in discovering and promoting new acts.


Standard Therapies May Help Only Impulsive Spouse Abuse
AS the death of Nicole Simpson has fixed the nation's attention on marital violence, new findings question the standard psychotherapeutic wisdom for husbands who batter their wives, suggesting that some therapies are futile for many wife batterers.
A landmark study has found that many of the most vicious husbands -- those who regularly punch, kick or otherwise beat up their wives or threaten them with knives or guns -- become calmer physiologically while arguing with their wives.
As their anger mounts, their heart rates drop and their attention sharpens, making their violence an act of calculated marital terrorism meant to control their wives through instilling fear.


First-Quarter Gain Signals Rebound in Japan's Economy
Japan's economy grew at an unexpectedly strong annualized rate of 3.9 percent in the first quarter of this year, providing new evidence that the long slump here is finally fading.
"The worst period is over," Tsutomu Tanaka, vice minister of the Economic Planning Agency, said today in releasing the figures.
But Mr.
Tanaka and many private economists said it was too early to proclaim a complete recovery.


Beard Could Be Nets' No. 1 Candidate
With excellent track records as Nets assistants, either Paul Silas or Brendan Suhr would seem to have the inside track at becoming New Jersey's next head coach.
Pushing hard along the outside as another candidate, however, is Butch Beard, who was interviewed for the job yesterday by Willis Reed, the Nets' executive vice president and general manager.
As the Nets wind down their search for a successor to Chuck Daly, who has retired from coaching, the 46-year-old Beard, head coach at Howard University and a former scout and assistant coach with the Nets, has emerged from a handful of candidates.


Precautions to Take Against Lyme Disease
To the Editor:
While I'm happy to see people enjoying the great outdoors, I want to remind everyone to dress properly when going into grassy or wooded areas to avoid contracting Lyme disease.
This is important in the lower Hudson Valley region and Long Island, which are known to have high tick populations.
However, cases of Lyme disease have been reported in New York City, so its residents should also take precautions.


Winter Sports, Summer Soldiers, City on the Edge; As 7th Game Follows 7th Game, New York Fans Find Their Nerves Stretched Taut
Go Ricks! Go Knangers!
What was that again?
As summer begins and a New York winter sports franchise gets set to play for a championship for the second time in a week, city denizens might be excused for their exhausted confusion.
Tonight, eight days after the New York Rangers closed out their streak of 53 prematurely concluded seasons and brought home professional hockey's ultimate trophy, the Stanley Cup, the New York Knicks face the Rockets in Houston, trying to duplicate the feat in the world of basketball.


Out-of-Court Settlement Reached Over Love Canal
Closing a major chapter in one of the nation's most notorious environmental disasters, the company that buried chemical wastes at Love Canal reached an out-of-court settlement with New York State yesterday, agreeing to pay $98 million and to take on cleanup work that will extend for decades, at a cost of millions more.
Both sides claimed victory in the 14-year-old case, which prompted Congress to enact the Superfund law.


Children and Smoke-Filled Rooms
Once America learned that secondhand smoke was at the least a nuisance, and at the worst a health hazard, states and localities all over the country began developing regulations to protect nonsmokers from other people's bad habit.
New York might be well on its way toward intelligent new restrictions too, had the State Legislature enacted the bill known as "Prokids" last year.
Although the Assembly has passed it twice, overwhelmingly, it has yet to make it to the Senate floor.
The bill would prohibit smoking in schools and on school grounds, and ban the sale of out-of-package or "loosie" cigarettes.
It would also require separate, enclosed smoking rooms in workplace lounges and cafeterias, and would limit hospital smoking to patients who obtained written authorization from physicians.
Smoking in transportation terminals, buses and restrooms would be banned too, as well as in youth centers, child care facilities, group homes for children, public institutions for children and residential treatment facilities.


After the Deal, the Pain Eases for Some Agencies, but Still Cutbacks Loom
Although the Democratic leaders of the City Council managed to restore money for several programs that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had sought to cut, the budget they have agreed to will still cause significant pain for New Yorkers on a number of fronts, from longer lines at city agencies to reduced service at the city's public hospitals.
Many City Council members complained that they had received only scant details of the agreement reached early yesterday morning between the staff of Speaker Peter F. Vallone and the Giuliani administration.
But they said that from the details they were able to get, the budget would have a severe impact on the city's residents, including less frequent repairs of potholes, reduced course offerings in the city's colleges and less maintenance for the city's parks.


Blast Injures 39 in Pennsylvania


Price, Not Safety, Drives Yankee Fans Away
To the Editor:
New York Yankees officials ascribe low attendance for ball games at Yankee Stadium in the Bronx to concern for fan safety.
The Yankees point to the fact that attendance at day games is 30 percent higher than at night games.
This is misleading.
Many day games are on the weekend, when fans have free time, whereas night games now have a start time of 7:05 P.M., which makes it difficult to get to games after work.


Veterans Changed Colleges' Attitudes
The G.I.
Bill went well beyond enrolling millions of Americans in higher education; it forever altered teaching styles and attitudes about older students in colleges and universities.
"For the first time, you had people in classes who had had real life experiences and had much to share," said Connie Odems, senior vice president of the American Association of Community Colleges, a group of 1,200 two-year colleges.
"It was not all textbook learning anymore."


Clinton Offers North Korea A Chance to Resume Talks
Trying to build on former President Jimmy Carter's recent trip to North Korea, the Clinton Administration has sent a letter to the North proposing to resume high-level talks and offering to suspend its push for economic sanctions once talks are under way.
In the letter, sent on Monday, Robert L. Gallucci, Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs, said the Administration would resume talks soon if the North Koreans took steps to confirm that they were willing to freeze their nuclear program, as Mr.
Carter reported.


Fratricide in Bosnia: Muslim vs. Muslim
This Bosnian village set in undulating countryside has become the most active front line in Bosnia over the last week, and the heart of a bizarre and intensifying conflict that has set Muslim against Muslim in a fratricidal war.
The 26-month-old war has seen virtually every permutation of conflict among and between Muslims, Serbs and Croats.
But none is more intractable than a battle raging in the northwestern Bihac area between the Muslim-dominated army of the Bosnian Government and the Muslim troops of a wealthy businessman named Fikret Abdic, who has declared autonomy from Sarajevo.


Big Board Uncovered Short Sales Up; Amex Off
For the first time since January, the number of borrowed shares sold short and not yet covered by repurchases fell on the American Stock Exchange in the month that ended on June 8, even as the uncovered short sales rose to a record on the New York Stock Exchange.
In separate reports released yesterday, the New York exchange said that the number of these uncovered shares rose 5.4 percent, to 1.56 billion shares, surpassing the previous record of 1.48 billion shares set for the month that ended on May 6.


McNeil Ousts Graf in an Upset for the Ages
While a storm brewed around Center Court and Lori McNeil created a maelstrom at the net, Steffi Graf tonight became the first defending champion in the 108-year history of Wimbledon's coveted women's singles crown to discover herself dethroned in the first round.
Playing too tamely and lamely for her own good, and unable to provoke herself into mimicking the attacking style that was working wonders for McNeil, Graf was ousted, 7-5, 7-6 (7-5).
While the 22d-ranked McNeil treated the net as if they shared a magnetic attraction, Graf served and volleyed just twice in the match, and admitted she should have been more aggressive.


Battle Over a Health Plan In General Dynamics Strike
Intent on preserving health care benefits fully paid by their company, 2,000 members of the United Automobile Workers union walked off the job on Monday at General Dynamics factories in three states.
No talks to resolve the strike are scheduled.
Officials of the General Dynamics Corporation would not describe the concessions the company is seeking.
But U.A.W. officials said the company wanted employees of its tank-making operation to begin making co-payments for health care, give up some vacation time and take a cut in their life insurance policies.


In Performance: Cabaret
When Tenuta Calls, The Stud-Puppets Jump  The Ballroom
Although Judy Tenuta's comic alter ego, a cheery faux dominatrix who calls herself "the goddess," may be more than a decade old, she remains one of the more original eccentrics to emerge from the world of 1980's stand-up comedy.


In Performance: Recordings
Boyce's Symphonies: Period Music, Modern Appeal  Academy of Ancient Music, directed by Christopher Hogwood
William Boyce's eight Symphonies (Op. 2), composed from 1739 to 1758 and published in 1760, have a foot in the world of Handel and a toe or two pointing toward early Mozart.
They are, really, proto-symphonies: opera overtures that escaped the theater to stand on their own as abstract entertainments.
With their compact structures, in which cheerful, danceable tunes alternate with graceful slow movements, they have the anonymous chug-along quality of Baroque table music.
Yet they also have a magnetic charm, which Christopher Hogwood and his Academy of Ancient Music mine irresistibly on this L'Oiseau-Lyre release (436 761-2, CD).


Personal Health; Making sure that children play it safe with the sun.
SCHOOL is almost out and millions of youngsters will be outside playing from dawn to dusk.
But while they frolic in the summer sun, many will be overexposed to the sun's skin-damaging ultraviolet rays.
Although wrinkled, leathery skin and skin cancers may seem too remote to matter to a 5-year-old, the aging effects of sunlight are cumulative, and children spend three times as much time in the sun as adults do.
Eighty percent of the typical American's lifetime exposure to cancer-causing ultraviolet radiation occurs before the age of 20.


Review/Television; New Summer Episodes On Three Cable Series
Summertime, and the television schedule isn't easy.
Reruns and failed pilots predominate on the commercial networks.
But at least in some instances, cable is into some shrewd counterprogramming, gussying up established series with fresh material.
Tonight, for example, HBO begins adding several new episodes to "Dream On" and "The Larry Sanders Show." Tomorrow, MTV opens a third season of "The Real World," its "reality-based soap opera" with a whole new cast of people in their 20's.
Television entertainment still shows a pulse.
"Dream On," at 10, brings back Martin Tupper (Brian Benben), the usually perplexed single parent who was weaned on 1950's television and now works in publishing as a failed writer.
"Not failed," explains his former wife, Judith (Wendie Malick), sweetly.
"Just unpublished." Martin is now somewhat consoled by the sudden death of Judith's second husband, the fabulously overachieving Dr.
Richard Stone.
But at a memorial service for Richard at the United Nations, observing an "international day of sorrow," Martin gets entangled in a kidnapping plot involving Judith's infant son.


2 Opposites Share One Center Attraction
Hakeem Olajuwon and Patrick Ewing are opposites at virtually every turn.
Olajuwon is expansive and talkative, Ewing abbreviated and reserved.
Olajuwon epitomizes versatility, spinning and whirling to the basket; Ewing is the classic center who shoots a jump shot or makes a power move.
Olajuwon is Muslim, Ewing Catholic.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Timothy Daigle, pitcher.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 17
June 10
June 18
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.5
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.4
3.3
3.1
Gasoline stocks
217.9
219.2
225.2
Distillate stocks
116.4
113.8
106.4
Crude imports, daily
8.7
7.2
7.6
Product imports, daily
1.7
2.1
1.8
Crude stocks
324.6
326.6
352.2
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
94.8
96.2
92.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Trammell Crow Picks Chief From Empire's Hotel Unit
The Trammell Crow Company reached beyond its real estate development business today, but not the Crow family's empire, to name James D. Carreker as its new chief executive.
Mr.
Carreker, a former department store executive, will remain in charge of the family's Wyndham Hotels and Resorts.
As such, his appointment exemplifies how much the commercial real estate business has become like other service industries.


An Airman's Revenge: 5 Minutes of Terror
The gunman who killed 4 people and wounded 23 at an Air Force hospital near here on Monday was apparently motivated by a desire for revenge against the first two people he shot, both fatally: a psychiatrist and a psychologist whose observation of him ultimately led to his discharge from the service last month.
The gunman, who was shot to death by a military policeman while pursuing yet another would-be victim in the parking lot outside the hospital, was identified today as Dean A. Mellberg, a 20-year-old former airman from Lansing, Mich.


Nassau Faces A Challenge: Government From Scratch
A Federal judge today gave the deadlocked Nassau County Board of Supervisors one last chance to come up with a plan for a new county government that will comply with the one-person, one-vote principle.
The judge, Arthur D. Spatt, said that if the board failed to endorse a plan within two weeks, he was prepared to appoint a "politically neutral" special master to formulate a plan that the court would then impose on the county.


Flywheels To Power Vehicles
American Flywheel Systems Inc., a start-up company in Seattle that is developing a mechanical energy-storage device for electric cars, said yesterday that it would buy a technology used for making nuclear bomb fuel from the Federal Government.
American Flywheel said the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee would supply it with materials and techniques for rotating masses that were originally developed for centrifuges used to separate uranium isotopes.


In America; Juice and Reality
It's the most exciting and entertaining news story in years.
The parade up the highway could have been scripted by Spielberg.
Will O. J. get to call his mother?
Will he blow his brains out in the back of Al Cowlings's Bronco?
And what's the latest on the murder weapon?
Samurai sword?
Entrenching tool?
Hunting knife?
Fast-forward to the courtroom drama.
Quick, look!
Wasn't that just a hint of a smile when they mentioned Nicole's name?
Did you notice the gray in his hair?
Does he look drugged?


Dollar's Slide Against Yen Marked by Orderly Trading
The dollar fell to a new post-World War II low against the Japanese yen yesterday, continuing a slide that has lopped off 5 percent of its value in a little more than two weeks.
The dollar briefly traded below 100 yen for the first time.
Traders said yesterday's drop was orderly and was nothing like the speculative fever that gripped the currency market in early May, when the Federal Reserve Bank and other central banks intervened to support the dollar.
Indeed, there were no signs that the Fed or other central banks were buying dollars yesterday.


Chief Executive To Step Down At Deaf Center
In a victory for the deaf-rights movement, the newly appointed chief executive of the Lexington Center, the parent body of the largest school for deaf children in New York State, has stepped down after a two-month protest by students and alumni who said a deaf person should fill the post.
R.
Max Gould, a banking executive who was named to the post in April, said recently that he was withdrawing because his presence had become divisive.
His decision allows the center to search for a new candidate, and officials at the center, based in Jackson Heights, Queens, said many of those who have led the protests would be allowed to join the search process.


AMR Plans To Cut More Of Its Staff
The AMR Corporation, the parent of American Airlines, said yesterday that it was planning to further trim and consolidate the ranks of its managers and possibly other nonunionized workers in its core airline business.
The move underscores American's determination to reduce costs to remain competitive, a theme that Robert L. Crandall, AMR's chairman, has trumpeted for more than a year and a strategy being undertaken by other major carriers.


Senator D'Amato's Investment Coup
Senator Alfonse D'Amato has hidden talent as an investor.
According to his new financial filing, the New York Republican tripled an $18,000 investment overnight when a friendly broker provided him first chance at a new stock offering -- known as an initial public offering, or I.P.O. -- unavailable to ordinary investors.
By the way, Mr.
D'Amato is the ranking Republican on the Senate Banking Committee, which oversees the Securities and Exchange Commission, which sued Mr.
D'Amato's securities firm for cheating customers.
The friendly broker offered Senator D'Amato a series of deals that generated a profit somewhere in excess of 33 percent in less than one year.
None of this was illegal.
But for the Senator to accept this special treatment from a firm under investigation once again raises questions about Mr.
D'Amato's ethical judgment -- and his credentials to criticize the investment practices of Hillary Rodham Clinton.


Court of Public Opinion Is First to Try Simpson
Sooner or later the case of The People of California v.
O.
J.
Simpson will be played out in a courthouse.
But first, as inevitably occurs in today's world of big cases, big lawyers and big media, Simpson v.
People will be tried in the court of public opinion.


INSIDE
Olive Branch From Jordan
Jordan's leader said he was ready to move toward normal relations with Israel without waiting for general progress in Mideast talks.
Page A6.
The Judgment of the Masses
Long before California v.
O.
J.
Simpson is ever played out in a courtroom, Simpson v.
People will be tried in the court of public opinion.
Page A12.
Gang Members Arrested
Members of the Latin Kings gang in New York were charged with a series of crimes including the murders of eight of their own members.
Page B1.
McNeil Stuns Graf
Steffi Graf, a five-time Wimbledon winner, was defeated in the opening round by Lori McNeil, who is ranked No. 22 in the world.
Page B9.


John Dondero, 72, Christian Brother And Psychologist
Brother John P. Dondero, a former chairman of the psychology department at La Salle University, died on Saturday at the Roncalli Center, the Christian Brothers community in Philadelphia that he founded.
He was 72.
The cause was congestive heart failure, the university said.


Corrections
A chart yesterday summarizing the political status of the countries of sub-Saharan Africa misidentified Nigeria's current leader in some editions.
He is Gen.
Sani Abacha.
Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, whose picture appeared erroneously, led the country until he was forced out last August.


Surprisingly, No Gridlock
Rudolph W. Giuliani edged into office last November to become a Republican Mayor surrounded by Democrats, a political alignment in City Hall that seemed like a formula for municipal gridlock.
But the first major test between the parties -- the battle over Mr.
Giuliani's austere budget -- barely rose to the level of a confrontation, as the leaders of the Democratic-controlled City Council agreed to a $31.6 billion plan so similar to Mr.
Giuliani's original proposal that the Mayor could fairly say it represented the break he had promised with New York's tradition of expansive government.


Family Becomes Issue in the Texas Governor's Race
As their campaign for Governor gets under way, Ann W. Richards and George W. Bush have been trading jabs over the Texas economy, taxes and crime.
But today the sparring turned to a highly unusual campaign issue: whether men are frauds.
Speaking to hundreds of high school girls in Austin on Monday, Governor Richards, a Democrat running for re-election, urged the teen-agers to become more self-reliant.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about the immigrant lottery for visas misidentified the location of the application storage site shown.
It was Portsmouth, N.H., not Boston.


Lotus Development
Lotus Development continued its plunge yesterday, following its announcement after the market closed on Monday that results for its current quarter would not meet estimates.
The stock plummeted 28 percent from its Monday close, including after-hours trading on Monday.


Real Estate; A well-received auction of New York properties was a pitchman's dream, and a successful one.
EVEN before it started, yesterday's "Great Commercial Property Auction" at the Starlight Roof of the Waldorf-Astoria was a pitchman's delight: some 170 properties, valued in excess of $300 million, up for sale to the highest bidder.
More than 50 multifamily and commercial-use properties in the New York City region on the block, the biggest property auction ever held in New York.
The largest auction of petroleum properties -- real estate-ese for gas stations -- ever held.
And a successful pitch it was.
Nine properties were sold even before the auction began, for a total of $20 million.
And by the time the auction ended at 4 P.M., the auction sponsors say, an additional 84 commercial properties and 55 gas stations had been auctioned off, at a combined selling price of $100 million.


GIULIANI'S BUDGET WINS THE SUPPORT OF COUNCIL CHIEFS
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and the leaders of the City Council agreed yesterday on a $31.6 billion budget that would sharply curtail the growth in spending for the first time since the city fiscal crisis of the 1970's and begin to wrench down the size of New York City's government.
The Mayor and the Council leaders struck a tentative deal at 3:30 yesterday morning -- toasting it with champagne -- after two weeks of talks and a final day and night of haggling about what spending to cut and whether to merge the city's three police forces, which in the end was given the green light by the Council.


AT&amp;T Plans Video Service Along With '800' Numbers
Those ubiquitous toll-free "800" number telephone lines, used for everything from booking airline tickets to buying hosiery from a catalogue, could soon be going color.
The AT&amp;T Corporation announced yesterday that it would soon begin offering video and data communications to companies that operate toll-free numbers.
In time, customers may be able to dial up a catalogue company like L.L.
Bean with their computers and get pictures and price lists for outdoor clothing as they talk to salespeople on the telephone.


Mexico Tracking Voters by Computer
Faced with public doubt about the integrity of Mexico's elections, the Government and the political party that has controlled it for 65 years have promised to make the next national election scheduled for Aug. 21 fair and squeaky clean.
Backing up that promise has already cost the nation around $1 billion and required the design of an elaborate computer system capable of keeping track of almost 45 million names, one of the world's largest computerized voter registration lists.


Arsonist's Blaze Kills 2 in Williamsburg
A woman and a man were killed early yesterday in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, trapped on the top floor of an apartment building that the authorities said was set on fire by an arsonist seeking vengeance on another man in the building.
The police were searching yesterday for a Bronx man who they believe may have set the blaze to hurt a second-floor resident who was dating the man's ex-wife, said Martin Johnson, Deputy Inspector of the department's Brooklyn North Detective Operations.
The police and neighbors said that the Bronx man and the building resident, Jose Rivera Jr., had a running dispute over the woman and that the suspect had threatened Mr.
Rivera several times, slashing his car's tires once.
The suspect was not identified.


K. T. Stevens, 74, Actress and Unionist
K.
T.
Stevens, a theater, film and television actress and a theatrical-union official, died on June 13 at her home in Brentwood, Calif.
She was 74.
The cause was lung cancer, said Dick Moore, a spokesman for the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists.


CHRONICLE
Who was mobbed the most for autographs on Monday night at the opening of BARBRA STREISAND'S engagement at Madison Square Garden?
There was no way for most of the fans to get to Ms.
Streisand.
But they seemed more than content for a scribble or two from MARLA MAPLES TRUMP and BARBARA WALTERS, who obliged fans milling around them in the front rows of the cavernous arena by writing on $20 programs or other pieces of paper.


In Performance: Theater
The Goddess of Destruction In an Arizona Nightclub  Theater for the New City
If Leslie Mohn's feminist satire, "Wrath of Kali," were judged solely on the scope of its ambitions, it would earn high marks.
The multi-media production, overseen by the playwright in collaboration with the erratically brilliant experimental director Lee Breuer, folds several layers of narrative and myth into a video-based theatrical collage.
Among many clever notions, characters step in and out of scenes from "Close Encounters of the Third Kind," and the ghost of Orson Welles is channeled through the Internet computer network.


Big Board Uncovered Short Sales Up; Amex Off
For the first time since January, the number of borrowed shares sold short and not yet covered by repurchases fell on the American Stock Exchange in the month that ended on June 8, even as the uncovered short sales rose to a record on the New York Stock Exchange.
In separate reports released yesterday, the New York exchange said that the number of these uncovered shares rose 5.4 percent, to 1.56 billion shares, surpassing the previous record of 1.48 billion shares set for the month that ended on May 6.


CHRONICLE
PEGGY NOONAN, the former Presidential speech writer, can't quite get foreign policy issues out of her blood -- or, apparently, her speeches.
Invited by RUPERT MURDOCH to pay tribute to GRACE MIRABELLA and the magazine that bears her name at its fifth-anniversary party on Monday, Ms.
Noonan remarked: "I heard some good news from Washington just before I came here. We don't have to worry about North Korea; Mr. Murdoch just bought it."


Three-Bowl Conversion Is Attempted by CBS
CBS has made an offer worth an estimated $300 million to buy the television rights to the Orange, Fiesta and Gator Bowls.
If accepted, it would almost guarantee that CBS will be the home of the elusive college football national championship game for six years, according to a person familiar with the negotiations.
"The last great event that has not happened, how can't you be interested?" said Rick Gentile, a senior vice president of CBS Sports.


Lesbianism Does Not Bar Child Custody, Court Rules
Overturning a lower court decision that had awarded custody of a lesbian's son to his grandmother, the Virginia Court of Appeals unanimously ruled today that a person's homosexuality does not necessarily make that individual an unfit parent.
"The social science evidence showed that a person's sexual orientation does not strongly correlate with that person's fitness as a parent," Judge Sam W. Coleman 3d wrote for the court, which reunited Sharon L. Bottoms, 24, of Richmond, with her son, Tyler Doustou, 2.


In World War II, Many Jewish G.I.'s Left Religion Off Dog Tags
To the Editor:
Victor B. Geller (letter, June 14) offers as explanation of the scarcity of Stars of David in D-Day cemeteries that the families of fallen Jewish servicemen chose to have the remains shipped home for reburial, but there is a more likely explanation.


At $10,000, Mum's the Word
Anthony Mason and John Starks have sometimes gotten in trouble for things they have said.
Today, they got in trouble for what they didn't say.
Both Mason and Starks skipped today's interview session with the national news media and were fined $10,000 apiece by the National Basketball Association.
The Knicks were fined $20,000 by the league for allowing the two players to miss the session.
Both players arrived with the team at the Summit today, but while the rest of the team was being interviewed on the court, Starks and Mason simply waited in the closed Knicks' locker room for the interview session to end.
When it did, reporters were cleared out of the arena, and Starks and Mason joined the Knicks for practice.


Jordanian Hints at Flexibility in Israeli Talks
King Hussein of Jordan told United States officials during a visit here today that he was ready to take major steps toward normal relations with Israel, and that he would not wait for similar progress in Israel's dealings with Syria and other Arab countries.
The notion of solidarity in dealing with Israel has long been honored by Arab countries.
But King Hussein told reporters in Washington, "As far as we are concerned, this is a sovereign matter involving Jordan itself and has nothing to do with, nor is it tied to, movements on any other track."


Accounts
*
Living Books, Novato, Calif., a joint venture of Random House Publishing and Broderbund Software producing interactive children's stories on CD-ROM disks, to Hoffman/Lewis, San Francisco.
There was no previous agency.
Billings were not disclosed.


Moscow's Seedy Monster Hotel Is Told to Clean Up Its Act
"We have no rats and no cockroaches," the waiter at the restaurant of the Rossiya Hotel said sullenly.
City health inspectors ordered Russia's largest and some say ugliest hotel on Monday to close down temporarily and get rid of its uninvited guests.
Still with a straight face, he added, "absolutely none." Then, reluctantly, the waiter smiled and his smile stretched wider and wider until he threw his head back and began laughing uncontrollably.


The G.I. Bill, 50 Years On
Not all the great victories in World War II took place on the battlefield.
What proved a landmark triumph for America and its fighting forces had its start in the White House 50 years ago today when President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the G.I.
Bill of Rights.
Few laws have done so much for so many, yet the anniversary of this political and social counterpart of D-Day has been all but forgotten.
Formally known as the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944, this innovative bill was ambitious in design and laudable in purpose: to help 10 million veterans, and their country, adapt to peacetime.
The measure offered guaranteed loans to buy a home, farm or business; 52 weeks of unemployment insurance at $20 per week, plus job placement services; and most enduringly important, up to four years of Federal aid for learning or training at any level, from grade to graduate school.


Caned American Says Farewell to Singapore
A young American man flogged for vandalizing cars was released from prison here on Tuesday, pale and markedly thinner but walking without difficulty despite his four lashes with a rattan cane nearly seven weeks ago.
"I'm happy to be free," the American, Michael Fay, said after a meeting at the United States Embassy.
"My health is good. I'm looking forward to going back to my own country."


50 Years Later, the Value of the G.I. Bill Is Questioned
Returning home from World War II service as a gunner on an Army Air Forces bomber, Mike M. Machado went to St.
Mary's University here with all expenses paid.
"My rich uncle sent me to college -- Uncle Sam," said Mr.
Machado, now 70 years old, who went on to earn a law degree and become a state judge.
Under the G.I.
Bill, he received full tuition of $85 a semester and a monthly stipend of $250 that covered the living expenses of his family of four.


Public &amp; Private; Remember Nicole Simpson
This is not the story of a fallen idol.
It is the story of a man who, like many, many other men, beat up his wife and didn't think there was anything the least bit wrong with it.
In 1989, according to police reports, O. J. Simpson came to the door of the house in which he had blackened his wife Nicole's eye and split her lip and choked her, and told the officers: "This is a family matter. Why do you want to make a big deal of it?"


AT&amp;T and Silicon Graphics Plan Alliance
The AT&amp;T Corporation and Silicon Graphics Inc. plan to announce today an alliance aimed at developing and marketing networks that deliver interactive television and on-line computer services into the home.
The new alliance brings together two powerful suppliers in the race between telephone and cable television companies to build multimedia networks, like those being built by the Bell Atlantic Corporation in the mid-Atlantic states and by Time Warner Inc. in Orlando, Fla.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Study gives name-brand marketers a plan to mount a counterattack on private labels and store brands.
JUST as a sign admonished Clinton campaign workers to remember "It's the economy, stupid," marketers are being advised to behave as if signs in every corporate board room are reminding them "It's the best value, stupid."
By now it is a truism that marketing has been profoundly affected by the sea change in attitudes since the 1990's began, as value for money spent becomes the crucial attribute sought by consumers choosing among goods and services.
Marketers have slashed prices, increased package sizes and eschewed glitz for substance for products like cereal, cigarettes, drugs, fast food and paper goods.


Veteran Bronx Educator Appointed to Central School Board
Sandra Lerner, a professional educator with close ties to the teachers' union, was appointed yesterday to New York City's central Board of Education by Bronx Borough President Fernando Ferrer.
Mr. Ferrer said she would seek "radical change."


Legislature Agrees to Whitman's Budget Request
With relatively modest but politically sensitive changes, the leaders of the New Jersey Legislature today gave Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman the budget that she had requested.
The Republican-controlled Legislature released its version of a spending plan that embodies the Governor's 10 percent cut in the income-tax rate; gives the state a $450 million surplus for the year beginning July 1 and limits the state's spending to $15.28 billion, a shade less than even the Governor had proposed.


Robben Island Journal; South Africa Ponders Fate of Apartheid's Bastille
South Africans managed to overcome their vast cultural and political differences as they created their new Government, but a dry, windswept island six miles across the water from Cape Town is putting into focus the debate that is yet to come over how to treat the country's history.
Robben Island has been the home of South Africa's unwanted: lepers, the mentally disturbed, political prisoners, criminals.
Now, the new Government is trying to decide what to do with the spot of land that for years served as President Nelson Mandela's jail.


Remembering George Ball


Eating Well
HO-HUM.
Another month, another scare.
The latest is about a possible connection between the high consumption of hot dogs and childhood leukemia.
But Americans appear to be so inured to the scare of the month that if the recent study in question has had any impact on hot dog sales, no one has noticed.


Price, Not Safety, Drives Yankee Fans Away; Resist His Blackmail
To the Editor:
We must keep the Yankees in New York City.
But it makes little economic sense to spend hundreds of millions on a business that was recently valued at $160 million.
The Yankees represent social and political values that ought to be protected if reasonable compromise can be reached, including public expenditures.
The amount must be related to value, especially when schools, police and infrastructure are under attack.
We ought to keep the Yankees, we ought to pay a rational price, and we ought not let George Steinbrenner blackmail us.


A Meal of an Appetizer
IF you would rather eat hors d'oeuvres or appetizers than main dishes, have I got a meal for you!
Here are two kinds of bruschetta that can be put together in less than 30 minutes.
Together, they make a varied and appealing meal.
Good Italian bread has to be used to make the bruschetta come out just right.
Topping of Broccoli  And Olives
1 large clove garlic  2 pounds whole broccoli or 1 pound ready-cut broccoli florettes (7 cups)  1 teaspoon olive oil  1/8 teaspoon hot-pepper flakes  1 cup water  4 teaspoons green olive paste or 10 medium black or green Italian, Greek or French olives  1/8 teaspoon salt  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Thinly slice garlic.
2. Trim stems from whole broccoli; cut florettes into bite-size pieces.
3. Heat nonstick pan until very hot. Add oil; reduce heat to medium high.
4. Stir in garlic and hot pepper flakes, and saute for 30 seconds.
5.
Add broccoli; stir well, and stir in water; reduce heat to medium; cover, and cook broccoli until water evaporates, about 10 minutes.
6.
Stir in olive paste, and mash the broccoli with a fork into small pieces. (If using olives, pit and mix in.) Season with salt and pepper
7. Heap on bruschetta halves.
Yield: Enough for three slices of bruschetta.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 105 calories, 6 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 595 milligrams sodium, 7 grams protein, 13 grams carbohydrate.
Topping of Peppers  And Onions
16 ounces whole onion or 14 ounces chopped ready-cut onion (3 1/3 to 3 1/2 cups)  2 teaspoons olive oil  20 ounces whole red, orange and/or yellow bell peppers or 18 ounces chopped ready-cut peppers (5 cups)  3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Chop whole onion; heat nonstick pan large enough to hold all the vegetables.
2. Add oil to pan; reduce heat to medium-high and saute onion until it begins to brown.
3.
Wash, trim, seed and chop whole peppers; add peppers to onions, and continue cooking to soften peppers slightly.
4.
Add vinegar; reduce heat; cover and simmer peppers until they are soft; season with pepper.
Yield: Enough for 3 slices of bruschetta.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 200 calories, 5 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 20 milligrams sodium, 6 grams protein, 35 grams carbohydrate.
Bruschetta
6 large slices crusty Italian bread  3 large cloves garlic.  1.
Toast bread until brown.
2.
Cut cloves of garlic in half.
When bread is toasted rub one side with cut half of garlic.
3.
Cut slices in half, and top 3 of the halves with heaping tablespoons of broccoli topping; heap pepper topping over remaining bread halves.
Yield: 2 large servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving (before topping): 245 calories, 3 grams fat, 0 milligrams cholesterol, 525 milligrams sodium, 8 grams protein, 45 grams carbohydrate.


Rangers Visit A Fantasyland
Mark Messier dodged a curveball in batting practice, Brian Leetch pitched in the bullpen and Nick Kypreos helped the groundskeepers roll up the tarpaulin.
One week after winning their team's first hockey championship since 1940, three Rangers played Joe Hardy for a day while toting the Stanley Cup around Yankee Stadium.
Instead of wearing blue sweaters, the three players donned Yankee pinstripes and their presence turned the clubhouse into an endless procession of autograph seekers and camera operators trying to get closer to the champions and closer to the cup.


Protestants Now Killing More Than I.R.A.
Protestant paramilitary groups have gradually replaced the Irish Republican Army as the prime killers in the 25-year-old campaign of sectarian violence in this Protestant-dominated British province.
British statistics, which are not challenged by Protestant loyalist forces or the Roman Catholic republican paramilitary organizations, show that since late 1991, the Protestants of the Ulster Freedom Fighters and the Ulster Volunteer Force have been killing more people in the conflict, which has left 3,155 dead since 1969.


In Performance: Theater
A Neighborhood's Population In a One-Man Show  Irish Arts Center
Under all the laughter in Colin Quinn's "Sanctifying Grace" is a rueful meditation on loss that gives this 80-minute play a real bite.
The characters Mr.
Quinn creates in the one-man show, residents of an Irish neighborhood in Brooklyn in the 1970's, are very funny people.
But they hurt without saying so, except for one remark by a woman named Margaret: "We didn't go after what we wanted. We went after what was left."


Food Notes
A New Ice Cream
Considering that ice creams with Scandinavian-style names have been made in places like the Bronx, it comes as no surprise that a new, rich ice cream, Alaska Ice Cream, is made in Ronkonkoma, L.I.
It is made by Calip Dairies, owned by the Smith family, which has been in the ice-cream business for more than 80 years and owns the Dolly Madison brand, among others.


Market Place; Incorrect Prices Turn Fidelity's Face Red
Fidelity Investments, the nation's largest mutual fund company, deliberately provided incorrect information on the value of its mutual funds last week, causing newspapers to report that most Fidelity funds did substantially better than they actually did.
A Fidelity spokeswoman, Constance Hubbell, said yesterday that the fund management company had not been able to calculate the value of 166 funds on Friday because of a computer problem.
Rather than simply admit the problem, she said, Fidelity chose to report to the National Association of Securities Dealers that nearly all its funds had not changed in value on Friday, a volatile and generally bad day in American financial markets.


Will Yanks Spoil All-Star Pitching?
Tommy John returned to Yankee Stadium this week.
No, the Yankees were not asking him to bolster a sagging starting rotation, though at the age of 51 he probably could pitch as well as a much younger left-hander in the rotation has this season.
John was there in his new role as a member of the Minnesota Twins' television team.
His presence was timely because the subject of All-Star Games and Yankee pitchers has come up.


Will New York Still Love the Knicks Tomorrow?
The winners will drink champagne. The losers will taste bitter disappointment.
For the first time since 1988, the National Basketball Association championship will be decided in a one-game showdown, Wednesday night's Game 7 between the Knicks and the Houston Rockets at the Summit.
It will be the type of game where legends are made, where dreams are realized, and where hearts are broken.


CHRONICLE
It is a week to remember for ALEXANDER D. FORGER.
On Saturday, he became the president of the Legal Services Corporation, the Federally financed independent corporation that provides legal aid to indigent people.
Tonight, he is to receive the Servant of Justice Award of the Legal Aid Society of New York at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The award is given every year to an individual distinguished for advocating justice for the poor.
Mr.
Forger was a director and an officer of the Legal Aid Society for 20 years, 12 of them as its chairman.


Barge Pilot Blamed in Fatal Amtrak Wreck
Federal officials today blamed a poorly trained barge pilot for the worst train wreck in Amtrak's history, saying he rammed a train bridge in a pre-dawn fog moments before the 11-car Sunset Limited, en route from Los Angeles to Miami, began to cross the span.
Investigators said the pilot, Willie Odom, could not read his radar, had left his chart of the river at home and did not have a compass.
Like many towboat operators in the area, they said, he had no formal training.
They said he had received his piloting license only months before, after failing the exam seven times.


People
*
Paul Turcotte was named advertising director of Field &amp; Stream and Outdoor Life magazines, New York, succeeding Jonathan Stone, who became associate publisher of Bicycling magazine.
Mr.
Turcotte was previously advertising director of Playboy magazine, New York.


A Lot of Creative Work Went Into Makings of Tie
Taken alone, it was the kind of soccer score to make suddenly offense-minded FIFA officials cringe: Germany 1, Spain 1.
But this was far from a stultifying exercise in self-preservation and World Cup conservatism.
For any of the 63,113 fans who sat at sun-drenched Soldier Field, it was an afternoon well spent.


Double Slaying Simply a Bungled Robbery, Says Prosecutor
It was a botched robbery attempt and not the tortured belief that he was killing his parents that led an alcoholic Larchmont carpenter to break into his childhood home and murder the couple that slept in his parents' former bedroom, a prosecutor said in his closing argument today.
For the first time during the trial of Paul Cox, 26, on second-degree murder charges, the prosecutor offered a motive for the stabbing deaths of Dr.
Shanta Chervu and her husband, Dr.
Lakshman Rao Chervu.


'Dogfaces' in Rome
To the Editor:
I read with deep emotion "Roma e Libera! Viva l'Italia" by Ivo Lederer (Op-Ed, June 4).
At the time, June 1944, I was living on the same Viale Parioli, where through cracks in the otherwise tightly closed shutters imposed by the curfew, we watched the Germans retreating during the night and then saw the arrival of the first cautious American G.I.'s early the next morning.


Critic's Notebook; With Reality Reeling, Pity the Poor Realist
"The American writer in the middle of the 20th century has his hands full in trying to understand, describe and then make credible much of American reality," wrote Philip Roth in an essay in Commentary magazine.
"It stupefies, it sickens, it infuriates and finally it is even a kind of embarassment to one's own meager imagination. The actuality is continually outdoing our talents, and the culture tosses up figures almost daily that are the envy of any novelist."
Philip Roth made these observation back in 1961 -- before the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, before the assassinations of Robert F. Kennedy and the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., before the social upheavals of the late 60's, before Vietnam and Watergate and Iran-contra.


This Time, Yanks Give Key (11-1) Lift
Jimmy Key has made a habit of saving the Yankees when a situation is especially dire.
He has routinely followed losses by pitching splendidly and erasing whatever mess was created 24 hours earlier.
Last night, the Yankees rescued Key when he displayed a modicum of inefficiency.
Actually, both Key and Buck Showalter were saved because the manager probably would have received some criticism for not starting Paul O'Neill if the Yankees had not mounted another splendid comeback after the Twins scored the first three runs.
Danny Tartabull started in right field and his shoddy defense helped contribute to all three runs.


Reds Decide to Take Gamble on Gant
RON GANT, the former Atlanta Braves star who was released in March after breaking his leg in a dirt-bike accident, signed a two-year contract with the Cincinnati Reds yesterday.
The Reds, seeking more right-handed punch in their lineup, said they would place Gant on the 15-day disabled while he continues his recovery.
The Reds hope he will be ready to play next month.


In Performance: Theater
A Man Who Became a Woman, A Woman Becoming a Man  Performance Space 122
For Allie, the transsexual performance artist portrayed by the transsexual performance artist Kate Bornstein in "Virtually Yours," identity is a double Gordian knot.
Growing up as a boy, she worried about turning into her father; now she sees herself becoming her mother.
Worse, her female lover is in the process of switching genders, and Allie was never attracted to men.
"I know that somewhere deep inside that man," she says, "is the woman I fell in love with."


CLINTON PROMISES NOT TO SURRENDER ON UNIVERSAL CARE
Despite a week of panicky pleas for compromise from Capitol Hill, President Clinton vowed today that he would not "declare defeat" on the goal of guaranteeing health insurance to every American.
Mr.
Clinton's pledge, in a speech to executives from the nation's biggest companies, appeared to have several political purposes, like bucking up Democratic loyalists in the House, many of whom are going out on a political limb to advance a universal coverage bill.
It also signaled the Senate, and particularly a very divided Senate Finance Committee, that covering everyone is a goal that will not be compromised.


George Schultz, Philanthropist, Is Dead at 77
George L. Schultz, a philanthropist and former president of the toiletries manufacturer Shulton Inc., died on Friday at his summer home in Essex Fells, N.J.
He was 77 and lived in Vero Beach, Fla.
The cause was a heart attack, said his daughter Margaret S. Bilotti.


20 Members of Hispanic Gang Indicted in Multiple Killings
Twenty members or associates of the Latin Kings, a gang that prosecutors describe as one of the best organized and most violent in New York, were charged yesterday with crimes including the brutal murders of at least seven of their own members.
The United States Attorney, Mary Jo White, said the Latin Kings were a rigid hierarchal organization that beheaded, burned or beat up wayward members, and maimed and killed outsiders as well.
In addition, she said, some members trafficked in illegal guns and drugs.


Ads Deal Depression in SubwatAds Deal Depression In Subway
HAVE you read the ads on the subway lately?
Why are they more depressing than adolescence or fading friendship?
Why does the generally upbeat world of advertising turn so melancholy underground?
For starters, there are the ads making you aware of hair loss, foot pain and zits.
Then how about the one that just asks, "Torn Earlobe?"
Wait, it gets worse.


Thompson Executive Relinquishes a Title
In a surprising move, Peter Schweitzer, the president and chief operating officer of the J. Walter Thompson Company, has relinquished his duties as chief operating officer and thus removed himself as a candidate to succeed Burt Manning, the chairman and chief executive of the agency.
"This is absolutely my decision," Mr.
Schweitzer said in a telephone interview from Detroit yesterday, where he will continue to be based, heading the agency's worldwide Ford account.
He noted personal and professional reasons for his decision, including his two young children and a belief that "I don't want to work the rest of my life."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  FRENCH TROOPS OUTSIDE RWANDA  France moved troops to the Rwandan border in preparation for a mission to try to end ethnic killing, but France said it would not send the troops in unless both the Government and the rebels agreed.
A2  ANOTHER WAR IN BOSNIA  The northern Bihac area of Bosnia has become the most active battle front, and unlike the rest of the country, the fighting is between the mostly Muslim Bosnian Government and a breakaway Muslim group.
A3


Nicotine Patch Study Sees 25% Success Rate
The nicotine patch is effective in helping a quarter of smokers quit, a new study has found.
Smokers who used the patch are more than twice as likely to quit smoking for at least six months as are those who used dummy patches.
More than 4 million of the nation's 50 million smokers use nicotine patches each year in efforts to quit smoking.
The small adhesive patches release nicotine into the bloodstream to quell the smoker's cravings for cigarettes.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Citicorp's sale of I/B/E/S Inc. to Disclosure Inc., a subsidiary of the Dutch publisher VNU, misstated the location of Disclosure's headquarters.
It is Bethesda, Md., not Baltimore.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.13
4.24
2.98
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.17
4.18
3.08
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.58
4.55
3.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.20
7.16
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.49
7.46
6.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.29
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.30
5.79
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Budget Deal in Trenton
With relatively modest but politically sensitive changes, the leaders of the New Jersey Legislature gave Governor Whitman the budget she had requested.
Page B1.


In School
On May 5, 1993, after two meetings with her top aides, Alice Chandler, president of the State University of New York at New Paltz, declared Eric Coppolino persona non grata.
"They kicked me off campus," Mr.
Coppolino said.
This was a big problem for a man who has been eking out a living for more than two years doing freelance investigative reporting on PCB contamination in New Paltz dormitories and classrooms.


It's Official: Timberwolves Staying Put
The National Basketball Association's board of governors voted yesterday to reject the sale of the Minnesota Timberwolves to a group that planned to move the team to New Orleans.
The board followed the recommendation of the league's relocation committee, which decided last week that the proposal by Top Rank of Louisiana was inadequately financed.
The Timberwolves' president, BOB STEIN, said the vote was 25-1, with one abstention, against the sale. (AP)


Critics Assail Budget as Coucil Debate Wins
The $31.6-billion budget agreement between the Giuliani administration and leaders of the City Council was attacked yesterday by critics who questioned its fiscal assumptions and its spending cuts.
But supporters rallied behind the agreement, which restored some projects with strong local support that Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani had planned to cut.
The State Comptroller, H. Carl McCall, criticized the agreement, warning that it included $700 million in risky assumptions that could require the city to take drastic steps later this year.


Campus Drinking Problem Becomes Severe; Abuse, Not Addiction
To the Editor:
Re "The Legal Drug" by Anna Quindlen (column, June 11):


Anti-Gay Decree Splits Officials Family
Almost a year after commissioners in suburban Cobb County gained national attention by passing a resolution condemning homosexuality, a daughter of the commission's chairman announced today that she was a lesbian and called for the county to rescind the resolution.
The 24-year-old woman, Shannon Byrne, one of three daughters of Bill Byrne, the chairman of the Cobb County Commission, said at a news conference that she had told her family years ago that she was a lesbian and that the anti-gay resolution was creating unnecessary pain and division within her family and the county.


Disney's Virginia Park Will Bring American Experience to Life
To the Editor:
Re "Rebelling Against Disney" (editorial, June 19), regarding Disney's planned park in Northern Virginia: We have always planned for our park to be an entertaining, enlightening and educational portrayal of history.
We never intended it to be a referendum on Disney.
Yet that is what seems to be occurring.
While debate on substantive areas of disagreement can be useful, debate for the sake of being contentious, such as your editorial, is usually not.


Lawsuit Imperils Double-Deckers' Revival
Just three years ago, the first of the British double-decker buses arrived in New York City.
Tourists could cruise along on the upper level, the street theater of Manhattan at their feet.
They could hop on and off at leisure.
The idea caught on.
Today, the fledgling mini-industry is booming.
No fewer than 50 double-deckers lumber up and down the streets of Manhattan, from Battery Park to the Apollo Theater in Harlem.
One company boasts 1,000 passengers a day.


Block (H &amp; R) Inc.(HRB,N) reports earnings for Year to Apr 30


Houston Fans Show Their True Colors
There were fireworks, literally.
Little blazing rockets boomed and shot across the ceiling of the Summit.
Streamers dropped down from above, cloaking the players, the fans, even the police who forged a stern ring around the court, in red and gold.
And, finally, the transformation was complete: "This place is Champ City now," said Chuck Webber, a Rockets fan with a huge cigar firmly plastered in one corner of his mouth.
"Forget about Choke City."


Allou Health &amp; Beauty Care Inc.(ALU,A) reports earnings for Qtr to Mar 31


Working Hard for the Money
Hakeem Olajuwon's parents weren't on hand to watch their son play in the most important game of his career.
Salaam and Abike Olajuwon had intended to be courtside since Game 1 but instead have contented themselves with watching on television.
Why the change of heart?
"My parents cannot even watch the game on TV because of the physical contact," Olajuwon explained.
"They're not used to the contact. When they saw the first game they said, 'Oh, you actually work for your money.'


Israelis, by and Large, Back Peace Process
To the Editor:
"If I Forget Thee, O Jerusalem" by William Safire (column, June 13) and "Arafat's Secret Weapon" (Op-Ed, same day) by Ruth Wisse restate the Israeli opposition's arguments to the Government's peace process.


Red Sox Complete Sweep of the Blue Jays
Red Sox 3, Blue Jays 2
Tom Brunansky drove in two runs and the Boston Red Sox completed a three-game sweep, beating the host Toronto Blue Jays, 3-2, last night.
The Red Sox had lost 11 in a row, their longest skid since 1932, before sweeping Toronto.
The Blue Jays have lost five in a row and eight of nine.
Indians 9, Tigers 6
Jim Thome hit two home runs for the first time in his career, and Sandy Alomar homered for the third straight game, powering visiting Cleveland to a victory over Detroit.
White Sox 4, Rangers 0
Wilson Alvarez, who had lost his previous 2 decisions after winning a club-record 15 straight, got another victory by allowing 2 hits over 8 innings as host Chicago beat Texas.
Alvarez (9-2) earned his first victory since May 27.
Brewers 9, Orioles 2
Alex Diaz hit his first major league homer, off Ben McDonald, in an eight-run second inning that carried Milwaukee past Baltimore at Camden Yards.
The Brewers got nine hits and two walks in the second off McDonald (10-5) and Mark Williamson.
Expos 6, Cardinals 4
Larry Walker had a three-run homer and Moises Alou a solo shot as visiting Montreal kept Bob Tewksbury's worst slump alive with a victory over St.
Louis.
Pirates 5, Phillies 4
Kevin Stocker was tagged for the final out as he tried to dive over catcher Don Slaught for the second time, and Pittsburgh held off Philadelphia for its seventh straight victory at home.
Reds 4, Giants 3
Barry Larkin's two-out single in the ninth inning gave host Cincinnati a victory and sent San Francisco to its 11th loss in 13 games.
Rockies 14, Astros 5
Dante Bichette hit two homers and tied Colorado records with five r.b.i. and four hits as the Rockies pummeled visiting Houston.
Padres 7, Dodgers 6
Luis Lopez had a career-high four hits, including an r.b.i. double in the seventh inning that gave San Diego a victory over visiting Los Angeles.


No Headline
"Before Stonewall, we had no rights. Police treated us like dogs. I remember thinking, when it was over, that I never had to be afraid again." -- DARIO MODON.  [ A1:3. ]


Mets Take Their War To Braves and Triumph
The Mets tried to re-establish order before they played the Braves tonight at Fulton County Stadium.
Bret Saberhagen was summoned to meet with Dallas Green and Ed Lynch, the Mets' management representative on this trip.
So was John Franco.
Some criticisms were forgiven, some inflammatory comments brushed aside.
All was not at peace, but the organization was doing its best to piece things back together after frustration borne of injuries and ugly losses resulted in a mini mutiny by three veterans on Tuesday night.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  FRENCH TROOPS TO AID RWANDA  France said it would move troops into Rwanda today to protect civilians against further killings there.
Some 2,500 marines and Foreign Legion soldiers using helicopter gunships and vehicles will be involved in the operation, which will be launched from neighboring Zaire.
A1


Arthur H. Gladstein; Dermatologist, 72
Dr.
Arthur H. Gladstein, an authority on the use of radiation in dermatology, died on Monday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 72 and had homes in Searingtown, L.I., and on the Upper East Side.
The cause was cancer, said his son, Dr.
Michael J. Gladstein, a dermatologist who shared an office with his father in Astoria, Queens.


Retiring Haiti's Junta
The Clinton Administration would like to see Haiti's wealthy businesspeople promote a cushy Riviera or Spanish retirement for the three most notorious leaders of Haiti's military regime, and it is freezing all Haitian assets held in U.S. banks to spur them into getting on with the job.
Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, the junta leader; Gen.
Philippe Biamby, the army chief, and Col.
Joseph Michel Francois, the police commander, overthrew an elected Government, let political murders go unpunished, terrorized the civilian population and defied international agreements.
Now Washington hopes to see them bribed into exile with bundles of cash and promises of a safe European haven.
And it seeks to reassure rank-and-file soldiers they can keep their jobs and avoid punishment after President Jean-Bertrand Aristide is restored.


For Carter, a Thrust Onto the Front Pages Again
In the 14 years since he left the White House, former President Jimmy Carter has monitored elections, mediated disputes, promoted democracy and worked to eradicate illnesses like Guinea worm disease.
But it took an unusual visit to North Korea last week to thrust him back onto the front pages and into a foreign policy maelstrom that has had officials and commentators arguing for a week whether he was making peace or just making trouble.


Review/Opera; For 'Falstaff,' the Stage Becomes a Period Barn
When Richard Gaddes founded the Opera Theater of St.
Louis, in 1976, his plan was to create a modified Glyndebourne in the Midwest.
The atmosphere would be genial and festive, with dinner on the lawn before the opera.
The repertory would draw heavily on contemporary works and neglected 18th- and 19th-century scores, with familiar works as the icing rather than the cake.
The operas would be sung in English, mostly by young Americans.
And the house -- the 950-seat Loretto-Hilton Center -- would be intimate enough for the singers to be heard and understood without forcing.
In 19 seasons, the company's budget has grown to nearly $5 million from $139,000, and the number of performances has grown to 30 from 13.
Nine years ago, Mr.
Gaddes handed the reigns to Charles MacKay, the general manager, and Colin Graham, the artistic director, and although they clearly have their own ideas about opera presentation, they have largely upheld Mr.
Gaddes's original vision.
This season's offerings are Gluck's "Iphigenia in Tauris," Verdi's "Falstaff" and revised versions of two 20th-century American works, Conrad Susa's "Black River" and Leonard Bernstein's "Candide."


Russia Hides Effort to Develop Deadly Poison Gas, U.S. Says
Russia is concealing efforts to develop advanced chemical weapons, despite its pledge to disclose details of its poison gas program to the United States, Clinton Administration officials said today.
That assessment illustrates the problems that Washington has in dealing with the new Russia, as Moscow has pledged to cooperate with the West, but has been dragging its feet on putting some important arms control accords into effect.


Christopher Clarkson, 92, Ex-R.A.F. Pilot
Christopher Clarkson, a retired president of American operations for the British Aircraft Corporation, died on Sunday at his home in Old Lyme, Conn.
He was 92.
A native of England, Mr.
Clarkson was educated at Lancing College in Sussex and had a long career in aviation.
He joined the Royal Air Force in 1924 as an instructor at its Central Flying School, returned to civilian life as a test pilot and won trophies for aerobatics and cross-Channel air races.


Accounts
*
NBC Cable, Fort Lee, N.J., to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, as the first agency to handle America's Talking, a cable television network scheduled to begin operating July 4.
The agency already handles a sibling cable network, CNBC.
Billings were estimated at $3 million to $5 million. *
Ryan Drossman &amp; Partners, New York, was awarded three accounts with combined billings estimated to exceed $2 million: Sony Theaters/ Loews, New York, to handle the creative portion of its general advertising and the new Sony Imax Theater at Sony Theaters Lincoln Square; Renaissance Carpets and Tapestries, New York, and State-Wide Capital, Uniondale, L.I.


French Officer Is First Step Toward a Multinational Force
The United Nations Security Council voted today to accept an offer by France to send about 2,500 troops to Rwanda as a first step toward deploying a larger multinational force under United Nations control.
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali stressed that the mission was intended to relieve the suffering in Rwanda, where relief officials say the civil war has left hundreds of thousands dead or homeless.
But a spokesmen for the main Rwandan rebel faction expressed its strident opposition to the presence of any French troops, saying that it would be regarded as an act of aggression and that "we shall resist."


Panel's Moderates Say a Compromise Is Near on Health
Moderate Democrats and Republicans on the Senate Finance Committee approached agreement today on a national health insurance plan that would require people to buy health insurance for themselves and not make employers buy it.
If the three Republicans and five Democrats can agree among themselves, they said, they will present their plan to the 12 other members of the committee on Friday.
They said they thought they could get enough votes to have the committee then send the measure to the full Senate.


A Currency Dragged Down by Twin Deficits
With all the talk about the United States economy doing well -- so well that the worry is that it may overheat, why is the dollar hitting record lows against the Japanese yen?
To some, the economy may seem like a child who has been diligently doing his homework but still getting a bad report card.
The Clinton Administration appears to taking the dollar's plunge that way.


U.S. Investments Overseas Benefit From Dollar's Drop
The dollar has dropped substantially this year against both the yen and the mark, but for an increasing number of Americans who invest overseas, it has been a real boon.
That is because as the dollar has declined against other currencies, investments in overseas assets have become more valuable.
"This is probably a bad time to go to London and pay for a hotel and meal, but if you had some money there, you got a boost," said Mark Headley, director of international investments for Litman/Gregory &amp; Company, an investment adviser in Orinda, Calif.


CHRONICLE
The police in Miami have dropped an aggravated assault charge against LUTHER CAMPBELL, the rap artist who was accused of waving a gun at his companion and threatening to kill her, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The leader of the rap group 2 Live Crew, Mr.
Campbell was arrested in May after an argument with TINA BARNETT at his home in suburban Miami Lakes.


Drug Cartel Tied to Vote In Colombia
Hoping to buy leniency from the future Colombian President, a Cali cocaine cartel leader agreed to donate $3.75 million to the presidential campaign of Ernesto Samper Pizano, according to wiretap tape recordings made public here today.
Mr.
Samper, who won the presidential election Sunday by the narrowest margin in memory here, denied the charges and demanded a police investigation.
His campaign treasurer, Santiago Medina, said, "This campaign did not receive one peso from drug trafficking."


The Body as Evidence; Refugees' Wounds Bear Witness to Torture, Supporting Claims for Political Asylum
Granville Desousa has an unremarkable scar on his finger, old cuts on his knees, lesions on his limbs and chronic stomach problems.
The man's body, his doctor says, is evidence.
It supports Mr.
Desousa's claim that he was tortured in an underground military jail in Togo, where he says his captors sliced him with a knife, forced him to kneel for hours on gravel, sleep in unsanitary bedding that caused a skin disease, and drink water so dirty he had to filter it through a handkerchief.


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about CBS's negotiations with several college football bowls misidentified the network that broadcasts the Gator Bowl.
It is TBS, not ABC.


Athletes With AIDS Virus Conquering the Challenges
"The disease is the gold medalist, the world champion that will beat all comers," Thomas C. Gehring said acidly, just before his blue eyes went as soft and unfocused as the chlorinated water of the swimming pools he loves to dive into.
"The idea is to stay in the race as long as you can."
Two years ago, Gehring -- a 38-year-old diving coach, long-distance runner and part-time waiter from San Diego -- was told by a doctor that he had AIDS.
The disease nearly killed him.
He wasted away to 124 pounds and the antibodies in his blood were decimated.
He could hardly rise from bed.
His life shortened before him.
"I could never see being well again," he said.
"Then I started to think the Gay Games were coming."


Shorewood Packaging Corp.(SHOR,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Transactions
Baseball  National League
NEW YORK METS -- Signed Jay Payton, outfielder, and assigned him to Pittsfield of the New York-Penn League.
Eastern League
TRENTON THUNDER -- Activated Dean Decillis, third baseman, from the disabled list.
Released Bobby Perna, third baseman.


Youth Is Convicted in Murder for a Bicycle
A Brooklyn teen-ager was convicted of murder yesterday in the killing ofAllyn Winslow, 42, a drama teacher who was shot in the back last June as a groupof teen-agers tried to steal his bicycle in Prospect Park.
But because of what prosecutors called an "anomaly" in state law, the youth, Gregory Morris, will not be sentenced in State Supreme Court -- where he wastried and would have faced nine years to life in prison -- but in FamilyCourt, where he faces five years' detention in a state youth center.


Reports Say Carlesimo Is Heading to Blazers
Neither Seton Hall nor the Portland Trail Blazers are commenting on published reports that P. J. Carlesimo is going to jump from the college ranks to become the team's new head coach.
Carlesimo has made himself unavailable for comment.
But Chuck Daly, a former Nets coach who had Carlesimo as an assistant on the Dream Team at the 1992 Olympics, yesterday said that Carlesimo had spoken with him recently about coaching in the pros.


Honors
*
Charlotte Beers, chairwoman and chief executive at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, New York, received the Iphigene Ochs Sulzberger Award from Barnard College.


Joy Technologies Inc.(JOY,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Lowery Signs With the Jets
Ever since kicker Pat Leahy retired two years ago the Jets have been looking for a steady foot.
They might have found it yesterday by signing Nick Lowery, the third leading scorer in National Football League history.
Lowery signed a two-year deal, but the Jets would not release the financial terms.
His 14-year career with the Chiefs ended in March when he refused to take a pay cut in his $771,000 salary.


Jerusalem Journal; No Middle of the Road for Israel's Driven Politics
On the Israeli right, which emphatically says no to giving up land to the Arabs, Gilon Ben-Said is about as politically correct as one can get.
For sure, his car is.
On its front and rear windows, on its bumpers, on its sides, the French-made hatchback is plastered with no fewer than 18 stickers proclaiming Mr.
Ben-Said's total opposition to Government peace policies.


McDonald's and Hotels Plan Food Delivery Test
In a test that could begin as early as next week, McDonald's will begin delivering food to guest rooms at about 40 budget hotels in 20 cities across the country.
The McDonald's Corporation will conduct the test with Hospitality Franchise Systems Inc., which operates the Days Inn, Ramada, Howard Johnson, Park Inn and Super 8 hotel chains.
If the companies are happy with the results, fast food a la McDonald's could become a fixture at most of Hospitality's 3,850 hotels and motels in the United States.


Lennar Corp.(LEN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Camp Memories
To The Home Section:
As I pack my children's camp trunks, my mind wanders to the misty memories of summers at camp.
Like so many of my friends and people I see professionally as a psychologist, camp was a place to test possibilities, to escape worries and to nestle in the lazy days of summer.


German Not Guilty of Fire
A German judge today found a 19-year-old youth not guilty of setting a fire that destroyed a hostel where asylum-seekers were to be housed.


Before the Bar Scene
To The Home Section:
Your interesting article "Gathering to Meet, Perhaps to Marry" (June 2) on the current singles scene in the Catskills impels me to give the social history background of the phenomenon.


New Brennan Inquiry Reported in California
Robert E. Brennan, the embattled Wall Street financier now facing civil fraud charges in a Manhattan courtroom, also faces problems on another front.
Search warrants have been issued in connection with an investigation involving a health-care company he controls by the workers' compensation fraud unit of the Los Angeles District Attorney's office, people familiar with that inquiry said yesterday.


Corrections
A brief article from the United Nations on Tuesday about France's plan to send troops to Rwanda misidentified Faustin Twagiramungu.
He is the Prime Minister-designate of Rwanda, not an official of the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front.


Bridge
When an opening bid of one spade receives a one no-trump response, locating the best game when the opener is very strong may be tricky.
An old idea is to treat a jump to three clubs as an artificial forcing move, and this has been revived by Richard Schwartz of East Elmhurst, Queens.
His team won the Reisinger Knockout Teams in early June, and earlier in the event, on the diagramed deal, he chose exactly the right moment to forget his own convention.
His partner, South, was Peter Weichsel, who now found himself in a most improbable contract of five clubs and played it with the skill that befits a former world champion.


New Democrats, Old Cynicism
Everyone remembers Bill Clinton's multiple promises that when he got to the White House he would elevate Washington's moral tone by changing the rules of the capital's influence game.
Yet his own party has worked mightily to keep the old system alive.
And Mr.
Clinton himself has yet to press hard for his proposals to clean up a campaign financing system that binds lawmakers to special interests.
Indeed, the President has actively participated in, and his party has hugely profited from, one of the system's worst features -- a loophole that allows the two parties to raise so-called "soft money" in large chunks that evade present caps on direct giving to candidates.


Houston Finally Hailing a Champion
The Houston Rockets reigned on the court. Disappointment reigned in New York.
Ending years of frustration for Houston sports fans, the Rockets won their first championship by defeating the Knicks, 90-84, in Game 7 of the National Basketball Association finals.
No professional sports team from Houston had ever won a championship, a burden the Rockets, Oilers and Astros had carried for years.
Tonight, that burden was lifted.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Shaken Dollar
The dollar recovered slightly from lows against the Japanese yen without an intervention from the Federal Reserve.  [ Page A1. ]
The dollar's fall has been a boon to Americans investing abroad as currency gains cushion the blow of slumping markets.  [ D1. ]


Auto Showcase in Beijing


Budget Showdown at City Hall
New York City Council members' brave talk about defending programs for the poor seemed to end in the hours before dawn Tuesday when Speaker Peter Vallone sipped champagne with Mayor Rudolph Giuliani over a budget deal that gave the Mayor almost everything he sought.
If the full Council approves the deal, as expected, Mr.
Giuliani emerges as a master strategist.
Facing a huge prospective deficit in the year that starts July 1, he set a few critical priorities and stood firm: Hold the line on total spending.
Shave taxes.
And slash the city payroll while preserving the police and fire departments' budgets and funds for classroom teachers.
By fencing off those three categories -- half of all city personnel -- he forced deeper cuts in almost everything else.


Fearful Mrs. Simpson Is Heard On Tapes of Emergency Calls
An enraged O. J. Simpson broke into the home of his former wife by kicking down her back door one night last October and roared abuse at her as she cowered and wept, according to an audiotape of an emergency telephone call that she was placing to the police.
"My ex-husband has just broken into my house, and he's ranting and raving," Nicole Brown Simpson, her voice quivering, told a police operator.


Maradona Lets Feet Talk for Him
The twists and turns are not as lightning-quick as they were in 1986, when he almost single-handedly led Argentina to its second World Cup triumph.
He is still a little pudgy despite losing 26 pounds and upgrading his physical condition.
And throughout the world, the soccer player once most widely written about has been written off.
But the magic of Diego Armando Maradona is still visible, and, to the chagrin of his critics, he figures to be a factor in this World Cup.


A Win-Win Situation, With the Best Yet to Come
Success in horse racing has a kind of Catch-22 quality for a jockey: To win, you have to get good horses; to get good horses, you have to win.
And no rider in New York has been solving the equation more frequently than Mike Smith.
He won the Eclipse Award as the nation's leading jockey last year, so everybody knows he's good.
But when you're hot, you're hot, and this is how hot Smith has been lately:


Dollar Steadies Although U.S. Does Not Intervene
As the dollar rebounded slightly today from Tuesday's record low against the Japanese yen, the United States held back from intervening to shore up the American currency.
Instead, the Federal Reserve chairman assured investors that the American economy was as healthy as ever, while the Treasury Secretary warned speculators that Washington would act if they tried to push the dollar down further.
Many market analysts were surprised by the Administration's relatively laid-back behavior today.
Some viewed it as a gutsy high-risk strategy to convince the market that the dollar's fall was not justified by economic fundamentals, much like a doctor allowing a patient to heal naturally before trying more drastic intervention.


Critic's Notebook Critic's Notebook; On TV, Horror Stories on the Health-Care Front
Unlike many of the people featured on "To Your Health" Tuesday night, the man in the audience who complained that his hosts were "making policy by horror stories" was not suffering from ailments his health insurance does not cover.
In observing that sad cases were the most dramatic elements of the elaborate two-hour report on NBC, he proved there was nothing wrong with his eyesight.


INSIDE
Russia Conceals Arms Effort
United States officials say Russia is concealing efforts to develop advanced chemical arms.
The finding could affect the Senate's vote on a treaty banning poison gas.
Page A3.
Rebuilding an Ivory Tower
Bennington College is mounting a corporate-style restructuring campaign in an effort to close a deficit and increase enrollment.
Page A12.
Drug Gang Suspects Held
After months of gang warfare on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, 48 suspected drug dealers and gunmen were indicted in 8 murders and 13 shootings.
Page B3.


Apogee Enterprises Inc.(APOG,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Long-Sought Title That Ewing Needed Eludes Him Again
Patrick Ewing needed it more.
He needed championship validation more than Hakeem Olajuwon.
He needed it because it has always been so much easier for people to doubt him, to blame him for who he was or who he wasn't.
He needed it but he also needed help, which he didn't get, as the Knicks were losing the title to Olajuwon and the Rockets, 90-84, last night.
This morning in New York, there will be much ado of Pat Riley's decision to let John Starks keep firing last night, firing and missing until the bitter end.
Eventually, Starks will be forgotten and the series will be remembered as the year Olajuwon beat Ewing, which is the way it was billed.
It's never that simple, but no will have time for anything more.


Campus Drinking Problem Becomes Severe; Beneficial in Moderation
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's equating alcoholic beverages with illegal drugs in "Legal Drug" (column, June 11) is ridiculous.
As Dr.
Andrew Weil and Winifred Rosen state in their book "Chocolate to Morphine," "A common definition of the word drug is any substance that in small amounts produces significant changes in the body, mind or both. . . . All drugs become poisons in high enough doses, and many poisons are useful drugs in low enough doses."


Executive Changes
BANTA CORP., Menasha, Wis., named Donald D. Belcher president and chief operating officer.
DIAGNOSTEK INC., Albuquerque, N.M., appointed Andrew Masetti executive vice president and chief financial officer, assuming the responsibilities previously held by William Barron, who was recently named chief operating officer.


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Two Films, One Subject. Uh-Oh. In Hollywood, the Race Is On.
Movie studio executives and producers claim to be on a constant quest for new ideas, but they seem to hunger more for the not-so-new concept. ("Hey, let's make a female 'Fugitive.' ") The more derivative, the better.
But once in a while, as happened here recently, a fresh story idea surfaces and touches off a battle between big studios, high-priced stars and prominent directors.
By Hollywood standards, the current fight is not quite the equivalent of D-Day, but it's close to it.


Adopted Youths Are Normal In Self-Esteem, Study Finds
A new study of adopted adolescents and their families has found that contrary to popular belief, the adopted teen-agers were no more likely than other adolescents to suffer from mental health or identity problems.
Some mental health professionals said they were surprised and delighted by the findings.
The study of 715 adoptive families was made by the Search Institute, a nonprofit, Minneapolis-based organization that conducts research on children and adolescents.


Chest Pains Hospitalize Ditka
MIKE DITKA's cardiologist said yesterday that the former Chicago Bears coach was doing fine despite having chest pains the previous day.
Ditka was listed in fair condition yesterday at Lake Forest (Ill.) Hospital, where doctors were trying to determine if he had a heart attack.
"He's not having any discomfort now and his blood pressure is fine," Dr.
JAY ALEXANDER said at a news conference.
"He's watching TV." Alexander said it was too early to know whether Ditka's pain was heart related.
Ditka had chest discomfort after exercising at his home Tuesday.


48 Indicted on Warfare Over Drugs on West Side
After months of gang warfare for control of half a dozen blocks on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, 48 suspected drug dealers and gunmen were indicted yesterday in 8 murders and 13 shootings in a bloody struggle over a neighborhood business that earned $5 million a year.
Touting crack cocaine and heroin and packing semiautomatic pistols, the drug gangs terrorized residents in a neighborhood of well-kept brownstones and reconditioned tenements.
Their domain, the Manhattan District Attorney said yesterday, stretched along 107th Street from Amsterdam Avenue to Central Park, along Amsterdam Avenue between 104th and 105th Streets, and included the corner of 109th Street and Columbus Avenue.


Sweden Goalie Joins Islanders
Goaltender TOMMY SALO, who stopped Canada's PAUL KARIYA in a sudden-death shootout to give Sweden the 1992 Olympic gold medal, has agreed to terms with the Islanders.
Salo, 23, selected in the fifth round of the 1993 N.H.L. entry draft, also played in the world championships and for Vasteras in the Swedish Elite League. (AP)


Selig Chides Players Union
Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, yesterday issued a statement in which he chided the Players Association for its involvement in the attempt by some United States senators to strip baseball of its exemption from the antitrust law as it pertains to labor relations.
But the owners also just might be jittery about the outcome of a vote in Washington today.
The Senate Judiciary Committee is scheduled to act on a bill that would put baseball club owners and their players on the same footing in collective bargaining as owners and players in professional basketball and football.
That means the baseball players would be able to go to court to challenge any step by the owners to impose new terms and conditions unilaterally in the absence of an agreement.


A Killing Divides Kashmiris Seeking Freedom
The assassination of an influential Muslim cleric in Kashmir has drawn angry protests and prompted an investigation by pro-independence religious and political leaders.
At the funeral on Tuesday for the cleric, Qazi Nissar Ahmed, demonstrators shouted slogans against the more militant pro-independence forces, underscoring the divisions in the movement in the Indian-held areas of Jammu and Kashmir state.
Organizers of the mourners, who estimated the crowd at 80,000, counseled restraint.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
A Water Garden Barrel
Q.
I would like to have a water garden on my rooftop terrace but don't have much space.
How do I do a barrel? -- Sylvia Shaeffer, New York


Japan Sees Rise of Yen As Threat to Recovery
The rise of the yen to its strongest postwar level against the dollar has renewed fears that Japan's export-oriented automobile, electronics and steel companies will suffer another blow to their competitiveness, nipping in the bud Japan's fledgling economic recovery.
The decline of the dollar on Tuesday to below the crucial level of 100 yen brought back nightmares of what happened last year, when a sharp appreciation of the yen extinguished an economic resurgence after the Government declared, prematurely, that the economy had hit bottom.


Treasury Bonds Post Sharp Gains
Prices of Treasury securities rose sharply yesterday as a result of a rebounding dollar against the yen and three consecutive days of decline in commodity futures prices.
A stronger dollar and weaker commodity prices helped to ease concerns that the Federal Reserve would need to raise short-term interest rates soon to combat inflation or support the dollar.
The Commodity Research Bureau index of 21 commodities dropped 3.42 points yesterday, to 230.87.


As the car industry goes, so go the buff books. And right now, they're cruising in the fast lane.
THE benefits of the recovery in the American auto industry are being shared with the automotive enthusiast magazines, a publishing category that is rising to new levels of prosperity because of stronger advertising by the makers of cars and trucks.
While advertising pages in all magazines rose 3.9 percent in the first five months of 1994 compared with the period a year earlier, according to the Publishers Information Bureau, the Big Four automotive titles -- Automobile, Car and Driver, Motor Trend and Road &amp; Track -- enjoyed an increase of 23 percent.


MDS Health reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Illinois Health Facilities Authority is selling $76.08 million of revenue bonds through First Chicago Capital Markets.
The bonds are priced to yield a maximum of 6.40 percent for an issue due in 2014, with shorter- maturity serial bonds priced to yield from 4.40 percent in 1996 to 6.15 percent in 2009.
All the bonds are rated triple-A by Standard &amp; Poor's and Moody's Investors Service because they are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp. *
Taubman Realty Group Ltd., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., is selling $200 million of 8 percent notes due in 1999 at 99.954 to yield 8.01 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa2 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


ICF Kaiser International (ICF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Houston Finally Hailing a Champion
The Houston Rockets reigned on the court. Disappointment reigned in New York.
Ending years of frustration for Houston sports fans, the Rockets won their first championship by defeating the Knicks, 90-84, in Game 7 of the National Basketball Association finals.
No professional sports team from Houston had ever won a championship, a burden the Rockets, Oilers and Astros had carried for years.
Tonight, that burden was lifted.


Nicole Brown Simpson: Slain At the Dawn of a Better Life
For nearly half her life, Nicole Brown Simpson was known as O. J. Simpson's girlfriend, his wife, then his ex-wife.
But in her last days, after she had broken off their efforts to get back together, she had been struggling to be Nicole Brown.
Hours before Mrs.
Simpson was killed, she and her family -- her two children, her parents, two of her sisters -- were celebrating her freedom at Mezzaluna, one of her favorite neighborhood restaurants.


Books of The Times; A Flight of Fancy Through the Tobacco Industry
Thank You for Smoking  By Christopher Buckley  272 pages. Random House. $22.
How often have you heard about flacks from the tobacco industry smoothly insisting that there's still no proven connection between smoking and disease, and asked yourself in outrage, "How can they live with themselves?" Well, Christopher Buckley supplies some answers in his savagely funny new satirical farce, "Thank You for Smoking," a novel so timely that you have to wonder if Mr.
Buckley has been orchestrating recent events in tobacco-land, among them a full-page ad in The New York Times on Tuesday that was sponsored by the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company and called for "an informed debate" instead of a ban on smoking.


Scimed Life Systems Inc.(SMLS,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Look Who May Be Going to Boston
Hakeem Olajuwon, the Houston Rockets' star center, played soccer growing up in Nigeria and therefore has a strong rooting interest in the World Cup.
On Tuesday he told reporters he planned to watch Nigeria play Bulgaria that night on television, adding, "I think Nigeria will surprise a lot of people." Nigeria defeated Bulgaria, 3-0, and Olajuwon said he had not ruled out going to Boston to watch the second game, Saturday afternoon.


Teen-Ager Caned in Singapore Returns Home
Michael Fay, the teen-ager who was jailed and caned in Singapore for vandalizing cars, returned to his father's home in a Dayton suburb today and was greeted by friends, relatives and an international press corps.
Apart from saying, "I feel great, I feel great," Mr.
Fay, a 19-year-old high school senior, declined to comment about his experience.
His family said it would hold a news conference on Thursday to discuss his treatment, which caused an international furor.


Vast Changes Sought in Electric System
The two top officers of the New York Power Authority yesterday presented a proposal for a vast restructuring of the state's electric power system.
They would form a single company to operate the thousands of miles of transmission lines now owned by the Authority or by the seven investor-owned utilities around the state and another entity to run the six nuclear reactors in the state.
The proposal also called for the Power Authority to gradually reduce the amount of inexpensive hydroelectric power that it supplies to utilities upstate, and instead to use the electricity to lure job-producing industries there.


Corrections
A chart on Thursday showing the National Weather Service's scale of "apparent temperatures" and a corrective version of the chart on Friday misstated two figures.
When the temperature is 100 degrees and the relative humidity is 5 percent, the apparent temperature is 93 degrees, not 83.
When the temperature is 75 and the humidity is 80, the apparent temperature is 78, not 73.


After a 40-Year Wait, The Swiss Look Ahead
Perhaps it is time the Americans stopped browbeating themselves over that opening-match draw with Switzerland.
After today's astonishing 4-1 romp over Gheorghe Hagi and the Romanians in the Silverdome, the Swiss suddenly are looking like a side capable of advancing even beyond the second round.


From a Night of Rage, the Seeds of Liberation
In a time when homosexuality was still widely regarded as a mental illness, when many people shrouded their life style with lies, Dario Modon wore it like velvet.
It was the summer of 1969, when transvestites in four-inch heels shared a gay underworld with men in wingtips who lived straight lives by day but met at dark in the bars on Christopher Street in Greenwich Village.
Mr.
Modon was a stunning 27-year-old cross-dresser with fire-engine red fingernails and a raven wig.


Radical Answer to a Small College's Woes
In an aggressive effort to remedy ills common to many of the nation's small liberal arts colleges, Bennington College is reducing tuition, trimming its staff and eliminating tenure.
The private, four-year college in Bennington, Vt., said it embarked on the program to help close a $1 million deficit and to increase enrollment, which has fallen to 450 students from a high of 600 five years ago in part because of the high cost of attending the institution.


O'Rourke Proposes Making Davids Island a County Park
Westchester County would buy Davids Island, a long-deserted Army post off the coast of New Rochelle, and convert it into a waterfront park linked to nearby communities by ferry, under a plan proposed today by the County Executive, Andrew P. O'Rourke.
Mr.
O'Rourke's proposal for the 120-acre island, whose fate has been fiercely debated in New Rochelle for decades, comes two years after city officials rejected a Honolulu developer's plan to build a 1,500-unit high-rise condominium complex there.
The $1 billion condominium proposal, which was seen by some residents as the key to reviving New Rochelle's sagging tax base, ultimately foundered under others' concerns about its impact on the local environment, particularly Long Island Sound.


CHRONICLE
Since the first time he heard YO-YO MA perform more than 15 years ago, JOHN WILLIAMS, the composer of film scores and former conductor of the Boston Pops, has wanted to write a concerto for the cellist.
"He has an exuberant, warm, vibrant personality combined with a special virtuosity," Mr.
Williams said yesterday.
"Last summer, SEIJI OZAWA and the Boston Symphony Orchestra commissioned a piece from me for Yo-Yo, and I was thrilled."


Hard on the Trail Of Forgotten Roses
WE were rustling roses in western New Jersey, headed for the Pennsylvania line.
The women in the deli in Clinton had told us to check out the town cemetery, but when we saw the men spraying around the graves with weedkiller, we made a U-turn.
"Too clean for us," said Stephen Scanniello, our gang leader, as he whipped the van onward to Easton.


Team Spirit Is New Message at Olds
Blindfolded, about 30 people -- almost all men, many of them middle-aged and portly, and some worth millions -- stumbled through a pasture here, alternately clutching one another's sweaty hands and feeling ahead for trees or oncoming colleagues.
They were Oldsmobile dealers and employees, and over the next two days they would chant, fall backward into one another's arms, balance atop a telephone pole, embrace repeatedly and ultimately make a "personal commitment to the family of Oldsmobile." It would be an emotion-packed, soul-searching period, with the most pecuniary of aims: selling a lot more cars.


Park Electrochemical Corp.(PKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Starks Builds His Nightmare Brick by Brick
After all the stops on a long road, after the bold trip through the anonymity of basketball's minor leagues all the way to the game of his career, John Starks said he never experienced anything close to what happened tonight.
On a night for a game to remember, his was one to forget.
"I'm putting it all on myself," said Starks quietly and calmly, long after his 2-of-18 shooting became a central factor in Houston's 90-84 victory over the Knicks for the National Basketball Association championship.
Starks spent a long time in the shower, thinking about what had happened, but the conclusion never changed.


Calendar: Design Talks, Exhibitions and a Sale
Gay and Lesbian Forum  Cooper Union's Great Hall, 7 East Seventh Street; (212) 969-8773.
The Organization of Gay and Lesbian Architects and Designers is sponsoring "Design Pride '94," a series of discussions, lectures and presentations, tomorrow from 8:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Participants will include David.
R.
McFadden, an assistant director for collections at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, Stanley Abercrombie, editor in chief of Interior Design magazine, and the architect Frank Israel.
Fee is $65; members, $55.


Executive Quits Digital
The Digital Equipment Corporation has lost its third top executive in as many months.
The company said today that Adriana Stadecker, vice president of executive operations in the office of the president at Digital, had resigned to form Epic International, Executive Partners in Change, a consulting firm in Newton, Mass.
Ms.
Stadecker, 48, had long been considered the top executive to Digital's president and chief executive, Robert B. Palmer.
Her departure comes as Digital is struggling to return to profitability after continued losses this year.
The company lost $183 million in the third quarter.


Pancho's Mexican
Shares of Pancho's Mexican Buffet Inc. have been trading at $10 to $12 since September.
But on Tuesday, after the market closed, Pancho's announced that its third-quarter profit would be a third below Wall Street's estimates of 21 cents a share because of falling sales and rising costs.
Shares of Pancho's, which is based in Fort Worth, plunged yesterday.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Economic Scene; Back to the days of expensive oil? Don't top off your tank yet.
OIL for $20 a barrel? Is OPEC on the march again?
It would be precipitous to rush to the corner gas station to top off the tank.
The surge that has raised crude oil prices by one-sixth in two weeks is largely being written off as a speculative bubble, another symptom of Wall Street's current inclination to discover inflation lurking under every bed.


Oneok Inc.(OKE,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORIES INC., La Jolla, Calif., said it had received more than 99 percent of the shares of Allied Clinical Laboratories Inc.
Nashville, under its offer of $21.50 a share.
NATIONSBANK CORP., Charlotte, N.C., said it would buy the RHNB Corp. and its subsidiary, Rock Hill National Bank, in a tax-free exchange of common stock.
Based on Nationsbank's closing price yesterday, the deal would have an estimated value to shareholders of about $44.5 million.


Super Rite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Review/Film; A Sexual Awakening, for 2 Generations at Once
Alma Gold (Kim Weston-Moran), the title character of Ayoka Chenzira's good-humored coming-of-age film, "Alma's Rainbow," is the straitlaced owner of a beauty parlor who lives with her adolescent daughter, Rainbow (Victoria Gabriella Platt).
The daughter, who attends a strict parochial school and studies dance, is just becoming aware of boys.
Although Alma has no dearth of suitors, she has fooled herself into believing she has outgrown the need for male companionship.
And she sternly advises her daughter to follow her example and keep men at a distance.
Their austere life is disrupted when Alma's, sister, Ruby (Mizan Nunes) appears out of the blue for an extended visit.
Ruby is everything her sister is not.
A flamboyantly sexy nightclub performer with a trunk full of glittering costumes, she has been making her living in Paris as a Josephine Baker imitator.
Although Ruby's time has passed, she is too proud to admit it, and she still puts on the airs of an international star who is between engagements.
Using her wiles, she inveigles the neighborhood's pompous undertaker into shuttling her to auditions in his hearse.
He even allows her use his funeral home for a solo performance.


Univar Corp.(UVX,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lowery Signs With the Jets
Ever since kicker Pat Leahy retired two years ago the Jets have been looking for a steady foot.
They might have found it yesterday by signing Nick Lowery, the third leading scorer in National Football League history.
Lowery signed a two-year deal, but the Jets would not release the financial terms.
His 14-year career with the Chiefs ended in March when he refused to take a pay cut in his $771,000 salary.


City Hall Plan To Reshape School System
Much of the central administration of the New York City schools -- from the division that buys chalk and pencils to the academy that trains school safety officers -- would be dismantled under a City Hall plan now circulating in draft form.
The plan, written by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's adviser on school reform, would strip the Board of Education's central headquarters of most of its responsibilities, redistributing functions to local school boards, borough offices, or other city and private agencies.


Prosecutor in Katie Beers Case Details Other Episodes of Abuse
Katie Beers has known more than her share of suffering in her short life.
She was kidnapped and held in an underground bunker for 16 days, and she was sexually abused, prosecutors say, by her godmother's husband, Sal Inghilleri.
Today, the Suffolk County District Attorney, James M. Catterson Jr., revealed yet another episode in the 11-year-old's troubled past.
In a courtroom here, Mr.
Catterson said that Mr.
Inghilleri killed Katie's cat while the child watched.


Prof. Einar Ingvald Haugen, 88, Expert on Scandinavian Culture
Einar Ingvald Haugen, a professor of Scandinavian language and literature, died on Monday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 88.
Dr. Haugen, who lived in Belmont, Mass., suffered a brief illness, his family said.


CHRONICLE
Just when you thought you could recuperate from the stress of worrying about the Rangers and the Knicks, along comes the Intel Chess Grand Prix, a tournament involving 16 of the top players in the world.
The action, to be televised on ESPN, will run from Monday to next Thursday at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, and GARY KASPAROV, the world champion, predicted yesterday that the tension would run every bit as high as what hockey and basketball fans have been experiencing.
"This may be an intellectual sport, but it is still strong and violent," Mr.
Kasparov said yesterday, a day after arriving in New York from Moscow.


The Sight and Sounds of Things to Come


3 Governors Take Pleas On Aliens to the Senate
Armed with metaphors equating illegal immigration with natural disasters, the Governors of California, Florida and Arizona beseeched the Senate Appropriations Committee today for reimbursement for services that their states provide illegal aliens.
The Governors, who have already sued the Federal Government in an effort to recover some of those costs, used a hearing of the committee to restate their alarm at the havoc they see being wreaked by Washington's failure to police the nation's borders sufficiently to stem the flow of illegal immigration.
They spoke of storms, floods and tidal waves of illegal aliens.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about a re-organization at the Department of Energy misidentified the Government laboratory that a safety official said was contaminated with plutonium.
It was the Los Alamos National Laboratory in Los Alamos, N.M., not the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, Calif.


Robert L. Bates; Geologist, 82
Robert L. Bates, a geologist who was a teacher, science writer and editor, died on Tuesday at Riverside Hospital in Columbus, Ohio.
He was 82 and lived in Columbus.
The cause was a heart attack at home, said his daughter, Dr. Helen McDermott.


Journal; Addicted to O. J.
As one American man who doesn't consider professional football a national pastime, I never regarded O. J. Simpson as a hero or icon but merely as a bit player in disposable movies and a shill for the car-rental company that never seemed to offer the best rates.
But this didn't stop me, or the other football ignoramuses with whom I was eating dinner Friday night, from scrambling to a television the moment the waitress told us that O. J. was fleeing on a freeway live on every network.
Why did we care?
The Monday-morning quarterbacks tell us that a former football star's fall is An American Tragedy, and that the Friday night chase was Great Television.
Yet Mr.
Simpson is no Othello -- he commanded a playing field, not a battlefield -- and entertaining as the slo-mo cavalcade up I-405 was, it sometimes dragged on those occasions when Peter Jennings and Barbara Walters were not bickering.


Peggy Pollack; Magazine Executive, 38
Peggy Newcomer Pollack, the recently named associate publisher of Mademoiselle magazine, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 38 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was colon cancer, said Nancy Newcomer Vick, her sister.


Russia and NATO Agree To Closer Military Links
In a move intended to begin the process of binding the Russians more firmly to the West, Russia and its former enemy NATO signed an agreement today to forge closer military ties.
Russia became the 21st country to join the so-called Partnership for Peace program, in which non-NATO countries, many of them former members of the Communist bloc, hold joint military exercises with NATO nations, cooperate in peacekeeping matters, and exchange information on military doctrine and weaponry.
The new partners do not become members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which would guarantee them the alliance's protection from attack.


San Francisco Shop Makes Acquisition
Lewis &amp; Partners, an agency in San Francisco, said yesterday that it had acquired another shop in that city, Hovatter LaPointe Inc., which has been merged into Lewis.
The terms were not disclosed.
Hovatter LaPointe, which specializes in high-tech and business-to-business advertising, brings in billings estimated at $4 million from clients like Hewlett-Packard,.
Lewis specializes in consumer and food service advertising with billings estimated at $8 million from clients like Nestle.


Canada May Prohibit Entry Of Penthouse's Comic Book
Canadian authorities have warned General Media International, the publisher of Penthouse Comix, a Penthouse magazine spinoff, that the August-September issue will not be allowed into Canada unless six panels of comics dealing with the subjugation of women and other sexual themes are changed.
Under Canada's criminal code, it is illegal to distribute publications that are deemed to be obscene, constitute hate propaganda or are of seditious character.


METRO DIGEST
FROM NIGHT OF RAGE, SEEDS OF LIBERATION The Stonewall uprising is widely regarded as the turning point in the gay-rights movement, ushering in an era of pride, openness and activism.
But through the eyes of five people who were there that night, the uprising itself was not glamorous.
The fact that it has become an icon amazes them still.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  48 INDICTED IN GANG WAR OVER DRUG SALES After months of gang warfare for control of half a dozen blocks on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, 48 suspected drug dealers and gunmen were indicted in 8 murders and 13 shootings in a bloody struggle over a neighborhood business that earned $5 million a year.
B3.


Lowery Signs With the Jets
Ever since kicker Pat Leahy retired two years ago the Jets have been looking for a steady foot.
They might have found it yesterday by signing Nick Lowery, the third leading scorer in National Football League history.
Lowery signed a two-year deal, but the Jets would not release the financial terms.
His 14-year career with the Chiefs ended in March when he refused to take a pay cut in his $771,000 salary.


Stich Stunned by Shelton on the Court of Upsets
Michael Stich was already grouchy about being assigned to Court 2, the shady dell that gained its nickname as Wimbledon's graveyard court by playing host to upsets of a Who's Who of former champions that includes Jimmy Connors, Arthur Ashe and John McEnroe.
But once his match against the pride of Huntsville, Ala., the 120th-ranked qualifier Bryan Shelton, actually got under way, the second-seeded Stich, a champion here in 1991, found out the true meaning of the jinx.
He was ushered from the first round, 6-3, 6-3, 6-4.


Leadership Race in the Senate Attracting Mainly Spectators
A struggle is raging across Capitol Hill this summer for one of the most eminent and visible posts in politics.
Not that anyone can tell, though.
The fight is to succeed George J. Mitchell as majority leader of the United States Senate.
Four months after Mr.
Mitchell disclosed plans to retire at the end of 1994, only two of the Senate's 55 other Democrats -- Tom Daschle of South Dakota and Jim Sasser of Tennessee -- have offered themselves as a replacement.
Neither is a household name, and their efforts to win support from fellow Democrats, while vigorous, are all but subterranean.


Boeing and Airbus Split Big Order
Splitting a potentially huge purchase between the Boeing Company and Airbus Industrie, Singapore Airlines said today that it had placed orders and taken options for 52 jetliners worth as much as $10.3 billion.
The deal was seen as a blow to the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.


Union Faults Correction Dept. In Shootout at Kings Hospital
A hospital shootout on Tuesday between a prisoner and a New York City correction officer was part of a calculated escape plan that nearly succeeded because of the "inexcusable failures of the Department of Correction," the head of the correction officers union contended yesterday.
The union's president, Stan Israel, said the prisoner who was killed in the shootout "set up" the two officers who took him to the emergency room of Kings County Hospital Center for treatment of a bullet wound he suffered in a failed armed robbery on Friday.


Campus Drinking Problem Becomes Severe
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read Anna Quindlen's "Legal Drug" (column, June 11).
As I graduated this spring from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, I am a firsthand witness to the serious alcohol problems this country's young adults face.


Watts in Benefit Recital
The pianist Andre Watts is to give a recital on July 3 at 4 P.M. at the Tannery in Mount Lebanon Shaker Village in New Lebanon, N.Y.
The program is to include two rondos by Mozart, a sonata and two scherzos by Schubert, Janacek's Sonata ("Oct. 1, 1905"), Berio's "Wasserklavier," and "Les Jeux d'Eau a la Villa d'Este" and two "Paganini" Etudes of Liszt.
The recital is to benefit Classical Action, a management group that donates concert proceeds to AIDS organizations.
Tickets are $100, including a champagne reception after the concert.
Information: (518) 794-7887.


FRANCE IS SENDING FORCE TO RWANDA TO HELP CIVILIANS
France announced today that it would move troops into Rwanda early Thursday to protect civilians against further killings in a conflict that has torn that country apart for more than two months.
Some 2,500 French marines and Foreign Legion soldiers using helicopter gunships and vehicles will be involved in the operation to be launched from Zaire, Rwanda's western neighbor, Francois Leotard, the Defense Minister, said today.


Culp Inc.(CULP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Rockets Hit the Heights as Champions
The Rockets took the city of Houston on its first championship ride.
The Knicks' quest for glory ended in anguish.
Winning their first National Basketball Association title in franchise history, the Rockets defeated the Knicks, 90-84, in Game 7 of the N.B.A. finals tonight at the Summit.
It was the first professional sports championship for the city of Houston.


Review/Music; Youth's Joy, Age's Wit: 2 Vintages Of Jazz
The rewarding jazz double bill through Sunday night at the Blue Note, (131 West Third Street in Greenwich Village) contrasts youthful ambition and agility with mature ebullience and wit.
The younger group is a quintet led by the 24-year-old trumpeter Roy Hargrove; it trades sets with the quartet led by the 86-year-old alto saxophonist Benny Carter.
For Mr.
Carter, well-made melodies are the occasion for wry, cheerful commentary.
On Tuesday night, Mr.
Carter split a short set between standards ("On Green Dolphin Street," "Misty") and his own equally tuneful compositions ("Another Place, Another Time" and "South Side Samba").


Review/Dance; A Timely Infusion of Shakespeare by Way of Balanchine
George Balanchine's humane and humorous "Midsummer Night's Dream" opens up an enchanting world for adults and children alike.
Darci Kistler and Peter Boal caught the work's ineffable magic when they led the season's first performance on Tuesday night.
It was an auspicious beginning to the New York City Ballet's weeklong run of the work.
Ms.
Kistler as Titania and Mr.
Boal as Oberon presided with beautifully delineated portrayals over a fairy kingdom that had all the familiar mayhem of Shakespeare's play.


G.E. Ousts Kidder, Peabody Chief
In an effort to restore the shine to Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company's tarnished image, General Electric yesterday replaced Michael A. Carpenter, Kidder's chief executive, with two senior executives from G.E.
John F. Welch Jr., chairman of G.E., said the decision to replace Mr.
Carpenter, a close friend, was not the result of any findings in its continuing investigation into a Treasury bond trading scandal at Kidder involving Joseph Jett, a former top trader at the firm.
Instead, he said, the change was needed to rebut the perception in the financial markets that the episode with Mr.
Jett and Kidder's recent losses in mortgage securities were raising questions about Kidder's future.


Kasatonov Is Signed by Bruins
The Boston Bruins have signed free-agent defenseman and former Soviet hockey star ALEKSEI KASATONOV, the team announced yesterday.
Kasatonov, 34, played for 12 years on the Central Red Army team.
He represented the former Soviet Union in eight world championships and played on Olympic teams that won gold medals in 1984 and 1988 and a silver medal in 1980.


F.C.C. Plan For License Diversity
The Federal Communications Commission is close to completing a plan that would give small businesses, women and members of minority groups preferences worth hundreds of millions of dollars in bidding on new licenses for wireless telephone and data communications.
The plan, to be adopted next week, would reserve nearly 1,000 radio licenses for small businesses in what commission officials call "entrepreneurs' blocks." In addition, companies owned by minorities or women would receive an array of bidding credits, or discounts, and flexible payment terms, which could shrink the cost of a wireless license by as much as half.
A Mandate From Congress
Agency officials say they plan to adopt the rules formally at a meeting next Wednesday, as part of the commission's broader program to begin auctioning more than 2,000 licenses for a new generation of wireless "personal communication services" in December.
Each license authorizes a company to operate wireless services on a specific band of frequencies that cover a region somewhat larger than today's cellular telephone franchises.


Falcons Pick Up Matthews
Five-time Pro Bowl linebacker CLAY MATTHEWS has reached a one-year contract agreement with the Atlanta Falcons.
Matthews, 38, the Cleveland Browns' career leader in sacks (76 1/2), has played in more games (232) than any National Football League linebacker. (AP)


Firan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


Gunfire Kills Woman and Wounds Her Infant Son
An 18-year-old mother holding her infant son was shot to death yesterday outside her Brooklyn home by a gunman who was apparently aiming at someone else.
The baby and two men, including one who may have been the intended victim, were also shot.
Naryon Ware, 18, was shot twice in the back at Brownsville Gardens, a complex of two-story duplexes and town houses at 50 Legion Street in Brownsville, and died there.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about testimony by Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, that the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation had developed a genetically engineered tobacco plant misstated the effect of the development.
The genetic engineering doubled the amount of nicotine in the tobacco, not the amount in cigarettes made from it and other tobaccos.


Putting Their Heads Together With One Goal in Mind


Man Held in Fatal Arson
The police arrested a man yesterday who they said had set fire to an apartment building in Brooklyn, trapping and killing two residents on the top floor.
The police said the man was trying to hurt the man who was dating his former girlfriend.
The suspect, Hector Lopez, 27, was charged with two counts of murder in the fire on Tuesday at a building at 2 Hope Street in Williamsburg, the police said.
He was arrested on Tuesday at his home at 520 Morris Park Avenue in the Bronx and was charged yesterday.


Yankees Roll a 7 And Get A Sweep
Ten minutes.
That is how long the Yankees let the Twins enjoy the one-run lead Minnesota had crawled to secure before New York destroyed it.
Eleven hitters.
That is how many Yankees rushed to swing a bat in an unexpected and eventful seventh inning.
Twelve months ago.
That is the last time the Yankees had orchestrated a series sweep of the Twins.
Until yesterday.


Pension Rules Threaten Police Chief's Job
These are trying times for Neil A. Polay, a retired New York City police lieutenant who is the new Police Chief here.
Chief Polay is a popular figure here who local officials say has done a good job.
But unless the State Civil Service Commission grants the city a rare waiver of its rules, he confronts a difficult choice: either give up his $57,500-a-year job or his New York City pension of about $30,000 a year.
Stopping 'Double Dipping'
Chief Polay, 52, faces the choice because of a provision of the Civil Service law intended to prevent "double dipping" -- receiving a pension from one municipal entity and a salary from another.


Youth Is Convicted in Murder for a Bicycle
A Brooklyn teen-ager was convicted of murder yesterday in the killing ofAllyn Winslow, 42, a drama teacher who was shot in the back last June as a groupof teen-agers tried to steal his bicycle in Prospect Park.
But because of what prosecutors called an "anomaly" in state law, the youth, Gregory Morris, will not be sentenced in State Supreme Court -- where he wastried and would have faced nine years to life in prison -- but in FamilyCourt, where he faces five years' detention in a state youth center.


Review/Music; Xenakis Program Cuts Through the Mystery
It may have been fortunate that the copying machine broke down at Thread Waxing Space on Tuesday night, because the audience was spared from seeing the program of the ST-X Ensemble Xenakis USA.
All the compositions were by the group's namesake, Iannis Xenakis, and all bore cryptic titles -- some drawn from the ancient Greek -- that might have put listeners off: "Khalperr," "Epei," "Anaktoria" and "Waarg." Had explanatory notes from the composer been available, the result would have been still more bewildering.
For Mr.
Xenakis -- who was born of Greek parents in 1922 and lives in France -- has, throughout his unusual career, used exotic mathematical theories to help construct his compositions.
And even for a music critic with mathematical training, the methods are confusing, with groups of notes ordered according to theories of probability or organized using mathematical objects known as Markov chains.
Even obscure principles of physics have come into play.
Nothing is random, everything is carefully ordered, but the composer's own program notes need hours of decoding before one can begin to understand how he arrived at his effects.


German Socialists Name Choice For Uphill Battle Against Kohl
The German opposition Social Democratic Party, reeling from a steep drop in popularity in recent weeks, officially nominated Rudolf Scharping today as its candidate for Chancellor, and Mr.
Scharping responded with a fighting speech that brought him loud cheers.
"Optimism, hope and confidence in Germany requires a realistic basis," Mr.
Scharping, 46 years old, said at a party convention, in one of several attacks on Chancellor Helmut Kohl.
"It serves no purpose simply to repeat what was done in 1990, to make promises and then ruin everything."


Bias Policy Widened to Include Gay Students
The school board here has unanimously passed a proposal that prohibits discrimination against gay students.
The policy is believed to be the first of its kind in a suburban school district in New York State, according to the New York State School Boards Association.
The measure amends the school's policy against bias to include a ban on discrimination based on sexual orientation.
The board voted after an hour-long discussion Tuesday night, before 100 people, some of whom spoke.
While some were vehemently opposed, the majority endorsed the proposal.


Thompson Shifts On Media Research
J.
Walter Thompson U.S.A. said yesterday that it had restructured its media research operations by decentralizing them in local offices rather than having them based in the agency's Chicago and New York offices.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.(SHP,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 21


Body and Soul: United States Pulls Off a Minor Miracle
American soccer desperately needed a moment this exalted and galvanizing, something that would urgently lift the game from the back burner to the front of the country's sporting consciousness.
The moment occurred today as the United States dominated Colombia, 2-1, in its second World Cup game before a sellout crowd of 93,194 at the Rose Bowl.
Simply put, it was the most important victory in the history of American soccer.


Health Data Chief Settles With S.E.C.
The chairman and chief executive of the Shared Medical Systems Corporation admitted in Federal court yesterday to charges of insider trading -- and then promptly denied he had done any such thing.
R.
James Macaleer agreed to pay a total of $199,995 to the Government.
The settlement included $99,500 as disgorgement of profits from sales of Shared Medical Systems stock in late 1986, after he had learned, but before other investors had been told, that the company's explosive growth rate was slowing.
The remainder of the money is interest.
Pact Departs From the Norm
While consent settlements with the S.E.C. normally state the defendant neither admits nor denies he violated the law, the one signed by Mr.
Macaleer was unusual in that he admitted violating a section of the Securities Act that bars action in trading that amounts to "a fraud or deceit" upon the other party to the trade.
The S.E.C. dropped a series of other charges.


Owen Healthcare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.14
3.24
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.16
4.17
3.11
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.55
4.58
3.21
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.10
7.20
5.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.39
7.49
6.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.22
8.30
7.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.31
6.32
5.78
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Gtech Holdings Corp.(GTK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Game 7 Pivoted on the Changing of the Guards
For nearly an hour after Houston's rousing 90-84 victory over the Knicks tonight, Vernon Maxwell, Kenny Smith and Sam Cassell stood in different corners of a packed, steamy and champagne-soaked locker room, savoring the good vibrations of winning the city's first major championship.
Ridiculed throughout the series for playing erratically (Maxwell), timidly (Smith) and inconsistently (Cassell), the Rockets' three guards had come through in a big way at the perfect time.
The trio had attempted 24 shots and made 14, repeatedly puncturing the Knicks' once-impenetrable defense.


AT HOME WITH: E. Annie Proulx; At Midlife, a Novelist Is Born
DON'T get Annie Proulx wrong.
She is pleased, happy, thrilled beyond words about winning the Pulitzer Prize this year for her second novel, "The Shipping News." For one thing, she loves soft-shell crabs, which are not available in Vermont.
Lately, she has been flying to New York and has been taken to restaurants that serve them.
E.
Annie Proulx -- E is for Edna, which she never uses, and Proulx rhymes with true -- is 58.
She has lived hard, even recklessly, the way she has wanted.
She has been married and divorced three times and has raised three sons alone.
She was a waitress, a postal worker and then, for 19 years, a writer of magazine articles on everything from chili growers to canoeing to mice.


Vietnam Finds First Live Example of Rare Ox
Two years of searching in Vietnam have led to the capture of a Vu Quang ox, a species that had been known only from skulls and pelts, the World Wildlife Federation announced yesterday.
The federation said a calf caught by local hunters was grazing safely in a Vietnamese preserve.
The rarity of such a find can be judged from the fact that only seven species of large land mammals, including this one, have been discovered since 1900.


An Estate Stars As a Spanish Palace
HIGHLAND MILLS , N.Y.
FOR the third straight summer, Rushmore, a lavish Spanish Colonial-style mansion built in 1908, is putting on makeup and taking on a new role.
This year, the house, on 500 acres an hour's drive north of New York City, stars as a palace in Spain.
Last year, it was an estate in Russia amid a cherry orchard.
The summer before, it became a French country house and its caretaker's cottage a train station in the Alpine town of Culoz during World War II.


Sudan Detains Ex-Premier
Sudanese security forces have detained former Prime Minister Sadeq al-Mahdi and three of his aides on charges of plotting against the military Government, the state television reported this week.
A "high-level" security official accused Mr.
Mahdi's Umma Party of planning to assassinate prominent political figures and destroy vital installations in the Sudanese capital, Khartoum.


Rhodes Inc.(RHD,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Pledge Made To Give ABC Tax Breaks
In the latest pledge of city and state resources to keep a large company in New York City, the ABC Television Network and its corporate parent, Capital Cities Communications, will receive $26 million in sales-tax abatements and subsidized electricity.
Capital Cities/ABC said yesterday that it would use the incentives to invest more than $150 million in new high-technology production equipment for its New York City studios.


For Harding, It's All a Big Act
TONYA HARDING has agreed to appear as a feisty waitress in an independent film maker's movie about a woman running from the mob.
The Olympic figure skater will play Gina, a waitress who accidentally receives a cache of money from the mob in the movie "Breakaway," written by SEAN DASH and ERIC GARDNER.


Edwards (A.G.) Inc.(N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Theater; Retelling Of Life's Abashing Moments
Lisa Kron, the inspired creator of the one-woman show "101 Humiliating Stories," hates it when she gets sleepy in the theater, especially if she's onstage.
So there's the inevitable point, befitting a performance where the star wears pajamas, when her eyelids grow leaden and her head so heavy that she bumps it against a lamp.
She wakens to recall a childhood dream that was so realistic it influenced her behavior in school the next day; its unfortunate consequences will be familiar to anyone who remembers the social mores of second-grade friendships.
The fact that any performance -- and life itself -- is a minefield of potential embarrassments provides both the form and content of this blissful piece of theater of abashment.
The show "101 Humiliating Stories" (there are only 17, actually, but each has numerous subsets) is a chain of artfully paced narratives of excruciating moments recollected in, well, not exactly tranquillity, but with the modulated control of a master comic eternally poised between ingenuousness and irony.
Ms.
Kron, who is a member of the theater troupe Five Lesbian Brothers, combines a novelist's sense of the telling social detail with a Chaplinesque knowledge of the humor in the yawning gap between intention and action (or, as she puts it, between the self you see in your mirror at home and the one that leaps out at you from store windows).
She realizes, as she tells us, brushing a sheaf of papers to the floor, that there's "a second set of behaviors that I exhibit to people that I am not aware of."
All of the anecdotes, in fact, are spiritually akin to the sorts of dreams in which you find yourself naked before a crowd.
They are linked by a series of scenes in which Ms.
Kron imagines herself addressing her Lansing, Mich., high school reunion, explaining -- in styles ranging from cringing to confrontational -- both her sexual and professional identities.
No alternative, of course, is safe when you're standing behind a podium.
The show, which has been artfully staged by John Robert Hoffman and was first presented in a rougher form at the Serious Fun festival last summer, is part of the Gay Games and Cultural Festival.
The question of how Ms.
Kron presents herself as a lesbian to the world at large (and particularly to her former classmates) is a prime source of the social awkardness she describes.
But "101 Humiliating Stories," at the New York Theater Workshop through July 2, is really for anyone who has ever had cause to blush. 101 Humiliating Stories  Written and performed by Lisa Kron; directed by John Robert Hoffman; set by Amy Shock; costume by Jose Gutierrez and Chip White; production stage manager, Janet M. Clark.
O Solo Homo Festival presented by New York Theater Workshop (James C. Nicola, artistic director; Nancy Kassak Diekmann, managing director) and Gay Games IV and Cultural Festival.
At 79 East Fourth Street, East Village.


Anticipating Influx of Refugees, Miami Plans Schools for Aliens
Concerned that political troubles in the Caribbean might cause a major influx of refugees, Miami's school board today approved a contingency plan that would put the children of aliens into makeshift special schools rather than integrate them immediately into the district's already overcrowded schools.
The plan, which would involve students attending classes in places like shopping centers and movie theaters, has met with resistance from advocates for children who worry that segregation would provide unequal educational opportunities.
Others worry that any plan aiding immigrants will lure more to Florida.


Flyers Set Sights on Murray
TERRY MURRAY, former coach of the Washington Capitals, will be named coach of the Philadelphia Flyers, a television station reported yesterday.
The Flyers have called a news conference for today to announce the hiring of a coach, and WPVI-TV in Philadelphia said it would be Murray, a friend and former teammate of BOBBY CLARKE, the Flyers' new president.


AAR Corp.(AIR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Sports of The Times; Houston Finally Has an Edge
CAN fans win a championship?
Can the pent-up frustrations of an entire region spur a team on to victory?
That is exactly what happened last night in this humid city in south Texas.
The Houston Rockets won the first championship of a major sports league in the history of the city, beating the New York Knicks, 90-84, and touching off emotions that haven't been felt in New York in, oh, a week or so, since the Rangers won the Stanley Cup.


Casey's General Stores Inc.(CASY,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Review/Pop; Lesbopalooza Celebration
Lollapalooza is a traveling summer music festival that defines itself by its diversity and multicultural appeal.
But its roster of alternative rock bands and the young, mainly white middle-class following it attracts is representative of only a very small audience.
Lesbopalooza, a one-time event that took place on Tuesday night at the Continental defined itself by its lack of breadth and adherence to one theme.
But in actuality, Lesbopalooza's seven hours of bands led by women was a diverse parade of talents and styles, attitudes and outlooks.
With the many visitors in New York commemorating the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall uprising, which helped begin the gay rights movement, Lesbopalooza's organizers had a wide-ranging, multinational cast of bands to choose from.
It was a night for women to be together, but it was also a night for them to see how different they all are.
Onstage, hard-core rock bands followed dance divas, and American folk musicians set the stage for yodeling New Zealanders.


Where Confidentiality Is and Isn't Protected
To the Editor:
A front-page article June 15, discussing testimony in a murder trial about disclosures at an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting, describes the lack of legal protection for confidential information in self-help and psychotherapist-led therapy groups.


Yanks Have the City to Themselves
Baseball's official calendar may have indicated that the 1994 season started in April.
For New Yorkers, it starts today.
After all, there's no more hockey consuming the city, what with the Rangers having gone on to glory, preparing to spend the rest of the summer sipping from the Stanley Cup.
The Knicks, too, saw their long campaign for the championship of their world end last night, as the National Basketball Association finally, finally saw its season conclude before the month of June did.


Clinton Says the North Koreans Really May Be Ready for Talks
President Clinton said today that he was now satisfied that North Korea is willing to freeze its nuclear program temporarily, and he agreed to open comprehensive talks next month in Geneva.
The announcement may ease the tension that has built up in recent months.
But it does little more than move the standoff to an unpredictable new stage; it remains unclear whether any progress has been made toward resolving the basic differences.


The Pop Life
New Leaf for Gangster Rap
Now that controversy and moral outrage have slowed down the influx of new gangster rap recordings, how about a little gangster funk?
The 23-year-old Warren G, whose self-produced first album, "Regulate . . . G Funk Era" (Violator/RAL), entered the Billboard pop charts at No. 2 this week, has all the right credentials -- or wrong credentials, depending on whom you ask.
Warren G's older brother is the notorious gangster rapper and producer Dr.
Dre; Warren G used to rap in a group called 213 with Snoop Doggy Dogg, who's currently facing a murder charge, and he produced several songs by Tupac Shakur, who is facing charges of aggravated assault of two policemen and sexual battery.


U.S. Wins in Soccer
The U.S. shocked Colombia, 2-1, for its first World Cup victory since 1950.
SportsThursday, page B9.


Airline Gives Family a Crack at Fame
Instead of putting up with jokes about lunacy and legumes, families with the last name of Nutt may become recipients of an unanticipated benefit because of a humorous promotion by Continental Airlines.
The airline, which in October began offering unrestricted, lower-cost flights called Peanuts Fares, is expanding the service, beginning today, to five new cities: Miami, Philadelphia, Omaha, Richmond and Tallahassee, Fla.


Indonesia Shuts Three Outspoken Magazines
An era of relative political openness and press freedom in Indonesia appeared to end this week as the Government of President Suharto shut down three influential magazines, including the country's most prominent newsweekly, and warned other publications that they could soon share a similar fate.
Diplomats and human rights advocates said the closing of the magazines was the most serious blow to freedom of the press in Indonesia in decades and would harm the international standing of the Suharto Government at a time when it seemed to be otherwise improving.


Nordica Selects Morey Mahoney
Nordica U.S.A.
Inc., a unit of the Italian company Benetton, said yesterday that it had selected Morey Mahoney Advertising in Denver to handle advertising for its Nordica and Kastle Alpine ski products in North America, previously handled by Jager di Paola Kemp in Burlington, Vt., for a year and a half.
Billings were not disclosed.


Stocks Recover a Bit, Following the Dollar
After three punishing sessions in which the Dow Jones industrial average lost more than 100 points and nearly 3 percent of its value, the stock market recovered modestly yesterday as it awaited developments in the wandering course of the dollar and of commodities prices, especially for oil.
The dollar fell on Tuesday to a post-World War II record of below 100 yen to the dollar.
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said yesterday that the United States and its allies were monitoring the course of the dollar and would "act as appropriate."


Mandela Is Mr. Nice Guy, Irking Some Allies
Some imagined that President Nelson Mandela would be Africa's Franklin D. Roosevelt, and a few predicted Fidel Castro.
But who ever imagined that the first black President of South Africa would be Mister Rogers?
And yet the tone that Mr.
Mandela has set in his first weeks as President is, in a word, nice.
He is easygoing and unexcitable, comforting, never scolding, with friendly words for everyone, from disgruntled tribal elders to white racists.


Selig Chides Players Union
Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, yesterday issued a statement in which he chided the Players Association for its involvement in the attempt by some United States senators to strip baseball of its exemption from the antitrust law as it pertains to labor relations.
But the owners also just might be jittery about the outcome of a vote in Washington today.
The Senate Judiciary Committee is scheduled to act on a bill that would put baseball club owners and their players on the same footing in collective bargaining as owners and players in professional basketball and football.
That means the baseball players would be able to go to court to challenge any step by the owners to impose new terms and conditions unilaterally in the absence of an agreement.


Essay; See-Nothing Congress
"I only picked up the phone," said the judge, not all that happy to be speaking to a columnist, "because the secretary is out to lunch and my clerk is in labor."
He is David B. Sentelle, Presiding Judge of the Independent Counsel Panel of the U.S.
Court of Appeals, a Reagan appointee.
Along with Judge John D. Butzner Jr. (Kennedy-Johnson) and Joseph T. Sneed (Nixon), Judge Sentelle will soon be faced with a momentous decision affecting the separation of powers and the Clinton Presidency.


Archer Cole, New Jersey Leader For Organized Labor, Dies at 77
Archer Cole, who spent more than 50 years in the American labor movement, the last 10 as president of the New Jersey Industrial Union Council, died on Saturday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 77 and lived in Roselle, N.J.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Government Panel Hears Call For Expanded AIDS Testing
More people need to be tested for the virus that causes AIDS, even if it means using such unconventional approaches as letting them do it themselves at home, former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop testified today.
Dr.
Koop, among scores of witnesses testifying before a Food and Drug Administration advisory committee meeting, said the nation had failed to pursue all options in identifying every individual infected with the human immunodeficiency virus, or H.I.V.


A Cool Respite From the Summer Heat


Editorial Notebook; Role Models, Bogus and Real
America deludes itself about why its children behave as they do.
In the suburbs we herd them into malls and let them grow up bereft of community, under the impression that what you can buy is who you are.
In the cities we raise them in devastated, parentless settings, where drug addiction and random gunfire rule the day.
After all that, when children behave badly we inexplicably lay the blame at the tarnished feet of America's sports gods.
We blame Michael Jordan, for gambling.
We blame Charles Barkley, for spitting on a fan.
This week we're blaming O. J. Simpson, for battering his wife and for being accused of her murder.


Ah, Sweet Sound of Stick on Spaldeen
I REMEMBER the day when stickball began its decline as a street game in New York City.
It was a spring Saturday in 1950 and Nathan Miller, a local furrier, rolled down Creston Avenue in the Bronx in a Buick the size of an elephant.
The streets had been ours for stickball, punchball, ring-o-levio, marbles, hangman, whatever we felt like playing, and now there were these -- cars.
Traffic pushed us onto the sidewalks and into the schoolyards during the postwar years.
Street games that needed scale and that sweet, smooth asphalt gradually disappeared from neighborhood life.
And today, take a deep breath former children of New York City, stickball is the subject of an exhibition in the Museum of the City of New York, in Manhattan.
A museum was where you went on class trips!
The stuff of your life wasn't in a museum!


Art in Review
Akira Kurosawa
Ise Foundation Gallery  623 Broadway, near Bleecker Street  Greenwich Village  Through July 9
If he weren't already a great film director, Akira Kurosawa might have been Japan's answer to Neo-Expressionism.
His exhibition of more than 200 works on paper from 1980 to 1992 -- all preparatory studies for his films from these years -- has a youthful, perpitetic energy that belies his advanced years. (He was born in 1910.)


Council Chief Wheels and Deals, And New York's Budget Is Passed
In the hours before the City Council voted yesterday to approve New York City's new budget, Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone invited a number of his fellow Democrats into his City Hall office.
One by one, he beseeched them to ignore their misgivings and to support Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's austere $31.6 billion budget.
But he did more than plead.
To some he promised perks for their districts; to others assignments to prestigious committees.
And to those who still resisted, he promised a brand of rebuke only the Speaker himself could unleash -- loss of money for their districts and perks for themselves.


A High-Rise Condo for a Pair of High Flyers


Diner's Journal
Campagna
Menus rustle open.
Satisfied sighs float toward the ceiling.
Whispered conversations can be heard.
Intense negotiations begin.
The start of a meal at the new Campagna is a very pleasant time.
Mark Strausman, the former chef at Coco Pazzo and proud proprietor of Campagna, really knows how to write a menu.
Every dish sounds delicious and appealing: spinach-ricotta ravioli with sweet garden peas, asparagus, fava beans and Parmesan cheese; couscous with steamed fish in a spicy broth; wild arugula salad with Sicilian plum tomatoes.
There is not a single dish on this menu that I would not be happy to order.


Corrections
An article in The Living Section on June 15 about a group of Los Angeles high school students who formed a company called Food From the 'Hood misstated their financial benefits.
The company has set a limit of $45,000 in scholarships that any student can earn, but it has not projected that any current students will earn that much.


A Family Must Deal With the Murders of the Couple Who Shaped Their Lives
While the jury deliberated today in the murder trial of Paul Cox, members of a family of Indian immigrants sat solemnly in a courthouse hallway, their immigrant transition evident in the sari worn by one middle-aged woman and the elegant navy blue business suit on her niece.
The trial raised issues about whether members of Alcoholics Anonymous could be compelled to reveal confessions by Mr.
Cox, a 26-year-old carpenter from a prominent Larchmont family.


We Must Keep Violent Criminals Locked Up; Costly Early Releases
To the Editor:
Barry Krisberg of the National Council on Crime and Delinquency asserts in "Two Midwest States" (letter, June 14), regarding A. M. Rosenthal's "Prisons Save Lives" column, that my research is far outside "mainstream criminology" and has been criticized by many criminologists, including past presidents of the American Society of Criminology.


William Morgan Dies at 88; A Leading U.S. Astronomer
William Wilson Morgan, the astronomer who discovered the spiral structure of the Milky Way galaxy, died on Tuesday at his home in Williams Bay, Wis.
He was 88.
The cause of death was a heart attack, said Diana Steele, a spokeswoman for the University of Chicago.
Dr.
Morgan was an emeritus professor of astronomy at the university and former director of its Yerkes Observatory in Williams Bay, a town in far southern Wisconsin, near the Illinois border.


Art in Review
Beverly Semmes
Michael Klein  594 Broadway (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through next Thursday
Beverly Semmes's sculptures in the form of clothing are simple, almost gossamer creations, made of organza or organza and rayon, one with a subtle flower pattern, all of them tacked lightly to the walls.
The thing is, the dresses she designs are big enough to fit King Kong's sister.
Sleeves are so long that they gather in large piles on the floor.


House Votes a Cut in Arts Endowment's Budget
The House of Representatives voted yesterday to cut the 1995 budget of the National Endowment for the Arts by $3.4 million, or 2 percent of the $170.2 million allotted for 1994.
The vote of 380 to 41 came after Democrats blocked several attempts by Republicans to impose deeper cuts, or abolish the endowment entirely.
The Administration had asked for a $1 million increase over last year's budget.
The measure must now be acted on by the Senate.


Cultural Superiority in Curriculum Rejected
A resolution that would have made American cultural superiority a tenet of the curriculum in a Queens school district was rejected last night when no member of the community school board would second it.
The failure of the resolution headed off a confrontation with Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines, who had indicated that he would try to have the measure overturned if it succeeded.


Echoes of Disbelief in a City Where Simpson Was a Hero, and a Neighbor
On Sundays, Lloyd Smith remembers, his father took him to see O. J. Simpson run with the wind at the football stadium.
Sometimes that was really against the wind, or against the freezing rain or snow.
O.
J. was the one who appeared out of the Buffalo blizzards, football tucked to his chest, knees high, face alert beneath his helmet, steady as a breeze through it all.
"My O. J.," Mr.
Smith remembers calling him, and he could not take his eyes off him.
This week, Mr.
Smith, now 36, had his jaw locked and his eyes steeled as he watched O. J. Simpson on a hotel lounge television.
Mr.
Simpson was sitting behind the defense table in a Los Angeles courtroom, wincing as the judge matter-of-factly said the words "murder case." Mr.
Smith winced, too, and scanned the others who were watching alongside him.
He had the look of someone searching for a doctor in the house.


Top Horses to Renew Rivalries At Belmont and Atlantic City
Some of the star horses in the Belmont barns were working out yesterday to renew rivalries in two states this weekend and to raise the curtain on the second half of the racing year.
At Belmont Park on Sunday, the chief rivals in the $100,000 Tom Fool Stakes will be the sprinters Bird onthewire and Cherokee Run, with Virginia Rapids and Punch Line trying to run them down at seven furlongs.
And at the Atlantic City track the same day, Lure and Star of Cozzene will meet in the $500,000 Caesar's International for the first time since they tangled in the same race one year ago.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  AWACS TO FLY THE ANDES AGAIN  The Administration, criticized for halting flights over the Andes that provided information to Colombia and Peru on drug smuggling, will resume the flights.
A1  FRENCH MOVE INTO RWANDA  France sent its first troops on a relief mission from Zaire into Rwanda, where countless thousands have been killed since April in ethnic and political fighting.
Rwandan Patriotic Front rebels denounced the French as invaders.
A1


Is the Writing on the Wall for These Knicks?
Long after the Knicks departed the Summit here late Wednesday night, the only traces left behind in their locker room were a few discarded socks, adhesive wraps, empty soda cans, one box score of their Game 7 defeat that was torn into a stack of about 100 pieces and a defiant message that someone printed neatly on the chalkboard.
The message read: "1995 = The Knicks' Year!"


RESULTS PLUS
CYCLING  Swiss Rider Triumphs  Pascal Richard of Switzerland won the 992-mile Tour de Suisse road cycling race yesterday, beating out Vladimir Poulnikov of the Ukraine.
It was the first time in five years that a Swiss rider had won the race.
Richard had worn the leader's yellow jersey for the past week. (AP)


AT THE MET WITH: Brice Marden; A Tour That Moves From Calligraphy to Pollock
BACK in the 1960's, Brice Marden first made a name for himself painting monochrome gray panels that were spartan, implacable, silent.
Today Mr.
Marden is waiting at the round information desk in the lobby of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in black jeans, black shirt and black baseball cap.
With a nod rather than a hello, followed by a long silence, he is as subdued as his dress.
But this impression gives way to another one as time passes and Mr.
Marden zigzags through the museum.
He talks more and more freely, in a way that's intense and searching.
He chuckles occasionally.
He listens hard.
He says "you" when he means "I," as in, "You start working with the figure and all these things begin to come up in your art."


Claire Nichtern Memorial
A memorial tribute to the Broadway producer Claire Nichtern is to be held on Monday at 5 P.M. at the Promenade Theater, Broadway at 76th Street.
The actors Anne Jackson and Eli Wallach and the playwright Murray Schisgal are among those scheduled to speak.
Ms.
Nichtern died on March 26 at the age of 73.


Tobacco Company Chief Denies Nicotine Scheme in Testimony
In five hours of testimony before a Congressional subcommittee today, Thomas E. Sandefur Jr., the chairman and chief executive of the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, denied that his company had deliberately manipulated nicotine levels to keep its customers addicted.
Mr.
Sandefur was virtually the only witness before the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Health and the Environment, which is investigating whether tobacco should be regulated as a drug.


A's Witt, Nearly Perfect, Says It's Ump Who Wasn't
Athletics 4, Royals 0
It won't say so in the record book, but as far as Bobby Witt's concerned, he pitched a no-hitter and a perfect game.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Waived Sam Horn, outfielder-first baseman, from Columbus of the International League.


Release of Simpson Tapes Annoys District Attorney
Gil Garcetti, the chief prosecutor in the murder case against O. J. Simpson, criticized the Los Angeles City Attorney today for authorizing the release of police recordings on which Mr.
Simpson is heard screaming and cursing his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson.
Mr.
Garcetti, the Los Angeles District Attorney, said no more tapes would be made public "in the interest of justice."


Officer Threatens Suicide
A New York City police officer sat on the front steps of City Hall early today, put a gun to her head and threatened suicide, the police said, leading to a tense standoff with hostage negotiators.
The woman, identified as Officer Roberta McCartney, 33, an 11-year veteran, was first sighted by other officers at about 1:05 A.M. in the area in front of City Hall, said Sgt.
Joseph Gallagher, a police spokesman.


Will a Falling Dollar Bring Inflation? Not Necessarily
Inflation fears fanned by the dollar's fall this week are overblown, many economists say.
Despite all the talk about the global economy, they say, the United States is more insulated than most countries against such shocks.
A popular rule of thumb among specialists is that a 10 percent drop in the dollar against the rest of the world's currencies would add no more than one percentage point to the inflation rate over the next year or two.
The rule is based partly on the fact that imports account for only a tenth of all goods and services sold in the United States, so changes in their prices are heavily diluted.


U.S. to Revive Flights to Help Latin Nations Combat Drugs
Reversing a decision that drew heavy criticism, the Clinton Administration plans to resume intelligence-gathering flights over the Andes that provide information to Colombia and Peru about planes that smuggle drugs.
Because those countries have a policy of shooting down drug-carrying aircraft, the Administration last month stopped flights of Awacs aircraft over Peru and Colombia and cut off the flow of flight-tracking information to those countries.


Julius A. Stratton, 93, Ex-President of M.I.T.
Julius Adams Stratton, a scientist who was president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology from 1959 to 1966 and chairman of the Ford Foundation from 1966 to 1971, died Wednesday night at Goddard House, a nursing home in Boston.
He was 93.
Dr.
Stratton, who had most recently lived in Cambridge, Mass., died of pneumonia, said Charles Ball, an M.I.T spokesman.


CHRONICLE
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON said yesterday that her husband gets "a bad rap" when it comes to his reputation as a junk-food aficionado, Reuters reported.
"My husband has good eating habits," she said as she participated in a ceremony in front of the White House proclaiming June to be National Fruit and Vegetable Month.
"He really does love fresh fruits and vegetables," she said, taking pains to mention that he eats broccoli, a bone of contention for the previous first family.


Critic's Choice/Film; Precursor of 'Passion,' And Other Italian Treats
The timing couldn't be better for a revival of Ettore Scola's "Passione d'Amore," the 1981 movie that inspired "Passion," the new musical by Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine.
The film, which opens the Joseph Papp Public Theater's 1994 Italian Summer Festival tonight at 8:05, is remarkably similar in look and pacing to the Broadway musical adaptation except for one crucial difference.
The character of Fosca, the ugly, ailing woman who conceives an obsessive passion for Giorgio, a handsome 19th-century cavalry officer, was softened for the Broadway musical.
The difference between Valeria D'Obici's movie portrayal of Fosca and Donna Murphy's performance is the difference between commedia dell'arte and Chekhov, between Margaret Hamilton in "The Wizard of Oz" and Olivia de Havilland in "The Heiress." The scenes in which Miss D'Obici's bony, hollow-eyed Fosca throws herself at Bernard Giraudeau's dashing Giorgio lend the film an undertone of gallows humor.
The character is a leering, voracious symbol of death.
Ms.
Murphy's lush voice and air of mournful abjection, deepened by Mr.
Sondheim's yearning music, makes Fosca seem more romantically tragic than scary.
The two performances are equally powerful in their very different ways.


Efforts on Quality of Life in Village a Success, the Police Say
Until three months ago, the switchboard at the Sixth Precinct station house was overwhelmed with complaints from agitated residents: every weekend night young people from all five boroughs and the suburbs invaded Greenwich Village, drinking and urinating in the streets.
Teen-age boys cruised around Washington Square in cars, blasting their portable radios to attract girls.
"It was like peacocks spreading their tails," recalled Lieut.
Robert E. McKenna, "except here they'd turn the volume real loud to impress the girls and exchange phone numbers."


Skippy Maker Follows Crowd and Revamps
CPC International Inc., the maker of Skippy peanut butter, said yesterday that it would take a pretax charge of $227 million in the second quarter to close several plants and cut its work force by 2,600 people, or nearly 7 percent.
CPC, which also makes Hellmann's mayonnaise, Thomas' English muffins and Knorr soups, said the cost of the revamping after taxes would be $137 million, or 92 cents a share, and would not change the company's expected earnings for the year.


Miscellany
*
Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws, Los Angeles, formed the EJL Entertainment Group as well as divisions for direct response and graphic design.
Ric Militi will head EJL Entertainment as vice president, in addition to managing the sales promotion division.
Sharon Scollard was named manager of the direct response division and Lisa Tucker was named manager of the graphic design division.


Cutbacks Peril Miami's Citizenship Events
Immigrants who come here in search of wealth have encountered another sign that the streets are not paved with gold: the Government has run out of money for the swearing-in ceremonies at which new Americans take the oath of citizenship.
The Miami office of the Immigration and Naturalization Service can no longer afford the elaborate events in which some 8,000 people become citizens each month at a downtown performing arts center, said Lemar Wooley, an agency spokesman here.


Anselm Talalay, 82, Inventor and Official
Anselm Talalay, an inventor and retired vice president of research and development at the B.F.
Goodrich Industrial Products Division in Akron, Ohio., died on Thursday at his home in Cleveland.
He was 82.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Nykanen Gives Up Comeback and Retires
The five-time Olympic champion MATTI NYKANEN of Finland -- regarded by many as the greatest ski jumper ever -- has retired after making several comeback attempts during the last few years.
"The decision is definitive," Nykanen told the newspaper Ilta-Sanomat in Helsinki, Finland.


Penalty Time Mystery Solved
Americans are asking: What's with this injury time?
Here's how it works:


New Signs Of Slowdown In Economy
Fresh evidence of a decelerating economy appeared today as a moderate overall rise in new orders for durable goods was accompanied by the fourth consecutive decline in orders for equipment to be used by nonmilitary manufacturers.
Orders for durable goods -- items from toasters to helicopters designed to last at least three years -- climbed nine-tenths of 1 percent in May, aided by another double-digit gain in military contracts, Commerce Department figures show.
While this advance was somewhat bigger than expected, many analysts regarded the report over all as pointing to a slackening of economic growth.


The Knicks' Crying Game: Disappointment Reigns
The pain runs deep for the Knicks, the kind of pain that will not subside quickly.
Fewer teams seemed to work harder this season to win a championship.
Fewer teams seemed to want it more.
No team is more disappointed.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the establishment of a legal defense fund for President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, misstated the maximum contribution members of the House of Represenatatives may accept for such funds.
The amount is $5,000; it is Senators who may accept up to $10,000.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
From noon to 3 A.M.
These Greenwich Village streets will be closed for Gay Pride activities: Weehawken Street from Christopher Street to 10th Avenue, Morton Street from Greenwich Avenue to Hudson Street, West Fourth Street from 12th Street to Horatio Street and Christopher from the West Side Highway to Seventh Avenue.


Review/Art; Gay Pride (and Anguish) Around the Galleries
The 25th anniversary of gay liberation this week has been ignored by New York's major art museums, but a few other public institutions and art galleries have picked up the slack with exhibitions on gay and lesbian themes.
Some of the shows are solo exhibitions; most are large, ad hoc group gatherings that would have profited from judicious nips and tucks.
Yet even when overcrowded and wildly uneven in quality, the shows' wealth of individual voices demonstrates why the gay presence has so long been a catalytic force in this city's visual culture.
The New York Public Library
In an often-told story, the gay movement had its political beginnings on June 28, 1969, when the clientele of a Greenwich Village bar called the Stonewall Inn physically resisted police harassment for the first time.
Anybody interested in the specific events of that night or in the history of gay and lesbian life before and since should head directly to the main branch of the New York Public Library, where a remarkable exhibition, "Becoming Visible: The Legacy of Stonewall," is in the Gottesman Exhibition Hall


Think Positive! It's the Motto For U.S. Team
A night earlier, they had skipped and jumped and hugged jubilantly in the Rose Bowl, draped in victory and the Stars and Stripes, having proved to international skeptics and themselves that, contrary to popular belief, American soccer was not third world but first-rate.
"We have struggled for years, and today we showed we can play with any team in the world," midfielder John Harkes said after Wednesday's magnificently improbable 2-1 victory over Colombia in the World Cup.


HEALTH COALITION STRONGLY OPPOSES COMPROMISE PLAN
A broad coalition of labor, civic and consumer groups today mounted an attack against the compromise national health insurance plan emerging in the Senate Finance Committee.
The opponents announced that they would fight any bill that would ultimately put a new requirement on individuals, rather than their employers, to purchase health insurance.


The Spoken Word
"FOOD FOR THOUGHT: HEALTHY WAYS TO COOK AND EAT OUT," Dish, 100 West 82d Street, Manhattan.
A seminar on healthy eating that also features a cooking demonstration.
Participants include Betsy Lydon of Mothers and Others for a Livable Planet, an environmental organization; Andrew Gold, head chef at Dish Restaurant, and Heidi Skolnik of Plus One Health Management, a club that assists in health management plans for corporations.
Sponsored by American Woman's Economic Development Corporation.
Tomorrow at 10:30 A.M.
Admission: $20.
Information: (212) 692-9100 ext. 13.
PLAY READING, Aldrich Museum, 258 Main Street, Ridgefield, Conn.
Two short plays by the novelist Joyce Carol Oates -- "The Key" and "The Sacrifice" -- will be read by professional actors; Ms.
Oates will be present to discuss her work.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Information: (203) 438-4519.
ARCHEOLOGICAL LECTURE, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 79th Street.
Discussion of the culture and art of the Moche, a pre-Inca civilization, based on artifacts excavated in Sipan, Peru, that are on display at the museum through January 1995; led by Christopher B. Donnan, director of the Fowler Museum of Cultural History in Los Angeles and a co-curator of the exhibition.
Today at 7 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Information: (212) 769-5315.
POETRY SLAM, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Everton Sylvester, Terry Lewis, Snuff, David Mills and Osagyefo will recite poetry in a mock competition.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Ideas and Objects: Selections from the Permanent Collections," tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "Joseph Stella," tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M; all by Margaret Sundell.
Free with museum admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Inside Art
Politics First
The steps of City Hall may be an odd place from which to announce the appointment of a museum director, but then the troubled New-York Historical Society is not your typical institution.
Both the site and the appointment of Betsy Gotbaum as the society's executive director are being interpreted by some museum officials and others in the art world as a clear message about priorities: politics first, then the society's art collection and extraordinary library.
The art world has not been alone in expressing skepticism about the new director's lack of a background in art.
The society's search committee itself was divided between two finalists, Ms.
Gotbaum, the former Commissioner of Parks and Recreation under Mayor David N. Dinkins, and Kent L. Barwick, the president of the Municipal Art Society.
When they first voted, the eight members tied 4-to-4; Miner H. Warner, the society's chairman, changed his vote.


C.I.A. Backs Arms Treaty On Chemicals
The head of the Central Intelligence Agency told Congress today that American intelligence was not sure that it would be able to detect all violations of a new global treaty banning chemical weapons.
Despite the verification problems, the C.I.A. and the American military urged the Senate today to ratify the accord, saying that it would deter other nations from building poison gas, and that Washington plans to phase out its chemical weapons.


No Drama, but Franco Will Take It
John Franco wanted to celebrate the moment on Tuesday night.
He took over with the Mets ahead of the Braves, 3-2, in Atlanta, looking to earn his 17th save of the season and the record 253d of his career.
Instead, that night ended in anger and recriminations, and with a clubhouse post smashed by the force of Franco's frustration as exhibited with a nearby bat.
On Wednesday night, he was nothing but smiles.


Carlesimo Leaves Hall To Coach Trail Blazers
Ending days of speculation, the Portland Trail Blazers yesterday named P. J. Carlesimo as head coach, giving the man who built Seton Hall into a national power over the last 12 years his first professional basketball job.
Terms of the multiyear contract were not announced, although Carlesimo said it is "a generous, fair contract for five years." The deal is rumored to be for $1.5 million a year.


U.S. Offices of Hong Kong Commodities Firm Are Seized
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission has closed down the offices of an unregistered commodities trading company based in Hong Kong that the commission fears cheated about 1,000 investors out of millions of dollars.
The commission said today that five offices in California, Texas and New York affiliated with Frankwell Bullion Ltd. sold millions of dollars worth of futures contracts for gold, silver and foreign currency to "unsophisticated retail investors," many of them members of what the agencies called "affinity groups," individuals with ethnic or religious affiliations.
Offices Shut in Three States
"This is a sizable operation," Dennis Klejna, director of the commission's division of enforcement in Washington, said.
He estimated there have been at least 300 brokers operating from the offices since 1991.


Phyllis Shorenstein, 76, Patron Of Asian Arts in San Francisco
Phyllis J. Shorenstein, a founder of the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, died on Wednesday at the University of California at San Francisco Medical Center.
She was 76 and lived in San Francisco.
Mrs. Shorenstein had a heart ailment and died after a long illness, doctors said.


Art in Review
Julian Schnabel
Pace Gallery  142 Greene Street  SoHo  Through Sept. 9
Perhaps in hopes of eradicating from memory the debacle of his Pace show in April, a display of vacuous paintings on paper collectively titled "Boni Lux," Julian Schnabel is back.
His current offering introduces five much larger and far more presentable works that will occupy Pace's SoHo gallery for the summer.


Rabbi, a Town Official, Is Accused of Taking Bribe for Power-Plant Approval
An Orthodox rabbi who is also the chairman of the planning and zoning adjustment boards in Lakewood Township was indicted today by an Ocean County grand jury on charges that he took $500,000 to help win political approval of a power plant there.
The rabbi, Yisroel Schenkolewski, 49, was charged with conspiring with the representatives of two power companies from 1990 until 1992, when the Township Committee reversed its opposition to the plant.


We Must Keep Violent Criminals Locked Up; Drug Program Option
To the Editor:
Continuation of the policy of simply constructing more and bigger prisons and jails will not make communities safer.
There is an alternative that is less costly because it uses existing resources in a more effective way.


Life Insurer Bests G.E. On Kemper
Conseco Inc., an upstart life insurer, challenged the General Electric Company to a bidding war for the Kemper Corporation yesterday, but General Electric decided to retreat from the field.
Conseco offered yesterday morning to buy Kemper for $67 a share in cash and stock, or about $3.2 billion, topping General Electric's all-cash offer of $60 a share.
By midafternoon, General Electric had withdrawn its bid, giving no reason for the move.


School Report Draws Doubts From Cortines
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines expressed skepticism yesterday about a preliminary City Hall plan to dismantle the central school bureaucracy and delegate some of its functions to the city's 32 community school districts.
Saying he could not react directly to the plan because he has not seen it, Mr.
Cortines voiced general concerns about whether the districts could take on new responsibilities, whether decentralizing functions like purchasing could bring greater efficiency -- and even whether the city ought to expend its energy on school reorganizing.


U.S. to Resume Anti-Drug Flights Over 2 Latin Nations; Talks in Colombia
With American officials in Washington expressing anger over the "narco tape" scandal here, the United States Ambassador met secretly for two hours today with the Colombian president-elect.
In a tape recording made public Wednesday, a leader of the Cali cocaine cartel is heard to agree to donate $3.75 million to President-elect Enersto Samper Pizano's presidential campaign.
In response, Mr.
Samper said that his campaign never received any donations from drug traffickers.





3 Companies Plan Services For Phones With Screens
Citibank, Nynex and Philips Electronics plan to introduce a series of services today that will allow people in New York to use a new-generation telephone equipped with a small computer screen and keyboard.
Philips, which manufactures the "screen phone," is among several companies that have advocated the devices as a way of providing electronic information and shopping services to customers who may not want to use personal computers.


Review/Rock; Four Women Crying Out Life's Pains and Losses
Seven Year Bitch, a rock group from Seattle, has probably had its fill of news headlines.
In 1992, its guitarist, Stefanie Sargent, died of a heroin overdose; last summer, one of its friends and label mates, Mia Zapata, the lead singer of the Gits, was abducted and murdered.
The female quartet's first album, "Sick 'Em," is dedicated to Ms.
Sargent; its second, "Viva Zapata!" (C/Z), is dedicated to Ms.
Zapata.
With the recent death of another friend, Kristen Pfaff, the bassist in Courtney Love's band, Hole, it seems as if the group could spend the rest of its career dedicating albums to absent friends.
Understandably, when the band performed on Saturday night at CBGB, its rock-and-roll was forged from anger and hate, and delivered in the form of threats and accusations.
It played dirty, funky heavy metal anchored in the big, sinewy bass lines of Elizabeth Davis, who writes most of the band's music.
Selene Vigil's vocals were screamed instead of sung.
When she injected the line "Twinkle, twinkle little star, sometimes I wonder who you are" into one verse, it came more from the point of view of a bitter, abandoned adult than that of a child in awe of the mysteries of the universe.


On My Mind; The Press and Simpson
Among the scores of millions of Americans who watched the Simpson story play out on TV and read about it in the papers were every reporter, commentator, editor and publisher in the country.
Since the first day, a sizable number of them have been raising and answering questions about the meaning of the case -- what we learned about our social, sexual and moral manners, beliefs and customs.


Art in Review
Jorge Ribalta
Zabriskie Gallery  724 Fifth Avenue (at 56th Street)  Through July 9
Figurines take on personalities, or at least seem to, in the black-and-white images of Jorge Ribalta, a young photographer from Barcelona, Spain.
Like Laurie Simmons, David Levinthal and other contemporary photographers who work with dolls of one sort or another, Mr.
Ribalta uses his pictures of figures to play with the medium's illusion of reality.


Dudley to Test Free-Agent Market
As expected, Portland Trail Blazers center CHRIS DUDLEY has opted out of his contract to test the free-agent market.
Dudley, who made $790,000 last season, said he was interested in returning to Portland and league rules allow the Blazers to match any offer.


At Wimbledon, Stars Disappear Under Clear Sky
Stefan Edberg lay on his back on the Center Court lawn, a place where he has twice pocketed a Wimbledon title and a place that is literally a backyard for his London residence.
First, he looked up at the unbroken expanse of blue sky as if all the answers to his lost serve and composure might be stored overhead.
Then, broken himself at the start of the fifth set, he wearily regained his feet and trudged back to the baseline to allow Denmark's unsung Kenneth Carlsen to put the finishing touches on a 6-7 (6-8), 6-7 (6-8), 6-2, 6-4, 6-4 comeback that robbed this Grand Slam event of yet another former champion.


Reading for Sally Belfrage
Maya Angelou will be the host for a reading from the books of Sally Belfrage on Monday at 7 P.M. at Symphony Space, 2537 Broadway and 95th Street.
Ms.
Belfrage, an author of memoirs, died on March 14 in London at the age of 57.


Gay Rights Group Suing To March on Fifth Ave.
Three days before an international gay-rights march past the United Nations, a gay organization based in Greenwich Village went to court yesterday to seek a permit for a second march up Fifth Avenue, throwing an 11th-hour wrench into the city's planning.
The suit is the culmination of a lengthy three-way struggle among the Giuliani administration, the organizers of a march commemorating a 1969 gay-rights protest and a handful of more radical gay and lesbian groups that have insisted on holding a maverick march on Fifth Avenue.


On Stage, and Off
Counting the Plays
After "Broken Glass" and "Medea" close on Sunday, only four plays will still be running on Broadway.
"The Sisters Rosensweig" is to close on July 16, and two others -- "Angels in America" and "Laughter on the 23d Floor" -- are wobbly enough that even people involved in them say they'll be fighting to stay alive until Labor Day.
This means the Broadway fall season may begin with only one play running in a commercial theater, and that one, "An Inspector Calls," is a revival of what is generally acknowledged to be a creaky drama, whose chief asset is its staging.
"And look at what hasn't been able to work," said Nicholas Scandalios, the assistant to the Nederlander Organization chairman, James M. Nederlander.
"Arthur Miller, Anna Deavere Smith. These people aren't exactly pikers."


National League Suspends Walker
Montreal right fielder LARRY WALKER was suspended for four games yesterday by the National League president, LEN COLEMAN.
Walker received the suspension, effective Friday, and was fined an undisclosed amount for charging the mound and provoking a bench-clearing brawl in a game June 14 against Pittsburgh. (AP)


Market Place; Who wants Philip Morris with its problems? Many investors do.
THERE is turmoil in the executive suite, earnings have plunged, and the company's major product is under attack as an addictive drug.
So why in the world would any investor want to own Philip Morris?
Plenty do.
Many big investors hold huge stakes in Philip Morris.
The stock is the largest position of a couple of billion-dollar mutual funds.
Managers of these funds brush past the headlines to focus on what they think is fundamental: Philip Morris is a relatively cheap stock.
And like anyone who buys a stock, they think it is likely to go up.


COMPANY BRIEFS
R.
G.
BARRY CORP., Pickerington, Ohio, agreed to acquire Vesture Corp., Randleman, N.C., a closely held maker of Lava Buns stadium seat cushions and other heating products, for an undisclosed amount of stock.


Bush's Presidential Guest


First Data Raises Western Union Bid
The First Data Corporation raised its offer for the New Valley Corporation's Western Union unit yesterday to $660 million, topping by $10 million a surprise bid for the company made last week by the buyout firm Forstmann Little &amp; Company.
But Western Union may be subject to auction.
A judge overseeing its bankruptcy reorganization said at a hearing in Newark that she would consider today whether to impose an auction to sell the company.


Restaurants
Paris to Provence.
A generation ago, Paris captured the imagination of the American Francophile.
It was a little late to follow in the footsteps of Hemingway, Stein and Fitzgerald, but New Yorkers spooned up gooey onion soup and dreamed of life on the Left Bank.
Autres temps, autres moeurs.


Shooting Prompts a Review of Prisoner Policy
The City Department of Correction said yesterday it was reviewing its system for classifying "high risk" prisoners, two days after an inmate -- a robbery suspect who was not considered high risk under the current policy -- snatched a correction officer's gun and critically wounded another officer at Kings County Hospital.
Under the current policy, only inmates charged with "high-notoriety" crimes or with records of repeated escape attempts are labeled high risk, according to Tom Kelly, who is the Correction Department's Deputy Commissioner of Public Information.
The Regulations
Department regulations require high-risk inmates to be escorted by three officers and a captain, instead of two officers as was the case on Tuesday.


Are Lawyers Compulsive, Or Just Nicely Precise?
Lawyers are compulsive creatures where language is concerned, instinctively treating even the placement of a comma as if it could destroy an entire legal document.
"We can be precise to a fault, but that's because precision is essential in a transaction," said Sherry F. Colb, an assistant professor of law at the Rutgers University School of Law in Camden.
"After all, you are binding yourself and your client to something specific. You want that something to be absolutely correct."
But this exactitude can be a curse, Professor Colb says, especially since it can carry over to inappropriate areas, "like conversations with a friend, which you have to stop yourself from editing."


Terry Murray Hired to Coach the Flyers
The Philadelphia Flyers yesterday named the former Washington Capitals coach and former Flyers defenseman TERRY MURRAY as the team's head coach.
Murray, 43, was hired by BOB CLARKE, the team's new general manager and president, apparently for his ability to run a disciplined team and to relate to players of all ages.


Port-au-Prince Journal; Is Voodoo the Weapon To Repel the Invaders?
With the threat of foreign intervention hanging over Haiti, the de facto president, Emil Jonassaint, appeared on television last week to rally nationalist sentiment and warn attackers of the secret weapons he said his country held in reserve.
"Mobilizing all the resources and strategies of our ancestors, we will return to the worthy heritage of the famous maroons," the 81-year-old army-backed leader said.
He was speaking of the fugitive Haitian slaves who overthrew French colonial rule nearly 200 years ago, and his allusion was to the use of voodoo as one of their weapons.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Presley Cos., Newport Beach, Calif., is selling $200 million of senior notes due in 2001 at 100 to yield 12.5 percent through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
Callable in four years, the notes are rated B-2 by Moody's Investors Service and B- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


CHRONICLE
Mrs.
Clinton got to eat a vegetable or two herself yesterday when she spoke at a luncheon of the Women's Legal Defense Fund in the Washington Hilton Hotel.
The event, attended by 2,100 people, celebrated the 20th anniversary of JUDITH L. LICHTMAN as president of the organization.
Ms.
Lichtman recalled her first encounter with Mrs.
Clinton 20 years ago.
"She was working in Washington and living with a close friend of ours, Sara Ehrman," she said.
"Sara called me up and said: 'There is this young woman lawyer. Come over tonight and meet her. She is destined for great things.'


A Sure Shot Captures the Title


Jets Make New Kicker Seem Years Younger
The Jets have plucked a player out of the record books 16 years after they cut him.
But the Nick Lowery they unveiled as their new place-kicker today also appears to be an aging veteran whose skills have remained at a big-league level.
Lowery is, simply, the most accurate field-goal kicker in pro football history.
Indeed, he is virtually the paradigm for the modern place-kicker in accuracy and distance.
He booted 80 percent his attempts, including 79.3 percent of his chances last year with Kansas City.


White House and Aristide Clash on Broadcasts to Haiti
An American plan to beam radio broadcasts into Haiti has been sharply revised after the country's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, threatened to block the mission if it included an appeal to Haitians not to flee the country, Administration officials said today.
The transmissions will now be devoted entirely to messages aimed at stirring opposition to the country's military leaders and preparing the way for Father Aristide's return, the officials said.
They said the United States now intends to resort to paid radio advertisements to send its parallel message that Haitians should not join in an exodus by boat.


An Upset Kick-Starts American Confidence For the Long Run
Was this a miracle on grass?
The United States team's shocking 2-1 defeat of Colombia on Wednesday night in Pasadena, Calif., sent soccer commentators around the world into a dither of debate over how high this ranked on the list of World Cup upsets.
Here in America, it sent sports historians back to 1980, and the United States hockey team's improbable defeat of the Soviet Union en route to a gold medal at the Lake Placid Olympics.


Dodgers Send Dreifort to the Minors
The rookie right-hander DARREN DREIFORT, who began his professional career with the Los Angeles Dodgers without pitching in the minor leagues, was optioned to San Antonio of the Texas League yesterday.
Dreifort, 22, was 0-5 with six saves and a 6.21 earned run average in 27 games -- all in relief -- for the Dodgers this season.
He allowed 45 hits and 21 runs, 20 earned, in 29 innings of work with 15 walks and 22 strikeouts.


Chart House
Chart House Enterprises, a restaurant chain, said after the market closed on Wednesday that it expected second-quarter earnings to fall below analysts' estimates of 25 cents a share, to 14 cents to 18 cents a share.
Trading in the stock was delayed yesterday because of an order imbalance.
An analyst for CS First Boston also cut her recommendation to "hold" from "strong buy."


Corrections
An article last Friday about research on smoking misstated an action by the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company at a research laboratory in 1983.
The company moved into a larger lab; it did not shut the lab on the advice of its lawyers.


Pop/Jazz; Sampling Young Jazz Outdoors Free
Out with the old and in with the new: with a few exceptions, this year's JVC Jazz Festival, which opens tonight, offers a spectacular way to sample the wares of jazz's younger musicians.
The festival is divided between free (yes, free) shows outdoors at Bryant Park and at Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center, and the standard concerts at Carnegie Hall, Town Hall and Avery Fisher Hall.
It's also, for the most part, divided between the exciting (outside) and the expected (inside).
Indoors, there's not much need for description, with jazz musicians like Dave Brubeck, George Shearing, Billy Taylor, Dick Hyman and Mel Torme competing with Ray Charles, Milton Nascimento, Gilberto Gil, Caetano Veloso and other not-so-jazz acts, all of them well known.
But outdoors and at a few of the indoor shows, the party looks to be a good one.
George Wein, the boss of the festival, has planned six outdoor shows, a few of which not only dig deep into the jazz renaissance of the last 10 years but also highlight jazz's cross-generational depth and even some of its stylistic diversity.


Driver Slain by Gunman In Armored-Car Robbery
An armored-truck driver delivering the weekly payroll to a graphics company here was shot and killed today by two men who fled with more than $100,000 in cash stuffed into two suitcases, the police said.
The victim, Julius Baumgardt, a 46-year-old driver for the Mid-Island Check Cashing Corporation of Massapequa, lay sprawled on the sidewalk at the entrance to the building at 6851 Jericho Turnpike this afternoon, dead of a single bullet wound in the head.


Corrections
A headline in Business Day on Wednesday about American Flywheel Systems Inc.'s development of electric cars described the cars' power source incorrectly in some editions.
It is to be spinning flywheels that produce electricity; it is not "bomb fuel."


Accounts
*
Accolade Inc., San Jose, Calif., to Goldberg Moser O'Neill, San Francisco, to handle the entertainment computer software maker's account, previously at Darien &amp; Kilburg, San Francisco.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Good Looks, and Dreams of the Stylish Life
In the fast-lane life that flows along San Vicente Boulevard in the Brentwood section here, Ronald Lyle Goldman moved with a youthful grace that turned heads even amid the opulence and glamour.
He could only dream of being one of the moneyed elite who cruised the streets in $100,000 Mercedes coupes and passed the time in sunny restaurants like Mezzaluna, where he worked as a waiter.


People
*
David Kuhlmann, partner and chief operating officer of the Hively Group, Houston, has resigned.
The agency said a successor, possibly involving a reorganization of duties, would be announced soon. *
Ted Gramkow, Eastern advertising director for Forbes ASAP, New York, was promoted to advertising director in San Francisco, succeeding Ward Flock, who left to join Interactive Video Enterprises, San Ramon, Calif., as vice president of sales.
Ellen Baum was named to succeed Mr.
Gramkow in New York; she was previously advertising director at a sibling publication, Forbes FYI.
Martin Shapiro, director of conference and section sales for Forbes magazine, New York, was named to succeed Ms.
Baum at Forbes FYI.
And Arnold J. Prives returns to Forbes in the long-vacant position of special projects director; he was previously a senior vice president for the New Jersey Nets.


Regeneron Shares Drop After Drug Trials Stop
Shares of Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. lost 17 percent of their value yesterday after the company disclosed that it was abandoning clinical trials of its drug for the treatment of Lou Gehrig's disease because of the drug's severe side effects.
Regeneron, based in Tarrytown, N.Y., has been testing ciliary neurotrophic factor, or C.N.T.F., a naturally occurring human protein for treatment of the disease, which is clinically known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
The disorder causes rapid loss of muscle control, paralysis and death.
There is no effective treatment.


Home Run for the Owners: Senate Judiciary Committee Kills Antitrust Bill
Major league baseball yesterday fought off the latest attempt to tamper with its exemption from the antitrust law.
Led by six senators whose states have a total of 11 major league teams, and one whose state hopes to get one, the Senate Judiciary Committee rejected a bill that would have brought baseball's labor relations under the antitrust law.
The vote was 10 to 7.
The outcome, which represented a victory for the owners over the players' union, most likely put to rest for a long time the threat to baseball of losing the exemption it has had since a 1922 United States Supreme Court decision.


Risk Where Least Expected
Smart investors know to brace themselves for wild rides in certain kinds of mutual funds, because the small-stock fund or overseas fund from which they profit today could cause a migraine tomorrow.
But in the case of the funds that invest in short-term Government bonds, no such worry seemed warranted.
Or so it would seem from advertising by brokerage firms and mutual fund companies that trumpeted their short-term fixed-income funds as safe alternatives to lower-yielding money market funds and certificates of deposits in the early 1990's.
The ads promised higher yields without much more risk.


Waterlogged Commerce in Manila


Senate Panel Asks for Whitewater Files
The Senate committee that plans limited hearings on the Whitewater affair next month has asked the White House and other Federal agencies to turn over documents related to its inquiry.
"Our intention at this point is to comply," President Clinton's spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers, said today.
She also said that the White House would cooperate with the committee if it seeks to question aides to Mr.
Clinton in public.
She stopped short of flatly guaranteeing that they would testify if asked.


METRO DIGEST
SPEAKER WHEELS AND DEALS ON BUDGET
Before the City Council voted to approve New York City's new budget, Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone invited a number of his fellow Democrats into his City Hall office.
To some he promised perks for their districts; to others, assignments to prestigious committees.
And to those who resisted, the Speaker promised a brand of rebuke only he could unleash -- loss of money for their districts and perks for themselves.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.18
3.02
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.13
4.16
3.09
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.54
4.55
3.18
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.08
7.10
5.85
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.40
7.39
6.73
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.22
8.22
7.44
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.32
6.31
5.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Mattingly Intent on Keeping The Clubhouse Vision Focused
Don Mattingly wants the Yankees to reach September with the chance to accomplish something special again.
When the Yankees climbed that plateau last year in pursuit of the Toronto Blue Jays and Mattingly was spotlighted because he has never participated in the playoffs, his offense disappeared.
Maybe Mattingly's right wrist, which required surgery last November to remove a cyst, irritated him.
Maybe Mattingly was not as selective a hitter as he has been this season.
Maybe Mattingly simply tried to achieve too much with the scent of post-season finally wafting so close.
For whatever reason, he hit .220 during the first 23 games in the month in which the Yankees desperately needed him to produce, the month he had dreamed about producing in.
It was not a September to remember.


INSIDE
'Quality of Life' Crackdown
A police offensive against nuisance-makers in Greenwich Village has been a success so far, officials say, and the police plan to expand the strategy citywide.
Page B1.
No More Simpson Tapes
The Los Angeles County District Attorney criticized the release of recordings of Nicole Simpson calling 911 for police protection.
Page A16.
One Korean Crisis Down . . .
With the immediate fear of a North Korean nuclear crisis past, Washington moved on to the next challenge, high-level talks with Korea.
Page A3.


Trenton Court Assails '88 Trial of Day-Care Aide
Saying that the interrogation of child witnesses in her trial was tainted, the New Jersey Supreme Court today upheld an appellate ruling that freed a former preschool teacher, Margaret Kelly Michaels, who was convicted six years ago in one of the most notorious child sexual abuse cases in the nation.
The unanimous decision is in line with a series of recent court decisions elsewhere that have cast doubt on the use of testimony from children who have undergone "suggestive interrogations."


Japan Leader Faces Move To Oust Him
After two months in office that were marked by near total political paralysis, Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata faces a no-confidence vote in coming days that threatens to bring down his minority Government.
The no-confidence motion was submitted in Parliament today by the Liberal Democratic Party, which ran the country for four decades until its own ouster by the same method last summer.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For gay consumers, sales pitches are getting more personal.
THE fledgling trend of mainstream marketers aiming sales pitches at gay and lesbian consumers is evolving to more specialized levels.
Most advertisers, to be sure, still shun even elemental efforts in this realm because of a stigma about homosexuality.
But some that have made their initial forays into the market in the last half-dozen years are proceeding with additional steps.


Sports of The Times; Knicks' Time Just Might Have Passed
ON this one manic night the only one that mattered -- the city of New York was only a footnote.
There were glorious things happening elsewhere.
In the state of Texas, the Rockets were beating the Knicks, 90-84, making themselves the best basketball team on the face of the earth, for this season.
And in the state of California, the United States was stunning the world by beating Colombia, 2-1, in the World Cup of soccer.


French Troops Enter Rwanda In Aid Mission
France sent troops into Rwanda today, beginning a complex mission to protect civilians in a conflict that has produced horrendous blood baths in the past 11 weeks and shows no sign of ending.
French troops in armored vehicles and helicopters crossed from Zaire this afternoon to assess the situation of 8,000 Tutsi threatened by troops of the Hutu-dominated Government and irregular Hutu militias, Defense Ministry officials said.


For Children
Sony Wonder Technology Lab
Sony Plaza  550 Madison Avenue (at 56th Street)  (212) 833-5414  Recommended ages: 4 and up
Brace yourselves, the 21st century is in full fiber-optic force at this interactive technology-driven museum.
The exhibits mean to show communications of the future, but the future is actually now.
The lab, designed by Edwin Schlossberg in collaboration with the architectural firm of Gwathmey Siegel &amp; Associates, opened last month but is still in the preview stage; most of the exhibits should be ready by the end of July.
Until then, tours offer minimal interaction with the computer-supported devices but that's plenty for a first visit.


'Sunset Boulevard' To Close in Los Angeles
The Los Angeles production of "Sunset Boulevard," the $12 million Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, is to close after the Sunday evening performance at the Shubert Theater.
Faye Dunaway, the veteran screen actress who was to take over the leading role from Glenn Close, is said to be not up to the vocal demands of the part.
The Really Useful Company, which is producing the show, referred to Ms.
Dunaway in a statement released late yesterday: "It was concluded after several weeks of rehearsals and vocal preparation that the musical demands of the role were such that it was not possible for her to perform as scheduled."


TV Weekend; Extraterrestrials and Earthlings Who Know Them
Apparently leery of everyday realities that might discomfort viewers, Rupert Murdoch's Fox Broadcasting is increasingly fond of diversions into the supernatural and paranormal.
The evolving network had surprising success this past season with "The X Files," a drama series featuring two F.B.I. agents investigating cases that defy reason, and usually believability.
Tonight at 8, the latest Fox excursion into paranormal phenomena can be found on a new magazine series (it was given a sneak preview in February) called "Encounters: The Hidden Truth."
This kind of exercise has by now settled into rigid format.
An anchor, in this case John Marshall, very seriously chats with several reporters who, in turn, introduce and narrate their individual essays, often decked out with highly questionable dramatizations.
Mr.
Marshall is, appropriately, a combination of Robert Stack and Hugh Downs.
A pro-forma disclaimer opens the show, noting that "the following program deals with controversial subjects" and that "the theories, opinions and beliefs expressed are not the only possible interpretation." That said, "Encounters" rushes momentously into the surreal.


Someone Just Scored? One Announcer Won't Let You Forget It
From the sterility of a Miami studio, with a television set three feet in front of him, a 31-year-old Argentine calls World Cup matches in 90-minute paroxysms of ebullient red heat.
If his throat survives, he will call all 52 games in Spanish (only three from stadiums) to perhaps 20 million mostly Hispanic viewers in the United States on Univision, seen locally on WXTV, in Paterson, N.J.
And he shall be known by his goal call: "GOOOOOOOOLLLLLLLLLL!"


'No Excuses' Jeans Pays Clinton's Accuser $50,000
Real life raced past satire once again today, as Paula Jones became the latest cause celebre to promote No Excuses sportswear.
At a news conference high atop Rockefeller Center, Mrs.
Jones wore a pair of black No Excuses jeans and a white T-shirt with the red No Excuses logo.
"I see this as an opportunity to take an unfortunate situation and turn it into a positive action," she said, her soft voice colored by an Arkansas accent.


Pragmatic Plan for Health Care
The sudden emergence of a health insurance proposal that ultimately relies on making people pay for their own policies has given the Administration and its allies a nasty choice between principle and legislative progress.
The idea of making working people, not their bosses, responsible for paying for health insurance is an idea Democrats cannot embrace with any passion.


Emerging Plan Is Still Costly, Still Complex
The health care proposal being developed within the Senate Finance Committee, like President Clinton's plan, is technically complicated, difficult to administer and expensive, health policy experts said today.
The proposal relies on changes in insurance regulations, taxes on some businesses, subsidies to low-income people and a provision that could require people to buy insurance if they did not get it through their employers.


As Drought Looms, Farmers In California Blame Politics
A few hundred yards from the Edmund G. (Pat) Brown Aqueduct, an old cotton trailer sits alongside Interstate 5, which slices through the parched hills and verdant rectangles of California's San Joaquin Valley.
The wire mesh wagon is empty, and over it is draped a large green banner.
"NO WATER, NO FARMING. NO FARMING, NO FOOD," the sign says.
It is one of several along the highway between Los Banos and Bakersfield, in letters large enough to be seen by motorists on the Interstate, the main artery between Northern and Southern California.


CHRONICLE
GEORGE ABBOTT is not one to make much of his birthdays, not even his 107th.
"I haven't paid any attention to them," he said yesterday from his home in Miami Beach.
"I never have anything to do with them. If they happen, it's O.K."


American Love Affair With the Auto May Doom Magnetic Rail
To the Editor:
Two scientists at the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, L.I., are frustrated that Congress won't release $730 million for developing magnetic levitation trains in this country, while Europe and Japan are moving forward (news article, June 13).
There is good reason for holding up this program.


Justice Department Is Reviewing Inquiry Into Teamsters Leader
Justice Department officials have begun an internal investigation to determine whether Federal prosecutors in Manhattan properly investigated allegations that Ron Carey, head of the international teamsters' union, was linked to organized-crime figures, a spokesman for Attorney General Janet Reno said yesterday.
The spokesman, John J. Russell, said Ms.
Reno ordered the inquiry concerning the office of Mary Jo White, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York, at the urging of Representative Don Edwards, Democrat of California.


Review/Music; Master and Pupils Mesh As Solti Project Concludes
The 81-year-old Georg Solti has opened himself to attack with recent statements about the problems caused for American orchestras and aspiring players by the striking down of mandatory retirement clauses.
Yet he speaks a truth that few of less venerable stature would dare to utter.
And he put that stature to further use in the last two weeks by providing a showcase for young American-trained musicians in the Solti Orchestral Project at Carnegie Hall.
The project concluded with a second concert on Tuesday evening, and as usual in a Solti performance, it was easy to take issue with specifics of his interpretations.
But the skill and artistry with which the players carried his ideas through were everywhere admirable.
The Strauss "Don Juan," especially, was a model of its big, brash kind. ("Just blow me away," Mr. Solti had exhorted the brass players in rehearsal on Saturday morning, an injunction that explains much about the Chicago Symphony sound he left behind in 1991.)


We Must Keep Violent Criminals Locked Up
To the Editor:
In "More Prisons Haven't Yet Reduced Crime" (June 14), three letters made similar arguments against A. M. Rosenthal's "Prisons Save Lives" column (June 3), in which he asserted that incarceration will bring down the crime rate.
While I agree with the letter writers that building prisons will not act as a magic bullet, and that we should be smarter about whom we jail and for how long, punishment as well as prevention must be a significant part of any comprehensive attack on the crime problem.


Henry Marx, 82, Editor and Expert On German Culture
Henry Marx, editor of the German-language newspaper Aufbau in New York City and a leading figure in German literature, theater and music in the city, died Wednesday while vacationing in Adelboden, Switzerland.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan. His family said he died of pneumonia.


Yes, Change the School Lunch Menu, but Also Teach Nutrition; Grow Your Own Food
To the Editor:
It is encouraging to learn about the proposals for providing schoolchildren with healthier meals.
But we, as parents, teachers and neighbors need to go a step further: We need to teach children how to grow their own food.


The Market Gives Back Earlier Gain
The stock market gave back all of the previous day's gains and more yesterday, despite a stable dollar, nearly steady bond prices and falling commodities prices, which are normally conditions for a market rally.
Still, some analysts said they were optimistic about an upturn in the market.
"The market will stumble upward," said Alfred Goldman, director of market analysis for A. G. Edwards &amp; Sons in St.
Louis.


Review/Film; Three Losers and One Fool On a Grim Abduction Caper
"Thieves Quartet," a kidnapping drama set in and around present-day Chicago, sets out with a vengeance to demystify the romance of the caper movie.
Among the four main characters who conspire to kidnap the daughter of a wealthy businessman, three are shabby losers without a trace of decency or loyalty, and the fourth is a well-meaning fool.
Art Bledsoe (Joe Guastaferro), who masterminds the scheme, is a bartender in his late 40's who, when not plotting crimes, likes to blabber on pretentiously about the genius of Miles Davis.
With a peace symbol stuck on his shirt and his salt-and-pepper hair tied into a ponytail, he embodies the last dregs of 1960's idealism steamed into a putrid puddle of suppressed rage.


France's Risky Rwanda Plan
For want of a better offer, the United Nations has warily authorized France to send troops to try to quell the ethnic massacres in Rwanda.
It is an anomalous bid, since it was France that originally armed and trained the very Hutu-led "government" militias that are credibly accused of slaughtering minority Tutsis.
Though the U.S. delegate praised France's "bold" and "noble offer," it has been generally opposed by human rights and humanitarian groups, and has been assailed by the rebel Patriotic Front, whose leaders are mostly Tutsis.
It is obviously risky for the Security Council to approve a peacekeeping force that is viewed as a mortal enemy by one side in the very war the U.N. is striving to end.
France insists that its 2,500 or so troops will not occupy territory but will only try to save threatened civilians for a two-month interim period, then turn over peacekeeping tasks to an all-African force.
But as the Somalia experience attests, "humanitarian" mandates tend to expand very rapidly, and to prevent another debacle France needs to be held to its word.


The Newest Name in the Ovrnite-Dlvry Biz
The gods love the obscure and hate the obvious.
If there is any truth to that ancient Hindu saying, then the gods were probably furrowing their brows over yesterday's announcement by the Federal Express Corporation that for the first time since the company was founded 21 years ago it would change its brand name and logo to, of all things, "FedEx."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief article yesterday about a teen-ager's conviction for felony murder in the killing of a bicyclist in Prospect Park described the rules on sentencing juvenile offenders incorrectly in some editions.
Although in this case the defendant could not be sentenced in State Supreme Court, because the felony murder charge accompanied only a charge of attempted robbery, the law does allow 14- or 15-year-old defendants in some cases to be sentenced in Supreme Court, where penalties are harsher than in Family Court.


Benching Its Star May Yet Hurt Italy
The shock of reality was great enough that Roberto Baggio appeared capable only of trying to run from it.
Italy's star player backpedaled from the sight of the substitution marker being held aloft in the late afternoon sunshine.
The red square, after all, had his uniform No. 10 on it.
With expressions of anger and incredulity on his face, Baggio made it as far as the wall of players being constructed in front of Italy's goal in the 21st minute of its World Cup game against Norway.
The marker, though, wasn't changed.
There was nowhere left to run, only a peculiar, mystifying, humiliating walk to take.


Korean Talks: Looking for Options
Now that the North Koreans and the United States have finally agreed to hold high-level negotiations, the Clinton Administration confronts a difficult problem: defining what the talks are supposed to accomplish and how.
The agreement to hold the talks, and North Korea's agreement to freeze its nuclear program as long as the negotiations are under way, has removed the immediate sense of crisis and reduced tensions on the Korean peninsula.
It has also enabled the White House to focus again on its domestic agenda and to insulate the Administration from charges that it is allowing the North Korean nuclear program to proceed apace.


AT&amp;T Finds 3 Partners In Europe
Hoping to match its rivals in forming global alliances, the AT&amp;T Corporation said today that it had teamed up with the telephone companies of Switzerland, Sweden and the Netherlands to provide advanced communication services to multinational corporations.
Just a week ago, MCI Communications obtained approval from the Justice Department to form an alliance with British Telecommunications and the Sprint Corporation announced a $4.2 billion deal with the French and German telephone companies.


Race for Governor: Cuomo Focuses on Accomplishments
CANDIDATE: Mario M. Cuomo
PRODUCER: The Garth Group of New York


Ayer Acquires Unit Of Bentley, Barnes
Ayer Inc. said yesterday that it had acquired the consumer division of Bentley, Barnes &amp; Lynn in Chicago from TMP Worldwide and merged it with the Ayer office in Chicago.
Terms were not disclosed.
Bentley, Barnes's consumer division, which has 18 employees, brings in billings estimated at $20 million from clients like the Chicagoland Oldsmobile Dealers Association, ERA Real Estate and Town and Country Homes.
Ayer Chicago has 24 employees and billings estimated at more than $30 million from clients like Leaf Inc., Delta Dental Plans and Wolverine Worldwide.
Ayer said it expected no conflicts.


Olajuwon Is Savoring Experience Of Victory
With a group of friends and fans looking on, Hakeem Olajuwon today accepted the National Basketball Association finals most valuable player award for leading the Houston Rockets to their first championship.
On Wednesday night, Olajuwon put his signature on a spectacular National Basketball Association finals performance by scoring 25 points as Houston defeated the Knicks, 90-84.
Over the seven-game series, Olajuwon averaged 26.9 points, 9.1 rebounds and 3.9 blocked shots.


U.S. and Russia Agree to Cooperate on Oil and Space Station Plans
Vice President Al Gore and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin of Russia signed a series of agreements today providing for a major oil exploration project by American companies and calling for cooperation on the development of a joint space station.
The accords had been an importantfocus in three days of talks between American officials and the Prime Minister.
The meetings, including a session today between Mr.
Chernomyrdin and President Clinton, helped set the stage for Mr.
Clinton's meeting with President Boris N. Yeltsin early next month in Italy.


European Leaders to Choose New Top Official
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia has been espied aboard a Greek shipping magnate's yacht in the azure seas around this tourist-laden isle.
Scandinavian ministers plan to dance around a maypole at midnight in a belated celebration of the summer solstice.
Then the European Union summit meeting starting here on Friday will get down to its real business: choosing a successor to Jacques Delors, the European Commission President.
The contest goes beyond the naming of the Continent's top bureaucrat to the question of who really wields power among the 12 members of a body troubled by joblessness and political uncertainties.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The chairman of Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco denied that the company had deliberately manipulated nicotine to keep its customers addicted.  [ Page A1. ]


Caning of Son Leaves Father Embittered
Michael P. Fay, the teen-ager who was flogged for vandalism in Singapore, did not appear at his own news conference here today, but his father and his lawyer spoke for him, saying that the family would do everything possible to clear his name and retaliate against Singapore.
The father, George M. Fay, said his son wanted to share his story with the Senate, especially the 27 members who signed a letter of support for him.
"Then we're going to evaluate and pursue any legal means available to us to pursue against the Government of Singapore," Mr.
Fay said.


Talk of the Towers; Co-ops Are Rumbling Over a Fraud Scandal
They are lawyers and financiers, physicians, accountants, scientists and corporate titans of every stripe, as well as writers, sales clerks and secretaries.
But when it comes to keeping house, running their own apartment buildings as shareholders in the great New York institution known as the cooperative, there is often no one home.
So they rely on the wisdom of strangers, another New York phenomenon: the managing agent.
This perilous partnership of those with more means than time who hire others to spend their money for them stands at the core of the latest betrayal saga, a classic New York scandale that has sent tremors through the limestone towers of Fifth Avenue, publicly assisted projects and the real-estate industry.


Honors
*
Christine O. Adams, vice president of operations of the Bases Group, Covington, Ky., received the 1994 Award of Excellence from the Marketing Research Association.
Also, Linda K. Tessar, president of Network, Covington, received the 1994 Distinguished Service Award.


At the Bar; Lawyers jockey for a piece of O. J. action on TV or in court.
Call it the Roone Arledge-ization of the law.
All over the airwaves, Los Angeles lawyers are doing for the O. J. Simpson case what Mr.
Simpson once did for football: analyzing, second-guessing, prognosticating, handicapping, Monday morning quarterbacking.
Turn on "Sonia Live" and there is Stanley Greenberg.
Elsewhere on CNN is Robert Philibosian.
Flip to CBS and hear Susan Estrich and Vince Bugliosi, while Don Wager is appearing on ESPN.
Anyone channel-surfing through local Los Angeles television would catch Manuel Medrano on Channel 4, Luke McKissack on Channel 11 and Gordon Greenberg on Channel 2.
Other increasingly usual suspects are Laurie Levenson and Peter Arenella, grizzled academic alumni of the Rodney King case.


Art in Review
Nic Nicosia
PPOW Gallery  532 Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through July 15
The jokey tone that characterized many of Nic Nicosia's earlier photographic tableaux is gone; here he presents scenes that evoke feelings of loss and threat.
The change in mood is matched by a change in means, as he has switched from bright color prints to somber black-and-white pictures of night scenes.


Executive Changes
OFFICE DEPOT INC., Delray Beach, Fla., the office products superstore chain, appointed Judith Rogala executive vice president of contract and commercial.
RAM MOBILE DATA USA L.P., Woodbridge, N.J., a joint venture of RAM Broadcasting and BellSouth Mobile Data, appointed R. Douglas MacIntyre president and chief executive.


Princeton Chooses New Athletic Director
GARY WALTERS, a former Tiger basketball player and coach, was named yesterday as Princeton's new athletic director to succeed BOB MYSLIK, who retired.
Walters, managing director of an investment advisory firm in Boston, was an all-Ivy guard for Princeton in 1967, then an assistant coach there and later the head coach at Middlebury, Union, Dartmouth and Providence College.


Are Lawyers Compulsive, Or Just Nicely Precise?
Lawyers are compulsive creatures where language is concerned, instinctively treating even the placement of a comma as if it could destroy an entire legal document.
"We can be precise to a fault, but that's because precision is essential in a transaction," said Sherry F. Colb, an assistant professor of law at the Rutgers University School of Law in Camden.
"After all, you are binding yourself and your client to something specific. You want that something to be absolutely correct."
But this exactitude can be a curse, Professor Colb says, especially since it can carry over to inappropriate areas, "like conversations with a friend, which you have to stop yourself from editing."


Cuomo's Ads Use 'Real New Yorkers' to Recall Accomplishments
Using his first television advertisements in an effort to define himself in the 1994 campaign, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has chosen "real New Yorkers" to say specifically how his 12-year administration has affected their lives, rather than outlining a broad vision for another term.
His campaign officials declined today to discuss the strategy of the advertisements or to release copies or transcripts.
But two television advertisements and one radio ad that were broadcast in Albany this week suggest that the Governor, whose critics often accuse him of having no easily identifiable legacy, wants to remind voters of concrete accomplishments in a campaign likely to focus on his record.


Colombia's 2 Defeats Stretch Belief
Gloom gripped Colombia today as a nation of soccer fans struggled with the shock of their team's virtual elimination from the World Cup.
Only last week, Colombia was fielding a seemingly invincible team, one that had only lost one match out of its last 41 international games.
Pele had assured the world that Colombia was destined for the finals.


Ohio State Gets One Year of Probation
The National Collegiate Athletic Association placed Ohio State on one year probation yesterday and stripped it of a scholarship because of recruiting violations in men's basketball.
The governing body of college athletics also said Coach RANDY AYERS will not be permitted to leave campus during the July and September recruiting periods this year.


Chrysler and Nissan Top Auto Production Survey
The Chrysler Corporation is the most profitable and lowest-cost maker of automobiles in North America, while the Nissan Motor Company's plants are the most efficient, according to a survey released here today.
The General Motors Corporation has improved its efficiency the most, gaining almost 12 percent from a previous study for 1992.


Dykstra Out After Appendicitis Surgery
Phillies center fielder LENNY DYKSTRA was listed in good condition yesterday at a Philadelphia hospital after undergoing surgery for appendicitis.
Dr.
PHILLIP MARONE, the Phillies' team doctor, estimated Dykstra would be out two to three weeks, which could keep last season's runner-up for the National League most valuable player award out of the lineup until after the All-Star Game break.


Review/Dance; In the Ancient Greeks' Theatrical Tradition
For the first time since its founding in 1982, the Gay Games is presenting dance events.
The ancient Greeks would not have been surprised.
Their ideal of a sound mind in a sound body made them prize dance and theater along with athletics.
It was therefore appropriate for the Cultural Festival of Gay Games IV to offer "Passion and Grace: A Program of International Dance" on Wednesday night at Symphony Space.
The participating choreographers concerned themselves with many themes.
But possibly because this festival is intended to be a serious celebration as well as an expression of joy, several dances were ceremonial.


Disney Licenses Characters for Multimedia
America's favorite mouse has a multimedia future.
The Walt Disney Company said yesterday that it had licensed the Microsoft Corporation and Sony Imagesoft to develop multimedia titles featuring Mickey Mouse and other Disney characters.


From Albany, Money for 9-Millimeter Police Pistols
With a police firing range in the Bronx as backdrop, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced yesterday that the state would provide $2.5 million to New York City's police officers for 9-millimeter pistols.
Police officers in New York City buy their own guns; the average price of a 9-millimeter is $400; the allocation would pay for 6,250 of them.


Review/Film: Wyatt Earp; Into the Heart And Soul Of Darkness
WHENEVER Wyatt Earp experiences a dark night of the soul -- which happens more than once in Lawrence Kasdan's and Kevin Costner's 3-hour-and-10-minute epic -- you can bet it will be a dark and stormy night outside, too.
At a turning point in the story that takes Wyatt from the Iowa cornfields of his boyhood to old age, he lies in a jail cell.
He is a sweaty, dirty, drunken young man who doesn't blink when a giant bug crawls across his chest.
And to make sure no one misses the point, there is rain and thunder and lightning, not to mention some fancy movie lighting that allows Mr.
Costner's All-American face to be seen clearly among the shadows.
Visually and thematically, this version of Wyatt Earp's life may be the darkest ever put on screen.


Corrections
An article on June 12 about the Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts referred imprecisely to a foundation donation to the Studio in a School Association, a fine arts program founded by Agnes Gund.
Of the $500,000 donation, only $50,000 was authorized while Ms.
Gund was a board member of the Warhol Foundation.
The rest was authorized in April 1989, shortly before Ms.
Gund joined an advisory committee to the foundation and a year before she joined its board.


Sanofi to Get Part of Kodak Drug Unit
Taking a long stride on its way out of the drug business, Eastman Kodak said yesterday that the Sanofi Group, a French pharmaceutical company, had agreed to buy the prescription drug business of Sterling Winthrop, a Kodak subsidiary, for $1.68 billion.
The deal opens the way for a second big sale by Kodak because Sanofi relinquished its minority interest in the over-the-counter drug business of Sterling.
Analysts valued the interest at $150 million, raising the value of the deal to $1.83 billion.


Reviving the Independent Counsel
Congress has finally voted to revive the independent counsel law, one of the most valuable reforms that followed the Watergate scandal.
President Clinton, who campaigned as a fan of the law but is himself now the subject of an investigation, is expected to sign the bill.
That will do much to restore the nation's ability to guarantee justice free from political interference when Presidents and other high officials are implicated in criminal investigations.
The law died a shameful death in 1992 at the hands of Senate Republicans, bitter and defensive about the scandals of Iran-contra and covert aid to Iraq, and House Democrats, reeling from their own scandals.


Review/Art; Space Is Spare for Women's Work at the Modern
The first exhibition that the Museum of Modern Art has devoted exclusively to art by women has a cramped, confined-to-quarters atmosphere.
"Sense and Sensibility: Women Artists and Minimalism in the 90's" relegates the work of seven young women, whose sculptures and installations build on the strategies of 1960's Minimalism and 70's Post-Minimalism, to a half-share of the museum's basement level.
Each artist has been given her own small gallery, making the confinement solitary.
The show has been organized by Lynn Zelevansky, a curatorial assistant in the painting and sculpture department, and is based on a sound and good-size idea.
Ms.
Zelevansky correctly likens Minimalism to Cubism in its impact on the art of the second half of this century, and agrees with the view that Minimalism is the last heroic art movement of modernism.


Abroad at Home; Issue Or Solution?
Something strange is happening in Washington, something to confound the skeptics and the cynics.
Congress is showing signs that it may actually pass a meaningful form of compromise health-care legislation.
I was a skeptic myself.
Health care is so complicated a problem, involving so many legitimate and powerful interests in this large and diverse country, that getting anything serious past all the roadblocks in Congress seemed to me unlikely.
Moreover, polls showed that the issue was way down on the list of public concerns.


Marie J. Emery, 64; Headed Programs To Educate Indians
Marie Janis Emery, who directed school programs countrywide for exceptional and gifted American Indian children before she retired from the Bureau of Indian Affairs last month, died on Tuesday at her home in Centreville, Va.
She was 64.
The cause was congestive heart failure, her family said.


Yes, Change the School Lunch Menu, but Also Teach Nutrition
To the Editor:
I am delighted about President Clinton's plan to improve the school lunch program.
I am a magnet specialist at Public School 84, a small elementary school in Queens.
Since my school's theme is health, my goal, like President Clinton's, was to change our institutional lunch menu into a "heart-healthy" one.


Mr. Jefferson Goes on Trial (Without Jury Of His Peers)
Never one to leave sleeping Presidents lie, not even in the historical assessment of their deeds, the Association of the Bar of the City of New York put Thomas Jefferson on trial recently.
The Chief Justice of the United States, William H. Rehnquist, presided.
About 400 lawyers, historians and judges packed the association's auditorium on West 44th Street in Manhattan, eager to measure the statesman's words against his deeds.
The indictment consisted of three counts: that Thomas Jefferson, third President of the United States, "relentlessly attacked the independence of the Federal judiciary," that he "provided grandly for himself in the manner of a North American Louis XIV" while serving as President and, most vexing, that he "never took the Bill of Rights seriously."


American Love Affair With the Auto May Doom Magnetic Rail; New York's Progress
To the Editor:
Your June 13 article on the ambivalent relationship of the United States with magnetic levitation technology does not note that New York State has gone further than any other state toward building a maglev system.


Treasury Prices End Day Mixed
Treasury prices were mixed yesterday, as investors moved into shorter maturities to avoid the volatile long end of the bond market.
With early reports yesterday on orders for durable goods and first-time claims for unemployment benefits apparently canceling each other out, the bond market's attention again turned to the dollar, which was more or less steady, and to lower commodity prices.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in Manhattan that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "BROKEN GLASS," Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street.
A drama by Arthur Miller, set in 1938 Brooklyn, about a woman whose sudden paralysis baffles her husband and doctor; with Amy Irving, Ron Rifkin and David Dukes; directed by John Tillinger.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $45 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"MEDEA," Longacre Theater, 220 West 48th Street.
The Euripides tragedy, directed by Jonathan Kent and starring Diana Rigg.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50 to $50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"FOUR DOGS AND A BONE," Lucille Lortel Theater, 121 Christopher Street, Greenwich Village.
A satire by John Patrick Shanley about the people involved in making a motion picture in New York City; with Grant Shaud, Kim Zimmer, Arabella Field and Reg Rogers.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 9:30 P.M., and Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $29.50 and $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"MILK AND HONEY," American Jewish Theater, 307 West 26th Street, Chelsea.
Jerry Herman's 1961 musical about an older man and a young widow who meet on a visit to Israel.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 633-9797.
ELIZABETH STREB'S RINGSIDE, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Dance performances, including "Line" and "Bounce." Through tomorrow.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $22.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
ALBERTO GIACOMETTI, Yoshii Gallery, 20 West 57th Street.
"Early Works in Paris, 1922-30." Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 265-8876.
"ART DEPOT," Alternative Museum, 594 Broadway, at Houston Street, SoHo.
Sam Wiener and Evangeline Tabasco's installation, in which the entire museum is turned into a gift shop.
Also, "Dwellings," works on homelessness by the sculptor Craig Pleasants.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 966-4444.
"SIMPLY COLE PORTER," Perry Street Theater, 31 Perry Street, Greenwich Village.
A musical revue conceived by Deborah Ausemus and J. Kent Barnhart, who also appear in it; directed by Francis J. Cullinan.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M., and Sunday at 5 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 691-2509.
Closing Next Weekend  "THE PRINCE AND THE PAUPER," Manhattan Theater Club, Stage 2, at City Center, 131 West 55th Street.
Concert version of a musical about a group of homeless children, written and directed by Elizabeth Swados.
Through July 3.
Performances: Tuesdays through Fridays at 7:30 P.M.; Saturdays at 3 and 7:30 P.M.; Sundays at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $27.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
"101 HUMILIATING STORIES," New York Theater Workshop, 79 East Fourth Street, East Village.
A one-woman show written by Lisa Kron, who also stars; directed by John Robert Hoffman.
Through July 2.
Performances: Tuesdays through Thursdays at 8 P.M.; Fridays at 7 P.M., and Saturdays at 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 302-6989.
"CUBA, 1990-94," Condeso/Lawler, 524 Broadway, at Spring Street, Room 206, SoHo.
Photographs by Tria Giovan.
Through July 2.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 219-1283.


Woman Burned in Dispute
A man threw a flammable liquid on his girlfriend then set her afire after an argument in Brooklyn last night, the police said.
Romaine Starks, 32, was in stable condition early today at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center with second and third degree burns to her neck, arms and chest.
The police were looking for her boyfriend, identified as Alfred Myers, 40, who they said was a suspect in the 8:15 P.M. attack.


No Headline
"Every generation here has lived through at least one war. So often, victims here have gone on to become aggressors later." AIDA HASIMBEGOVIC, a psychologist in Sarajevo.  [ A1:3. ]


Caterpillar Tries to Fill Strikers' Jobs
Managers, supervisors and other white-collar employees of Caterpillar Inc. began toiling on assembly lines this morning, confident that they could build at least a few engines, bulldozers, road graders and other heavy machines while the company's 14,000 union workers were on strike outside.
On the picket lines, members of the United Automobile Workers were openly contemptuous of Caterpillar's ability to operate factories long without them.
About a dozen plants are on strike.


Home Video
Fate of Videotape
Buried in hype about the information superhighway, the makers and purveyors of that supposedly outmoded material called videotape have crawled from their shelters to survey a situation that may not be that dire after all, at least for the short term.


Italy Survives, and the Other Baggio Gets to Sing the Aria
In a chaotic melodrama worthy of Italy's other great passion, grand opera, the Italian national soccer team pushed itself to the brink of elimination from the World Cup today, before Dino Baggio's diving header salvaged a 1-0 victory over Norway.
The lanky midfielder scored with about 21 minutes left in the game -- a game that had already seen the more famous Baggio, Roberto, no relation, yanked by his coach less than a quarter of the way into the match.
That move came moments after Italy's goalkeeper, Gianluca Pagliuca, was red-carded by the referee, forcing him out of the game and requiring Italy to play with 10 men the rest of the way.


Clinton Tries to Head Off Senate on Bosnia Embargo
The Clinton Administration began a furious diplomatic and lobbying campaign today to head off a Senate bill that orders the President to ignore the United Nations and unilaterally end United States participation in the arms embargo against Bosnia.
In league with the Administration, Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia rounded up four European military officials to testify today against lifting the embargo.
But Senator Nunn's tactic only escalated emotions in the already fractious debate.


Healing Children, Can Bosnia Heal Itself
To reignite the spirit of 8-year-old Adnan Mujkanovic, his mother says, it has taken five months without exploding shells, a lot of cuddling and a move from a shell-scarred high-rise just off Sarajevo's western battlefront to a central-city apartment.
"Adnan isn't afraid to go outside anymore," said his mother, Dzenana, a doctor.
"He can go to the bathroom by himself again and isn't terrified at being left alone."


Books of The Times; Windsurfing a Vast Sea That Is the Roosevelts
The Roosevelts
An American Saga
By Peter Collier with David Horowitz
Illustrated. 542 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.
Consider the feat of basket-weaving it took to tie together "The Roosevelts" as this book moves busily from generation to generation, from Hyde Park to Sagamore Hill.
The accomplishment isn't strictly in the reporting: there's not much that isn't already known about individual Roosevelts, since they lived quite publicly and wrote prolifically about themselves and one another.
The hard part is coaxing so many separate lives into a seamless family story.


Teams' Chances Aren't Nil, But Game's Final Score Is
In a week of World Cup play not lacking in surprises, Bolivia and South Korea provided another one tonight: neither team scored.
Ordinarily, there would be nothing notable about a scoreless tie in a tournament where such outcomes routinely surface within the first half-dozen games.
But tonight's tie came in the 17th game, and, surprisingly, it was the first one of the tournament.


Senate Leaders Fight Plan to Lift Bosnia Arms Embargo
In another attempt to head off Senate approval of a bill that would order President Clinton to ignore the arms embargo against Bosnia, Senator Sam Nunn today introduced an alternative proposal that essentially maintains the status quo.
Senator Nunn's resolution endorses the current peace talks and says that if the Serbs do not respond to any agreement "constructively," the United States and its allies "should work" with NATO allies to lift the United Nations arms embargo.


Court Rejects G.M. Pickup Coupon Plan
A Texas appeals court threw out a tentative settlement yesterday that would have given $1,000 coupons to owners of the General Motors pickup trucks that are suspected of posing a fire hazard in side-collision accidents, describing the plan as having little value for consumers.
The court said that because the coupons could only be applied toward the purchase of a new G.M. pickup, they required current pickup owners to make a substantial purchase to be useful.


Japanese Graduates Finding Few Jobs
Ayae Hazama, who will graduate next March from a junior college, has already written to 180 companies seeking a job.
She has approached some companies three times to impress them with her zeal.
Most days she misses classes because she has heard that if she is not home when a company calls, she will not get a second chance.
But so far, the 20-year-old Miss Hazama has been granted only one interview, and no job offers.
"I'll take anything," she said.


To the Victors Goes the Gridlock
Some 400,000 Rockets fans jammed the steamy streets of downtown Houston yesterday for a parade honoring the National Basketball Association champions, who defeated the Knicks on Wednesday night in the seventh game of the finals, giving the city its first major pro championship.
At least 400 people were treated by emergency medical service crews for heat-related problems, District Fire Chief LESTER TYRA said.
About a dozen were hospitalized for seizures, heart attacks and minor injuries, he said.


Hayes's Swimming Records Add a World-Class Touch
It was his best time in about 10 years and his third world record this week.
Not bad for a 31-year-old swimmer.
Bruce Hayes set a world Masters swimming record for the 30-34 age group in the Gay Games at the Asphalt Green AquaCenter in Manhattan yesterday.
In a race that was not even close, he swam the 1,500-meter freestyle in 16 minutes, 21.25 seconds.
The old record for swimmers in that age group had been 17:05.25.
Hayes said it was the best time he had posted for that distance since he retired from competitive swimming in 1985.


Time Responds to Criticism Over Simpson Cover
In response to the barrage of criticism about Time magazine's cover portrait of O. J. Simpson in the current issue, James R. Gaines, managing editor, posted an electronic message on a computer bulletin board on Wednesday stating that "no racial implication was intended, by Time or by the artist."
The cover portrait of a blurry, darkened and unshaven Mr.
Simpson is actually a doctored version of a photograph made by the Los Angeles Police Department.
Mr.
Gaines's message said that the police photo had been given to an artist who was asked to interpret it.
The credit line, printed at the bottom of page 3 of the magazine, said, "Photo-Illustration for Time by Matt Mahurin."


Term Trusts Are Cheap. Are They a Bargain?
IF it's darkest before the dawn, then here comes the sun for the troubled closed-end bond funds known as term trusts.
These trusts strive both to return investors' stakes when they liquidate, generally 5 to 15 years after the public offering, and to furnish high monthly yields in the meantime.
To do this, managers borrow money and variously invest in adjustable-rate mortgages, zero-coupon bonds, corporate debt and such arcana as interest-only strips and inverse floaters.


Judge Denies Permit for a Second Gay March
A Federal judge yesterday denied a request from a gay-rights group for a permit to march up Fifth Avenue tomorrow at the same time that a huge international gay-rights demonstration will pass the United Nations.
But even without the permit, several gay and lesbian organizations have vowed to hold an unauthorized protest march from Greenwich Village to Central Park.


CHRONICLE
On June 27, 1990, fire engulfed Santa Barbara, Calif., and when it was over, Andrea Lang, the 37-year-old daughter of GEORGE LANG, the New York restaurateur, and Dr.
DOE LANG, a communications consultant, was dead.
Though 560 buildings were destroyed, Ms.
Lang, an artist, was the only person to die in the blaze, which began as a brush fire.
On Monday, her friends will gather to remember her at a concert in Santa Barbara, featuring original music in her honor.
The concert will benefit the Andrea Lang Scholarship Fund for Art Students.
Ms.
Lang's own art is on view at the Contemporary Art Forum and the Karpeles Library, both in Santa Barbara, through Aug. 6.


Reed Uses 5 Fingers For Coach Candidates
Willis Reed, the New Jersey Nets' general manager, has been studying his options for the National Basketball Association college draft on Wednesday.
But first, Reed has a more important decision to make.
Reed must decide whom he will hire to replace Chuck Daly, who resigned as head coach on May 26.
"We're going to try to get it done by the draft, by the first of next week, maybe Monday or Tuesday, hopefully," Reed told reporters at the Meadowlands today.
"Our list is the same guys we've had on there, the five guys we've interviewed. Adelman Not Interested
"We had Brendan Suhr, Butch Beard, Paul Silas, Bill Blair and Bob Hill," said Reed.
"The only other guy I talked to was Rick Adelman, and he was not interested. He's going to make money by not working. We've had some good interviews with guys."


Leslie Severinghaus; Headmaster Was 94
Leslie R. Severinghaus, former headmaster of Haverford School in Pennsylvania, died on Wednesday at his home in Coconut Grove, Fla.
He was 94.
The cause was heart failure, said a daughter, Elizabeth Warner of Osterville, Mass.


The Black Hole Called Cuba
The people who make foreign policy in the Clinton Administration say that the "enlargement" of freedom is what America is all about.
But there is a big black hole only 90 miles from Florida where Americans are forbidden to travel, on penalty of 10 years in jail and $250,000 in fines.
Thus 200 U.S. citizens who this week began an illegal trip to Cuba are in the peculiar position of upholding America's libertarian values against a President whose middle name is Jefferson.
The trip is a legal challenge mounted by a San Francisco group called the Freedom to Travel Campaign.
Apprised of its defiance, the U.S.
Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets has blocked the group's $43,000 Wells Fargo bank account.
This Treasury can do so because unauthorized travel to Cuba is unlawful under the Trading With the Enemy Act and the ill-named Cuban Democracy Act, which candidate Clinton carelessly endorsed in 1992.


Sports of The Times; The Worship Of False Sports Gods
I WAS struck with a statement in a column in another newspaper the other day about O. J. Simpson, which said that "it had taken courage for him to run against men who were twice his size."
The writer went on to say that "it took no courage at all to murder the mother of two children and her companion, if in fact he was the one who did it. And it took no courage to repeatedly beat and terrorize the same woman, which we know for a certainty that he did."


Sniper Injures 2 Motorists In Nassau
A sniper opened fire on motorists on the Southern State Parkway in Baldwin early this morning, critically wounding a 30-year-old woman and injuring a 62-year-old man.
As the state police searched for clues, they said they had few leads and no idea of a motive.
They announced plans to step up patrols as part of the investigation, and said they had assigned more than 20 troopers to the case, including troopers from upstate.


4 Miami Officers Convicted of Misconduct in '88 Slaying
After two trials and a riot, Federal prosecutors have won convictions of four police officers accused of misconduct in the beating death of a Puerto Rican drug dealer.
On Thursday, a Federal jury convicted four Miami police officers of misleading investigators in an effort to cover up the killing.
The charges stemmed from statements that conflicted with evidence presented at the first trial, in 1990, in which six officers were charged with conspiring to violate 35-year-old Leonardo Mercado's civil rights by killing him.


All That Was Needed Was a Summer Breeze


Finally, Talks With North Korea
President Clinton's announcement on Wednesday came as a relief: North Korea had persuaded him that it was suspending its nuclear program for now.
Consequently, the U.S. would resume high-level talks with the North on July 8.
Mr.
Clinton paid tribute to Jimmy Carter's mission to Pyongyang: "It is the beginning of a new stage in our efforts to pursue a non-nuclear Korean Peninsula."
Now that nuclear diplomacy with North Korea is finally getting back to the negotiating table where it belongs, Mr.
Clinton has to keep it there.
He can accomplish that by cutting through the bickering in his own Administration and putting his personal stamp on a sound U.S. negotiating strategy.


2 Held in Theft of Truck Buried Near Pipeline Blast Site
In the first arrests related to the natural gas pipeline that exploded in a thunderous fireball in Edison three months ago, two men were charged today in the theft of a pickup truck that had been dismantled, crumpled and buried on the line's right of way.
The arrests and court appearances here today did not address the question of who buried the crushed parts of the truck and when.
Nor did they answer whether that burial was linked to the gouging that apparently weakened the pipe and caused it to explode on March 23.
The flames incinerated 8 town houses in an apartment complex, damaged 6 others and routed more than 1,000 residents.


Lawyers for the Poor
To the Editor:
You report that New York City "court officials have agreed to significantly cut the number of cases assigned to private defense lawyers" (news article, June 14).
This is, unfortunately, premature and misleading.
A preliminary meeting was held this month with the Mayor's office and representatives of the Legal Aid Society and the assigned counsel plan.
However, no final written plan has been received or approved by this office, and no timetable has been set.


Henry Heydenryk Jr., 89, Expert On the Framing of Art, Is Dead
Henry Heydenryk Jr., patriarch of the American branch of the House of Heydenryk, one of the world's oldest makers of fine picture frames, died on Thursday at the Mary Elizabeth Nursing Home in Mystic, Conn.
A resident of Stonington, he was 89.
The cause of death was a heart attack.


Observer; Games Men Play
You want to know about baseball, I'll tell you about baseball.
Hank and me, father and son.
It's baseball brings us together.
Thirteen times a year we drive 160 miles for baseball.
That's 80 miles to Baltimore, 80 miles back.
Thirteen times 160 miles makes 2,080 miles we drive every summer.
Just for baseball.
Father and son.
Driving to and from Baltimore.
Together.


Stocks Tumble With Dollar as Dow Falls 62.15
Stocks fell far, fast and early yesterday, as currency intervention by the United States and other nations failed to stop the decline of the dollar.
Bond prices plunged, worsening the stock market's decline.
The dollar's drop again raised the prospect that the Federal Reserve would be forced to raise interest rates to make dollar-denominated assets more attractive, particularly to foreign investors.


Girl, 17, Raped and Stabbed On a Lower East Side Roof
A 17-year-old high school girl was stabbed 40 times and raped early yesterday on a roof landing in a 13-story building in the Baruch Houses on the Lower East Side, the housing police said.
The teen-ager, who was stabbed in the heart, liver and kidney, was in critical but stable condition after about seven hours of surgery at Bellevue Hospital Center, the police said.


Let's Take Tourism Authenticity Further
To the Editor:
Your suggestion in "Ellis Island, N.J.?" (Topics of The Times, June 12) that construction of a footbridge between New Jersey and Ellis Island be stopped to force tourists to approach the island from the water -- "the better to visualize the immigrant experience" -- is a remarkably enlightened position.
But why stop there?
Shouldn't visitors to the Grand Canyon and Yosemite National Park be required to approach on pack mule, the better to visualize the pioneer experience?
Can't we force the tourists at Lexington and Concord to pack a musket and hide behind the trees?
And how about the tourists at Cape Canaveral -- shouldn't we make them survive a flaming re-entry to the parking lot via space capsule?


INSIDE
New Russia-Europe Ties
Russia signed a pact with the European Union for a closer trade relationship with its members, its second agreement this week to bring about stronger ties with the West.
Page 3.
Graves Found in Rwanda
French troops fanned out in Rwanda seeking refugees who need their protection, and they reported finding several mass graves.
Page 7.
Sniper Hurts 2 on L.I.
Road
A sniper opened fire on motorists on the Southern State Parkway in Baldwin, L.I., critically wounding a 30-year-old woman and injuring a 62-year-old man.
Page 25.


Review/Dance; New Principals Presented In City Ballet's 'Dream'
Major debuts poured forth at the New York State Theater on Wednesday and Thursday nights in the New York City Ballet's "Midsummer Night's Dream." Rarely has George Balanchine's 32-year-old version of Shakespeare's classic seemed so much a living classic in its own right.
The cast of principals was virtually all new on Thursday and the performance (attended by President Michal Kovac of Slovakia) was especially exciting.
Kyra Nichols was Titania to Damian Woetzel's Oberon while Igor Zelensky made a debut opposite Darci Kistler, one of the ballet's few veterans, in the pas de deux of the divertissement.


A City Ballet 'Danish Pastry' Is Stepping Down
"I have these moments of really extreme happiness at how my life and my career have been," Adam Luders said the other day in a conversation in his Upper West Side apartment.
It was a little over a week before his retirement from the New York City Ballet after 20 years.
Mr.
Luders, who is 44, was one of the original "Danish pastries," as balletomanes affectionately nicknamed the male Scandinavian dancers George Balanchine imported for the City Ballet in the 1970's.
He stayed on to become one of the company's most distinctive and compelling performers in a wide-ranging stage career that ends tomorrow night when he performs the second-act divertissement in Balanchine's "Midsummer Night's Dream" as the company closes its spring season.


Eve Gentry, 84, Dancer and Notator
Eve Gentry, a modern dancer who helped found the Dance Notation Bureau in New York City and later established the Institute for the Pilates Method of Physical Conditioning in Santa Fe, N.M., died on June 17 at her home in Santa Fe.
She was 84.
Miss Gentry grew up in San Bernardino, Calif., and was studying in Los Angeles when Martha Graham saw her perform and offered her a scholarship in New York City.
Miss Gentry performed with Hanya Holm's New York company from 1936 to 1942, and later founded her own group, the Eve Gentry Dancers.
She danced under the name Henrietta Greenhood until 1945, when she professionally adopted Gentry, her husband's surname.


New Senate Proposal Retreats On Required Health Insurance
A bipartisan group of moderates on the Senate Finance Committee unveiled a new health plan today that eliminates any politically contentious requirements that individuals or employers purchase insurance.
But the plan also falls short of guaranteeing universal coverage, President Clinton's bottom line.
The group appeared to decide that it was easier to give up the goal of guaranteed universal coverage than produce a palatable mechanism to attain it.
The Finance Committee as a whole has been stalled for months over the issue of how to pay for universal coverage, and the moderates' proposal is widely seen as a good approximation of what the committee is likely to produce.
Democratic leaders are eager to get the committee moving, even if it produces a plan that requires substantial revision later.


Marv Throneberry, 60, Ex-Met; Had Best Year in Team's Worst
Marv Throneberry, who became a symbol of the futility of one the most tragicomic teams in baseball, the 1962 New York Mets, died of cancer on Thursday night.
He was 60.
Throneberry, who was nicknamed "Marvelous Marv" during his career as a first baseman, died at his home in Fisherville, Tenn., a rural community about 22 miles east of Memphis.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.18
2.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.14
4.13
3.07
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.58
4.54
3.17
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.20
7.08
5.81
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.52
7.40
6.70
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.33
8.22
7.41
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.40
6.32
5.77
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


METRO DIGEST
SOME DOCTORS FIND H.M.O. DOORS SHUT
While their patients are drawn or routed increasingly into health maintenance organizations, many doctors say they are finding it difficult themselves to become part of the networks.
But executives at H.M.O.'s say that to maintain tight control over the cost and quality of care in their organizations, they must limit the number of doctors who can join.
What's more, they point out that several years ago they fruitlessly begged these same doctors to join their networks.
Page 1.


A Police Officer, Threatening Suicide, Surrenders on the Steps of City Hall


Overhauling Juvenile Justice
Young people are committing ever more violent crimes, but the juvenile justice system has been slow to adapt.
Now a New York State commission on youth violence offers sensible suggestions to align the system with the new reality.
From 1985 to 1991, the number of youths arrested in the state for violent crimes like murder, robbery and forcible rape increased by 41 percent.
Not only are young offenders committing more crimes; easier access to firearms makes those crimes more dangerous.


Caps, Gowns and Smiles


Traffic Alert
TODAY Gay Games Marathon will be held from 6 A.M. to 11 A.M.
The race will close 72d Street from Fifth Avenue to York Avenue, York Avenue between 61st and 72d Streets, and the northbound Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive for five hours.
Central Park roads and part of Battery Park will also be closed.
From noon to 3 A.M., these Greenwich Village streets will be closed for Gay Pride activities: Weehawken Street from Christopher Street to 10th Avenue, Morton Street from Greenwich Avenue to Hudson Street, West Fourth Street from 12th Street to Horatio Street and Christopher from the West Side Highway to Seventh Avenue.


The Bourses Are Pounded; Rates Rise
If there were lingering doubts about how interconnected the world's financial markets have become and how powerful an effect they can have on the world's economies, this week's turmoil should have laid them to rest.
The turmoil encompassed a weakening dollar and plunging stock and bond prices.
It washed indiscriminately over the major exchanges in Tokyo, London, Frankfurt and New York, seemingly oblivious to very real differences in national economic conditions.


High Court, in a 5-4 Split, Limits Public Power on Private Property
In a substantial victory for advocates of private property rights, the Supreme Court today placed new limits on the ability of governments to require developers to set aside part of their property for environmental or other public uses.
The 5-to-4 decision, with a majority opinion by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, reflected a fundamental ideological division on a Court where curbing government land-use authority has long been a priority of the conservative Justices.
The decision did not cast doubt on the Court's precedents upholding local governments' general zoning authority.


Empire's Plight
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield of New York became a political pariah last year after sensational disclosures of inept and deceitful practices.
Even though Empire has since exorcised most of the rot -- dismissing discredited executives and replacing many somnolent board members -- Albany persists in punishing the company.
The latest example is Empire's reasonable request for a bill that would allow it, like its commercial competitors, to pay brokers to market its group policies.
The measure would generate profitable customers and, therefore, desperately needed reserves.
And though there is no organized opposition to the bill, it languishes in the State Senate because few lawmakers want to look as if they are cozying up to the pariah.


Revised U.S. Plan for Haiti Calls for Large Peace Force
The Clinton Administration is preparing a plan for Haiti, if and when its military leaders leave power, to create an international peacekeeping force that would involve several thousand American troops, police and civilian contractors, senior Administration officials said today.
The size of the United Nations-mandated force is expected to be 12,000 to 14,000 troops, about half of them Americans, although the officials said the final number could change.


CHRONICLE
A new slate for the Jewish Museum in Manhattan: On Thursday, the board elected E. ROBERT GOODKIND chairman of the museum and ROBERT J. HURST president.
Mr.
Goodkind, a founder of and a senior partner in the New York law firm of Goodkind, Labaton, Rudoff &amp; Sucharow, is chairman of the board of the American Jewish Committee and chairman emeritus of the Jewish Foundation for Christian Rescuers of the Anti-Defamation League.
He has also been chairman of the American Academy of Dramatic Arts.


Lions Make Easy Target For Brazil
Like an overmatched fighter, Cameroon cynically tried to clinch and grab and hang on against Brazil today.
Surrendering the trademark exhuberance of their attack, the Lions were no longer indomitable, merely toothless.
Cameroon appeared to have decided that, if it couldn't win with ingenuity, it would rely on defense and muscle.
The tactic proved futile, even pathetic, and finally disastrous.
The Indomitable Lions finished with 8 shots, none of them threatening, and 16 fouls, including one that drew a red card in the second half of a feebly contested 3-0 victory by Brazil.


Fore! Ditka the Patient on Course Soon
MIKE DITKA, the former Chicago Bears coach who suffered chest pains earlier this week, was hospitalized yesterday for a third day after his cardiologist cleared a blockage in an artery near his heart.
Dr.
JAY ALEXANDER said Ditka was doing well, would be released today and could resume playing golf next week.
During a news conference at Lutheran General Hospital in Park Ridge, Ill., Alexander said that the chest discomfort Ditka experienced while exercising Tuesday at his Lake Forest home probably was related to his 1988 heart attack.
But there was no evidence Ditka's heart was in any worse shape now, Alexander said.


Some Like It Hot, but Not Ireland as Garcia's Goals Pace Mexico
Two games into an emotional World Cup experience, Ireland's irritability index rose dramatically today.
High temperatures, plus taxing humidity, times the margin of defeat in Mexico's 2-1 victory at the Citrus Bowl left the Irish exasperated but still comfortable.
Two goals by Mexico's Luis Garcia, in the 44th and 66th minutes, and a save by goalkeeper Jorge Campos in the 90th minute created a four-way tie in Group E, for even.
Ireland, Italy, Norway and Mexico have each accumulated 3 points and scored the same number of goals as they have allowed.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Battered Dollar
The Federal Reserve and 15 other central banks failed to prevent the dollar from slipping again, despite a multibillion-dollar global buying spree to prop up the American currency.  [ Page 1. ]


Errors Seem on Rise In Figuring Fund Prices
NOBODY is suggesting that mutual fund companies frequently lie about their funds' prices.
If they did, there would not have been such an uproar when The New York Times disclosed that the giant Fidelity Investments had deliberately put out inaccurate information a week ago.
But in truth, computing a fund's real price in a matter of minutes at the end of the day is so difficult that mistakes frequently occur.
Such errors seem to be on the rise as the fund business booms -- more funds owning more securities means more opportunities for error -- and as funds hold increasingly exotic investments.


G.M. Plan For Idled Workers
The General Motors Corporation is offering some of its idled hourly workers up to $60,000 to move to four plants where jobs are available.
The offer is the latest in a series of attempts by G.M. to plug a perennial drain on its coffers: members of the United Automobile Workers union who draw full wages for not working.
The U.A.W. negotiated that benefit as part of a 1990 contract with G.M., to discourage the company from laying off workers.


Beliefs; The deepest division is frequently not between denominations but within one. Here's Exhibit A.
A little more than a week ago, delegates to the annual General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), held this year in Wichita, Kan., deftly averted a crisis in their 2.7-million-member denomination, long a pillar of American Protestantism.
By a lopsided vote of 516 to 4, they approved a resolution aimed at calming the furor raised by the church's support of the Re-Imagining Conference, a gathering in Minneapolis last November that encouraged women to develop new concepts of God, redemption, church and spirituality by using feminine imagery and experience.
The resolution was a masterpiece of consensus-building, distancing the church from the conference while defending church members' right to rethink their faith within certain established parameters.


Woman Charged in Death Of Her 5-Month-Old Girl
A 21-year-old Yonkers woman, whose three young children died mysteriously during an eight-month period last year, was charged with murder today in the death of one of them, a 5-month-old girl, the authorities said.
The woman, Karisa Santiago, has not been charged in the deaths of the two other children -- a 2-year-old boy and an 8-month-old girl -- but the boy's death was ruled a homicide today by New York City authorities, who said they would present the case to a grand jury on Monday.
The case of the 8-month-old girl, whose death in March 1993 was initially attributed to sudden infant death syndrome, is under investigation by the Westchester County District Attorney.
A Troubled Past
Ms.
Santiago, who lived with relatives in both Yonkers and the Bronx in recent years, has a deeply troubled past, and has been hospitalized several times with psychiatric problems, her family said.
The most recent hospitalization came in December, a month after the death of her son, when she tried to kill herself, her mother, Mildred Vega, said.


What a Difference Emerging Markets Make
The top 10 winners among foreign stock funds over the last three years have moved deftly among regions of the world, mostly avoiding Japan and investing heavily in emerging markets.
In fact, every fund that is diversified in emerging markets and has a three-year record is on the list.
This year has been a different story.
The emerging markets have crashed, while Japan has performed strongly since late 1993.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about lobbying against a Senate proposal to lift the arms embargo on the Bosnians misstated Senator Sam Nunn's committee affiliation.
He is the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, which held a hearing on Bosnia; he is not a member of the Foreign Relations Committee.


The Nigerians Bloom
Nigerian soccer team supporters in the Boston area have been jubilant since the Super Eagles landed two days ago for today's World Cup encounter in Foxboro, Mass., with powerful Argentina.
Nigeria beat Bulgaria, 3-0, Tuesday night in Dallas.
Wherever they go, members of the Nigerian delegation are greeted by fans waving flags of green and white, the colors of the country.


Review/Dance; A Gay Evening in the Word's 2 Meanings
There was passionate dance and graceful dance to be seen when the Cultural Festival of Gay Games IV presented the second of two dance programs called "Passion and Grace" on Thursday night at Symphony Space.
But the evening was also blessedly lighthearted.
Gay in the old sense of the word was in, taking prideful center stage and even jostling aside the pain of homophobia and the age of AIDS.
The program, coordinated by Stephen Brown and Paul Sutherland, opened and closed with handsome quartets by Donald Byrd and Peter Pucci.
Mr.
Byrd was represented by an excerpt from "Life Situations," and Mr.
Pucci by "Love Duets." After Mr.
Byrd's sleek dancers, Jennifer Monson and D. D. Dorvillier roared in with "RMW," a combative duet in which contact improvisation met unbridled lust.
In Dennis O'Conner's stylish, haunting duet, an excerpt from "The Ostrich and the Spider are Said to Hatch Their Eggs by Looking at Them," a nearly nude male angel and a man in a business suit meet and fall gently in love.
The piece was danced by Mr.
O'Conner and Joseph Lennon.


Gooden Has Worst Outing In 10 Years
Some night, some time, has to be the worst -- at least statistically -- of Doc Gooden's distinguished career.
And last night was some night.
The Mets right-hander yielded a career high of 9 runs to the Pirates in a 9-4 loss.
For only the second time he permitted 8 earned runs, an embarrassment that hasn't happened to him in 10 years.


Emperor Honors U.S. Dead Near Pearl Harbor


Doctors Slow to Join H.M.O.'s Now Often Find Doors Shut
In January, the once-bustling offices of the Brook-Island Pediatric Group in Bensonhurst turned much quieter, as the number of appointments suddenly dropped by 40 percent.
Was it the fierce winter weather?
Or, perhaps, the mild flu season?
The five doctors searched for explanations.
Over the next two months they discovered the answer: in December, when many companies allow employees to change health insurance programs, a large number of families in the practice switched to health maintenance organizations or other forms of managed care.


Tech's Varitek Named Player of Year
Georgia Tech catcher JASON VARITEK, who smashed school batting records while leading the Yellow Jackets to the College World Series title game this month, has been chosen as the college baseball player of the year.


Gains for Tobacco in Health Care Fight
Within days after President Clinton's speech last fall outlining his health care proposal, tobacco-state members of Congress and tobacco companies mobilized to battle one of the plan's principal elements: a sharp increase in tobacco taxes.
As the health care plan moves through a crucial period this month, it is apparent that their efforts have won some important victories.
Although the industry has failed to eliminate tax increases altogether, prospects for a steep rise in tobacco taxes have faded in the Ways and Means Committee, which, as the House tax-writing panel, is expected to have enormous influence on the issue.


A Thinking Person's Guide to University Grades
To the Editor:
Many of those both inside and outside of America's premier universities complain almost Calvinistically about the supposedly undeserved grades that are awarded to today's top students -- as, for example, in your letters columns of June 18 ("Graduate Students Give Grades a Boost") and June 12 ("Students Care Far Too Much About Grades"), all in response to "Making the Grades" (editorial, June 5).
But these complaints often overlook two important points.
First, it is wrongheaded to castigate students for relying, as all of us do every day, on settled expectations.
Students at a given university get a sense of what sort of grades they ought to expect, and there is a certain haughty arbitrariness in suddenly stopping on a dime to inform the B student that he or she is "really" only a C student.


Public &amp; Private; Game Time
Several months ago the Rev.
Ruben Diaz, a member of the Police Civilian Complaint Review Board, said he saw some real dangers in the Gay Games, the exuberant Olympiad for gay men and lesbians being held this week in New York.
In some fashion the Reverend was right.


Miriam L. Judd, 89, A Y.W.C.A. Official
Miriam Louise Barber Judd, a former trustee of Mount Holyoke College and a member of the Y.W.C.A. board, died on Thursday at the Collington Life Care Community in Mitchellville, Md.
She was 89.
The cause was sepsis, a type of blood poisoning, her family said.


Nigeria Protest Broken Up
Police fired tear gas today to break up a protest over the arrest of the self-proclaimed President, Moshood Abiola, by the military Government.
The tear gas was fired at a march by about 1,000 market women in the business district, an opposition official said.
In the city's Ikeja district, hundreds of Abiola supporters marched along streets near his home.


A Subtle Game That May Not Work
Currency intervention is a subtle game, and one that does not always work.
That was clear yesterday, when the dollar slipped, even after the Federal Reserve and 15 other central banks bought billions of dollars on the world's foreign exchange markets to prop up the American currency.
The process of intervention itself is not complex.
Unlike interest rates, which are set independently by the Federal Reserve, currency intervention policy is set by the Treasury, in consultation with the Fed.
Once the Treasury approves an action, traders at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York call up the major banks that deal in currencies and place orders to buy or sell dollars in return for foreign currencies.
Process Akin to Judo
But while the actions are straightforward, the impact is anything but.
The process is more akin to judo than boxing, because the central banker uses intervention to divert the force of the market against itself.
And if a country is not firm in its footing and confident in its strategy, intervention can well backfire.


In Assisted Suicide, Risks Are Pervasive
To the Editor:
The New York State Task Force on Life and the Law has proposed four laws to give people more control at life's end by improving laws and practices to forgo unwanted treatment.
Contrary to "Time to Move Ahead" (letter, June 13), in response to "Mercy for the Dying" (editorial, May 28), we never opposed living will legislation.
We proposed a health care proxy law and recognized that living wills have legal support in this state.
As to your editorial:
*
You presume that many patients would want to commit suicide.
Many people believe they might opt for suicide rather than endure a vastly diminished quality of life.
Yet often when patients are confronted with terminal illness, continued life becomes more precious.
Most terminally ill people, when given appropriate relief from pain and depression, even those with AIDS and cancer, do not want to kill themselves.


Review/Theater; Stonewall Liberation: Who and How
In the immortal words of carnival hucksters throughout the decades, they're all here, they're all alive.
Men in dresses!
Women in neckties!
Hustlers!
Hippies!
Homosexuals!
In the wonderfully heady prologue to the En Garde Arts production of "Stonewall: Night Variations," the play's director and author, Tina Landau, and its designer, James Schuette, turn Pier 25 in lower Manhattan into a boisterous freak show for the audience to wander through.
It speaks volumes about the perception of gay men and lesbians in the late 1960's.
The setting is Gay World, a retrospective theme park that recalls the days when Greenwich Village was a mecca for misfits, a place for tourists to gawk at girlish boys, boyish girls and other exotic species in their natural habitat.


Yankees and Indians In a Tale of Suspense
The Yankees heard all the intimidating stories about the Indians and about Jacobs Field.
They heard how the Indians had not lost here since Reagan was President, or so it appeared.
They heard how this series was being touted as the most important in Cleveland in 40 years.
So, in the midst of this thrilling, soggy setting, how did the usually dull Yankees react in the matchup between the teams with the two elite records in the American League?
They heard, they yawned, they conquered.
They almost won and probably would have if torrential rains that caused three delays of a combined 3 hours 10 minutes did not derail them.


CHRONICLE
JUDITH S. KAYE, Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals, is going back to her alma mater, Monticello (N.Y.) High School, today and she couldn't be more thrilled.
"It's like a dream to go back to your tiny little community as the Chief Judge of the state," she said the other day.
She is not the only chief judge of the state's highest court to be among the more than 1,000 alumni expected to be on hand for the school's centennial celebration.
One of her predecessors, Lawrence H. Cooke, will join her in a program that will trace the decades of the school's 100 years.
Judge Kaye, class of 1954, will reminisce about the 1950's, and Judge Cook, class of '31, will recall the 1930's.


Deftly, Lobbyists Fight Tobacco Tax
Days after President Clinton announced a health care proposal calling for a sharp rise in taxes on tobacco, lobbyists went into action.


Send Sweden's Dahlin To Head of the Class
Four years ago in Italy, Sweden's soccer team could do little right in the World Cup finals, losing all three matches it played to Brazil, to Scotland and, most painfully, to a lightly regarded side from Costa Rica coached by a now-familiar Serb named Bora Milutinovic.
But four years ago in Italy, the Swedes did not have Martin Dahlin.
Tonight, with the gold hoop in his left ear glittering under the lights of the Silverdome, Dahlin gave a memorable demonstration of his world-class blend of athleticism and opportunism to rally the Swedes to a crucial 3-1 victory over a sadly diminished Russian side.


Review/Opera; A Dive Into Depression, Then Up With 'Candide'
In "Black River," the composer Conrad Susa and his librettist, Richard Street, look in on a cocaine addict who rampages through Black River Falls, Wis., trashing store windows; a teen-age runaway; an opera singer who has landed in an asylum, and her son, who is charged with theft.
Depression is everywhere, suicide is mentioned several times, and the town minister is unable to cut through the pervasive emotional malaise.
It could be a work about modern times, but actually the opera is set in 1898, and is based on Michael Lesy's documentary study of the period, "Wisconsin Death Trip."
"Black River," heard on Wednesday (the final performance is on Sunday) and Leonard Bernstein's "Candide," which ended its run on Thursday night, are the contemporary component of the Opera Theater of St.
Louis's 19th season.
Mr.
Susa and Mr.
Street composed "Black River" in 1975 for the Minnesota Opera.
They revised it thoroughly in 1981, and touched it up again for this production.
The opera focuses mainly on three unhappy women, with occasional glimpses of the men in their lives and a synopsis of the town's history for perspective.
One of the women is drawn from life: the coloratura soprano Pauline L'Allemand, who studied in Germany, had a reasonable but not stellar career, and landed temporarily in the Mendota State Mental Hospital after the failure of her own operetta, "Die Kappe des Confucius."


Clinton Calls Show to Assail Press, Falwell and Limbaugh
President Clinton dialed into a radio call-in program from Air Force One today and unleashed an unusually bitter 23-minute attack on the press, the Rev.
Jerry Falwell, conservative radio talk show hosts in general and Rush Limbaugh in particular.
Mr.
Clinton, who won election a year and a half ago in part through his mastery of talk radio and television, portrayed the nation's airwaves as being filled with a "constant, unremitting drumbeat of negativism and cynicism."


Girls, Pull Your Freight
You may find this hard to believe, but your Governor often finds herself listening to Saturday morning TV.
And I have, on occasion, landed on a program that is a sort of idealized vision of life with the in-crowd in high school.
I noticed that on this show, the boys are always doing adventurous, daring kinds of activities.
And the girls are doing passive things like having slumber parties, gossiping about boys and sucking on soda straws.


NEWS SUMMARY
An earlier acquittal was followed by a riot.  8  TOBACCO LOBBYISTS' WORK  Soon after President Clinton outlined a health plan calling for a sharp increase in tobacco taxes, industry lobbyists went into action.
Now it is apparent that they have won some important victories.  9  Beliefs: How a church dealt with a major dispute.  12 Metro Digest 25 H.M.O.'s CLOSE DOORS  H.M.O. executives say that to maintain tight control over the cost and quality of care in their organizations, they must limit the number of doctors who can join.  1  Business Digest 39  Arts/Entertainment 13-18  Adam Luders on his retirement from City Ballet.  13  Theater: "Stonewall: Night Variations." 13  Music: "Black River" and "Candide" by St.
Marv Throneberry, former major league baseball player.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  Finally, talks with North Korea.
Overhauling juvenile justice.
The black hole called Cuba.
Empire's plight.
Letters  Anna Quindlen: Game time.
Russell Baker: Games men play.
Terry McMillan: An icon, but not a hero.
Ann W. Richards: Girls, pull your freight.
James L. Oberstar: Liberate Haiti.
Bridge 18 Chronicle 24 Crossword 14


Charging Meddling, Election Chief in Mexico Says He'll Quit
The senior Government official in charge of the coming presidential election angrily announced today that he would resign, complaining that "many people in the most diverse sectors" of Mexican politics were blocking his efforts to assure a fair vote.
The official, Interior Minister Jorge Carpizo MacGregor, is regarded as perhaps the single most important Government figure in President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's campaign to win credibility at home and abroad for the election on Aug. 21.


Emperor Visits Site Near Pearl Harbor
In a ceremony of silence broken only by the sound of birds and the barking of cannons and rifles fired in three successive 21-gun salutes, the Emperor of Japan today laid a wreath at a monument for war dead at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific.
The somber and sparsely attended gesture of sorrow for the losses incurred in war was an oblique gesture to the 2,395 servicemen killed the day Japanese warplanes attacked Pearl Harbor just after dawn on Dec. 7, 1941.
Of the 21 ships sunk or damaged in the attack, the worst losses occurred on the battleship Arizona, which lost 1,177 men, most of whom were buried alive in the ship's sunken hull.


Russia and European Union Sign Accord for Free Trade
President Boris N. Yeltsin pressed his campaign for closer Western ties today at the European Union summit meeting, concluding an agreement that is intended to free up trade with member countries and bring his vast, struggling land closer to rich Western economies.
The signing ceremony, and others formally inviting four new members to join the union, took place on the grounds of Corfu's Venetian fortress in the neo-classical Chapel of St.
George, overlooking the Ionian Sea.


Why Study of Gay Consumers Can Mislead and Do Damage
To the Editor:
Re "A Sharper View of Gay Consumers" (Business Day, June 9): The results of a Yankelovich Monitor study that show gays and lesbians are 5.7 percent of a nationally representative respondent pool are a significant advance over previous marketing studies of lesbians and gays.
Yet, they are still open to misinterpretation.
The study required lesbian and gay respondents to disclose information about sexual orientation.
It is no surprise that those in the study were more educated, more likely to be self-employed and lived in major metropolitan areas, as these are all characteristics of gays and lesbians likely to be "out" about sexual orientation.


Buenos Aires Journal; Nazis a Dead Issue? In Argentina, Definitely Not
For Argentina, which opened its doors to Nazis fleeing postwar Europe, this is the season for exposing war criminals and debating whether, 50 years after the crimes, they should be brought to justice.
Events have once again made this country face its murky history -- an arrest of a former SS captain in a southern resort town, interviews with two former Nazis living in the capital and a research project investigating the Government's archives that continues turning up revelations about the numbers of Nazis who entered the country after the war and the Argentine Government's promoting of that immigration.


French Soldiers in Rwanda Report Finding Mass Graves
French troops moved deeper into Rwanda today on the second day of their disputed expedition to save civilians from the murderous gangs that roam the countryside there.
On their first incursion on Thursday, French units discovered at least three mass graves near the town of Cyangugu in southwest Rwanda, military officials in Paris said today.
But they said the soldiers did not know how many bodies these held or who the victims were.


Citing News Deluge, Simpson Case Judge Halts Jury's Inquiry
In a highly unusual step, a judge today halted a grand jury inquiry into the O. J. Simpson case, saying unrelenting pretrial publicity could prejudice the deliberations.
In the absence of a grand jury, the case against Mr.
Simpson is scheduled to be heard Thursday at a preliminary hearing where a judge will determine whether he should be brought to trial in the killings of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and her friend, Ronald L. Goldman.


Kenneth Pontikes, 54, Founder Of Computer Leasing Company
Kenneth N. Pontikes, the founder of Comdisco, a pioneer in computer leasing and support services, died today at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
He was 54 and lived in Chicago.
The cause was colon cancer, the company said.


China Raises Prices to Lull Its Farmers
Fearing a poor harvest, which could add to social instability in China, the Communist Party leadership has approved price increases of 40 percent for wheat, rice and other grains.
The price of grain, particularly of wheat and rice, is the most sensitive item in the household budget for most of China's 1.2 billion people.
The price increases, approved this month, represent an urgent attempt by China's leaders to enlarge the harvest by making farming more lucrative.


Police Search Bronx River for a Possible Rifkin Victim


Uncovered Short Sales Climb to a Nasdaq Record
Uncovered short sales of stock in the over-the-counter market have reached record levels, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
The latest rise in the association's tally of uncovered short sales continued a long-term trend that was interrupted by a brief drop in April, when the total fell for the first time in more than a year.


Direct Flights From Haiti End as Sanctions Take Hold
The last direct flights from Haiti to the United States departed today as broader and tougher international economic sanctions took full effect.
The embargo is aimed at forcing the military to cede power so the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, can return.
All trade with Haiti is covered except in medicine, food and informational materials.


Judgment of School Official Criticized in Drowning Report
A report by school officials on the drowning of a Bronx teen-ager while on a class trip faults an assistant principal for leaving the scene before the boy was found, officials said yesterday.
Daniel Maracallo, a 14-year-old student at Intermediate School 166, in the Morrisania section of the Bronx, drowned on June 15 at Dorney Park and Wildwater Kingdom, a Pennsylvania water park.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about a Senate committee request for Whitewater documents from the White House and other Federal agencies misstated the given name of the Treasury Department deputy secretary whose records are among those being sought.
He is Roger C. Altman, not Robert.


Corrections
A report in the "On Stage, and Off" column yesterday misstated Susan H. Schulman's function in "Baby, That's Rock 'n' Roll," a musical revue about to open in Chicago.
Ms.
Schulman has been hired as a consultant to the show, not to replace its director.
The report also misspelled the director's name.
He is Otis Sallid.


Excerpts From Court Ruling Limiting Governments' Power Over Property
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 5-to-4 decision today in Dolan v.
City of Tigard, setting new limits on the ability of local governments to require property owners to give up part of their land for public purposes in return for permission to build or expand.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist's majority opinion was joined by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, Anthony M. Kennedy, and Clarence Thomas.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote a dissenting opinion that Justices Harry A. Blackmun and Ruth Bader Ginsburg joined.
Justice David H. Souter also wrote a dissenting opinion, not excerpted here.


Middle-Aged Duran Laces Them Up Again
MARVELOUS MARVIN HAGLER is an actor living in Italy.
SUGAR RAY LEONARD is a would-be actor living in California.
About 10 1/2 years after he fought Hagler, 14 years after he first fought Leonard, 27 years after he turned pro, ROBERTO DURAN still is a fighter at age 43.
"I'm not really surprised he's still fighting," Leonard said.
"With Duran, what's the alternative? He's always searching for the rainbow, even though he's famous. I think certain guys are meant to do that."


Agassi Beats the Rain With a Backhand
It was too hot for any more fireworks today at Wimbledon.
The antics of the upset artists at this name-drained Grand Slam finally slowed under the cover of a sweltering summer haze that eventually halted play altogether this evening with a blast of thunderstorms.
Andre Agassi, seeded 12th in honor of his 1992 crown, had just reached match point in his third-set tie breaker with Aaron Krickstein when the skies opened.
The spectators ran for cover, but Krickstein gamely stepped up to the service line in the downpour.
He thought he'd delayed his defeat with a angled backhand volley, but Agassi finished with the flourish of an improbable cross-court backhand winner launched at a run from the outer boundary of center court.


Marchers Block Square
A group of gay transvestites, transsexuals and their supporters gathered in Sheridan Square last night, blocking traffic in Greenwich Village for nearly an hour, following a march from Tompkins Square Park.
The march, which had been planned in advance, started about 9 P.M. with police officers outnumbering marchers, about 50 in number, by about 2 to 1, according to some of the marchers.
But as the parade moved west across the Village into the historical heart of the gay community, it slowly gathered more marchers and supporters.


Buying Forays Transformed A Sluggish Summer Friday
The dollar continued its decline against the Japanese yen and German mark yesterday, despite a concerted but not overly vigorous effort by the Federal Reserve and other central banks to reverse its recent slide on world currency markets.
The currency market intervention by the Fed and other banks, including the Bank of Japan and the Bundesbank of Germany, transformed what otherwise probably would have been a sluggish summer Friday into a very active trading session.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DIAMOND SHAMROCK INC., San Antonio, has agreed to buy 18 convenience store and gasoline outlets in Colorado from PDQ Food Stores.
Terms were not disclosed.
FRAME-N-LENS OPTICAL INC.  announced the acquisition of Family Vision Centers Inc., taking control of its 132-unit lease optical departments.


Knicks Pack Up Their Troubles
Instead of riding in a victory parade, the Knicks held a somber season-ending meeting today, still lamenting the National Basketball Association championship that got away.
As the players and coaches gathered their belongings and said goodbye, these developments took place:


Itel to Sell Its Stake in Rail-Car Fleet
The Itel Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its interest in a fleet of 70,000 rail cars to a group of New York investors for $204.5 million in cash and notes.
If the buyers get the needed financing, the deal would mean that Itel, a holding company based in Chicago, would leave the rail-car leasing business and record a taxable gain of $500 million.
But the company's existing tax credits would offset 80 percent of the gain.


A Call for Health Cost Curbs, But Not Mandatory Insurance
A plan endorsed today by members of the Senate Finance Committee is seen as a way of getting some form of health plan through a panel that has been stalled on the issue for months.
Any plan leaving the committee could be substantially modified later.
Under the bill, private insurers would have to offer coverage to all applicants at standard rates calculated by the Government.
To help people pay the premiums, the Federal Government would offer subsidies to millions of Americans, including many with incomes substantially above the official poverty level, which is now $14,764 for a family of four.


Both Math and Money Kicking In for the U.S.
The game is so elemental, the numbers so complex.
The United States soccer team, suddenly the national darlings, just want to put the ball in the net a few times and beat Romania in the Rose Bowl on Sunday and qualify for the second round of the World Cup.
But behind the simplicity of the game, there are the higher mathematics of the qualifying system.
And then there are the high finances for American soccer players, suddenly extra zeroes tacked on for young athletes who were playing nearly for free not too long ago.


Bridge; Individual tournaments can be very successful even though many experts dislike them.
Individual tournaments are unpopular in North America, particularly with the top professional players.
But they can be very successful events.
At the end of April, 52 invited stars, mainly from Europe, gathered in Paris for the second Generali Masters Individual, a four-session event with cash prizes.
They were all players with international credentials, and the final placings were: 1st, Jon Baldursson, Iceland, 55.17 percent; 2d, Christian Mari, France, 55.1; 3d, Jean-Marc Roudinesco, France, tied Jan Westerhof, the Netherlands, 54.17; 5th, Alfredo Versace, Italy, 53.82; 6th, Gabriel Chagas, Brazil, 53.48.
The low scoring testifies to the high standard of play.
The most talked-about deal of the contest is shown in the diagram.
Some declarers made six no-trump by developing clubs and eventually squeezing East in spades and diamonds.
Others reached six diamonds, which sometimes succeeded after South shortened his diamonds and trapped East's jack at the finish.


Prosecutors Focused on Bribery, A Crown Heights Witness Says
A Brooklyn man appearing this week before the grand jury that is investigating the fatal stabbing of Yankel Rosenbaum in Crown Heights said that he was repeatedly questioned about whether a witness was paid to lie in testimony at the trial.
The man, Henry Rice, 24, of Crown Heights said yesterday that Federal prosecutors asked if he knew whether the witness, John Anderson, was paid for the testimony he gave during the trial of the man who was acquitted in Mr.
Rosenbaum's death.


No Headline
If there is just one grand juror who has listened to any of this -- even though they had been told you are not to listen to any of the media, read, watch anything -- then the validity of the indictment would be undermined.
But also it's just an element of fairness. - GIL GARCETTI, the prosecutor in the O.J.
Simpson case.  [ 8:2. ]


Brooklyn Jewelry Store Owner Shoots an Armed Robber to Death
A Brooklyn jewelry store owner shot and killed a robber yesterday and critically injured a suspected accomplice, the police said.
About 1:30 P.M., the police said, a well-dressed man entered the Gold Star Jewelry Store at 3833 Nostrand Avenue in a small shopping strip in Sheepshead Bay.
He told the owner, Leonid Rosenthal, 52, that he wanted to look at a ring in the window.
Then, pulling out a revolver, he announced a holdup.


Felon vs. Youth
This week's proposals by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's commission on juvenile offenders build on a trend that is making New York State's juvenile-justice system, conceived to keep young offenders out of the adult criminal system, increasingly indistinguishable from that system.
Three decades ago, the state decided that young lawbreakers -- who at the time were usually charged with misdemeanors like jumping turnstiles, breaking windows and stealing hubcaps -- should not face trial and sentencing in the same forum as adults, the punishment-oriented State Supreme Court.


Politics With the Beat of the Bronx; Willie Colon, Salsa Star, Makes a Bid for a Congressional Seat
In his first major campaign appearance as a candidate for Congress, the trombonist-singer Willie Colon barely shook hands.
Instead he was grabbed, squeezed and kissed as he zigzagged up Fifth Avenue on June 12 in the Puerto Rican Day Parade, ambushed by grown women who hopped in excitement after touching him, bearhugged by men who shrieked "Willieeee! Ven aca!" ("Come here!").
Mr.
Colon, an international salsa star, announced this month that he will challenge Rep.
Eliot L. Engel in the September Democratic primary for the 17th Congressional District seat in the Bronx and Westchester County.
His fans were not surprised.
For much of his nearly three decades as a musician, Mr.
Colon has offered social commentary with a 3/2 Afro-Caribbean beat, railing against military despots, exposing unsavory slices of barrio life, finding inspiration as readily in AIDS as in child beggars in Bogota.


3 Shot in Attempted Pawn Shop Robbery
The owner of a pawn shop and his partner were wounded last night in Flatbush, Brooklyn, during what was apparently a robbery attempt outside their store, the police said.
One of two suspects was critically injured after two associates of the shop owners returned fire, they said.
The attempted robbery happened about 5:30 P.M. after the the two pawn brokers -- identified as Peter Alexander and John Umerouski -- had closed their store, the Church Avenue Pawn Shop, at 2240 Church Avenue.


Japan Should Pay for Its Own Defense
To the Editor:
A misleading impression is given that the United States holds a weak hand in negotiating with Japan in "A Giant Restrained" (Business Day, June 8).
Japan is totally dependent on the United States for its external security.
Moreover, Japan relies heavily on exports to United States markets, while the United States would benefit from fewer imports and more exports to Japan.
At the end of the Second World War the United States mandated that Japan devote its energies to peaceful development.
To facilitate this policy, the United States opened its markets to Japan without requiring free access to Japanese markets.
Moreover, the United States took care of Japan's external defense at the expense of United States taxpayers.


Liberate Haiti
I lived in Haiti for three and a half years.
I went there in 1959, fresh from graduate studies at the College of Europe, armed with a fluency in French and a young man's desire to change the world.
I worked under contract to the U.S.
Navy to teach French to its mission in Port-au-Prince and as an unpaid volunteer teaching English in schools at various levels, including the military academy.
I came to love Haiti and its people, and traveled all through the country by foot and jeep.
My fluency in French and in Creole, the language of the common people, gave me insights into the Haitian mind.


OPPOSITION FORCES JAPANESE PREMIER TO LEAVE OFFICE
A year after being ousted from power, Japan's Liberal Democratic Party took its revenge on the defectors who brought it down, forcing Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata to resign this morning rather than face certain defeat in a no-confidence resolution.
Mr.
Hata's announcement at 11:15 A.M. (10:15 P.M. New York time) touched off a scramble for power that could, under some scenarios, see the Liberal Democrats return to power as the leading party in a new coalition government.
They ran the country for 38 years until countless scandals forced them out last summer as part of a drive to reform both the political system and an overregulated, faltering economy.


Punitive Damage Awards by Juries Must Be Subject to Judicial Review, Justices Rule
In a ruling likely to give new ammunition to the effort to limit punitive damage awards, the Supreme Court ruled today that juries cannot have the last word on punitive damages and that states must make some form of judicial review available.
The immediate effect of the 7-to-2 decision was limited, because among the 50 states and the Federal Government, only Oregon provides no judicial review of the size of a jury's damage award.
The Court today set aside a $5 million punitive damage award against the Honda Motor Company, won by an Oregon man who was injured when a three-wheeled all-terrain vehicle flipped over on him as he drove it up a steep embankment.


Review/Dance; Performers Who Keep Their Secrets
Sometimes performers can do something with such intense concentration that even theatergoers who are mystified by their activities can still find the experience enthralling.
Gus Solomons Jr. surely enjoyed being mysterious in "Private Parts," the new work his Solomons Company/Dance presented on Thursday night as part of the Events series at St.
Mark's Church in the East Village.
A program note explained that each dancer in the cast invented a scenario to justify the choreographic actions.
But the dancers kept their scenarios totally private.


Ban on Flights From Haiti to the United States


A GLOBAL EFFORT ON DOLLAR FAILS
A multibillion-dollar global buying spree today by the Federal Reserve and 15 other central banks to prop up the dollar in the face of a new onslaught from currency traders failed to prevent the dollar from again slipping against the Japanese yen and the German mark.
The coordinated central bank operation, led by the Clinton Administration, initially stemmed the dollar's slide against both the mark and the yen, but only briefly, as the American currency resumed its drop, falling by late in the day to 1.585 marks, its lowest level in more than a year, and to 100.65 yen, just above the record low of 99.90 yen that it touched briefly on Tuesday.


Additional Streisand Show
Barbra Streisand is to give an additional performance on July 10 at 8 P.M. at Madison Square Garden, Seventh Avenue and 33d Street.
Tickets, at $50, $125 and $350, will go on sale on Tuesday at 9 A.M. at the box office and through Ticketmaster; there is a limit of four per person.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
Ticketmaster: (212) 307-7171.
Ms.
Streisand gave two of five sold-out concerts last week; the others are scheduled for tomorrow, Tuesday and Thursday.


Q &amp; A
Stocks' Paper Trail  Q. I want to sell some of the stock I bought through dividend reinvestment plans, but the paperwork has been destroyed.
How can I find out how much these stocks have cost me?
MITCHELL ROTHMAN, Atlantic Beach, L.I.
A.
The best source for this information is the transfer agent that handles each company's dividend reinvestment plan.
You can usually obtain the name of the transfer agent from the corporation's investor relations office.
"The agent normally keeps dividend reinvestment transactions from day one," said Joseph Tigue, editor of Standard &amp; Poor's annual Directory of Dividend Reinvestment Plans.
"There is no charge for the information." With duplicate statements from the transfer agent, you can determine how much you have paid for your stock.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation also has a section that provides historical dividend data.
The first dividend statistic is free, but additional ones cost $5 each, with a minimum charge of $35.
The charges are billed to a major credit card.
Inquiries should be directed to (212) 208-1199.
Complaints About Advisers  Q. Where does a client with a problem with an investment adviser go for redress?
RUTH A. UNTERBERG, New York  A. Anyone who charges to provide advice on the purchase or sale of securities must register with the Securities and Exchange Commission as an investment adviser.
If you have a complaint about an adviser, call the agency's consumer affairs section at (202) 942-7040.
Some states require investment advisers to be licensed as well.
To find the appropriate agency in your state, call the North American Securities Administrators Association at (202) 737-0900.
"The Better Business Bureau also will mediate your dispute with an investment adviser," said Barbara Berger Opotowsky, president of the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York.
Section 457 Plans  Q. What are the benefits and drawbacks of a Section 457 plan?
SYLVIA ANTONIER SCHER, Great Neck, L.I.
A.
A Section 457 plan is offered by state and local governments as a way for employees to save pretax dollars for retirement.
Workers can defer as much as $7,500 or 331/3 percent of their taxable income, whichever is lower.
Tax is due, however, when the funds are withdrawn.
"Unless there are unforeseen emergencies, these dollars cannot be withdrawn from the plan until retirement," said William Dannecker, president of Retirement System Group Inc.
"In addition, the employee may have no say in how the funds are invested, because investment options are determined by the plan sponsor."
As a participant, you cannot roll over your money into a more common 401(k) plan, which is used by private companies, or an individual retirement account.
If you change jobs, rollovers are permitted only to other 457 plans.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  MINNESOTA TWINS -- Purchased the contract of Kevin Campbell, pitcher, from Salt Lake City of the Pacific Coast League.
Optioned Brett Merriman, pitcher, to Salt Lake City.


Murray Gitlin, 67 A Former Dancer
Murray Gitlin, a dancer and stage manager, died on Wednesday at St.
Clare's Hospital.
He was 67 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his cousin, Frances Jacobs, of Syosset, L.I.


Phillies Give Valenzuela A Ticket Back to Majors
For the third time, Fernando Valenzuela has found a way to the major leagues through Mexico.
The Philadelphia Phillies, with three-fifths of their pennant-winning pitching rotation on the disabled list, yesterday signed Valenzuela to a contract for the remainder of this season.


A Dancer Confronts Barriers
BARRY MARTIN, in his wheelchair, cannot keep from thinking about himself and South Africa.
"That's where my life blew up," said the 32-year-old New Yorker, who had been a dancer when an automobile accident near Pretoria left him with no movement in his legs and little in his arms.
It was 1983, Nelson Mandela was in prison with no hope of release, and Mr.
Martin, having just graduated from SUNY-Purchase, was performing with a troupe at Sun City, an enclave where South Africa, aspiring to world class decadence, stretched the limits of apartheid.
With a white acquaintance he had taken a day off to to visit a black township and learn how most South Africans lived.
On the way back the car slid off the road.


More Charges Against Gang
Five men who Bronx prosecutors say are members of the Latin Kings gang have been indicted on state charges of kidnapping, robbery and weapons possession.
On Tuesday, 20 members or associates of the Latin Kings, a gang prosecutors called one of the best organized and most violent in the city, were charged with a variety of Federal crimes, including the brutal murders of at least seven of their own members and beatings of others.


Four Killed as Jet Crashes


Don't Forget Harding
To the Editor:
David Frum states in "Wilson? Quayle? Dole? Anyone?" (Op-Ed, June 10) that Barry Goldwater in 1964 was the only sitting senator nominated for the Presidency by the Republican Party in this century.


Son of Easy Goer Is Last
The first son of Easy Goer to go to the races made his debut yesterday at Belmont Park.
He did not exactly follow in the footsteps of his renowned sire, the popular champion who died last month in Kentucky.
The colt, Easy Does It, ran eighth and last in a $25,000 race for 2-year-olds.
Easy Does It, out of the mare Infinite, opened his career with all the trappings of success: He is owned by Ogden Mills Phipps, who also owned Easy Goer.
He is trained by Shug McGaughey, who also trained his sire.
He was ridden by Mike Smith, who won the Eclipse Award as the best jockey in the country last year.


A Call for Health Cost Curbs, But Not Mandatory Insurance
A plan endorsed today by members of the Senate Finance Committee is seen as a way of getting some form of health plan through a panel that has been stalled on the issue for months.
Any plan leaving the committee could be substantially modified later.
Under the bill, private insurers would have to offer coverage to all applicants at standard rates calculated by the Government.
To help people pay the premiums, the Federal Government would offer subsidies to millions of Americans, including many with incomes substantially above the official poverty level, which is now $14,764 for a family of four.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Stockton Shoots Another 66 to Grab Lead  Dave Stockton Jr. shot a four-under-par 66 for the second straight day to take a one-stroke lead in the second round of the Greater Hartford Open yesterday in Cromwell, Conn.
Stockton's father won the tournament in 1974 and is currently leading the PGA Seniors Championship at Dearborn, Mich., after also shooting two 66's.
The younger Stockton had a bogey and five birdies to finish 36 holes at eight-under-par 132.
David Frost shot a 68 for 133 and sole possession of second over the 6,820-yard Tournament Players Club at River Highlands.
He was seven under after 12 holes but missed a chance to tie Stockton when he double bogeyed No. 4.
Five golfers were at 134, including Greg Norman, who shot a bogey-free 65.
Stockton, in his first year on the PGA Tour, has missed the cut in 16 tournaments and hasn't placed higher than 30th in the other six.
Last year, he earned $64,214 to place 23d on the Nike Tour. (AP)
Stockton Sr.
Also in Lead: In scoring 132 through two rounds, Dave Stockton fired a three-stroke lead over Lee Trevino midway through the Senior Players Championship at the TPC of Michigan.
At 8-under 136 were the first-day leader, Tom Weiskopf, who had a 71 on Friday; Jim Albus, who shot 69, and Harold Henning, who had a 67.
The Stocktons could become the first father-son duo to win PGA tournaments in the same week and also the first to win the same tournament.
McGeorge Tops Leader Board: Missie McGeorge shot a five-under-par 66 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead over eight others after the opening round of the $500,000 ShopRite L.P.G.A.
Classic in Somers Point, N.J.
McGeorge led a tournament-record 34 players who came in under par at the 6,235-yard, par-71 Greate Bay Country Club course.
In addition, 27 golfers shot in the 60's. (AP)
From Bad to Worse for Swede: Anders Forsbrand of Sweden, sliding toward a dismal 100-shot round at the French Open yesterday in San Quentin, withdrew on the 18th tee when he ran out of golf balls.
Forsbrand, a five-time European Tour winner who finished fourth on the European money list in 1992, came to the final tee 26 shots over par at 93 for the second round.
He ran up one sextuple bogey, one quintuple, two quadruple, one triple, one double and three straightforward bogeys.
At the 18th he promptly drove two balls into water and retired.
Limited by the rules to the number he started with, the Swede left all nine balls out on the course, seven in water hazards and two in thick rough. (AP)


Peace Pact With Syria Needed to Prevent War, Rabin Says
Israeli leaders have begun lending a note of urgency to their sputtering peace talks with Syria, including a warning from Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin that war is likely unless the two enemies come to terms.
One senior official, Deputy Foreign Minister Yossi Beilin, cautioned this week that the two sides had only "a matter of months" to reach agreement.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a vote in the House of Representatives on Thursday to cut the 1995 budget of the National Endowment for the Arts misstated the party affiliation of Senator Don Nickles of Oklahoma.
He is a Republican, not a Democrat.
The article also misidentified the source of a request for a $1 million increase in the endowment's budget.
It was proposed by Representative Sidney R. Yates, Democrat of Illinois, not by the Adminstration.


Belarus Voters Back Populist in Protest at the Quality of Life
Showing once again how distressed people in the countries of the former Soviet Union are with the current state of their lives, Belarussian voters overwhelmingly supported a populist anti-crime crusader against the current Prime Minister in the results today of the first round of presidential elections.
Alexander Lukashenko, 39 years old, whose vitriolic rants about government and the country's shattered economy remind many observers of the Russian ultranationalist Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, received 45 percent of the vote on Thursday -- more than all five other candidates combined.
Candidates cannot win on the first round, however, unless they receive more than 50 percent of all votes cast.


Sculley Takes a Part-Time Job With Kodak
John Sculley, once the high-flying chairman of Apple Computer Inc., has accepted a part-time job as a marketing consultant to the electronic imaging division of Eastman Kodak Inc., the company said yesterday.
The relationship with Kodak represents a re-emergence for Mr.
Sculley, who left Apple last year to join a small company on Long Island, Spectrum Information Technologies, only to depart in February, four months later, amid a flurry of lawsuits.


An Heir Finds a Loophole to Move a Trust
Over the years, Louise W. Corbett became more and more dissatisfied with how the trust fund established for her by her grandfather was being managed.
She wanted lower management fees and more responsiveness from her trustee.
Most of all she wanted greater exposure to potentailly more profitable investments.
Against the odds, she managed to move her trust from a bank in the Boston area, where she once lived, to a bank near her home in Southern Florida.
Not everyone will be able to break a trust, but others may triumph by following the examples set by Mrs.
Corbett, said Danielle E. deBenedictis, her lawyer in Boston.


Corrections
A chart last Saturday in the "How They Do It" feature in Your Money mislabeled segments of the investment distribution of the Lifepath mutual fund from Wells Fargo &amp; Company.
At the time of purchase, the fund was 35 percent stocks, 54 percent bonds and 11 percent cash.


California Seeks Solutions To Prevent Insurance Crisis
As more insurance companies cut back or even abandon their homeowners business in California because of earthquake risks, the state's officials are groping for solutions to prevent an insurance crisis that could derail California's economic recovery.
Gov.
Pete Wilson and his insurance adviser, Marjorie Burke, have scheduled a meeting on Monday with executives from 18 insurance companies to discuss the problem and the state's role in keeping earthquake insurance available to homeowners.


Family of Kidnapped Mexican Financier Agrees to Ransom
In a dramatic, late-night appearance on national television, representatives of one of Mexico's richest businessmen have agreed to pay the ransom sought by his kidnappers and pleaded with them for his prompt release.
Walking onto the set of a live television news program just half an hour before the 11:30 P.M. deadline set for his execution, a lawyer for the 50-year-old businessman, Alfredo Harp Helu, said on Thursday night that his family would pay the undisclosed amount that the kidnappers had demanded.


Frozen Embryos' Fate Awaits L.I. Custody Battle
In the first case of its kind in New York State, a Long Island couple who struggled for years to have a baby and then divorced are battling over the fate of five frozen human embryos.
Maureen Kent Kass, 36, of Amityville is seeking control of the embryos so she can have them implanted and give birth.
Her former husband, Steven Kass, 33, is seeking to have the embryos destroyed.


Greasy or Dirty Air-Conditioners May Need Expertise
DO NOT wait until the dog days of summer to improve home cooling.
Addressing the problem early not only insures that the equipment works, but also allows taking advantage of natural strategies that can lower energy bills while increasing comfort.
Service air-conditioning equipment promptly.
Room air-conditioners seldom need more than minor maintenance to make sure the filter is clean and the drain tube, if there is one, is unblocked.
In the cooler seasons, cleaning the filter monthly helps keep the appliance at maximum efficiency.


Mary H. Gregg And Lance Minor
Mary Hotchkiss Gregg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Gregg Jr. of Henniker, N.H., was married there yesterday to Robert Lance Minor, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald R. Minor of Alpine, N.Y.
Mary Anne Foster, a justice of the peace in Concord, N.H., performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Minor, 29, teaches prekindergarten at the Episcopal School in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College and is studying for a master's degree in early childhood education at the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is a manager, in Concord, at Land Vest Inc., a real estate company.


The Real Victim
To the Sports Editor:
In the column on Mike Tyson and Judge Gifford's denial of the motion to "modify" Tyson's six-year sentence for the rape of Desiree Washington ("Tyson Seems to Have Changed," The Times, June 14) Ira Berkow referred to Tyson's life as an "enduring tragedy . . . a classic American success story turned to rubble." What about Tyson having turned Washington's life to rubble?
What about the pain she will always feel because of the rape?
CATHERINE STRUVE  New York


Traveler's Checks
To the Editor: After reading about Kurt Strauss's experience with American Express dual-signature traveler's checks (Letters on Travel, May 15), I wanted to tell you about my experience in Italy in September 1992.
My husband and I were in the Ventimiglia railroad station late one night; we were to leave for Turin the next morning.
While he stood in the ticket line, I went to the cambio for lire.
I signed several $20 checks, but the cashier refused to accept them without my husband's signature.
No supervisor was available.
I told the cashier: "But American Express says that you can cash these checks with just one person's signature." He shrugged and sneered.
And at that point I couldn't get my husband out of the ticket line.


Battle Lines Drawn Over Newborn H.I.V. Disclosure
Assemblywoman Nettie Mayersohn describes herself as a typical Jewish grandmother from Queens.
But the 67-year-old legislator has become a true anomaly in the State Capitol.
Without a leadership position, she has singlehandedly forced the most emotional issue of the 1994 session to the top of the Assembly's agenda.
The issue is the state's seven-year-old policy of testing all newborns for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, but then refusing to inform parents of the results.
The sole purpose of the testing is to help the State Health Department track the prevalence of the virus.


Change of Venue?
To the Sports Editor:
The third leg of racing's Triple Crown has become its jackleg.
How disappointing that only six colts, perhaps four of them qualified, started in the Belmont Stakes.
How sad that the attendance, according to New York Racing Association officials, was only 40,000 for what many consider New York racing's biggest day.
Perhaps the time has come for the sponsors of racing's Triple Crown to stage the third leg in more hospitable surroundings, preferably in California, where the better horses race most of the year and where the racing industry is still capable of rising to the occasion.
JOHN J. CASSIDY  Venice, Fla.


TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS
The news bomb: in the last few years, the sheer amount of news disseminated to the public has exploded.
In 1979, C-Span began broadcasting gavel-to-gavel proceedings in the House of Representatives.
A year later, the Iran hostage crisis prompted ABC to start its new "Nightline" news discussion program and CNN began its startling growth into a global news service.
Then the networks started cloning their versions of "60 Minutes" and "20/20." This past television season, there were 600 minutes of prime-time news magazine programs on the major networks each week.
And that doesn't include tabloid TV shows like "Hard Copy."
The explosive growth in news outlets has loosed an equally explosive growth in the appetite for news, or "news" product.
More than appetite; ravenous hunger.
As Nicholas von Hoffman once wrote of the press: "Butchers make sausage. Newspapers make public affairs." Has that hunger driven the media out of control?


Now It's Bus and Subway Workers' Turn
Just a week after the end of a bruising battle with Long Island Rail Road workers, transit officials face another major test: trying to reach an agreement with bus and subway workers, whose contract expires on Thursday.
The June 18 contract settlement between the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the largest union of the L.I.R.R. is likely to complicate the transit agency's negotiations with the subway and bus workers, which resumed last week.
In the settlement, which came after a two-day strike on the L.I.R.R., the agency dropped demands for work-rule changes under pressure from Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


For the Season Past, Awards Imagined and Real
WHAT to make of a theater season that promised discovery and adventure but delivered retreads and tours?
Such is the disappointment reflected in the Connecticut Critics Circle awards for the 1993-94 season that are being presented tomorrow night at 8 at the Norwalk Community-Technical College.
Of awards in 10 categories for achievements in the season just ended (covering the year from June 1 to May 31), a shared prize for set design is the only one being given to home-grown productions at the Yale Repertory and Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.


Marv Thronberry Dies at 60: Player Was Symbol of '62 Mets
Marv Throneberry, who became a symbol of the futility of one the most tragicomic teams in baseball, the 1962 New York Mets, died of cancer on Thursday night.
He was 60.
Throneberry, who was nicknamed Marvelous Marv during his career as a first baseman, died at his home in Fisherville, Tenn., a rural community about 22 miles east of Memphis.


Don't Get Angry. Get on the Phone.
HERE it is: a list of some of the more common annoyances of life in New York, and whom to call in city, state and Federal government when they happen to you.
ADVERTISING  Misleading or deceptive ads Department of Consumer Affairs . . . (212) 487-4398 Federal Trade Commission (212) 264-1207 AIRLINES  Delays, overbooking, rudeness U.S.
Department of Transportation, Office of Intergovernmental Affairs  (202) 366-4000 Lost luggage  Federal Aviation Administration Public Affairs . . . (718) 553-2692
(212) 967-3002 FOOD  Rotten, unwholesome or unsavory food sold in supermarkets State Department of Agriculture and Markets . . . (718) 722-2877 In restaurants or bakeries City Department of Health  (212) 442-1999 Pricing violations Department of Consumer Affairs  (212) 487-4398 Tampering or poisoning U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, Inspector General's line (800) 368-5779 F.B.I. . . . (212) 335-2700 GARBAGE  Non-pickup and other complaints City Sanitation Department  (212) 219-8090 HOSPITALS  Complaints about municipal hospitals City Health and Hospitals Corporation . . . (212) 556-8100 Complaints about private hospitals State Department of Health, Hospital Unit . . . (212) 502-0855 HOUSING  City Department of Housing Preservation . . . (212) 960-4800
INSURANCE  State Department of Insurance (212) 602-0203 LAWYERS  Disciplinary Committee  (212) 685-1000 MAIL  Mail fraud, obscene mail, service complaints U.S.
WATER  Water-quality problems City Department of Health  (212) 442-1999 Low pressure City Environmental Protection Communications Center . . . (718) 699-9811 For other complaint sources, refer to "Big Apple Street Smarts" (The Consultant Press: 1992)


Janet Ghattas, John T. Hand
Janet Louise Ghattas, a daughter of the late Najib and Josephine Ghattas, is to be married today to John Taylor Hand, the son of Ruth Crull of River Vale, N.J., and the late John T. Hand.
The Rev.
Louise Conant is to perform the Episcopal ceremony at the Habitat Institute for the Environment in Belmont, Mass.
Ms.
Ghattas is keeping her name.
She is the director of Intercultural Dimensions, a nonprofit educational organization in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in French from Indiana University.


Once Again, A Time to Be Highly Confident
IN merger land last week, it was almost like old times.
There was a junk-bond financed buyer, waving a "highly confident" letter from his investment banker to support a sky-high bid.
The would-be buyer is Conseco, an insurance conglomerate that is a master of complicated financial transactions.
Its founder, Steve Hilbert, has become a hero to many an institutional investor, who believe he can work wonders in reviving, restructuring and growing insurance companies.
Conseco's bid for the Kemper Corporation, an also-ran in insurance and mutual funds, sent General Electric, Kemper's other suitor, fleeing.


Recitals in Norfolk
FOR more than half a century the 70-acre Ellen Battell Stoeckel estate in Norfolk has been the summer home of the Yale School of Music and its accompanying Norfolk Chamber Music Festival.
And a week ago this season the resident Tokyo String Quartet began working with six young ensembles who will perform quartets by Bartok at 8:30 P.M. on Thursday and Friday in the first two open recitals of the '94 Festival.
The Tokyo itself appears in recital at 8:30 P.M. on Saturday, broadening the repertory to encompass quartets by Haydn, Berg and Beethoven.
Thereafter, audiences will find a series of Young Artists Recitals, mostly scheduled at 7:30 P.M. on Thursdays and at 10:30 A.M. on Saturdays, while faculty and guest artists are presented in 8:30 P.M. concerts Friday and Saturdays through Aug. 20.
Among the returning ensembles are the Fine Arts and Cassatt String Quartets, the New York Woodwind Quintet and the Norfolk Chamber Orchestra (conducted on July 29 by Aldo Parisot and on Aug. 13 by Peter Csaba), while the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center makes its Norfolk debut Aug. 20.


Soaking Up the Atmosphere
I STARED down at the narrow pool of inky green water and knew I was supposed to climb in, but I just couldn't.
The smell, like a hair salon where every customer is getting a permanent, made me wince.
But a pair of braver bathers happily soaking nearby seemed undaunted, and, besides, I had driven more than two hours to Wilbur Hot Springs, a northern California spa, for this experience, so in I stepped.
The water was a surprise, oddly viscous, but also velvety and hot.
After a while, I hardly noticed the sulfurous reek.
Hot-spring baths are an acquired taste, and recently I set out for California, hotbed of hot springs, to see if I wanted to acquire it.


Investing In Tomorrow
To the Editor:
I read Edward Rothstein's essay " 'Mostly' Is a Hard Act to Follow"  [ May 22 ]  with sadness, and not only at the thought of an interesting and worthwhile enterprise disappearing from the musical scene.


Leslie Spencer, James Huffman 2d
Leslie Murray Spencer, an associate editor at Forbes magazine, was married on Thursday to James Lloyd Huffman 2d, the dean of the law school at Lewis &amp; Clark College.
Both work in Portland, Ore.
Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg of the United States Court of Appeals in Washington officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
The bride, 37, is a daughter of Louisa C. Spencer of New York and the late Duncan M. Spencer.
A graduate of Princeton University, she received a master's degree in East European studies from the University of London.
Her father was the chairman and chief executive of the Fiduciary Trust Company, an investment management company in New York co-founded by her maternal grandfather, the late Grenville Clark.
Her mother is a lawyer for the Environmental Defense Fund in New York and a director of the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


Sophistication Amid the Americana
NEVER judge a restaurant by its decor alone.
If you were to peek inside the mustard-yellow clapboard house in Old Lyme that is now the Bee and Thistle Inn, you might presume that the menu would match the quietly old-fashioned Americana of the inn's two waiting parlors -- and you would be wrong.
It is surprisingly contemporary.
The decor of the two narrow glassed-in dining porches, the smaller rear porch and the main dining room does indeed suggest country inn cliches, with hanging plants and baskets, and dried herb and flower wreaths on the walls.
But a quick glance at the dinner menu suggests that there is more urbanity here than meets the eye.
And the carefully cooked, prettily garnished, superb food reveals just how sophisticated the operation is.
When you learn that Francis Brooke-Smith, the executive chef, was formerly at the elegant Copper Beech Inn in Ivoryton, the puzzle pieces fit.


A Celebration of the Life of a Fallen Firefighter


Section 10; Page 1; Column 1; Sports Desk
A decade after his heyday, a Brazilian soccer hero of the 1940's named Heleno de Freitas somehow talked his way back into the lineup of a team that was about to take the field in Rio's massive new Maracana Stadium.
Though he went on single-handedly to cause his side's defeat and left the game under a chorus of jeers, he was hardly crestfallen.
"I couldn't die without having played in Maracana," he explained.


Auckland's Surf 'n Turf: Prime Fish, Choice Lamb
LEISURELY and laid back Auckland is New Zealand's "City of Sails." Clustering around the bays and inlets of sparkling Waitemata Harbour, the city and suburbs offer, from almost anywhere, glimpses -- and vistas -- of the sea.
Auckland residents take full advantage of their access to the water, judging from the harbor's vast and colorful fleet of yachts and boats.
Not surprisingly, then, there is a strong emphasis on seafood in Auckland restaurants.
Generally, fish are pan-fried or grilled, but the influx of Japanese tourism has been acknowledged by the introduction of sashimi and sushi to more than a few menus.
Of course, New Zealand is also renowned for its lamb -- which might appear as lamb fillet, rack of lamb, or a slow-cooked, savory dish of lamb shanks -- for which New Zealanders seem to have a particular fondness.
Lamb is sweet, succulent and tender, with the characteristic flavor that comes from natural pastures.


Caroline Rule, William Finnegan
Caroline Rule, an associate at Rabinowitz, Boudin, Standard, Krinsky &amp; Lieberman, a New York law firm, was married on Thursday to William Patrick Finnegan, a staff writer at The New Yorker magazine.
John Alley, a justice of the peace in Dukes County, Mass., performed the ceremony at the Lambert's Cove Inn on Martha's Vineyard.
Ms.
Rule is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Cape Town and received a law degree from Yale University and a master's degree in fine arts from the San Francisco Art Institute.
She is the daughter of Mark and June Rule of Harare, Zimbabwe.
Her father is the Central Africa representative for Manica Freight Services in Harare.
Her mother teaches elementary school in Harare.


Precedent For Suing A President
When Paula C. Jones filed her sex-harassment suit against President Clinton last month, legal scholars, historians and senior Justice Department lawyers all agreed that it was unprecedented.
Never before, they said, had an incumbent President been sued for actions alleged to have occurred before he took office.
But news accounts from 32 years ago show that this is not so.
In 1962, President John F. Kennedy was sued in California for his indirect role in a traffic accident at the 1960 Democratic National Convention, in Los Angeles.


Greasy or Dirty Air-Conditioners May Need Expertise
DO NOT wait until the dog days of summer to improve home cooling.
Addressing the problem early not only insures that the equipment works, but also allows taking advantage of natural strategies that can lower energy bills while increasing comfort.
Service air-conditioning equipment promptly.
Room air-conditioners seldom need more than minor maintenance to make sure the filter is clean and the drain tube, if there is one, is unblocked.
In the cooler seasons, cleaning the filter monthly helps keep the appliance at maximum efficiency.


The Summer's Mismatched Pair, Homemade Bombs Bursting in Air


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Existing-home sales, May, mils., ann. rate
4.12
4.05
Tuesday
New-home sales, May, thous., ann. rate
683
678
Consumer confidence index, June
87.6
87.0
Wednesday
G.D.P., final, 1st qtr., pct. chg.
3.0
3.0
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
350
350
Personal income, May, pct. change
0.4
0.5
Factory-goods orders, May, pct. change
-0.1
0.3
Friday
Leading indicators, May, pct. chg.
0.0
0.1
Purchasing managers' index, June
57.7
57.9
This Week's Developments
Monday
Senate Finance Committee, public mark-up of health bill
Wednesday
Commerce Department reports on corporate profits


The Hudson Waterfront: What's Next?
RIBBONS will not be cut for the grandest projects until early in the next century -- if then -- but plans for Manhattan's Hudson River waterfront are advancing on several fronts this summer, with tangible results promised next year.
Federal and state highway officials are nearing a final choice of design for the reconstruction of Route 9A from Battery Place to 59th Street.
They are likely to heed the preference of transportation engineers for a $380 million "urban boulevard" with six to eight lanes of traffic, a 19-foot-wide median and a parallel bikeway and walkway.
The decision could come next month.


Health Debate Moves Forward On Rocky Path
Through the grinding labors of its committees, Congress is on track to meet a critical deadline of July 4 for drafting national health insurance legislation.
But its struggles underline just how difficult reaching agreement will be.
As one committee after another clears -- or perhaps just runs through -- its hurdles, Congress is making progress without coming closer together.
The leaders of both parties insist that they want bipartisan agreement, but they insist even more firmly that the legislation must meet their political bottom line.
The Democrats demand insurance for all Americans; the Republicans reject what many of them concede is the only plausible way of getting there, a requirement for employers to pay most of the cost.


Pain, Justice and the Workplace
To the Editor:
The article dealing with repetitive strain disorders will surely find its way into legal briefs on behalf of victims who seek relief from their pain.
But while it alludes to the many legal actions under way because of this ailment, it neglects to credit the legal profession for providing victims an opportunity to enjoy a fruitful life.


Muriel E. Smyth Geoffrey Young
Muriel Elizabeth Smyth, the daughter of Mrs.
John G. Crommelin 4th of Atlanta and Charles D. Smyth Jr. of Jacksonville, Fla., was married yesterday to Geoffrey Preston Young, a son of Mrs.
Edward A. Davis Jr. of Thomasville, Ga., and Hillyer M. Young of Atlanta.
The Rev.
Richard A. Nussel, a Methodist minister, officiated at the First United Methodist Church in Starke, Fla.
The Rev.
Frederick A. Buechner, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Young, 24, graduated from Georgia Southern University.
She is a clerk at Macy's in Atlanta.
Her father owns Cypress Business Forms in Jacksonville.
Her mother, Wendie Crommelin, retired as a municipal bond saleswoman at Kemper Securities, in Atlanta.


A KILLER IN THE EYE
I was moved by Roger Rosenblatt's article on the Rwandan refugees at the Benaco camp, and the accompanying photographs by Sebastiao Salgado ("A Killer in the Eye," June 5).


Neighborhood Rivals: Belgians Beat Dutch
As the resurrected rivalry between Belgium and the Netherlands spun into the final moments, the drama of their 117th meeting, the first on the global stage of the World Cup finals, was reduced to a simple factor today.
Even as their first meeting in seven years passed into the timelessness of injury time, the difference remained clear, even for American hosts who may not know the difference between a sweeper and a vacuum cleaner.
"The keeper who can keep the zero is very happy," Michel Preud'homme said.


SMOKING TOAD
We have reached the last stages of the Roman Empire when the venerable New York Times squanders two pages on a rather anomic writer's drug trip ("Smoking Toad," by Larry Gallagher, June 5).
Ethics?
Personal safety?
Consequences?
Not one line on that stuff.
DIANE RAY Issaquah, Wash.


Police Academy for South Bronx Moves Ahead, on Paper
The long effort to build a police academy in the South Bronx reached a milestone last week when Mayor Giuliani, under pressure from Bronx officials and black and Hispanic Council members from around the city, restored money to pay for the initial stages of the project.
But the academy's future still hangs in abeyance.
The new budget approved by the City Council early Thursday morning included only $11 million for design work on the new eight-story academy at 153d Street and Park Avenue, but no one at this point can say when the city will be able to come up with the $138 million to build the project.


Sondheim Revisited In 'Side By Side'
ISN'T it time to put "Side by Side by Sondheim" aside?
The 1976 musical grab bag is diluted by Stephen Sondheim's prodigious output since then: "Sweeney Todd," "Merrily We Roll Along," "Sunday in the Park with George," "Into the Woods," "Assassins" and the current "Passion."
Not that the material included here is less than terrific.
It is culled from "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum," "Anyone Can Whistle," "A Little Night Music," "Company," "Follies" and "Pacific Overtures," just to mention the complete scores.
It's that the show has taken on the patina of a faded promo, especially in the streamlined though long and lusterless version being produced by Theaterfest at Montclair State University.


A HOME FOR ANTHONY
The only significant difference I could see between Anthony's treatment in this group residence and in the institution where he spent many years is that he has not been beaten up on Highland Road.
The fact that he is now "allowed" to go out at night for a slice of pizza, and is told he must leave the house from 9 to 3 each day, speaks more to me of institutionalization than of adult freedom and dignity.
ROBERTA VORSPAN LYNCH Brooklyn


At Work; Wired for the Revolution
OWING purely to a shock of hair that grows straight up off his forehead and marches backward in controlled profusion, Tom Rielly bears a loose resemblance to the Beavis half of MTV's heavy-metal philosophes.
At 30, he is demographically suited for devotion to the duo.
But when he opens his mouth, the resemblance ends.
Mr.
Rielly indicates no familiarity with frogs or baseball.
He never goes "heh, heh, heh."
Rather, he talks fervently of bringing together his work as a computer executive and his politics with the founding of Digital Queers, a group dedicated to promoting gay and lesbian workplace concerns while using its members' skills and connections to build a high-tech infrastructure for gay America.


From Society Era, With Lower Prices
THE Montauk Yacht Club was once the playground of New York society.
It was frequented by the Vanderbilts, Astors and Whitneys.
Even when the club became a hotel and restaurant, a blueblood's bank account would have come in handy.
This year that and a number of other things have changed.
The waterfront spot has new management and is called the Montauk Resort and Marina.
Ziegfield's restaurant is now the Lighthouse Grill.
The most welcome new wrinkle is its more affordable prices.
Five years ago at Ziegfield's there were audible gasps at the $34 price tag for an a la carte veal chop.
Today the Lighthouse Grill offers a spectacular four-course sunset meal for $20 before 7 P.M. or $28 after that hour.


June 19-25; From 0 to 66 Megahertz in No Time at All
YOU can never be too rich or too thin or, some say, have too much processing power in your computer.
But on the last point, some people will try.
"I need a faster motherboard, I need a bigger chip, more memory, bigger, better, faster," Alex Baker, an electronics technician who lives in Sacramento, Calif., said, teasing himself.
Mr.
Baker owns six computers, the most recent a 486-chip machine (pretty smart) running at 66 megahertz (pretty fast).
But it is, alas, last year's model in I.B.M.-style computers, a step behind the new Pentium (smarter and faster), which he covets.
But the cost of a new computer, Mr.
Baker's wife has informed him, will include child support, because she will leave him.
So he is holding off, for now.


Pain, Justice and the Workplace
To the Editor:
Your article told the story of the obstacles facing workers with repetitive strain disorders and other related injuries.
While the article discussed the various complications caused by these workplace injuries, it did not offer solutions for putting people back to work.


Rachel Gerstenhaber, Alexander Stern
Rachel Rebecca Gerstenhaber, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Murray Gerstenhaber of Merion, Pa., is to be married today to Alexander Franz Stern, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul G. Stern of Potomac, Md.
Rabbi Henry Cohen is to officiate at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.
The bride, a law clerk to Chancellor William T. Allen of the Delaware Court of Chancery in Wilmington, is to become an associate in September at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received a master's degree in art history from the University of London and a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.


Saudi Team Defies Odds With Upset Of Morocco
Before the World Cup began, oddsmakers had made Saudi Arabia the longest shot to win at 500 to 1.
The Saudis, after all, had never qualified for a World Cup.
Their country is a vast sandbox, with grass soccer fields plopped down in selected cities only in the last two decades.
Their players compete professionally in a league so young and parochial that it barely qualifies as professional in caliber -- a league for which Muslim clergymen had to give permission for the men to play in shorts.


SUNDAY, June 26, 1994; Not So Famous
Internet addresses may be chic, but judging by "E-Mail Addresses of the Rich and Famous," Seth Godin's handy little paperback from Addison-Wesley ($7.95), cybersociety has not arrived.
The book contains just under a thousand names, but few of them are rich, and very few famous.
Bill Gates is included, but the book's list of C.E.O.'s is very thin, and almost all are in the computer business.
As for fame, you'll look in vain for Madonna or any really big sports or movie stars.
Rush Limbaugh and Garrison Keillor (both included) are about the best.
On the other hand, "Rich and Famous" provides E-mail connections for almost every fishing magazine, from Pennsylvania Angler to The Florida Fisherman.
And it does raise one question: Why do the E-mail addresses of so many Canadian Government officials end in @chicken.planet.org?


Manager's Profile
Hugh F. Denison  Fund: Heartland Value Fund, $265 million in assets.
Co-manager since 1988. (Sponsor: Heartland Advisors, Milwaukee.)


Holly Milton, Erik Synnestvedt
Anne Hollingsworth Milton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Milton Jr., was married yesterday to Erik Field Synnestvedt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jared N. Synnestvedt.
The Rev.
Katherine Warner, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the White HartInn in Salisbury, Conn.
The bride, 25, is known as Holly.
She and her husband graduated from Wesleyan University.
She was until recently a sales and marketing assistant at the Immunex Corporation, a pharmaceutical company in Seattle.


Corrections
A review on May 22 about "Masters of American Sculpture: The Figurative Tradition From the American Renaissance to the Millennium," by Donald Martin Reynolds, misstates the race of the sculptor Charles Parks.
A reader's letter received in mid-June points out that Mr.
Parks is white, though his works in the book portray black people.


The Benefits Accruing From AIDS Charity
Many of us, volunteers and professionals alike, involved with AIDS service organizations were stunned by the article about Deanna Annis.
In our personal experience Ms.
Annis has proved to be a generous, dedicated and hard worker for the AIDS cause.
Perhaps she should have paid more attention to appearances, but she was occupied with the more immediate job of raising money for an urgent cause.
One shouldn't have to expend all that effort and energy worrying about how actions will be perceived, when that energy is better spent on searching for solutions.
Most really honest people in our world are so innocent that, like Desdemona, they don't concern themselves with appearances.
Realities, trying to get the job done, as Ms.
Annis has done on countless occasions, should take precedence.


A Rising Star Looks Toward Congress
Charles Millard marched with his parents for civil rights, served as a Vista volunteer in Crown Heights and fought for human rights in Chile.
He rails against "the influence of hate-mongers in the Republican Party, the rise of the Christian Coalition and the nomination of Oliver North." And, as a Councilman representing Manhattan's East Side, he dissented when Mayor Giuliani proposed cutting the budget for youth services and when the Mayor declined to discipline aggressively an appointee who made anti-gay remarks.
"All that leads you to think: 'Great. Liberal Democrat,' " Mr.
Millard said.
"I don't think liberal is an insult, but where I part company is on the solutions. I'm not a free-market ideologue, but if the best social program is jobs, I'm pro-jobs. And the private sector creates jobs better than government."


Gloria Steinem's Opinion
To the Editor:
After reading Derek Bickerton's review of three books on biology and evolution (May 22), I was bemused by the quotation from Gloria Steinem in the review of her book: "Biology can be used to prove anything."  GABRIEL AUSTIN  New York


Founder of AIDS Gala Responds to Reports
In response to "AIDS Group Splits on Gala After Founder Takes a Salary"  [ June 12 ] , I founded Sunday by the Bay in 1987 along with my husband, Dr.
Jonathan Annis, and co-founders Don Hall and Robert Starr.
Our first benefit, on July 19, 1987, attracted approximately 1,000 people and raised $118,000.
The fashion show that year was a makeshift runway on the grass under a tent the size of our 1993 food tent.
There would have been no silent auction that year if it wasn't for a friend from Boston, Ms.
Gail Paul, who was up with me at 5 A.M. frantically tacking small bags to long tables and cutting up pieces of paper for people to write in their silent bids.


A Reconditioned East Side G. O. P. Flexes Its Muscles
Last week, in the busy, final days of budget negotiations, Mayor Giuliani's chief deputy, Peter Powers, found the time to talk with Councilman Charles Millard.
The East Side Republican urged the Mayor to moderate taxes on co-ops and condos, narrowing the gap with single-family homes.
A day or two later, the proposed tax for a typical apartment was cut $78.
The Mayor's office says the contacts were crucial.


Politics Aside, a Shared Passion for the Game
The soccer ball traveled a short, perfect arc from parking spot 545 to parking spot 638.
The spontaneous cross was initiated with a quick, precise flick by a Moroccan senior citizen and was received with a subtle shifting of the chest by a 14-year-old from New Jersey.
Not a bad cultural exchange.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PSYCHOLOGY  NO ONE SAW MY PAIN  Why Teens Kill Themselves.
By Andrew E. Slaby  and Lili Frank Garfinkel.
Norton, $23.


It Takes More Than a Visa to Do Business in Mexico
SELDOM do either marriages or business alliances develop without crises.
Still, when Corning and the giant Mexican glass manufacturer Vitro made a cross-border alliance two and a half years ago, it seemed a blessed union.
"Vitro and Corning share a customer-oriented philosophy and remarkably similar corporate cultures" -- that was the enthusiastic toast offered at the time by Julio Escamez, a Vitro executive.
Both companies had long histories of successful joint ventures, both were globally oriented and both had founding families still at their centers.


Gay Clubs Take to the Streets With Tailfins and 2-Tone Paint
THE slogan of Great Autos of Yesteryear, a gay car club in Southern California with 800 members, is "Out of the garage -- into the streets." In the last two decades, gay men who are old-car enthusiasts have done just that across the United States, forming one national and at least four regional clubs.
These groups have a total membership of about 2,500, a mere blip when compared with, say, the 57,000 members of the Antique Automobile Club of America.
In the old-car hobby, clubs with very specific interests are not unusual.
Consider, for example, the National Woodie Club or the Studebaker Drivers Club.


The World; The Nafta Report: Windy, Chance of Greenspan
Six months after the North American Free Trade Agreement took effect, there has been no giant sucking sound of jobs going south of the Rio Grande.
Actually, the loudest sound emitted by Nafta is a sort of "whoosh" of hot air, as the inflated predictions that Nafta would bring down 10 plagues on the American work force have been deflated by reality.
Oh, there is another noise out there, but not one that anyone predicted when Nafta was hotly debated last fall.


Three-Ring Fire
MASTERS OF ILLUSION By Mary-Ann Tirone Smith. 210 pp. New York: Warner Books. $21.95.


Mullen Takes What Penguins Offer
Penguins right wing JOE MULLEN has reluctantly agreed to a contract extension of one year.
Neither the team nor Mullen's agent, LARRY RAUCH, would disclose the amount.
Mullen had signed a two-year, $1.6 million contract after knee surgery in 1992, and the Penguins exercised an option on that deal Friday. (AP)


Interface; An Exercise in Jetsonian Democracy
AND now comes Disney World for the wired generation.
Hoping to update the earnest-science-teacher image of its Epcot Center, Walt Disney World is about to open an exposition called Innoventions, a showcase of consumer electronics and creature comforts from the near future.


Art for Everyone's Sake
VISIONS OF THE MODERN By John Golding.
Illustrated. 368 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press. $35.


On a Hazy Day of Summer


Bites on Broadway: Food as Theater
CAFE UN DEUX TROIS * (212) 354-4148; 123 West 44th Street; $$; all major credit cards
For its reliably animated atmosphere and straightforward bistro fare, this cavernous spot continues to be one of the better bets for theater-district dining.
The short regular menu is supplemented by many daily specials.
Among current appetizers are baked snails in garlic and butter, pate de campagne and mixed greens tossed in a good vinaigrette.
For main courses, steak au poivre is always pleasing.
Other dishes include roast chicken with french fries, a notable, slightly spicy steak tartare and calves liver with grilled onions.
On the lighter side, try the Nicoise salad, with tuna, green beans, potatoes and more, or the assembly of greens, apples, walnuts and Roquefort. (Review: 4/5/91)  CARMINE'S * (212) 221-3800; 200 West 44th Street; $; American Express
This family-style Italian restaurant is the sister establishment of the original Carmine's on the Upper West Side.
The room is done in sandy tones and dark wood trim with stock publicity photos adorning the walls, overhead fans and neighborly tables.
Portions are so stupendous that most patrons share, resulting in an average check of about $20 a person.
Among popular starters are tasty baked clams and crunchy calamari deep-fried in a peppery batter and served with tomato sauce on the side.
Colossal entrees include rigatoni with fennel sausage and broccoli in a sweet tomato sauce; a 36-ounce porterhouse steak under a sauce of tomatoes, onions and sweet peppers; a 20-ounce swordfish steak with tomato, basil, capers and black olives, and chicken scarpariello with onions and fennel sausage. (Review: 9/25/92)  CENTURY CAFE ** (212) 398-1988; 132 West 43d Street; $$; all major credit cards
This friendly cafe has an airy, casual feel with its sky-blue ceiling, hardwood floor, theatrical track lighting, long green banquettes and paper-draped tables.
The menu, an engaging mix of contemporary American fare, features appetizers like grilled Louisiana prawns with a toasted sesame dressing; a fish and crabmeat soup with chives; asparagus risotto, and losbter salad with braised artichokes tossed in a mango and sweet pepper dressing.
For main courses, grilled marinated salmon in Moroccan spices is served with saffron couscous and grilled asparagus flavored with a shellfish vinaigrette; pan-seared tuna is topped with a mixture of crushed coriander, roasted pine nuts and sun-dried tomatoes.
Starting at 8 o'clock nightly, the restaurant promotes some 80 wines from all over the world by selling them at a dollar over cost. (Review: 9/11/92)  CHEZ JOSEPHINE ** (212) 594-1925; 414 West 42d Street; $$; all major credit cards
At any hour on any night, this bistro dedicated to Josephine Baker is a kinetic party overseen by Jean-Claude Baker, an incessant storyteller and one of the unofficially adopted sons of the 30's chanteuse.
Musicians of all types, some from Broadway and Off Broadway shows, drop in nightly and often find themselves behind Mr.
Baker's grand piano.
The French-American menu offers a beguiling selection.
Current appetizers include endive salad with Roquefort and walnuts, and Chinese-style ravioli with goat cheese, fresh herbs and roasted pignoli nuts.
Among main courses are a first-rate boudin noir (blood sausage) with red cabbage, onions and sauteed apples; cassoulet of lobster, shrimp, scallops and seafood sausage with black beans in a shellfish broth, and "Elvira's down-home fried chicken," with sweet potato fries and cornbread. (Review: 6/22/90; revisited: 6/23/94)  LA RESERVE ***  (212) 247-2993; 4 West 49th Street; $$$; all major credit cards
Inside this sumptuous and serene establishment, large colorful murals depict a marshy wildlife reserve.
The main dining room is cozily upholstered, spacious and softly lighted.
The cooking of Dominique Peyraudeau, the chef, is classically rooted, but with a light touch.
On the current list of appetizers are a terrine of game studded with pistachios and hazelnuts; lobster and sweetbreads in a white port aspic; dill-marinated salmon and scallops with a drizzle of olive oil, and chicken consomme with wild mushrooms.
Entrees include grilled snapper with tomatoes, olives and capers; salmon paillard with sorrel sauce; rack of lamb in a mustard crust; roast duck served with a chocolate and kumquat sauce, and veal medallions with rosemary and a ragout of morel mushrooms. (Review: 5/1/92)  LATTANZI * (212) 315-0980; 361 West 46th Street; $$; American Express
This simply decorated spot with exposed brick walls and small hanging lights turns out an array of zestily seasoned pastas and grilled entrees.
For starters, baby artichokes prepared in the style of the Jewish quarter in Rome are delicious in golden-green olive oil pungent with garlic.
There is also a salmon carpaccio with lemon and olive oil, and slices of fresh mozzarella with tomatoes and basil.
Tomato sauce, in various guises, is common to many of the dishes; a notable rendition is the lightly spiced sauce with capers and browned nuggets of chicken in the pollo capriccioso.
Other choices include stuffed tortelloni with veal and chicken in marinara sauce; cappellini primavera, with its well-cooked vegetables; veal scallopine topped with mushrooms and marsala wine sauce, and grilled lamb chops. (Review: 6/23/89; revisited: 5/93) ORSO ** (212) 489-7212; 322 West 46th Street; $$; Mastercard, Visa
This spiffy, upbeat trattoria with a large skylight in the rear dining room knows how to cater to the theater crowd.
The engaging menu changes daily, ranging from such light selections as salads, zesty thin-crusted pizzas and grilled seafoods to more substantial fare.
Typical appetizers are bruschetta; carpaccio of marinated salmon; dandelion and white anchovy salad; warm porcini and white bean salad with tomatoes, and a half dozen varieties of individual pizza.
On the main-course list are a risotto of green peas, taleggio and mascarpone cheeses; rigatoni with eggplant, zucchini and tomato; sauteed calves liver with onions and bacon; grilled soft shell crabs with a salad of orange, radicchioand red onion, and rosemary-roasted chicken with lemon. (Review: 6/4/93) Bistro Classic  PIERRE AU TUNNEL * (212) 575-1220; 250 West 47th Street; $$; all major cards
This bistro serves dependable peasant-style dishes and Gallic classics in a warm and homey setting.
Among starters are a light and vivid scallop mousse glossed with chive butter; salmon and sole terrine with a tomato-basil coulis, and a goat cheese, arugula and endive salad.
Main-course options on the current menu include grilled tuna with a reduction of Xeres wine vinegar and a saute of zucchini, tomato and onions; roast duck with an apple-orange sauce, roasted cabbage and baked apple, and lamb chop with a potato gratin. (Review: 11/8/91)
Summaries of reviews use the star system; others are culled from articles (indicated by +), the $25 and Under column (++) and Diner's Journal (


'Remember Jackie Fondly'
To the Editor:
I was shocked that you would publish such a mean-spirited article as Gwenda Blair's on Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.


The World: Prosperity in Israel; Rich Is One Thing. Happy Is Another.
Their Prime Minister warned last week of possible war with Syria and most people are nervous about where, exactly, they are headed with the Palestinians.
But for all the jitters, Israelis in many respects have never had it so good.
Collectively, they are richer than ever.
The per capita gross domestic product is about $13,000, well ahead of southern European countries like Greece and Portugal.
Increasingly, they drive big Volvos and BMW's.
Their supermarkets and shopping malls are filled with varieties of goods unimaginable only a few years ago.


Lara B. Schefler, W. D. McLanahan
Lara Brook Schefler, a daughter of Mrs.
Edward V. Mele of Barneveld, N.Y., and Arno Schefler of Aspen, Colo., was married yesterday to William Duer McLanahan, a son of Mrs.
Duer McLanahan of New York and the late Mr.
McLanahan.
The Rev.
Peter Larsen, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's Dune Church in Southampton, L.I.
Mrs.
McLanahan, 26, is also a stepdaughter of Edward V. Mele.
She is the show administrator at the Association of Independent Commercial Producers, a trade association in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is an art dealer in New York and Aspen.
Her mother, Robbin Bain Mele, is the vice president of the Central New York Arts Council in Utica, N.Y.


Disco-Skating Crackdown: Like Cutting Off Oxygen
To the Editor:
One of the main reasons I came here from Los Angeles is that my block, home and business were burned down during the riots.
I thought moving to New York would mean a better quality of life.
One of my real pleasures here has been the roller-skating area near the volleyball courts in Central Park.
But the police crackdown on the amplified music played there, reported in the article "Skate Around but Tone it Down" on June 12, has been a disheartening experience.


Where, When in a Season of Music
SUMMER music festival time has arrived.
Mozart and Mahler are once again mingling with the sounds of the outdoors, in venues ranging from a mountaintop to a tented Venetian theater.
Music lovers can explore the intricacies of the string quartet in an intimate 1934 concert hall built to resonate like the interior of a violin, enjoy ragtime and spirituals in Waterford, or be blown away by the Boston Symphony at full throttle in Tchaikovsky's "1812 Overture."


THE LOST QUAYLE DIARIES
Holy wow, Maureen Dowd (On Washington: "The Lost Quayle Diaries," May 29).
Is it Bash Quayle Week again so soon?
There you go with that lampoon of his diaristic maniere.
Isn't it enough that, with his own recent book as ammo, he shot himself in the foot, all the way up to the coccyx?


Qing Zhao, Averell Satloff
Qing Zhao, a daughter of Kang Zhao and Ping Wong Zhao of Qiqihar, China, was married on Thursday to Averell W. Satloff, the son of Rita Satloff Jacobs of Greensboro, N.C., and the late Max M. Satloff.
Cantor Dan Rous performed the ceremony at the Beekman Towers in New York.
Mrs.
Satloff graduated from the Beijing Foreign Language Institute.
Her father, a former chief director of the China Railway Ministry in Qiqihar, is an adviser to the agency.
Her mother is the assistant manager of health and medical research at the same ministry.


Switch by Plot Figure
The man accused of being the ringleader in a terrorist conspiracy to bomb New York City landmarks and assassinate public officials has dismissed his lawyers, and they said he was apparently becoming a witness for the prosecution.
The move would be a major coup for the Government.
Article, page 23.


The Economy Will Work Its Way Out of This; Misleading Data
To the Editor:
What amazes me is that "The Job-Killer Policy," Bob Herbert's June 8 column on the loss of jobs in America, and the concern with an invisible inflation, is so atypical today.
If anything, I suspect that the job picture will emerge as one of the penultimate challenges facing our society in this decade.
The fact is that the employment picture is suffused with misleading data that either misstate or obfuscate the real issue.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SHOW BUSINESS  SO FAR, SO GOOD  A Memoir. By Burgess Meredith. Little, Brown, $22.95.


Miss Timmerman And Mr. Cleary
Nancy Ellen Timmerman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew R. Timmerman of Cooperstown, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Thomas James Cleary, a son of Peter J. Cleary of Glen Ridge, N.J., and Mrs.
Leonard F. Reiter of Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Douglas C. Smith performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Cleary, 29, is a sales assistant for Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a salesman with the New York Central Mutual Insurance Company of Edmeston, N.Y.


FLAWS ARE FOUND IN CONTRACT PLAN TO AID MINORITIES
New York City's ambitious effort to steer more city contracts to companies owned by women or minorities has been marred by faulty bookkeeping and the use of companies whose real control is unclear, an analysis of scores of contracts shows.
In a three-month examination of 56 companies that received most of the large construction contracts under the program, The New York Times found that 9 companies, or 16 percent, have strong business and personal ties to white businessmen, casting doubt on their claims to be independently owned and controlled by women or minorities.


After Stonewall: Pride and Prejudice
The gay rights movement began in earnest 25 years ago, when police raided the Stonewall Inn, a cross-dressers' bar in Greenwich Village.
The raid led to a small but fierce riot -- prominently featuring men in drag -- followed by three days of civil disobedience in the streets.
Stonewall showed gay men and lesbians that they needed to organize for political action and demonstrations, like the march today in New York that commemorates that evening 25 years ago.


Agendas Are Critical
To the Editor:
As a management consultant serving professional service organizations and corporations for 28 years, it has been my experience that open-space meetings ("Round-Table Meetings With No Agendas, No Tables," June 5) in which participants decide what to talk about in a format that creates a coffee-break atmosphere without prepared agendas have been rejected by the majority of our clients.
Most find that such meetings reinforce the tyranny of the articulate minority, fail to encourage participation by all concerned and waste too much time getting started rather than addressing management's core reasons for having the meeting.


Minimalism, and After That
THE English critic Roger Fry may have started a fashion when, in 1910, he bestowed the descriptive Post-Impressionist on a group of French painters who in fact had little in common but the desire to react against Impressionism.
Now, at the century's end, there are "posts" galore, lined up like so many question marks.
Chances are, the Phoenix that is culture will renew itself on schedule, but not without outside help.


Tamar Ben-Dov, Seth Brufsky
Tamar Dorcas Ben-Dov, a daughter of Laurine Hawkins Ben-Dov of New York and Zohar Ben-Dov of Middleburg, Va., was married last evening to Seth Jonathan Brufsky, a son of Allen and Ruth Brufsky of Weston, Conn.
Rabbi Dennis Roth officiated at the Meeting House in New Marlboro, Mass.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Recalled Jerry DiPoto, pitcher, from Charlotte of the International League.
Placed Steve Farr, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


The Newest Dare: Legs, Uncovered
This is a great month for legs -- smooth, tanned from weekends at the beach or just glowing with a healthy natural color.
.
Did someone say natural?
Fashionable legs have been shrouded in dark hose for so long that most women have forgotten that legs used to be seen as part of you, and not an extension of what you wear.


A Single Shopper Feels Lost In the Land of Family-Size
To the Editor:
I wholeheartedly agree with Melissa Bell's June 19 letter, "Beyond the Supermarket: Shopping in Hell's Kitchen," as regards the flaws of those cavernous supermarkets with their "car-sized shopping carts" outside the city.
I have just returned from two weeks in rural Indiana.
As a single person, I realized I was spoiled by New York shopping.
Out there, most produce is packaged "family size," including the meat.
The sirloin tip roast I bought, which cost more than it would have at my butcher shop on Second Avenue, provided several meals for me; the rest went to friends, a retired couple, and it provided several meals for them as well.


Katharine Legg, David Seifman
Katharine Stewart Legg, the executive director of the Spence-Chapin Services to Families and Children in Manhattan, and David Seifman, the City Hall bureau chief for The New York Post, are to be married today .
Justice Leonard Scholnick of the State Supreme Court in Brooklyn is to officiate at the Hudson River Club in the World Financial Center.
The bride, a daughter of Mrs.
John P. Traugott of Riverside, Conn., and Elmo Legg of Los Angeles, graduated from Connecticut College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a former executive deputy commissioner of the New York City Human Resources Administration.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Marathon and Ceremony Bring Gay Games to Close
The fourth Gay Games drew to an ebullient close yesterday as 750 runners slogged through a humid marathon in Central Park, thousands of athletes and spectators thronged into Yankee Stadium for a Olympic-style closing ceremony and Greenwich Village was transformed into a giddy, glittering festival of homosexuality.
"This is exactly what I was hoping for: it's one big gay world," said Caity Mahoney, a 21-year-old lesbian student who arrived yesterday from Baltimore, as she took snapshots of friends in front of the Stonewall Inn, the shrine of the gay-rights movement on Sheridan Square.


Group Bumped: Tale and a Moral
ON March 7, the night before he was to lead 31 people on a two-week educational trip to Brazil, John E. Sykes of College Station, Tex., got a call from his longtime travel agent saying the party had been bumped off the flight from Miami to Manaus in Amazonia.
It was the stuff of nightmares for Mr.
Sykes, who planned the trip as a windup to a two-year cycle of a nonprofit program called Texas Agricultural Lifetime Leadership, or TALL.
Mr.
Sykes spent the night on the phone to no avail.
The group left the next day anyway, taking a 15-hour detour of 3,500 miles, longer than a New York-San Francisco trip, traveling from Miami to Manaus via Rio de Janeiro.
With stops and plane changes, the group arrived not at midnight but late the following day.
In addition to arriving worn out, the group lost a day of the tour and the cost of a day's lodging, which had been booked separately.


Mr. Stevenson, Miss Farmanfarmaian
Roxane Farmanfarmaian, the daughter of Manucher Farman Farmaian of Caracas, Venezuela, and Verla Gean Farman Farmaian of Salt Lake City, was married yesterday to John Reese Stevenson Jr., the son of Mr.
Stevenson of Washington and the late Patricia F. Stevenson.
The Rev.
Dr.
Herbert B. Andersen performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Brick Church Chapel in New York.
The bride, a cum laude graduate of Princeton University, is a writer.
She and her father are preparing his memoirs, to be published next year by Random House.
A former Iranian Ambassador to Venezuela, her father was a signer of the agreement that created the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in 1960.
Her mother, who is retired, was an elementary-school teacher in Salt Lake City.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Superstores Fueling Quest for Books
THE sea change taking place in bookselling across the country was happening here, too, at Encore Books last week, as Lisa Singer hurried to the checkout counter with an armload of children's books and Louis Perri tarried in the aisles of the new fiction section.
Mrs.
Singer, a homemaker from New Rochelle who was buying books for her daughter, said she was becoming a regular at the so-called superstore, lured by the vast selection of titles and the steep discounts on most books.


And The Truth Set Her Free (Albeit Naked)
AT THE CENTER OF "THE NAKED Truth," Paul Rudnick's satiric new comedy at the WPA Theater, stands the commanding figure of Nan Bemiss, an upper-middle-class New York society woman.
You know the type: Dina Merrill has played her in movies, sometimes for laughs, sometimes as the ferocious other woman.
Nan is Greenwich born, Republican bred, an indefatigable doer of good works and perfectly groomed.
She looks so bright, shiny and hard that she seems not only to have been washed and set at Elizabeth Arden's, but also glazed like a ham.
As played by Mary Beth Peil with strategically funny abandon, her forehead often furrowed, Nan is the sympathetic, questing innocent in "The Naked Truth." She's also a most unlikely equivalent to the youngish title character in "Jeffrey," Mr.
Rudnick's award-winning hit comedy about gay romance in the time of AIDS.
Both Nan and Jeffrey yearn for sexual freedom though she, being older and far prissier, doesn't even know what she's missing, at least at first.


Tintoretto Recalled In His Home Town
The 400th anniversary of the death of Jacopo Robusti, better known as Tintoretto, is being commemorated in Venice this year with a map outlining a walking tour and a special exhibition of his work.
Tintoretto was born in Venice in 1518, died in the city on May 31, 1594, and, except for a brief period in Mantua from 1590 and 1593 lived and painted exclusively there.


A 19th-Century Touch At a Dairy in Peekskill
THERE isn't a cow anywhere in sight at Egg Farm Dairy, a modern industrial park by the shores of the Hudson River here, but that doesn't stop Jonathan White and his crew from producing the kinds of dairy products that any 19th-century farmer's wife would recognize as one of her own.
At the dairy, which opened two months ago, Mr.
White transforms the raw milk he buys from a Dutchess County farmer into cultured butter (made from cultured cream, unlike regular butter, which is made from sweet cream), ripened cheeses and clabbered cream, a European type of sour cream, which is closer to France's creme fraiche than to the products found in most supermarket dairy sections.


Update; Award Is Upheld for Worker Exposed to Cigarette Smoke
New York State's highest court has upheld a workers' compensation award to a former New York City employee whose asthma was aggravated by second-hand cigarette smoke.
Terry O'Brien, a spokesman for the State Attorney General, said the award, upheld unanimously by the Court of Appeals on Tuesday, was the first one in the state in which an on-the-job injury from second-hand smoke qualified for workers' compensation.


Cindy Lombardi, David C. Hespe
Cindy Ann Lombardi, a research associate at the New Jersey Office of Legislative Services in Trenton, is to be married today to David Christopher Hespe, an assistant counsel to Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey.
The Rev.
Dr.
Wilbur H. Graffam is to perform the nondenominational ceremony at the Manor in West Orange, N.J.


New Unit Using Drug Arrests to Crack Murders
In the steamy afternoon heat, a tall man with his shirt stuffed in his back pocket sized up a potential customer on a street corner in the Bronx, decided he was not an undercover police officer and slipped him five little bags of cocaine.
He had made a mistake.


Who Else Would Name a Foundation for a Roadie?
THE COMPOSER ROBERT Simpson has garnered great praise but little support during his long career, a predicament that has left many of his works unrecorded.
"It's Simpson's luck," he says.
"What's Simpson's luck? It's bad luck." So he was "marvelously astonished" when he received a $10,000 money order from some outfit in America called the Rex Foundation.
"My agent said they were associated with an American music group called the Grateful Dead," recalls the 73-year-old composer, who used the grant to help record his Ninth Symphony.
"I laughed and said, 'Good heavens, only someone with a name like that would want to help me.' "


Correction
A picture last Sunday showing the American Museum of Natural History in 1890 carried an erroneous credit.
The photograph was supplied by the museum.


Leslie Severinghaus; Headmaster Was 94
Leslie R. Severinghaus, former headmaster of Haverford School in Pennsylvania, died on Wednesday at his home in Coconut Grove, Fla.
He was 94.
The cause was heart failure, said a daughter, Elizabeth Warner of Osterville, Mass.


Giants' Quarterback Worry: A Child (Well, Almost) Will Lead Them
There is something medieval about the place where the Giants practice these days: their field adjacent to Giants Stadium is surrounded by turreted white tents and banners, a paean to the World Cup soccer being played next door.
And the Giants themselves are playing out one of the oldest, and most captivating, stories in football: the battle for the starting spot between two young quarterbacks.


Identity Crisis


Cheryl Baity, Celso Gonzalez-Falla
Cheryl Robinson Baity, the daughter of Bette Jean Plant and the stepdaughter of David W. Plant of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Celso Miguel Gonzalez-Falla, a son of Celso Gonzalez-Falla of Corpus Christi, Tex., and the late Marylis Rodriguez y Gonzalez.
The Rev.
Howard B. Major 3d performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in Rye.
Mrs.
Gonzalez-Falla is a national account representative for Pitney Bowes Business Systems in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her mother retired as the director of special events at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx.
The bride's stepfather is a partner in the law firm of Fish &amp; Neave in New York.
Her father, John C. Baity of Greenwich, Conn., is a partner in the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy.


Afro Days Are Here Again
A few months ago, a 23-year-old black graduate student from Long Beach, Calif., took the impossibly long walk out to center stage of the Apollo Theater in Harlem, an arena littered with more bones of the weak of heart and talent than the Roman Colosseum.
And then, with a poem, no less -- no band, no dancers, no deejay -- the student, who calls himself only D-Knowledge, alternately charmed, tickled and moved an audience in a theater famous for its skeptical audiences.
On this night, the crowd seemed to cling to his every intonation about, no less, being black in the 1970's.


Dole, Campaigning From Afar, Wins an Early Republican Straw Poll in Iowa
Seven years ago, Senator Bob Dole was so eager to win the Iowa straw poll of Republican Presidential contenders, a quadrennial rite of politics, that he arranged for buses to deliver his supporters to the event.
He finished second, behind Pat Robertson.
This weekend, Mr.
Dole tried a new strategy.
No buses.
No free beer.
In fact, the Senator from nearby Kansas, pleading a prior commitment, did not even show up (except on new lapel pins).
He finished first.


Ms. Blumenthal, Mr. Mercado Jr.
Juli Lyn Blumenthal, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Blumenthal of Hooksett, N.H., is to be married today to Antonio Mercado Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mercado of Howell, N.J.
Rabbi Gordon Gladstone is to officiate at the Manor in West Orange, N.J.
The bride, 29, is a vice president and a portfolio manager at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


A Week Of Fetes And Frivolities
Groups celebrated anniversaries, raised money and honored their special friends.


Sophistication Amid the Americana
NEVER judge a restaurant by its decor alone.
If you were to peek inside the mustard-yellow clapboard house in Old Lyme that is now the Bee and Thistle Inn, you might presume that the menu would match the quietly old-fashioned Americana of the inn's two waiting parlors -- and you would be wrong.
It is surprisingly contemporary.
The decor of the two narrow glassed-in dining porches, the smaller rear porch and the main dining room does indeed suggest country inn cliches, with hanging plants and baskets, and dried herb and flower wreaths on the walls.
But a quick glance at the dinner menu suggests that there is more urbanity here than meets the eye.
And the carefully cooked, prettily garnished, superb food reveals just how sophisticated the operation is.
When you learn that Francis Brooke-Smith, the executive chef, was formerly at the elegant Copper Beech Inn in Ivoryton, the puzzle pieces fit.


Tom Skinner, 52, Minister and Trainer
The Rev.
Tom Skinner, the son of a minister who became a member of a street gang and then an evangelist known for his motivational teachings, died on June 17 at Norfolk General Hospital in Norfolk, Va.
He was 52 and had lived in Tracys Landing, Md., since 1992 and before that in midtown Manhattan.
The cause was complications related to leukemia, said his daughter Lauren Skinner.


Marv Was Indeed Marvelous, His Own Way
Marv is gone.
His gig was to claim he didn't understand why they asked him to be in those light-beer commercials, but he knew, he knew.
He never wanted to be a lovable icon of ineptitude, but after it happened, he went along with it.
He was Marvelous Marv, the ultimate Met.
By the time he died of cancer on Thursday, at the age of 60, Marvin Eugene Throneberry had accepted his place in history, the symbol of the worst team in the history of baseball, 40 wins, 120 losses and many, many laughs directed at the home team.


After the Soviet Collapse, a Deluge of Russian Opera
THE MOST IMPORTANT development in the world of opera in the last several decades has been the collapse of Communism.
The West has seen an enormous influx of talented Eastern singers and conductors, and hence a palpable shift in repertory toward the Russian.
Now that shift has begun to produce copious results in record stores, with new recordings of Russian operas from both East and West by Western labels using the latest technology.
The need for novelty remains critical in an era without popular new operas, and the Russian repertory from Glinka to Schnittke infuses accessible Western forms with a primal communal vitality.
These operas offer the sort of heady exoticism that appealed to Diaghilev's Western audiences before World War I and the same cosmic yearnings heard today in the mystical Minimalism of Eastern Europe.
Indeed, some earlier Russian operas, especially Rimsky-Korsakov's "Legend of the Invisible City of Kitezh," were powerful precursors of that transcendental tendency.


Lani Guinier's Opponents
To the Editor:
I almost never respond to reviews of my work, but Cass R. Sunstein's otherwise quite thoughtful review of my book "The Confirmation Mess" (May 22) contains two surprising statements that, singly or in combination, could badly mislead a reader about my views on some very controversial subjects.


The Benefits Accruing From AIDS Charity
I am a person living with AIDS who has benefited from funds raised in prior years by the Sunday by the Bay benefit.
I receive services from many of the agencies that have in turn received funding directly from this benefit.
It truly saddens me to see an article which is obviously geared as a personal attack on Ms.
Annis.
I consider it in very poor taste.
I personally think it is very easy to use a little energy to disparage something, instead of complimenting the vast amount of energy it takes to create something good or to bring about change.
I wish your reporter would have taken the time to inquire about some of the good things that have come from the money raised by


Street Theater
INSIDE the Cort Theater, where Anna Deavere Smith has been portraying people affected by the 1992 Los Angeles riots, it is intermission.
The lights come up.
The theater doors open.
And the audience flows out of the lobby into the night.
Immediately, the drums begin.


Yanks Get A Victory After 2-Day Swim
Friday night sloshed into this morning, the seventh inning gushed into the eighth and any potential sleep in between by either the Yankees or the Indians was disturbed by thoughts of the sloppy game that was suspended, thoughts of finally completing it and even more thoughts about the regularly scheduled game to follow it.
It was bizarre, weird and surreal today when the Yankees and Indians returned to Jacobs Field 12 hours after the series opener was suspended by a league curfew at 1:18 A.M. today to finish the last two innings.
Although Manager Buck Showalter said he did not feel comfortable leaving the stadium with a 9-5 lead after seven innings but without the victory, his comfort level improved as the Yankees survived by using three relievers to secure the final six outs and defeated the Indians, 11-6.
He grew even more comfortable as the second game was then postponed.


SUNDAY, June 26, 1994; Bombers Away!
Starting last fall, the United States began a three-and-a-half-year project to chop up 350 B-52 airplanes to comply with the original Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty.
The Air Force does the chopping at the "Bone Yards" at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base in Tucson, Ariz (above).
Since World War II, the Air Force has stored aircraft there, many of them for spare parts.
The airplane crunchers use a 13,000-pound guillotine blade dropped from a crane, and work on the B-52's on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Each plane gets four chops: nose, midsection and each wing.
The chopped planes, at the bottom of the photograph, are left in their dismembered state for 90 days so that Russia can confirm their destruction with satellite photos.
Then the planes, which cost about $64 million each to build, or $345 a pound, are sold as scrap for about 16 cents per pound.


WORLD CUP '94: Carrot-Top Defender of the U.S.; He Has a Goatee Like a Broom, but Boy Can He Body-Check
If you don't recognize the name, Alexi Lalas, you will recognize the hair.
Orange as a blow-dried sunset.
A cascading tangle of curls.
The man looks like a heavy metal Ronald McDonald.
A goatee hangs from his chin like a whisk broom.
Any longer, it would need its own grounds crew.
"I have employed a full-time staff of highly trained professionals to keep it clean," Lalas joked on a recent afternoon at the Rose Bowl, where the United States will face Romania on Sunday in the World Cup with a chance to win its group.


SUNDAY, June 26, 1994; Acting: The Shoe Method
'It is all in the shoes.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
100.55
102.70
106.25
per Dollar
German Mark
1.5835
1.6105
1.7065
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3900
1.3908
1.2820
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5525
1.5355
1.4757
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$391.00
$391.50
$375.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Tara Brandaleone and Eric Glicksman
Tara Brooke Brandaleone, a teacher at the Dalton School in New York, was married last evening to Eric E. Glicksman, an assistant vice president at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
Rabbi Richard S. Chapin performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Glicksman graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in education from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Linda Brandaleone of New York and Bruce Brandaleone of Potomac, Md.
The bride's father is the managing director and head of the equity division at Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, the Baltimore investment bank.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CIVIL WAR  CHICKAMAUGA AND CHATTANOOGA  The Battles That Doomed  the Confederacy.
John Bowers.
HarperCollins, $28.


The Benefits Accruing From AIDS Charity
I have served as the entertainment and celebrity coordinator for Sunday by the Bay for three years and was elected to the board of Stopping AIDS Together in January 1994.
I can thus state unequivocally that the article is unnecessarily sensationalist and extremely misleading.
Stopping AIDS Together has not "split." In its highly successful four-year history -- and for four years prior as P.T.A.A.A. -- Stopping AIDS Together has always had a coming and going of active members.
There was a minor reorganization of the group this year, including the election of new board members and the creation of an executive committee, which has 19 members, not three, as stated in the article.
Second, while there is no question that Ingo Thouret was an integral part of the event during his tenure, to claim that "Ingo honestly is the benefit" is absurd.
No one person is or ever has been "the benefit," -- not even Stopping AIDS Together founder and president Deanna Annis, for whom such a claim might more readily be made.
Sunday by the Bay has always been a team effort, with a core group of about 30, plus well over 100 volunteers.
And Clare Connaughton's statement -- "It really pains me not to be involved" -- is specious at best.
She never attended a meeting of Stopping AIDS Together.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Marla Rivera must deal with demon taxis, squawking horns, testy passengers.
So why is this woman smiling?
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Intermission on Broadway.
The theater doors open.
The crowd flows onto the street.
The performance begins.


A HOME FOR ANTHONY
Why isn't more attention paid to the behavior of Anthony's mother?
Your article reports instances of her hysteria and refusal to visit her son.
Winerip mentions genetics as a possible cause of Anthony's schizophrenia, but what was his life like from the day he was born?
MARGARET CLARK DRAY Corvallis, Ore.


Your Wedding
If you will settle for nothing less than 16 bridesmaids costumed at Vera Wang, a four-tier butter-cream cake and the Gipsy Kings playing while you skip the light fandango across the Rainbow Room floor with a rose clamped firmly between your teeth, stop reading.
And if your idea of a perfect wedding is a quick lunch-hour stop at City Hall followed by a pastrami on rye on the N train back to the office, you should probably put down the paper right now and do some work, even if it is Sunday.


Volunteers Track Down The Missing
SEVERAL days a week, Clara Fetzer, an uncommonly determined octogenarian, climbs two flights of stairs to a sunny Morristown office and goes about the business of finding missing people.
Miss Fetzer spends hours trying to cajole information from bureaucrats, funeral directors and others.
When she is not on the phone, Miss Fetzer fills out forms and writes letters to the people she hopes can set her on the trail of somebody's lost brother or aunt or cousin.


June 19-25; California and the Politics of Drought
Water has always been precious in California, but when agriculture was king, it always ran freely -- and almost cost-free -- to farms.
As the state has become urbanized and environmental consciousness has grown, California's priorities (and politics) have changed.
Water allocations for agriculture have been cut, and some farms, particularly in areas of the Central Valley where little rain falls and ground water is deep, are starting to dry up.
California is in the midst of another "drought watch," the result of one of the driest winters on record.
But farmers complain far more about what they perceive to be a man-made drought -- caused, they believe, by environmentalism run riot.
They complain of Federal laws like the Endangered Species Act and the Central Valley Project Improvement Act that have diverted billions of gallons once earmarked for them to rehabilitate waterways and restore the dwindling population of winter-run salmon and delta smelt.
The new rules, the farmers say, threaten to make them the endangered species.


June 19-25: Seoul's Sigh of Relief; North Korea Again Tries The Bargaining Table
From the brink of new confrontation, the United States and North Korea turned instead back to the bargaining table last week in an attempt to resolve their dispute over nuclear weapons.
As evidence of North Korean good will, Mr.
Clinton settled for little more than its promise to halt its most suspicious nuclear operations as long as the talks proceed.


Barbara Straut, G. C. Goldsmith
Barbara Sheldon Straut, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles B. Straut of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Graham Campbell Goldsmith, a son of Peter L. Goldsmith of Califon, N.J., and Margurite Eaton of Delray Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Leslie Smith performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Goldsmith, a graduate of the University of Vermont, is an assistant kindergarten teacher at the Spence School in Manhattan.


Corrections
An inventory on June 5 of military equipment carried by an average D-Day paratrooper described one item incorrectly.
It was a packet of sulfa tablets, which inhibit bacteria, not sulfur.


Pain, Justice and the Workplace
To the Editor:
The key to dealing with reflex sympathetic dystrophy syndrome is not lawsuits but a better-educated medical profession.
There is no known cure for this disorder, which is not limited to a single part of the body.
The onset of R.S.D.S. can be caused by anything from a simple finger cut from a kitchen knife to a surgical procedure -- if the surgeon does not properly administer pain-killing injections three hours before any procedure and continue the injections in the surgical area for six hours after the procedure.
Surgery to relieve repetitive strain disorders also can cause R.S.D.S if proper pre- and post-operative pain control procedures are not used.


Siobhan Murphy, Richard Zane
Dr.
Siobhan Murphy, a resident in orthopedic surgery at the University of Maryland Hospital, was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard Douglas Zane, a resident in emergency medicine at the Johns Hopkins Hospital.
Both work in Baltimore.
Judge John D'Amico of the New Jersey State Superior Court in Freehold officiated at the Monmouth Hills Clubhouse in Highlands, N.J.
Dr.
Murphy, 28, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received her medical degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Murphy of Little Silver, N.J.


A KILLER IN THE EYE
The impression we take away from Rosenblatt's article is of humanity sinking into the barbaric mire, dragged down by forces somehow wired into the genotype.
By contrast, there is only cursory mention of the widely corroborated testimony of survivors that a fanatical clique of civil-service hacks and French-armed government army regulars conspired, in a calculated attempt, to slaughter an entire people.
STEPHEN R. MORRIS New Britain, Conn.


Ireland Coach Suspended For Game
Jack Charlton, coach of the Irish team, won't be on the sideline for his team's final Group E game because he was suspended today for "unsporting conduct" after the loss to Mexico on Friday.
FIFA penalized Charlton for criticizing officials after the loss.
He also has been critical of the water provided for his players, who aren't used to such heat.


SMOKING TOAD
What was Gallagher's motive in smoking dried poison that veteran smokers were reluctant to try again?
As an example of "gonzo journalism," his article lacked depth and detail.
EZRA OGOREK Brooklyn


Phoenix House Plans a Center: All's Quiet
Six months ago, Phoenix House Foundation, the country's largest nonprofit drug abuse services agency, asked for permission to open a 200-bed treatment center and a vocational training school in a pair of buildings in Vinegar Hill.
At a time when neighborhoods are increasingly uncomfortable, even outraged, at the opening of drug treatment centers and other social welfare units in their midst, the calm response in Vinegar Hill is noteworthy.


Volunteer Advocates Helping Those in Need
LIKE many Essex County homemakers, Janet Klein and Patricia Sherman spend their days tending to the needs of children, husbands and homes.
But the women also spend several hours each week filing medical claim forms, resolving disputes with housing officials and hacking through the bureaucratic thickets that surround government entitlement programs.
Mrs.
Klein and Mrs.
Sherman are volunteers in the Friend Advocate program of the Community Health Law Project in East Orange.
Each works with a single elderly person, helping to sort through paperwork and find solutions to the problems that sometimes accompany old age and infirmity.


The Great Unknown
IN TOUCH The Letters of Paul Bowles.
Edited by Jeffrey Miller.
Illustrated. 604 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $30.
CONVERSATIONS WITH PAUL BOWLES Edited by Gena Dagel Caponi. 254 pp.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.
Cloth, $35.
Paper, $14.95.
After July 1: Cloth, $37.50.
Paper, $15.95.


Berlin Music
To the Editor: "What's Doing in Berlin" (April 10) was the tip of the iceberg, especially for music.
Although theater has been "rationalized," music is going on full-tilt as if there still were two cities: two music academies, three operas, five major symphony orchestras, etc.
As a resident of Berlin in much of the fall and winter period, I can testify to the vitality of cultural life there, especially in music.


J. A. Rothschild, Richard L. Sontag
Jordana Ariel Rothschild, the daughter of Rhona and Jay Rothschild of Great Neck, L.I., was married there last evening to Richard Lee Sontag, the son of Joan and Rollin Sontag of New York.
Rabbi Susan Heneson Moskowitz performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El.


Governor and Legislature Spar Over Mississippi Welfare Agency
Although it will mean no difference for the welfare recipients in the nation's poorest state, the authorization for Mississippi's welfare agency will run out at the end of this month because of a political squabble between Gov.
Kirk Fordice, a Republican, and the Democratic-controlled Legislature.
Legislators refused to renew the charter of the State Department of Human Services after the Governor tried to include a provision that would turn over the collection of child support payments to a private company.


Greasy or Dirty Air-Conditioners May Need Expertise
DO NOT wait until the dog days of summer to improve home cooling.
Addressing the problem early not only insures that the equipment works, but also allows taking advantage of natural strategies that can lower energy bills while increasing comfort.
Service air-conditioning equipment promptly.
Room air-conditioners seldom need more than minor maintenance to make sure the filter is clean and the drain tube, if there is one, is unblocked.
In the cooler seasons, cleaning the filter monthly helps keep the appliance at maximum efficiency.


Tanglewood's New Concert Hall
Since the 1930's, Tanglewood, the expansive Lenox, Mass., estate that is the summer home of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, has offered travelers a combination of sylvan Berkshire scenery and classical music performed by by first-rate musicians.
On July 7, in the second week of this year's summer season, Tanglewood will dedicate the $9.7 million, 1,180-seat Seiji Ozawa Hall, named for the Boston Symphony Orchestra music director, who is observing his 20th anniversary as director.


World Markets; Riding the Roller Coaster in Europe
IN the European bond markets, last week was a doozy, even by the tumultuous standards of the last several months.
It started with a bang on Monday.
With the dollar plunging and inflation fears intensifying, investors dumped bonds as fast as they could into a market where buyers, to the extent that there were any, were growing increasingly reluctant at any price.
Prices plunged.
Yields soared.
Traders began worrying about a major market meltdown.


Running A Co-op In-House
AS accusations continue to pile up about managing agents involved in kickbacks, bribery, special favors and other corrupt practices aimed at extracting excess dollars from New York City co-ops, the temptation to switch to self-management becomes more and more enticing.
"Since the indictments came out my phone hasn't stopped ringing," said Darlene Lynch Heger, a consultant on self-management based in Manhattan.


Wall Street; Viewing the Dollar Through the Eyes of Other Markets
CURRENCY counts.
Maybe not in the long run; given enough time, the dollar's zig and the yen's zag could well cancel each other out.
But in the short run -- like, say, the last six months -- the dropping dollar has given a big boost to American investors who had money in Tokyo.
So far this year, the Nikkei 225 average has climbed 19.2 percent, at least when measured in yen.
But because the dollar has fallen 10 percent against Japan's currency, investments denominated in yen are now worth a lot more greenbacks.
Quite a lot more: in dollar terms, the Nikkei has soared 32.6 percent.


Streetscapes/718 St. Nicholas Avenue; Mending an Unusual 19th-Century Limestone Row
IS the row greater than the sum of its houses?
Yes, is the judgment by New York City in the case of the 1993 collapse of 718 St.
Nicholas Avenue, an 1889 limestone rowhouse at 146th Street, part of an unusual seven-house row at 718-730 St.
Nicholas Avenue.
Now the city's Department of Housing, Preservation and Development is spending $99l,000 just to stabilize the surviving facade, which, in another case, would simply have been demolished.


From a Wellspring of Bitterness
THE POLITICS OF DISPOSSESSION The Struggle for Palestinian Self-Determination, 1969-1994.
By Edward W. Said. 450 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $27.50.


Theft in Hungary
To the Editor: To Cornel Sarosdy of San Antonio, who asks about crime in Hungary in the Q&amp;A column (May 15), I would suggest another precaution.
When you park, no matter where or when, take the windshield wipers off and put them in the trunk or under the driver's seat.
I speak from experience.
HY GROBER  Teaneck, N.J.


Tortillas, Anyone? One Shop Expanding to Four
THE Tortilla Grill in Huntington Village is branching out.
The storefront takeout and eat-in establishment, which makes its own fresh soft flour tortillas, has opened a second 36-seat outlet, at 53 Merrick Avenue in Merrick (546-4141).
The experienced chef who owns both Tortilla Grills, Faz Esmizadeh, says additional restaurants are planned.
The third is scheduled for the East End, and a fourth will open in western Nassau, probably in the Great Neck area.
Mr.
Esmizadeh, who is from Acapulco, Mexico, and was a chef at the Ritz, Plaza, Grand Hyatt and Hilton Hotels before coming to the Island, indicated that the new operations would be identical to the original.


Kristi-Anne Tolo Paul C. Passaro
Dr.
Kristi-Anne Tolo, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth W. Tolo of Austin, Tex., was married yesterday to Paul Charles Passaro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard P. Passaro of Beach Haven Park, N.J.
The Rev.
Peter Denton officiated at University Presbyterian Church in Chapel Hill, N.C.
Mrs.
Passaro, 26, and her husband, 27, graduated from Williams College.
She received a master's degree in public health from the University of Michigan and a Ph.D. in epidemiology at the University of North Carolina.


Besieged Bosnian Pocket Fights Sense of Betrayal
When the sun sets on Bihac, the town is plunged into blackness.
Nobody moves and there is scarcely a sound, save that of howling dogs and desultory machine gun fire.
Faintly visible are the silhouettes of nearby mountains.
On top of them, surrounding the Muslim population of this abandoned place, are Serbian forces.
Bihac by night looks a lot like the end of the world.
And in many ways, that is just what this Muslim enclave in western Bosnia has become after more than two years of encirclement by the Serbs.
Cut off from Sarajevo, largely forgotten by the rest of the world, this town of 50,000 people has been shelled back into the 19th century.


Sandberg's Class
To the Sports Editor:
Ryne Sandberg retired from baseball, thus releasing the Chicago Cubs from a contractual obligation to pay him almost $16 million over the next four years.
He did not want to just hang around and collect unmerited paychecks.
Sandberg is clearly a man of class, character and conscience.
ANTHONY J. WICKEL  Huntington Station, L.I.


SUNDAY, June 26, 1994; Costly Children
According to Town &amp; Country magazine, raising a child to 18 costs about $679,483.
That's $37,749 a year, to cover costs like birth announcements ($690), a "learning psychologist" ($3,000 a year), a pet dog ($1,200) and a teen-ager's "utility car" ($10,000).
These figures should probably be reprinted by Planned Parenthood and mailed out to low-income families around the nation.
Poor people would stop having children altogether if they knew the cost.
At these rates even rich folks might reconsider procreation.
You could buy three Flying Spur Rolls-Royces ($225,000) and not have to worry about college.


'Pangs of Conscience' as Man Admits Raping Girl
A man walked into a police station and turned himself in early yesterday in the rape of an 11-year-old Queens girl, the police said.
With police sketches of the rapist plastered throughout Queens Village and other sections of the borough, the man, Creston L. Harry, 25, went to the 112th Precinct station house shortly after midnight and gave statements implicating himself in the June 1 assault, the police said.


Habitats/Catalogue Cottage in Irvington; A Priest Is Personalizing Her Fairy-Tale House
THE Rev.
Sheila McKivergan Biggs stands proudly in front of her fairy-tale cottage, ordered straight from the Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company catalogue in 1930, brought in boxcars up the railroad line along the Hudson and put together on the site.
The cottage looks as if it had just been assembled; its white gables and glossy ivy-green shutters glow in the 5 o'clock sun.
On a quiet street next to an elementary school, the house peeks out from behind a manmade mound of earth, covered now with myrtle, pachysandra, lily of the valley and the yellowing leaves of daffodils past.


Ukrainians Voting Today In Sour Mood
Ukraine has one of the weakest and least reformed economies in the former Soviet Union, with its gross national product plunging, factories shutting and workers unpaid even in a currency so weak it is a national joke.
There are increasing divisions between east and west, between Ukrainian nationalists and Russian-speakers.
There are squabbles with Russia over Crimea and the Black Sea Fleet.
But as Ukrainians vote in presidential elections on Sunday, the conventional opinion is that they will in the end re-elect the incumbent, Leonid M. Kravchuk, 60, the former Communist ideology secretary who led Ukraine to independence late in 1991.


Son of M.K.?: The Bar Battle Of the Bowery
For the last several months, a dilapidated former gas station on the southwest corner of the Bowery and Fourth Street has been undergoing a quiet transformation.
Inside, its concrete floors have been replaced with terrazzo, and its entrance has been draped with quilted stainless steel.
Grass grows in place of alphalt in the service yard.


Karen Frigerio, Clifford Gilman
Karen Frances Frigerio, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Frigerio of New Vernon, N.J., is to be married today to Clifford John Peterson Gilman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert F. Gilman 3d of Cullowhee, N.C.
The Rev.
Alexander G. Leondis is to perform the ceremony at Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church in Westfield, N.J.
Miss Frigerio, 28, graduated from Connecticut College and received a master's degree in special education from Boston College.
Until recently, she taught special education at Lieut.
Job Lane School in Bedford, Mass.


Greasy or Dirty Air-Conditioners May Need Expertise
DO NOT wait until the dog days of summer to improve home cooling.
Addressing the problem early not only insures that the equipment works, but also allows taking advantage of natural strategies that can lower energy bills while increasing comfort.
Service air-conditioning equipment promptly.
Room air-conditioners seldom need more than minor maintenance to make sure the filter is clean and the drain tube, if there is one, is unblocked.
In the cooler seasons, cleaning the filter monthly helps keep the appliance at maximum efficiency.


Carolyn H. Hax, N. E. Galifianakis
Carolyn Hanley Hax, a copy editor at The Washington Post, and Nicholas Emmanuel Galifianakis, a cartoonist for USA Today, both in Washington, were married yesterday in Bridgeport, Conn.
The Rev.
Demetrios A. Recachinas performed the ceremony at the Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church.
Ms.
Hax, who will keep her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Hax of Trumbull, Conn.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is the director of research planning at Sikorsky Aircraft in Stratford, Conn.


54-40 or Fight
To the Sports Editor:
For history buffs, there are numerical parallels between the recent Rangers victory after waiting 54 years, since 1940, and what happened during the Polk Administration in 1844 relating to the boundary dispute at the 40-degree latitude mark over the state of Oregon.
We all learned the slogan ("54-40 or Fight") in grade school.
Such a numerological coincidence will only add fuel to the wild enthusiasm that New York enjoys.
EDWIN M. SLOTE  New York


When Hope Died
Not long ago, when I was four months pregnant, I had a miscarriage.
I found that society -- even I -- did not know how to mark or mourn such an event.
For I learned that the debate on abortion has contaminated our discussions and our feelings about pregnancy and miscarriage.
I was bewildered, torn by my physical and emotional experiences.
I had no doubt that what was growing inside me was alive in some way.
The very morning of the miscarriage, I had seen a sonogram.
The heartbeat was steady and regular.
The white lines sketched out the beginnings of a femur and tiny backbone; the gray splotches were a liver and kidneys.


Combining Strengths to Solve Unsolved Crimes


Janet Bukovinsky, Stuart D. Teacher
Janet Maria Bukovinsky, an editor at Philadelphia magazine, was married yesterday to Stuart David Teacher, a founder and the president of Running Press Book Publishers in Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Charles Kane, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the couple's home in Glenmoore, Pa.
Rabbi Shimon Berris took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Teacher, 38, graduated from Rutgers University.
She is the daughter of Theresa and John Bukovinsky of Somerset, N.J.


Some Tips to Brighten the Shady Spots
NURSERY owners may be telling us something.
Results from sales surveys are good indicators of plant popularity.
Two years ago, the top-selling annual was impatiens.
Last year the top-selling perennial was hosta.
These results point to a common denominator: shade.
Both of these best-sellers thrive where a canopy of trees and tall shrubs provides deep to semi-shade.


Advice for Planning Unit: Stay Away From Esthetics
To the Editor:
Your June 19 letter, "City Planning Should Join the Fight to Control Kitsch," fails to mention that the pleasing storefronts at the Ansonia and Apthorp apartments on Broadway are primarily the result of the buildings' being designated landmarks and thus under the esthetic eye of the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
The commission is both prepared and able to render esthetic judgments based upon the historic and architectural significance of the properties, albeit subject to occasional protests from building and store owners.


Kenneth Pontikes, 54, Founder Of Computer Leasing Company
Kenneth N. Pontikes, the founder of Comdisco, a pioneer in computer leasing and support services, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
He was 54 and lived in Chicago.
The cause was colon cancer, the company said.


A Team Victory
To the Sports Editor:
Now that the New York Rangers have unequivocally proven to all the media gurus that they are the best hockey team in the National Hockey League, I would like to know how the "no-brainers" who nominate people for the various league awards came up with their selections.


Summer Splashes, With Baseball
EVER SINCE "BULL Durham" turned into a summer hit in 1988, and "Field of Dreams" followed a year later, studios have been regularly adding baseball movies to their spring and summer schedules.
"Major League II," a sequel about the Cleveland Indians that stars Charlie Sheen, opened in March, and three more baseball films are due soon.
Here are their distinguishing characteristics.
LINDA LEE LITTLE BIG LEAGUE (Opens on Wednesday) Timothy Busfield, Jason Robards


Traveler's Checks
To the Editor: The letter on two-signature traveler's checks reminded my of our experience in Bologna in April.
I presented one of these checks to the foreign exchange bureau at the main railroad station.
The rate was very fair, but they demanded two counter-signatures, because it had two original signatures.
Luckily, my wife was nearby, but this is not the way checks-for-two is supposed to work.


Seattle Man Charged In Sex Conversations On Electronic Mail
A Seattle man has been charged with endangering the welfare of a 14-year-old Westchester girl in a case involving the exchange of sexually explicit electronic mail.
The man, Alan Paul Barlow, 51, flew to the New York area and met the girl, concluding a two-month period during which he frequently exchanged sexually explicit conversations with her via computer E-mail and by telephone, the Mamaroneck, N.Y., police said yesterday.


East Side, West Side, Call of the Wild All Around Town
From the ripping currents of Hell Gate in upper Manhattan to the sweeping arm of Sandy Hook, N.J., New York Harbor is home to a rich and thriving array of wildlife.
The old shellfish beds south of Gowanus Creek in Brooklyn, which supplied foot-long oysters to Delmonico's in the first half of the 19th century when Daniel Webster brought his daily catch of giant Long Island brook trout, are once again paved with oysters, clams, mussels and crabs.
Along the Arthur Kill between Staten Island and New Jersey, the Northeast's largest colony of herons nestle peacefully in the jumble of the Jersey shoreline.
Out at Robbins Reef, just below Liberty Island, you will always find a venerable fisherman from Perth Amboy, puffing on his pipe and trolling his skiff around the drop-off where he regularly catches bass as long as your arm.


RECORD BRIEFS
Purcell: Music for the Funeral of Queen Mary and Other Works  Winchester Cathedral Choir; Baroque Brass of London and Brandenburg Consort conducted by David Hill.
Argo 436 833-2; CD.


Ainslie Binder, John Tulenko
Ainslie Ann Binder, a daughter of Mary Jo Aagerstoun of Washington, and Robert H. Binder of Gaithersburg, Md., is to be married today to John Derkhiem Tulenko, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John Tulenko of New York.
The Rev.
Raymond Kemp, a Roman Catholic priest, is to perform a nondenominational ceremony at the Inn at Mitchell House in Chestertown, Md.
Ms.
Binder, who is keeping her name, is a documentary television producer in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of Amherst College.
Her father was an assistant secretary of transportation in the Nixon and Ford Administrations.
Her mother is writer and art historian in Washington.


Some Tips to Brighten the Shady Spots
NURSERY owners may be telling us something.
Results from sales surveys are good indicators of plant popularity.
Two years ago, the top-selling annual was impatiens.
Last year the top-selling perennial was hosta.
These results point to a common denominator: shade.
Both of these best-sellers thrive where a canopy of trees and tall shrubs provides deep to semi-shade.


Japanese Premier's Fall Forces Shift by the U.S. at Trade Talks
Just when it seemed that a year of tortuous trade negotiations with Japan was about to bear fruit, the resignation of Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata today is likely to leave the United States waiting once again in frustration, unable to reach market-opening agreements before a summit meeting next month of the seven leading industrialized nations.
The political turmoil arising from Mr.
Hata's resignation could divert Japan's attention from the trade talks just as negotiators are set to enter the final, critical week that will determine whether the two nations can forge agreements before the meeting in Naples to increase sales in Japan of foreign insurance policies, automobiles, telecommunications and medical equipment.


Airline Links Dulles And Johannesburg
USAfrica Airways, a new airline, started service this month between Washington-Dulles International Airport and Johannesburg.
Flight time is about 16 hours, with a stop in the Cape Verde Islands.
The airline, (800) 667-1800, based in Reston, Va., is the only United States flag carrier to provide direct flights to South Africa.
It started service on June 3 with two round trips per week.
Departures from Washington are at 6:50 P.M. on Friday and Sunday, arriving in Johannesburg at 4:50 P.M. the following day.
Johannesburg departures are on Saturday and Monday at 7:45 P.M, arriving in Washington the following morning at 7:15 A.M.
A third round-trip flight, departing from Washington on Thursday and from Johannesburg on Friday, is scheduled to be added on June 23.
The July and August round-trip coach fare, which must be purchased at least 10 days before departure, is $1,899.


Immigrants Describe Border-Crossing Plight
EVERY immigrant feels his soul broken when he takes leave of his family and departs his beloved homeland," writes Luis Alfonso Hernandez in "Border Stories: Cuentos de la Frontera," a book published recently by the Neuberger Museum of Art and the Center for Editions at Purchase College here.
Mr.
Hernandez adds that the immigrant "leaves a great emptiness; he undertakes the road with profound nostalgia and pain within his being, but at the same time with an enormous illusion of returning triumphantly and finding all his family in a state of well-being, healthy, and above all, with a better economic condition."


Christine Murphy And Ted Danforth
Christine Carey Murphy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas P. Murphy of Lloyd Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Edward Wilcox Danforth, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Danforth of New Haven.
Msgr.
John Casey performed the ceremony at Most Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Danforth, 28, is a sales and marketing representative for the United States Tennis Association in White Plains.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is an administrator in the Commack, L.I., public school system.
Her mother, Helen Murphy, teaches the fifth grade at the James Boyd Elementary School in Elwood, L.I.


A Gay World, Vibrant and Forgotten
It would have been unthinkable 25 years ago for thousands of openly gay fans to cheer openly gay athletes at Yankee Stadium, for openly gay artists to perform to the acclaim of openly gay audiences at Carnegie Hall, or for the mainstream media to provide extensive and sympathetic coverage of it all.
Today's march and the Gay Games and Cultural Festival are testimony to the legacy of the Stonewall rebellion of June 28, 1969 -- when a police assault on a Greenwich Village gay bar turned a small civil rights campaign into a mass liberation movement.
But the enshrinement of Stonewall as the genesis of gay culture threatens to deny the richness and resiliency of gay and lesbian life before the late 60's and to obscure the long history of gay resistance that made the gay-rights movement possible.


Texas and California: 2 Views of Illegal Aliens
In California, where sentiment against illegal aliens runs strong, Senator Barbara Boxer's proposal to use the National Guard to patrol the Mexican border was considered rather modest.
But in Texas, when Jim Mattox, a Democratic candidate for the Senate, suggested this spring that the military be used to crack down on illegal immigration, his opponent jumped all over him.
Mr.
Mattox had been the early favorite in the Democratic field, but he lost in the April runoff election to Richard Fisher, who said: "South Texans don't want tanks on their lawns." Mr.
Fisher carried El Paso County by a margin of nearly 3 to 2, swept practically every other border county and suffered no backlash elsewhere.


Q and A
Dude Ranching
Q.
I am planning to take my family out west to a dude ranch.
Can you suggest some good, reasonably priced places? -- Heinz Just, Silver Spring, Md.


Some Tips to Brighten the Shady Spots
NURSERY owners may be telling us something.
Results from sales surveys are good indicators of plant popularity.
Two years ago, the top-selling annual was impatiens.
Last year the top-selling perennial was hosta.
These results point to a common denominator: shade.
Both of these best-sellers thrive where a canopy of trees and tall shrubs provides deep to semi-shade.


Patricia Liptack, David M. Reilly
Patricia Susan Liptack, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Edward Liptack of Eastchester, N.Y., was married yesterday to David McDonald Reilly, a son of Mr.
William Raymond Reilly of East Williston, L.I.
Msgr.
Anthony Maltese officiated at the Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in Tuckahoe, N.Y.
Msgr.
Raymond Shevlin, the bridegroom's uncle, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Reilly is an associate at Martin, Clearwater &amp; Bell, a law firm in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University.
She and the bridegroom received law degrees from St.
John's University in Queens.


Gardening Prepares You for Fatherhood
To the Editor:
As the father of an 8-month-old baby, I recognize almost nothing of my own feelings in William Safire's "What Fathers Want" (column, June 16).
Many of Mr.
Safire's assertions about fatherhood and motherhood would have to be interchanged to apply to our family, but many simply do not apply to either parent.
Neither of us feels the need for recognition as "head" of the family.
Authority is something we exert, not something anyone can give us.
Power over our child is not an issue we dwell upon.


Europeans Fail to Choose a New President as Britain Balks
The European Union summit meeting broke up in extraordinary disarray today with a maverick Britain standing alone against its 11 partners on the choice of a successor to Jacques Delors, the President of the European Commission and one of the continent's most influential power brokers.
The debacle left an impression of an organization that, rather than exemplifying pan-European ideals, is again faltering because of the competing political agendas of its members.


Choreographers Learn Anew: Balanchine Is a Tough Act to Follow
AS A MASTERPIECE machine, the New York City Ballet's Diamond Project fell predictably short.
As a huge workshop for 12 emerging or established choreographers to conduct their education in public, it was right on the mark.
Like the 1992 Diamond Project, also conceived by Peter Martins, the City Ballet's artistic director, the latest event was intended to encourage new choreography in the classical idiom.
The premieres, spread out over two weeks, were created for the showcase, which is named after a prime donor, the Aaron Diamond Foundation.
It is debatable whether any such artificial stimulus can lead to genuine creativity.
The danger is that choreographers on assignment will produce work that looks as if it were made on assignment.
On the other hand, an opportunity to collaborate with dancers of City Ballet's caliber can provide an impetus to stretch creative talent.


Corrections
An article June 12 about Navarre, Spain, misidentified the airline that flies between Madrid and Pamplona.
It is Aviaco, not Avianca.


Volunteers Enrich Students' Lives
THE 16 children clustered on the rug in Judy Berg's kindergarten class offered up an exuberant Hola! in response to Harriet Barnett's Spanish greeting one recent morning.
As Mrs.
Barnett reviewed colors and introduced the youngsters to the names of farm animals in Spanish, the students practiced their new words and squealed when chosen to imitate animal sounds.
This wasn't a regularly scheduled language class at the Concord Road Elementary School here, where formal foreign language instruction is not part of the official curriculum.
The kindergarten students were benefiting from the fact that Mrs.
Barnett had come to the class at the behest of Mrs.
Berg, one of whose students, Matthew Bakal, had introduced the teacher to his grandmother.


Doesn't Anybody Want This Job?
WANTED: CHARMING, erudite executive with the diplomatic skills of a foreign service officer, the financial skills of an investment banker and the social skills of a 1950's wife.
Position requires the academic background of a serious scholar, with the willingness to let most of this knowledge go unused in favor of poring over budgets and staffing issues.
Long hours, low pay and the chance to see your name in the papers every time you make even the slightest wrong move.
The job, of course, is running an art museum.
Right now 13 museums in the United States are looking for directors, including three of the most prestigious: the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
Running any of them would seem like a dream job.
But as art museums have evolved into huge institutions playing host to millions, the job has become more a matter of politics than of art.
Who runs art museums may seem like a matter of little concern to art lovers.
But it gets to the very heart of the question of what museums should be.
And like so many other nonprofit cultural institutions, museums are struggling over the question of whether they should turn their fate over to professional managers or keep it in the hands of the specialists who have been in charge until now.


RECORD BRIEFS
Messiaen: 'Visions de l'Amen,' 'Petites Esquisses d'Oiseaux' and Other Works  Peter Hill and Benjamin Frith ("Visions"), pianists.
Unicorn-Kanchana DKP 9144; CD.


Miss Armfield And Mr. Kaiser
Katherine Lane Armfield, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard M. Armfield of Middleburg, Va., was married at her parents' house last evening to Lee Russell Kaiser, the son of Judy Kaiser of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and the late Jacob S. Kaiser.
The Rev.
Robert Marshall, a Methodist minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Kaiser, 27, is the production and marketing coordinator at Armfield, Harrison &amp; Thomas Insurance, in Leesburg, Va.
She graduated from Duke University.


No Headline
I'm from middle America where, you know, where you really can't come out.
It's hard to be gay there.
You come to New York and you feel at home. -- LARRY DARK of South Bend, Ind.  [ 25:4. ]


In America; Freedom Summer '94
The awful news that the young men were missing came on Father's Day, 1964.
It was the beginning of summer and the start of an exceptionally cruel period for the families of civil rights activists James Chaney, Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman, who had planned to spend the summer fighting for the right of blacks in Mississippi to vote.
Mr.
Chaney was a 21-year-old plasterer from Meridian, Miss.
Mr.
Schwerner, 24, was a former settlement-house worker from Brooklyn.
Mr.
Goodman, 20, was a Queens College student who lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Chaney was black.
Mr.
Schwerner and Mr.
Goodman were Jewish.
All had volunteered to be part of Freedom Summer, a bold voter registration effort sponsored primarily by the Congress of Racial Equality and the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.


Sound Bytes; Designer Opens On-Line Doors
LAST week Apple Computer Inc.'s on-line service, eWorld, passed from the nether realm of trial runs -- beta testing, in computerese -- to commercial launch.
Apple licensed some technology from America Online, itself a licensee of Apple technology, so eWorld will look familiar to users of that service.
The twist is that eWorld replaces America Online's simple icons and text with a whimsical drawing of a little town: click on the post office for mail, click on the library for research, click on the newsstand for, you got it, news.


In the Region/Westchester; Market Heats Up on Once-Foreclosed Town Houses
AFTER years of lanquishing in economic uncertainty, some formerly foreclosed town-house projects have been attracting renewed sales interest in recent months.
Some new owners say they are selling units faster than they can build them.
One such project is the Ridgeway, a 94-unit, fee-simple town-house condominium development in White Plains. (In a fee-simple project, the buyer owns the plot on which a home stands.)


Ms. Barrack, Mr. Howells 4th
Elizabeth Irene Barrack, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Barrack Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Henry Coggeshall Howells 4th, a son of Margaret K. Howells of Fairfax, Va., and Mr.
Howells of Lorton, Va.
The Rev.
Mary Carson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Howells, 32, is an interior design consultant in Louisville, Ky.
She graduated from Connecticut College.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of Texaco in Harrison, N.Y.


Nigeria Can't Keep Its Hold on Argentina
Nigeria's persistent fouling outside its penalty area proved fatal today in its clash with experienced Argentina.
Fouls should be avoided when the opposition has players like Diego Maradona and Claudio Caniggia.
Nigeria committed 38 fouls, about 24 outside its penalty area, and twice paid the price in Argentina's 2-1 triumph at Foxboro Stadium.


Technology; The Creative Force Behind Japan's Computer U.
TOSIYASU L. KUNII, one of Japan's most prolific and outspoken computer scientists, says there is a reason that Japanese companies do not design successful computer operating systems or original microprocessors.
Japan's education system, he says, churns out uncreative graduates.
Others have made similar observations, but Professor Kunii is doing something about it.
He quit his job at the prestigious Tokyo University to start his own computer college.


Commercial Property/The Hemmerdinger Approach; Carrots, Not Sticks; Improvement, Not Growth
H.
DALE HEMMERDINGER uses the carrot, not the stick.
When too many executives at ATCO Properties, his real estate services company, were getting pudgy, he offered them $100 a pound to lose weight.
When he read about the benefits of aerobics exercise, he began paying a $500 year-end bonus to any employee who climbed the 16 flights to ATCO's offices, $250 for anyone who walked halfway up.
A smoker quits, it's worth $500.
One result of all this gentle bribery is that very few fat people work at ATCO's headquarters at 555 Fifth Avenue, at 46th Street.
And Mr.
Hemmerdinger has offered the one holdout smoker a mink coat to quit.


Susan Drossman, Adam Sokoloff
Dr.
Susan Robin Drossman, the daughter of Sydell and Leslie Drossman of Port Washington, L.I., is to be married today to Adam David Sokoloff, a son of Belle and Harold Sokoloff of Port Washington.
Rabbi Jill Kreitman is to officiate at Oheka Castle in Cold Spring Hills, L.I.
The bride and bridegroom, both 31, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she magna cum laude.
She received a medical degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Next month, the bride is to become an attending physician and an assistant professor in the department of radiology at Mount Sinai Hospital.


Miss Sayres, Mr. McCullough
Charlotte Leavitt Sayres, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Sayres of Readfield, Me., was married yesterday to William W. McCullough, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. McCullough of Indianapolis.
The Rev.
David Stillman, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Somesville Meeting House in Somesville, Me.
Mrs.
McCullough, 31, is a sales representative for educational materials in Auburn, Calif., for the Mosby Publishing House.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire in Durham where her father is a professor of English.
Her mother, Wendy Sayres, teaches the first grade at the James Bean School in Sidney, Me.


NEWS SUMMARY
That is only the most startling of the attacks being directed at Bill and Hillary Clinton by fundamentalist Christian leaders.  1  President Kennedy was sued in 1962 for actions before taking office.  12  INCESSANT ATTRACTION  They were divorced, but they continued to date each other.
O.
J.
Simpson and Nicole Brown Simpson vacationed together in Mexico with their children.
But celebrity hid the dynamics of their relationship.  1  SOME PROGRESS, LESS GAIN  Congress is meeting a critical deadline on national health insurance legislation, but it is making progress without really coming closer to gether.  1  VERY DIFFERENT PERSPECTIVES  Two large states with the same southern neighbor, Mexico, show very different attitudes about illegal immigration.
But Peter E. Stangl is discovering who actually cracks the whip, and he's running for re-election this year.  23  CRACKING THE CASE  New police units concentrate on solving drug-related murders by scooping up drug dealers in buy-and-bust operations and coaxing them to tell about crimes they have seen or heard.  25  TAKE ME OUT TO THE SOCCER GAME  For generations Kearny, N.J., a former mill town by the Passaic River, has seen its young men go off to do battle on fields in foreign lands.
All of them were soccer players.  28  AND A STAR TO STEER HER BY  For students at North Shore High School on Long Island, building a 23-foot sailboat was the senior project to end all senior projects, a four-year lesson in history and design and patience.  28  The fourth Gay Games drew to an ebullient close yesterday.  25  Obituaries 40  Marv Throneberry, former major league baseball player.
Kenneth Pontikes, founder of a computer leasing company.
Tom Skinner, minister and trainer.


Getting Even With Dad, Uncle Scar and Bigots
Speed  Keanu Reeves, Dennis Hopper, Sandra Bullock Directed by Jan De Bont R 110 minutes


Ideas &amp; Trends: 'Oh, That Coup' (Yawn); In the Land of Show Trials, Playing to an Empty House
Remember the Soviet stalwarts who tried to overthrow Mikhail S. Gorbachev in a coup three summers ago?
Russia finally held a trial last week, and nobody came.
Well, almost nobody.


While Some Shimmer, Others Try to Blend In
Uptown -- Wearing a choker with rhinestones as big as headlights and a silver sequin minidress, Carol Channing was looking anything but understated on Monday at the fifth-anniversary party for Mirabella, the understated fashion magazine.
"It's called gunmetal and it's by Bob Mackie," said Ms.
Channing of the dress as she sat with her husband, Charles Lowe, in the Museum of Modern Art's sculpture garden.
"Bob Mackie has a talent for seeing you as God meant to make you -- perfect and beautiful and exotic." She wasn't mingling because she'd been on her feet all day, rehearsing for her world tour of "Hello, Dolly!"


Isn't It Funny?
THE SOCIAL MEANING OF MONEY By Viviana A. Zelizer. 286 pp. New York: Basic Books. $24.


A Serious Tack On Recycling
The recycling spoof on May 22 ("A Sense of Place") prompts these thoughts, in a more serious vein:
Useful items continue to be put in Dumpsters, ending up in landfills or incinerators, including clothing, books, toys, equipment of all types, furniture, etc.


Sushi for $200 (Members Only, Please)
"WE don't really want people to find us," Masa Takayama said of Ginza Sushiko, his exclusive sushi bar and restaurant.
No problem.
Even though he has just moved it from a remote mini-mall in midtown Los Angeles to superchic 2 Rodeo Drive, Sushiko remains a secret of the rich and famous.
If you call Beverly Hills information and ask for the number, the operators won't have it. (It is 310-247-8939.) No sign points the way to the secluded spot, which is one of about 15 shops that share the address, and even queries to his nearest neighbor, Jose Eber, the hair-stylist to the stars, are met with stupefied stares, and: "A sushi bar? Here?"


Prodding Pays Off for Straus Park
When Leon and Marjorie Auerbach moved onto West 106th Street in 1960 after meeting and falling in love at Cooper Union, they all but considered the triangular island of trees known as Straus Park to be their backyard.
The tiny sliver of parkland, in the delta where West End Avenue meets its end at Broadway between 106th and 107th Streets, was immaculately kept, they remembered, with a bubbling fountain monument to the park's namesakes, Isador and Ida Straus, who perished in the Titanic.
But like the streets around it, the park began to decline in the 1970's, in part because of the city's fiscal crisis.
At some point the fountain stopped bubbling, and no one seemed to be able to fix it.
Drug dealing and the problem of homeless people camping in the park increased.


PHOTOGRAPHER'S JOURNAL


Traffic Alert
TODAY, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., Lexington Avenue will be closed between 23d and 34th Streets for the Lexington Avenue Festival.
From 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. the east side of Broadway between 66th and 71st Streets will be closed for the "Project Open/Broadway Fair."


Andrew Farnsworth, Tessa Rowland
Theresa Ann Rowland and Andrew Clyde Farnsworth were married yesterday at the North Cornwall (Conn.) Congregational Church.
The Rev.
Peter Hammond performed the ceremony.
The bride, 33, is keeping her name.
She is known as Tessa.
She graduated from the American College in Paris and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Col. and Mrs.
Henry C. Rowland Jr. of Fort Belvoir, Va.
Her father, who retired from the Army Corps of Engineers, was the chief of the Military Advisory Group and the head of the American Battle Monuments Commission, both in Paris.


Marjorie Vandow, Richard Fields
Marjorie Ann Vandow, a daughter of Benjamin Vandow of Whitestone, Queens, and the late Lillian Vandow, is to be married today to Richard Lawrence Fields, the son of Joyce Simons of New York and the late Samuel Fields.
Rabbi Beth Davidson will perform the ceremony at a private home in Bedford, N.Y.
Ms.
Vandow, 34, is keeping her name.
She is the general counsel for Merrin Financial Inc., a computer software company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and received her law degree from George Washington University.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Blanche Vandow.


Ms. Nohrnberg, Mr. Savoldelli
Gabrielle Lamport Nohrnberg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Nohrnberg of Charlottesville, Va., was married there yesterday to Fabio Paul Savoldelli, a son of Irene Savoldelli of Toronto and the late Ugo R. Savoldelli.
The Rev.
Russell Davis, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the University of Virginia Chapel.
The bride, 25, is a head teacher at the Temple Emanu-el Nursery School and Kindergarten in New York.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in elementary education from Columbia University.
Her father is a professor of English at the University of Virginia.


Squid With the Crunch but Not the Frying
THE most popular way to eat squid (or calamari, as it is frequently called) is deep-fried to a crisp golden turn with mayonnaise or tomato sauce for dipping.
But for the home cook, that is not the easiest preparation.


New Neighbors: Sad Ecology of My Street
MY NEW neighbors began moving in, one by one, about two weeks ago, as the human ecology of the neighborhood began to change, and after a green sidewalk construction shed was erected along the 16th Street side of Washington Irving High School.
People on the block refer to the four new neighbors as "the homeless," in deference to polite discourse, although everyone gives the word a different spin and one doorman wrinkles his nose; in the steam heat of last Saturday, he says, their stench sent him reeling, nauseated, into his lobby; he nearly passed out.
Later that night -- and now he begins to get angry -- he saw one of the homeless plug a TV set into an outdoor socket.
He couldn't see what program the man was watching.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
PARK SLOPE  Charms of a Summer Night: 'Free and Close to Home'
Slide Hampton and the JazzMasters will kick off the outdoor summer concert series at the Prospect Park Bandshell on Wednesday, but tradition will also be served: the opening act of the 16th annual "Celebrate Brooklyn" festival, as usual, will be a Brooklyn band.


The World; Intervening With Elan and No Regrets
France's military intervention in Rwanda is a stark reminder of a diplomatic truism: among the colonial powers that once ruled Africa, France stands out for its readiness and its ability to dispatch troops to a besieged country on the continent.
Why this should be so, more than 30 years after the countries gained independence, is something that even experienced diplomats find curious.


One Defendant In Plot Case Is Reportedly Aiding the U.S.
The man accused of being the ringleader in a terrorist conspiracy to bomb New York City landmarks and assassinate public officials has dismissed his law firm and apparently agreed to become a cooperating witness for the prosecution in a trial next fall, his lawyers said yesterday.
The move by the defendant, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, was reported by William M. Kunstler and Ronald L. Kuby, who had represented him since shortly after his arrest a year ago.
The United States Attorney in Manhattan, Mary Jo White, declined through a spokesman to comment on the report.
Efforts to reach Howard R. Leader, the new lawyer for Mr.
Siddig Ali, and lawyers for other defendants in the case, were unavailing.


Art Deco Meets the Industrial Revolution
ASK ALEC BALDWIN, WHO STARS as Lamont Cranston in the forthcoming movie "The Shadow," "What evil lurks in the hearts of men?" and he smiles.
"The Shadow really does know," he says.
"There's as much evil in Lamont Cranston as anybody. He's done some terrible things. He knows anybody is capable of anything."
On the Art Decoish set of "The Shadow" at Universal Studios earlier this year, Mr.
Baldwin, John Lone and Penelope Ann Miller were trying to walk a delicate line between somber drama and 1930's comedy.
Their assignment: To play it as if Fred and Ginger had met the dark side.


Owning Your Own Vine
For 1,000 oenophiles, 1994 will be remembered as a very good year.
The 1,000 winners of a contest sponsored by Relais &amp; Chateaux, the international hotel and restaurant association, will each become partial owners of six of the choicest vineyards in France's Champagne region.
For three years each winner will own six vines at vineyards run by Moet &amp; Chandon, Mumm, Perrier-Jouet, Pommery, Roederer and Taittinger.
From 1994 to 1996 the winners will receive six bottles of Champagne a year from each vineyard.
Those who collect their wine in person will be receive a personal tour.
Entry coupons are available at any of Relais &amp; Chateaux's 410 establishments in 40 countries.
Three drawings will be held, on July 5, Sept. 5 and Nov. 30, with deadlines up to each drawing date.
Information: (212) 856-0115.
TERRY TRUCCO


California's Other Wine Country
JUST beyond Cloverdale, at the northern end of Sonoma County, Route 128 -- just a country road, really -- splits off from Highway 101 and wanders some 60 miles through Mendocino County to the sea.
Most of the way it follows the little Navarro River through the Anderson Valley, one of California's least-known and most beautiful wine regions.
As if by magic, a dreary succession of gas stations, fast-food places and used-car lots becomes a California of a different time and place.
Here is a remote, rural California of quiet country towns, fairgrounds and wildflowers, verdant farms and tidy orchards stretching off to distant mountains, majestic redwoods and, finally, the craggy Mendocino coast and the cold, vast Pacific.


Botanical Gothic
Architects used to talk about about walls and windows; now it's rhizomes and slime molds.
To a user of buildings, this does not sound promising.
But I've been assured by an architect friend in the know that something as mundane as structure is thoroughly out of date.
Today's avant-garde is much more interested in chaos than columns.
The latest theoretical jargon making its sweep from comp lit to architecture, by way of the Sorbonne, is borrowed from plant biology.
The key term is rhizome, a subterranean stem (akin to bulbs and tubers) that spreads horizontally.
The slippery nature of the rhizome, which has come to mean anything with no beginning, no end, just a middle overflowing in all directions, serves as a convenient metaphor for pedagogues who do not wish to value one culture's literature over another's.


And The Truth Set Her Free (Albeit Naked)
AT THE CENTER OF "THE NAKED Truth," Paul Rudnick's satiric new comedy at the WPA Theater, stands the commanding figure of Nan Bemiss, an upper-middle-class New York society woman.
You know the type: Dina Merrill has played her in movies, sometimes for laughs, sometimes as the ferocious other woman.
Nan is Greenwich born, Republican bred, an indefatigable doer of good works and perfectly groomed.
She looks so bright, shiny and hard that she seems not only to have been washed and set at Elizabeth Arden's, but also glazed like a ham.
As played by Mary Beth Peil with strategically funny abandon, her forehead often furrowed, Nan is the sympathetic, questing innocent in "The Naked Truth." She's also a most unlikely equivalent to the youngish title character in "Jeffrey," Mr.
Rudnick's award-winning hit comedy about gay romance in the time of AIDS.
Both Nan and Jeffrey yearn for sexual freedom though she, being older and far prissier, doesn't even know what she's missing, at least at first.


Megastore Plan for Corporate Park Draws Fire
A city plan to lure megastores to the thriving College Point Corporate Park is being hotly contested by local merchants concerned that the stores would crush prospering mom-and-pop businesses.
Next month, the city's Economic Development Corporation will solicit proposals for large-scale retail development on 500,000 square feet of vacant land at the center, which borders the Whitestone Expressway.
Merchants are scheduled to meet next week with officials from Mayor Giuliani's office to discuss the plan.


A Building Finds Physicians the Cure for Vacancy
UNLESS another gynecologist steps forward to state otherwise, Dr.
Ronald M. Caplan can fairly assume that he is the only one of his profession to be a managing partner in the ownership of a downtown office building.
He is also practicing in his own building, 96 Fulton Street, also known as 140 William Street.
Practicing with him are 12 other physicians who are part of the Chapley Medical Group, which Dr.
Caplan established in the building in 1992.
That was eight years after he and his wife, Marilyn, and another physician, Dr.
Richard Coburn, bought the fully occupied property as an investment.


Corrections
The Mutual Funds tables last Sunday showed incorrect net asset values provided by Fidelity Investments for most of its funds.
A corrected listing of all Fidelity funds for the week ended June 17, including the gains and losses for that week, appears today on page 33.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 26, 1994
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer pursues his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
2
2
DARK APPRENTICE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) A "Star Wars" novel.
3
19
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young boy learns a deadly secret.
4
6
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist conspiracy.
5
2
THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.
6
1
A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.
7
10
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while covering a story.
8
1
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
9
4
HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) Americans on holiday in Italy learn a lot about themselves.
10
9
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for murder.
11
3
MCNALLY'S RISK, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.99.) Archy McNally investigates a Palm Beach woman and mysterious deaths.
12
9
AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her house.
13
8
THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Their mother's sins haunt a boy and girl.
14
99
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions during a trial.
15
1
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers and dope smugglers.
16*
5
INTEREST OF JUSTICE, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A judge's pursuit of the murderer of her sister and brother-in-law.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
24
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Everyday spirituality.
2
8
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a Georgia town.
3*
6
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) Mood-changing medications.
4*
555
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
5
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.
6*
24
WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.
7*
4
FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated in combat.
8
71
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
9
7
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir of a young woman's mental illness.
10
2
THE LONGEST DAY, by Cornelius Ryan. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $11.) The Allied assault on Normandy, June 6, 1944.
11
141
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
12*
8
BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting is now going on.
13*
10
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues affecting black Americans.
14
34
THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a la A.A. Milne.
15*
13
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
16*
154
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
17*
56
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
171
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
2
4
RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
3*
113
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
178
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Tortillas, Anyone? One Shop Expanding to Four
THE Tortilla Grill in Huntington Village is branching out.
The storefront takeout and eat-in establishment, which makes its own fresh soft flour tortillas, has opened a second 36-seat outlet, at 53 Merrick Avenue in Merrick (546-4141).
The experienced chef who owns both Tortilla Grills, Faz Esmizadeh, says additional restaurants are planned.
The third is scheduled for the East End, and a fourth will open in western Nassau, probably in the Great Neck area.
Mr.
Esmizadeh, who is from Acapulco, Mexico, and was a chef at the Ritz, Plaza, Grand Hyatt and Hilton Hotels before coming to the Island, indicated that the new operations would be identical to the original.


Glenn Erikson and Kiki Caruson
Kiki Caruson, who received a master's degree last month in international relations from Johns Hopkins University, was married yesterday in Nashville to Glenn Erikson, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Sinclair Lewis, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at Wightman Chapel.
Ms.
Caruson, 27, who changed her name, graduated from Smith College.
She is the daughter of Merle W. Peery of Columbia, Tenn., and the late Dr.
Richard E. Weingart, and the stepdaughter of the Rev.
R.
Russell Peery.


SUNDAY, June 26, 1994; The Unbearable Lightness of In-Flight Movies
How do airlines go about distracting you from the fact that you are packed in a steel tube hurtling through space at 600 miles an hour?
"It's often the case that a movie that is not successful in theatrical release is ideal for an airline audience," according to Rob Brookler, public relations manager for the World Airline Entertainment Association, the go-between for airlines and movie distributors.
Indeed, some of the titles on the list of 10 most-booked airline movies -- like "Forever Young" or "Sneakers" -- didn't make anybody else's list.
Why?
"Basically, you're looking for films that are not going to offend," Brookler says.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Beyond Singapore: Corporal Punishment, A to Z
The case of Michael Fay, the youth caned in Singapore last month for vandalism before his release and return to Ohio last week, has focused extraordinary attention, pro and con, on corporal punishment -- largely because he is an American.
The Fay episode aside, however, corporal punishment usually gets scant notice.
Practiced around the world since ancient times, it is typically overshadowed by other human-rights concerns like capital punishment (in the United States and elsewhere), the torture and other mistreatment of prisoners in repressive states or blatant abuses in areas of conflict.


Veronica Burke, Alexander Isley
Veronica Marie Burke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund M. Burke of Valhalla, N.Y., was married yesterday to Alexander Max Isley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Max Isley of Durham, N.C.
The Rev.
Donald Pryor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Magdalene in Pocantico Hills, N.Y.
Ms.
Burke, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Boston University.
Mr.
Isley, 32, graduated from the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art and North Carolina State University.


Sophistication and Technical Perfection in Japanese Posters
AT first, Japonism was imagery influenced by Japan that was produced by artists like Gauguin and Toulouse-Lautrec and that recently acquired a gallery of its own at the Zimmerli Museum at Rutgers.
Now, there is another Japonism, which is more an outlook than a style and which reflects not a Western perception of the East but rather an Eastern perception of the East.
Currently, this New Japonism may be observed in "Japanese Posters of the 80's," a modest but enlightening show that is installed in the library of Fairleigh Dickinson University here and is the work of its director, James Fraser.


Data Bank/June 26, 1994
Data Bank/June 26, 1994
New Orders for Durable Goods
May
April
March
Monthly percent change
0.9
0.1
0.7
Merchandise Exports
April
March
Feb.
In billions
$56.2
$58.3
$52.9
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$64.6
$65.8
$62.6
Weekly Jobless Claims
June 17
June 10
June 3
In thousands
352
349
359
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,917
1,916
1,838
Coal Production
Thousands of tons, weekly total
19,228
19,770
18,732
30-Year Treasury Bonds
June 24
June 17
June 10
Yield in percent
7.52
7.44
7.31
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Friday spot price, per barrel
$19.32
$20.71
$18.48


Cold War Agency Looks At Problems Back Home
It is hard to know whether this is a good news story or a bad news story, but here it is: The Agency for International Development, which spent the cold war fighting Communism with foreign aid and helping poor countries like Bangladesh immunize children, has found a new customer for its services: America's inner cities.
The good news is that A.I.D. has something to offer.
The bad news is that parts of Los Angeles, Boston and Baltimore now need it as much as Bangladesh.


The Face of AIDS
In their striking collections of photographs of men, women and children affected by AIDS, Carolyn Jones and Sal Lopes capture, with compassion and dignity, the faith, optimism and grief prompted by illness.
The images are moving and at times anguished, but the faces depicted in both books convey hope and fortitude far more than sadness.
For LIVING PROOF: Courage in the Face of AIDS (Abbeville, $19.95), Ms.
Jones, a New York fashion photographer, asked people who are H.I.V. positive to pose in her studio with an object or person that meant a great deal to them.
The symbolism speaks for itself -- a close-up of two hands entwined, a mother embracing her daughter, a young man straightening his tie to prepare for whatever comes next.
Her subjects' comments focus less on the pain of loss than on the determination, verve and spirit of renewal that they need to live.
Almost without exception, their goal is to enjoy the life that remains, and the ultimate effect of these powerful portraits is surprisingly upbeat.
In LIVING WITH AIDS: A Photographic Journal (Bulfinch/Little, Brown, $24.95), Mr.
Lopes chronicles three related stories.
First, he illustrates the emotional -- and political -- impact of AIDS by depicting the Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt as it was unfurled during demonstrations in Washington in 1988 and 1992.
Candid shots show mourners touching, lying sprawled across and even wrapped around sections of the quilt.
In the next section, Mr.
Lopes, the author of "The Wall: Images and Offerings From the Vietnam Veterans Memorial," records the bonds that develop between AIDS patients and the volunteers assigned, through a community "buddies" program, to help them through their illness.
The agonizing immediacy of these dual portraits -- in many cases the AIDS patients are visibly close to death -- carries a message of courage and mutual support.
The final section tells the story of John and Sharon Boyce and their daughter Brianna, adopted when she was 3 years old and already suffering from AIDS.
Brianna is heart-wrenchingly lovely, even in her frailty; in a postscript we learn she died last June, at the age of 7.
DIANE COLE


Hard Work, at 5 M.P.H.
MARLA RIVERA's right hand guides the big, tilted wheel.
Her left clutches a wad of transfers.
Outside the city bus moving five miles an hour, the cabs she detests slice around her like ravenous piranhas.
Horns squawk on the too-crowded street.
And she'll be very lucky if this day doesn't include someone berating her because she tells them they're a coin or two short of the $1.25 fare.
But Marla Rivera is smiling sweetly.


Suit Targets State's Plan To Open Home
A two-story, red-brick house on a quiet, leafy street in Flushing is at the center of residents' latest battle to prevent what they perceive as an unfairly burdensome concentration of group homes and other social-service centers in their community.
About three weeks ago, a homeowners association filed a lawsuit to bar state officials from buying the house at 63-12 137th Street and turning it into a group home for eight mentally disabled adults.


Jimmy Key: The Man in Control
The pitching advice was dispensed to Jimmy Key when he was 10, barely old enough to comprehend or care about the nuances of fooling hitters.
But it was sternly delivered by his father, Ray, so Jimmy obeyed.
Key was not permitted to simply play catch.
If he tossed a baseball, he had to pitch precisely to a catcher.
Imagine that early dose of discipline.
Most 10-year-olds want to grab a baseball and then imitate Roger Clemens.
Watch me, Dad, watch how hard I can throw.
But Key was forbidden from that childhood stunt.
Astutely, Ray implored his son to locate every pitch so none were wasted.
He taught Jimmy control, and that sharp control has never waned.


Body Language
The demand for tattoo T-shirts and dresses that can be peeled off at the end of the day far outstrips the supply.
For many, these clothes by Jean-Paul Gaultier, which fit like a sheer body stocking, are the fashion prize of the summer.
Tattooing is one of the oldest forms of body decoration.
The motifs used by the French designer were inspired by patterns on foreign currency and graffiti.
One woman (below) added his bustier to her ensemble.
The designs are being worn both day and evening, often accompanied by Mr.
Gaultier's other success this season: his 18th-century-style waistcoat, in denim, silk or embroidered organza.
Mr.
Gaultier (left) wore the denim version over his T-shirt on a recent visit to New York.


When Hope Died
Not long ago, when I was four months pregnant, I had a miscarriage.
I found that society -- even I -- did not know how to mark or mourn such an event.
For I learned that the debate on abortion has contaminated our discussions and our feelings about pregnancy and miscarriage.
I was bewildered, torn by my physical and emotional experiences.
I had no doubt that what was growing inside me was alive in some way.
The very morning of the miscarriage, I had seen a sonogram.
The heartbeat was steady and regular.
The white lines sketched out the beginnings of a femur and tiny backbone; the gray splotches were a liver and kidneys.


Ms. Monney and Mr. Clark
CHRISTOPHER CLARK, the 36-year-old president of the Clark Construction Corporation in TriBeCa, is well-known for the parties he gives at his old shingled ocean front house in East Hampton, L.I.
Almost every weekend, the house fills up with friends (and friends of friends) who play touch football on the beach, go in-line skating and surfing, organize big sit-down dinners and bang on an old piano that's painted the color of a lobster, creating an atmosphere that one regular house guest described as "misspent youth over 30."
Peter Moore, an architect in New York and a longtime friend of Mr.
Clark, said: "Chris's house parties have been famous for the last 15 years. He's a great host because he really doesn't bother you too much. We just walk in, sit down and start partying. It's the same people year after year. They never lose the scent."


Grandmother Appealing Decision Giving Lesbian Custody of Son
Sharon L. Bottoms, the lesbian mother who had expected to take her 2-year-old home after the Virginia Court of Appeals ruled in her favor, may now have to wait weeks or even years because of an appeal by her mother.
On Tuesday, the court reversed a local judge's decision that had given custody of the toddler, Tyler Doustou, to his grandmother, P. Kay Bottoms of Richmond.
Court rules allow her to keep him until her appeal is decided.


Two Old Warriors March Into 4th Round
One of them uses, albeit grudgingly, a pink towel to wipe away the mist that sometimes settles on her glasses as she tries to make this final march at Wimbledon go the distance.
The other uses a green towel like an eraser, wiping away the years that have been less than glorious since he took this Grand Slam event by storm at age 17.
Neither of them appears likely to throw in the towel anytime soon: The possibility of giving their respective careers a kick-start by winning another Wimbledon title seems to have bewitched them both.


Andrea Labov, Timothy Clark
Andrea Laura Labov, an assistant United States attorney in New York, was married last evening to Timothy Joseph Clark, an associate at the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
Rabbi Harvey Tattelbaum performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Clark, 31, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Labov of New York.
A summa cum laude graduate of Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, she received a law degree from Harvard University.


Shipbuilding 101: Students Build a Boat
Aaron Carreras, a senior at North Shore High School, stood on the dock of the Sea Cliff Yacht Club the other day, admiring the handiwork that went into building the sleek, 23-foot sailboat that bobbed alongside in the undulating waters of Hempstead Harbor.
"I think it's beautiful," he said, his eyes fixed on the boat's elegant lines and crisp white sail, unfurled and festooned with flags.
"This came out excellent. I don't want to brag, but it looks better than all the other boats out here."


Ariane Noel, Marco Sodi
Ariane Noel, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Noel Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Marco Sodi, a son of Diana Sodi of Hobe Sound, Fla., and the late Mario Sodi.
The Rev.
Terry Elsberry officiated at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
The Rev.
Theodore Tack, a Roman Catholic priest and a cousin of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Sodi, 27, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is a partner with her mother in the Monica Noel line of children's clothing and table linens in Greenwich, where the bride's father has an investment management business bearing his name.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $315,000
438 West 23d Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,050-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in prewar building; dining area, 2 fireplaces, 500-sq.-ft. roof terrace, walk-up; maintenance $490, 20% tax deductible, listed at $329,000, 16 months on market (Broker: Kingman Associates)


Denise Hawkins, Peter Walinsky
Denise Ann Hawkins and Peter Lee Walinsky, medical students at Hahnemann University Medical School in Philadelphia, were married yesterday in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Mayor Walter Handelman of Scarsdale performed the ceremony at the home of Adam and Jane Walinsky, the bridegroom's parents.
Guido Calabresi, the dean of the Yale Law School and judge designate to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, also took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Walinsky, 28, graduated from Scripps College of the Claremont Colleges.
She is the daughter of MaryJo Corless of Beaverton, Ore., and Melvyn W. Hawkins of San Dimas, Calif.
Her father teaches history at Bonita High School in LaVerne, Calif.
Her mother, a reading specialist, is also an instructor in the gifted-student program in the Beaverton school district.


POSTINGS: Survey of New York Region; Unmarried Buy One Home in 3
The popular image of home buyers in the New York region has long featured married couples.
Such a stereotype, however, is becoming far less valid.
A survey of 856 owners and renters conducted this spring by the Dime Savings Bank in Manhattan showed that unmarried households bought 35 percent of the homes sold in the metropolitan area in the previous 12 months, up from 20 percent in a 1992 study.


Corrections
An article on May 29 about Isle Royale, which is in Lake Superior, misidentified the largest fresh-water lake by volume in the world.
It is Lake Baikal in Siberia, not Lake Superior.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York House
1.
Independent Counsel:Vote on passage of a compromise bill reinstating the independent counsel law, which expired two years ago.
Approved 317 to 105, June 21.
2.
Arts Endowment: Vote on an amendment to an overall appropriation bill for the Interior Department and other related agencies that would eliminate financing for the National Endowment for the Arts.
Rejected 313 to 113, June 22.
3.
Arts Endowment: Vote on an amendment to an overall appropriation bill for the Interior Department and other related agencies that would reduce a proposed 5 percent cut in the National Endowment for the Arts' budget to 2 percent.
Approved 222 to 204, June 23.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .  Y. . . N. . . Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
4. Shays (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
5. Franks (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . N
6. Johnson (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . N
2. Hughes (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . N
4. Smith (R) . . . Y. . . Y. . . N
5. Roukema (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . N
6. Pallone (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
7. Franks (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . N
8. Klein (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
N  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
N  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  New York  1.
Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . N
3. King (R) . . . N. . . Y. . . N
4. Levy (R) . . . Y. . . Y. . . N
5. Ackerman (D) . . . Y. . . A. . . Y
6. Flake (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . A
7. Manton (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
A  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y. . .
A. . .
Y  13.
Molinari (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y. . .
A. . .
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
A. . .
A. . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N. . .
Y. . .
N  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N. . .
Y. . .
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N. . .
Y. . .
N  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N. . .
A. . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


The Code; DNA and O. J. Simpson: Testing Science and Justice
AS the prosecution and the defense prepare their arguments in the case of O. J. Simpson, they must try to anticipate the nature of the evidence they might be confronted with in court.
So far, it has been elusive.
Yes, he was arrested once on a complaint of wife-beating, but past behavior is not necessarily admissible evidence.
All that passes so far for an eyewitness is a woman who was paid to appear on the television show "Hard Copy" and said she saw Mr.
Simpson speeding through the streets near the murder scene.
Mr.
Simpson maintains that he is innocent.
But the curtains may soon be lifted.
On Friday a Superior Court judge in Los Angeles stopped a grand jury investigation, ruling that it could be compromised by pretrial publicity, like the release of tapes of 911 calls made by Nicole Brown Simpson last year after Mr.
Simpson broke down the door of her house.
The decision opens the way for a preliminary hearing, scheduled for Thursday, in which both sides will have to put their cards on the table.
The speculation now among the hordes of lawyers who are microscopically examining the pretrial maneuvering is that the case may hinge on the delicate science of DNA fingerprinting and all the controversy that surrounds it.


Agendas Are Critical
To the Editor:
The position of churches in our society sinks ever lower.
Your article about open-space meetings describes the Presbyterian Church USA as "the Chicago-based umbrella group that sets church policy." The Presbyterian Church USA is a church, not an umbrella group, and it is based in Louisville, Ky., not Chicago.
It is true that within the denomination's polity, governance comes from the ground up, but your nomenclature diminishes the church's stature.
JULIANNE N. KING  Manitowish, Wis., June 6  The writer is a retired manager of church consulting services at the Alban Institute in Washington.


Masters of the Turf: Lure Faces Star of Cozzene
For the fifth and probably final time in their deadlocked rivalry as the superstars of grass racing, Lure and Star of Cozzene will meet today in the Caesar's International in Atlantic City, the tie breaker in their dramatic series of turf races.
Between them, they have won more than $4.3 million and have run in the money 36 times in 45 starts.
They will run a mile and three-sixteenths for a purse of $500,000 and with the extra prize of a trip to England for Lure if he gives a strong performance.


Pamela Freiman, Adam Rentzer
Pamela Jane Freiman, a daughter of Bonnie and Herbert Freiman of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday evening to Adam Craig Rentzer, the son of Linda Rentzer of Boca Raton, Fla., and Robert Rentzer of Plainview, L.I.
Rabbi Brooks Sussman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 24, teaches kindergarten at the Town School in New York.
Her father, now retired, was a vice chairman of Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.


Getting Even With Dad, Uncle Scar and Bigots
Getting Even With Dad  Ted Danson, Macaulay Culkin Directed by Howard Deutch PG 108 minutes


Corrections
A picture caption on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure section today about a New York City Ballet choreography project misstates the name of a dance in some copies.
It is "Red Angels," not "Red Angles."


Britain's Cancer Treatment Seen as Too Little, Too Late
Armed with statistics showing that patients in Britain with certain types of cancer are more likely to die -- and die sooner -- than patients in the United States or the rest of Western Europe, health advocates are demanding that the national health care system do a better job in diagnosing and treating a disease expected to afflict 260,000 new people here this year.
Increasingly outspoken groups of survivors, joined by Britain's top cancer specialists and largest cancer charities, say the Government has failed to spend enough money on cancer care and train enough specialists.
What's more, they argue that Britain's medical establishment and the National Health Service, the 46-year-old Government system that provides most Britons with medical care, sometimes hinder patients from seeing the best people or receiving the optimum treatment.


Jessica Hamilton, J. P. Brown 3d
Jessica Grant Hamilton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Hamilton 3d of Cohasset, Mass., was married there yesterday to James Potter Brown 3d, a son of Greta Brown Cummings of Little Compton, R.I., and the late Mr.
Brown Jr.
The Rev.
Daniel Burke performed the Episcopal ceremony at the First Parish Meeting House.
Mrs.
Brown, 27, is an account executive at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in Boston.
She graduated from Wheaton College.
Her father is the executive vice president of Prudential Prime Properties, a real estate company in Cohasset.


Laurie Marshall, James N. Lauria
Laurie Lynne Marshall, the daughter of Janet V. Marshall of Pelham Manor, N.Y., and the late Dr.
John L. Marshall, was married yesterday to James Nicholas Lauria, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rocca Lauria of Mastic Beach, L.I.
The Rev.
David S. Hoag performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Parish of Christ the Redeemer in Pelham Manor.
Mrs.
Lauria, a graduate of St.
Lawrence University, received a master's degree in Spanish literature from New York University.
She teaches Spanish at Woodlands High School in Greenburgh, N.Y., and at Pleasantville (N.Y.) High School.
Her father was the team physician for the New York Giants football team.


Taiwan Pushes to Rebuild Its Position in Global Community
After years of international isolation, including expulsion from the United Nations and the loss of diplomatic recognition by all but a handful of countries, Taiwan has embarked on an aggressive diplomatic campaign to re-establish itself as a legitimate member of the global community, a campaign that has enraged China.
For the past six months, Taiwan's President, Lee Teng-hui, has engaged in what is called "vacation diplomacy" across southeast Asia, arranging golf outings to coincide with meetings with regional leaders.
Mr.
Lee has also visited Costa Rica and Nicaragua and appeared in Pretoria last month for the inauguration of Nelson Mandela as President of South Africa, one of the countries that still recognizes this island's sovereignty.


Bad Temper? Me?
To the Editor:
I appreciate "First Out of the Chute: Bob Dole" (editorial, June 19), welcoming my interest in the 1996 Republican Presidential nomination.
However, while I haven't made any decisions about the 1996 race, you appear to have made some about me that need to be addressed.


Jennifer Cohen, Jonathan Zonis
Jennifer Jill Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome J. Cohen of New Canaan, Conn., is to be married there today to Jonathan Zonis, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Melvin Zonis of Quincy, Mass.
Rabbi Douglas Sagal is to officiate at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 27, is a publicity administrator in New York for the Buena Vista Pictures division of the Walt Disney Company.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in Carter, Ledyard &amp; Milburn, a law firm in New York.
Her mother, Elaine Cohen, is the president of Cohen Gilbert Associates, an educational consulting concern in New Canaan.


Nashville
Though thoroughly deserving the nickname Music City, Nashville is also home to a number of splendid plantations and evocative Civil War sites, redolent of opulent hospitality and that bittersweet fragrance of the lost South.
The luxuriant summer flora only add to the sense of gracious over indulgence -- magnolias whose white blossoms open to the size of a Tammy Wynette LP line the boulevards, emerald green lawns are set up for cricket or polo.
The loamy smell of boxwood and mown grass is pervasive.


The M.T.A.'s Engineer; Stangl Can Run a Railroad, but the Politics Derails Him
Peter E. Stangl should probably have seen it coming.
For all the importance of Mr.
Stangl's job as chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, he has never been part of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's inner circle.
And last weekend when he lost Mr.
Cuomo's support for a tougher stance in the Long Island Rail Road strike, it was not the first time his control over the quasi-independent agency he has run since 1991 was diminished by the very Governor who appointed him.


Mountain Biking the Icelandic Frontier
ATOP the crater's rim, the seven turned their backs to the camera and struck a pose.
Members of a French rugby team on a mountain biking tour, they had reached the top of this extinct volcano, Hverfjall, just behind our group.


Corrections
A caption on page 13 in the Travel section today with an article about hot-spring baths in northern California misidentifies the resort in the photograph.
It is Wilbur Hot Springs, not Vichy Hot Springs Resort.


Handling of Harassment Issues Helps Kill Admiral's Nomination
The Defense Department has withdrawn its choice for commander of American forces in the Pacific because misgivings about the nominee's handling of sexual harassment and other issues threatened to hold up Senate confirmation at a time of increasing tensions in the Korean Peninsula.
The current head of the Pacific Command, Adm.
Charles R. Larson, is scheduled to become superintendent of the United States Naval Academy in a few weeks.
The Pacific Command, which has its headquarters in Hawaii, is responsible for planning military operations in Korea.


A HOME FOR ANTHONY
I can only say thanks for "A Home for Anthony," by Michael Winerip (June 5).
I have recently learned of a close family member's mental illness, and it is comforting to know there are alternatives to institutions.
DENISE QUARINO Newark


June 19-25: Nicotine as a Drug?; This Is Your Brain On Tobacco
Dr.
David A. Kessler, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, held Congress in thrall last week testifying that a leading cigarette maker had secretly developed a breed of tobacco with twice the usual amount of nicotine.
The company, Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation, said it blended the plant, called Y-1, with other tobacco, but retained the normal amount of nicotine.
Dr.
Kessler argued Wednesday that the existence and use of Y-1 proved that the company manipulated the level of nicotine.
He contends that cigarettes can be seen as nicotine delivery devices, which the F.D.A. could regulate as drugs.
The same day, researchers at the University of Wisconsin reported what they saw as good news on the smoking cessation front: Nicotine patches can double the success rate for those trying to quit.
But even with patches, only a quarter of the smokers succeed in stopping.


Editors' Notes
A review of "Black Money," by Michael M. Thomas, on page 26 of The Times Book Review today cites a number of racist epithets and expressions of bigotry used by characters in the book.
As finally published, the book does not contain such frequent expressions of prejudice.
Like many reviews, this one was based on proofs supplied by the publisher before the finished copies were ready.


WHEN WHITES FLEE
I have been a substitute teacher in the New York City school system for almost nine years ("We're All Racist Now," by H. G. Bissinger, May 29).
And though I'm black, I, too, have grown tired of the attitude of some students.
So yes, there's a problem that calls for some creative solutions.
Somehow I doubt this entails a white social-studies teacher perpetuating stereotypes rather than helping his students identify underlying causes.
And I don't think this means fleeing so you "never have to see another black face."


'Sexing the Millennium'
To the Editor:
In his review of Linda Grant's "Sexing the Millennium" (May 15), Paul Robinson states: "Her story rests mainly on a handful of secondary studies. She has some solid statistical information on contraceptive practices, but mostly she offers a guide to sexual opinion makers and style setters."


How Change At Top Helps A Company
For most of its 10-year existence, Promanagement Associates, a Newark-based construction company, was owned and operated by a white man, Harry Hampel.
But when the company won a $4.6 million contract last year to rehabilitate city-owned housing, Promanagement described itself as owned and controlled by a woman: Mr.
Hampel's wife, Blanche.
The company's history illustrates one of a number of ways in which white men have benefited from a program intended to help women and minorities.


Mets' Vaunted Aces Now Nothing of the Sort
The Mets came closer this time.
But coming close, and failing, is starting to mark the Mets' campaign as they slide deeper into sub-.500 waters.
With Bret Saberhagen pitching, they dropped a 3-1 decision last night to the Pirates and Zane Smith at Shea Stadium.
For the Pirates, cruising to their fifth straight victory, the prospect of facing Saberhagen after tattooing Doc Gooden in a 9-4 victory Friday night proved no big problem.


Poor Air-Safety Record Moves Colombia to Act
WHAT happens when a developing country mixes jagged mountain peaks, lax safety controls, guerrilla sabotage and a free-market boom in air travel?
In Colombia's case, it is the worst air-safety record in the Americas, according to the International Airline Passengers Association, a consumer group based in Dallas.
Citing aircraft accident rates in India and Colombia, the association called the two nations "the two most dangerous places to fly in the world," saying in its newsletter in September, "We advise our readers to avoid flying in or out of Colombia."


Lake District
To the Editor: I was delighted with your article on the Lake District in England ("Borrowdale: Up Peaks and Over Tarns," May 15).
For the last 24 years, the International Wordsworth Summer Conference has been held there.
It was founded by Richard Wordsworth -- the poet's great-great-grandson, who died in 1993 -- and me.
For people who love poetry, landscape, exercise and good company, the conference is held in Grasmere in the Lake District, where so many of the poets and painters gathered during the early years of the 19th century.
It is held for people of all ages, from all over the world.
The conference offers a combination of study and play, with lectures by international scholars, seminars, discussions and various entertainments including poetry, play-readings and an auction.
Every morning there is a walk round the lake before breakfast; in the afternoon we hike over the fells (including Borrowdale Valley) or take bus trips to places of literary interest, like Beatrix Potter's farm, William Wordsworth's birthplace or Scott's mansion.


The Executive Life; A 200-Mile Journey To a New Camaraderie
WHEN some companies sponsor big sporting events, their executives often get the chance to enjoy the occasion from plush priority seating, every comfort provided.
Executives for the companies sponsoring the Seattle to Portland Bicycle Classic also get the chance to enjoy the event -- atop the hard seats of their bikes, cycling 200 miles in two days through the rolling countryside of western Washington and Oregon, and spending the night in a rural motel or in sleeping bags shoulder to shoulder with dozens of other cyclists in a church meeting hall or school gym.


The Executive Computer; Microsoft Tackles the Enterprise Computing Riddle Anew
IF at first you don't succeed, try, try again.
Has any company learned this childhood homily so well as Microsoft?
These days, it is hard to recall that the overwhelmingly successful Windows program was the subject of nearly universal derision when it was introduced in 1985, or that Microsoft kept tinkering with it until version 3.0 finally clicked with the market five years later.
Now Microsoft is playing a similar game with its products aimed at so-called enterprise computing, SQL Server and Windows NT.


Atrium War: When Is 'Public' Public Enough?
After several months of promises followed by unexplained delays, the public atrium in the Bel Canto condominium on West 68th Street reopened its doors early this month.
The assault on brown-bagging waged by the former cafe seems over, with the new cafe, Taco Madre, more accepting of those who bring their own, neighbors say.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Stocktons: Dad Leads and Son Shares First  A cold, steady drizzle and an unforgiving golf course caught up with all but Dave Stockton in the third round of the Senior Players Championship in Dearborn, Mich.
Stockton shot a one-under 71 at the TPC of Michigan on a gray, rainy afternoon, opening a five-shot lead over Jim Albus.
Albus -- who won this tournament in 1991 while still a club pro at Piping Rock Club on Long Island -- was grinding his way to an even-par 72 for the round and 208 for the tournament.
Lee Trevino bogeyed three of four holes during a wayward stretch on the back nine and finished two-over for the round.
Even though he was leading, Stockton said he frequently thought about his son, Dave Stockton Jr., a PGA Tour rookie who was fighting to hold the lead in the Greater Hartford Open.
He completed 54 holes in a tie with David Frost.
"I talked to Junior this morning," the senior Stockton said.
"I didn't tell him much. I just reminded him to go slow and allow some extra time at the course. He said he was going out early, exercise in the health van, and watch films for a couple of hours. His routine is a lot different than mine was." (AP)


Olympic-Style Ceremonies Close Gay Games


'Electra' With a Different Dimension
WHEN Novella Nelson as Clytemnestra emerges from behind towering palace doors in the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's production of Sophocles's "Electra," she declares: "I am not an evil woman" as though it were a proclamation.
No, she won't deny Electra's side of it: "You are all malice and venom." Or argue with her accusations of vanity and lust.
But Clytemnestra had the goods on Agamemnon, Electra's father, and grounds for killing him "with justice."


Profile; From Firewood to Environmental Empire in 14 Years
WHEN he was an 18-year-old freshman at Harvard University in 1980, Bill Haney noticed that a lot of dormitory rooms had fireplaces but no firewood.
"So I borrowed $1,000 and shipped two tractor-trailer loads of firewood into Harvard Yard," he recalled.
He worried about the gamble, but Mr.
Haney's business instincts proved sound.
The wood sold out, he made a $2,000 profit and his career as an entrepreneur was launched.


SUNDAY, June 26, 1994; The Adam and Eve of Cyberspace
Some people describe the Internet's digital realm as a way to transcend the body and others find it a way to have an out-of-body experience as they blend into a virtual community.
But the National Library of Medicine is putting a body into the Net -- actually two bodies.
It is creating the first ever highly detailed, digitized atlas of a pair of human bodies (nicknamed Adam and Eve), based on the corpses of a 38-year-old man and a 59-year-old woman, both of whom died in reasonably good physical condition.


Lone Vintner on 15 Acres on South Shore Defies the Skeptics
THE experts told him in 1983 that it could not be done, that grapes could not be grown on the South Shore because the climate and atmospheric conditions were not right.
But Barney Loughlin went ahead and proved the skeptics wrong.
Ignoring those who told him that grapes could be grown only on the North Shore, where the combination of Long Island Sound and Atlantic Ocean is best, Mr.
Loughlin bought 4,000 chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon vines and planted them on 5 of his 15 acres of farm on the Sayville-Bayport border.


Julie Applebaum, Gregory G. Flynn
Julie Ellen Applebaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey M. Applebaum of Washington, was married there last evening to Gregory Grant Flynn, the son of Roberta Flynn of Ross, Calif., and Donald Flynn of Sandy, Ore.
Judge Theodore Tannenwald of the United States Tax Court in Washington performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel.
Mrs.
Flynn, 27, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received a law degree earlier this month from Stanford University.
In the fall she is to become an associate at Morrison &amp; Foerster, a law firm in San Francisco.
Her father is a partner in Covington &amp; Burling, the Washington law firm.
Her mother, Elizabeth B. Applebaum, is the program coordinator at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington.


Wall Street; To Shareholders, Death Is 'Material'
THE presentation by the company last Wednesday morning was well-received, and the stock climbed 6.8 percent by the end of the day, buoyed by the management team's rosy outlook.
But would investors have scrambled to buy shares of the restaurant chain, Buffets Inc., had they known of a company tragedy the night before?


And The Truth Set Her Free (Albeit Naked)
AT THE CENTER OF "THE NAKED Truth," Paul Rudnick's satiric new comedy at the WPA Theater, stands the commanding figure of Nan Bemiss, an upper-middle-class New York society woman.
You know the type: Dina Merrill has played her in movies, sometimes for laughs, sometimes as the ferocious other woman.
Nan is Greenwich born, Republican bred, an indefatigable doer of good works and perfectly groomed.
She looks so bright, shiny and hard that she seems not only to have been washed and set at Elizabeth Arden's, but also glazed like a ham.
As played by Mary Beth Peil with strategically funny abandon, her forehead often furrowed, Nan is the sympathetic, questing innocent in "The Naked Truth." She's also a most unlikely equivalent to the youngish title character in "Jeffrey," Mr.
Rudnick's award-winning hit comedy about gay romance in the time of AIDS.
Both Nan and Jeffrey yearn for sexual freedom though she, being older and far prissier, doesn't even know what she's missing, at least at first.


The Great Unknown
IN TOUCH The Letters of Paul Bowles.
Edited by Jeffrey Miller.
Illustrated. 604 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $30.
CONVERSATIONS WITH PAUL BOWLES Edited by Gena Dagel Caponi. 254 pp.
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.
Cloth, $35.
Paper, $14.95.
After July 1: Cloth, $37.50.
Paper, $15.95.


The Evolution Of the SoHo District
To the Editor:
Here at the Landmarks Preservation Commission we all enjoyed your May 8 article on the evolution of SoHo.
For those of us who remember SoHo in the 1960's and 1970's, its transformation has been truly remarkable.


Squid With the Crunch but Not the Frying
THE most popular way to eat squid (or calamari, as it is frequently called) is deep-fried to a crisp golden turn with mayonnaise or tomato sauce for dipping.
But for the home cook, that is not the easiest preparation.


Business Diary: June 19-24
THE ECONOMY Suddenly, All Eyes Are on the Dollar (Just Look Down)  Currency traders took the markets on a wild ride last week, with the dollar crossing the 100-yen barrier for the first time in the postwar era.
And central banks, it seems, can do little.
By Friday, the White House decided to intervene and got 16 central banks to join it in a $5-billion shopping trip for dollars, but traders didn't even blink, as the dollar hit a '94 low of 1.58 marks.
The next step, of course, could well be for the Federal Reserve to tighten the screws again in early July, and this prospect didn't make the stock market happy at all, as the Dow industrials plunged 62 points on Friday, ending a dismal week in which it lost 140 points, or close to 4 percent.
President Clinton couldn't figure out why all this was happening, saying the dollar's fall was "puzzling a lot of economists." He insisted, probably correctly, that the American economy "is performing so well." But for today's hair-trigger markets, nothing is ever remotely that simple.


Krone's Day Off Merits a Blue Ribbon
JULIE KRONE took a day off from riding the thoroughbreds at Belmont Park yesterday.
But the first woman to ride the winner of a Triple Crown race continued her winning ways by capturing the blue ribbon in a celebrity "power and speed" jumping competition at the United States Equestrian Team's Festival of Champions at Gladstone, N.J.
Krone and Peter Rabbit, a chestnut gelding bred and raised by her mother, JUDY, were faultless in the power phase and went on the jump in the speed section.
Taking turns as tight as the rain-soaked turf course would allow, Krone and Peter Rabbit left all the rails up and stopped the clock in 35.75 seconds to earn a crystal bowl.


This Crazy Thing Called Love
A NATURAL HISTORY OF LOVE By Diane Ackerman. 358 pp. New York: Random House. $23.


A Ruin of One's Own
A VALLEY IN ITALY The Many Seasons of a Villa in Umbria.
By Lisa St.
Aubin de Teran. 220 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $21.


IN SHORT: FICTION
NOVEL OF OBSESSION  GAMES OF THE BLIND  By Evelin Sullivan. Fromm, $19.95.


Meredith Clark, C. M. Shachoy
Meredith Ann Clark, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Thomas Clark of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Mahan Shachoy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman J. Shachoy of Boston.
The Rev.
Gary Gelfenbein, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
James Church in Chatham, N.Y.
The bride, 25, is a retail operational consultant in Boston for the accounting firm of Arthur Andersen.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the president of Dubin Clark &amp; Company, an investment firm in Greenwich, Conn.
Her mother, Nancy Clark, is the president of the Clark Design Group, interior designers in Rye.


Unnecessary Nuclear Relics
The Pentagon says it does not want more B-2 bombers.
The Energy Department does not want a new nuclear reactor.
But there are interested parties in the private sector and in Congress who want one or the other or both.
By denying funds this week, the Senate can stop these superfluous programs in their tracks.
The B-2 bomber was designed to penetrate Soviet air defenses and drop nuclear bombs on targets that U.S. missiles missed.
That mission is extinct.
The B-2 is now being touted as a conventional bomber, at an exorbitant $870 million a copy.
The Pentagon already has 20 B-2's, and an ample number of other bombers, to carry out that new mission.


A Scarsdale 'Team' Off to Play France
THE latest winning high school team here plays neither football nor basketball but is stirring pride and excitement in this sports-minded village.
Wielding violins, cellos and other instruments, 20 members of the Scarsdale High School Chamber Orchestra are about to demonstrate their prowess in Europe, where they will represent New York State in the Allied Musical Salute to the Liberation of France.
The musicians will leave tomorrow for Paris, where they will begin a nine-day round of performances at places like the Luxembourg Gardens and the Evangelique Allemande Church.
Their itinerary also includes concerts at the United States War Memorial at Omaha Beach in Normandy, Blois Castle in the Loire Valley and on the coast in Deauville.
The group will give a final concert on July 4 at the American Embassy in Paris.


Alice E. Pernick, Christopher Barry
Alice Elizabeth Pernick, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin J. Pernick of Forest Hills, Queens, is to be married today to Christopher Brian Barry, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald G. Barry of Huntington, L.I.
Judge Ralph Gazzillo of Suffolk County District Court is to officiate at Flowerfield in St.
James, L.I.
Ms.
Pernick, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a lawyer in Silver Spring, Md.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from Lewis &amp; Clark College.
Her father is the president of Peconic Publishers, a technical publishing company in Forest Hills.
Her mother, Nancy Pernick, is the managing editor at Kirchoff/Wohlberg, a textbook development company in New York.


Up on the Roof
'... And all my cares just drift right into space.'


Shakespeare Festival: Another View
In his review of "Romeo and Juliet" (May 29), Alvin Klein mentioned how difficult it was "to rid the memory of dozens of drab, flat productions" before the arrival of Bonnie J. Monte as artistic director.
My husband and I wonder when these "dozens" took place.
We have attended the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival since the 1970's and have witnessed at least a couple of dozen performances at the charming, intimate Bowne Theater.
We remember some presentations that were mediocre, but dozens?
Hardly.


Need Greek Columns? Come to 63d Street!
For months, wooden panels had walled off the site at the corner of Second Avenue and 63d Street.
On Monday morning, the barriers came down and a jaded-New Yorker-stopping vision was revealed: a lush lawn, shrubs, stone paths, a gazebo, marble benches, large urns, Greek columns and a sumptuous 30-by-30-foot pool with classical statues and spraying fountain -- juxtaposed against standstill traffic and brick towers.
"This is phenomenal -- magnificent -- and that pool looks so tempting," said Brenda Hefter, wandering in. 'I've been dying to see what it was all about." Having done so, she was still unsure exactly what she had seen.


SURFACING
MERCHANDISING  Hot Character: The Japanese-created frog Kerokerokeroppi (pronounced kuh-row-kuh-row-kuh-ROPE-ee) is scoring with American children, adorning products like lunch boxes, wallets and pens.


Corrections
An entry in the "And Bear in Mind" listing on June 5 about "D-Day, June 6, 1944," by Stephen E. Ambrose, misstated the numbers of men and vehicles landed by the Allies on the first day of the invasion of Normandy.
Scholars' estimates vary, but Mr.
Ambrose believes there were about 175,000 men; his estimate for vehicles of all kinds, from bicycles to tanks, is 50,000.


Center Unmoved By Eviction Notice
ABC No Rio, a nonprofit center for experimental art, remains open despite an eviction notice from the city to vacate its storefront space at 156 Rivington Street.
The notice was issued after the center ignored the city's request to vacate its city-owned space and temporarily move into an alternative site so that much-needed structural repairs could be made to the building.


Two Ways to Replace a Familiar Face
KEN BODE HAS A BEARD.
HE also has a resume that includes a Ph.D. in politics, a decade as a national political correspondent for NBC News, nearly five years as politics editor of The New Republic, and stints as a reporter and analyst for CNN in the 1992 Presidential campaign.
But since Friday, March 11, when he sat down at the head of a slate-blue, suede-topped table to replace Paul Duke as host of "Washington Week in Review" on PBS, Mr.
Bode and his colleagues have heard a lot about the beard from the fiercely loyal viewers of one of the nation's most venerable video salons.


Calls to Spouse-Abuse Hot Lines on the Rise
Across the country, many domestic-violence hot lines have reported large increases in the number of calls since June 17, when O. J. Simpson was arrested on charges of murdering his former wife and her friend.
Calls for help have increased 27 percent in New York, 35 percent in Denver, 50 percent to 80 percent in the Houston area, 20 percent to 30 percent in Chicago and 80 percent in Los Angeles, where the killings occurred, hot line directors said.


Testimony and Film Leave Mrs. Kennedy's Actions a Mystery
To the Editor:
"Zapruder Film Contradicts the Warren Report" by Dennis Dalrymple (letter, June 14), following "What the Film Shows" by William O'Neill (letter, May 27) illustrate how amateur students of the John F. Kennedy assassination can misinterpret evidence or repeat false reports.


American Express Puts Its Checks in A.T.M.'s
Soon, if you leave home without your American Express traveler's checks, you may be able to get them at an automated teller machine.
American Express has begun a project, developed with Diebold Incorporated and the Electronic Data Service, to make the checks available at select A.T.M.'s in the United States.
The technology can be added to certain types of existing A.T.M.'s and will also be available in special machines dedicated only to American Express transactions inside banks.


A Remote First Lady
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that words of praise are wasted on a woman who, to the best of my knowledge, wasn't associated with one significant act during her time as First Lady  [ "Jackie O., Who Lived a Mini-Series," May 29 ] .


Elinor E. La, Andrew Hoover
Elinor Eunsun La, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Jea Min La of Westbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Benjamin Andrew Hoover 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Hoover 2d of York, Pa.
The Rev.
Richard E. Spalding performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Memorial Church of Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Hoover, 27, graduated cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard.
She is to become an associate with Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in New York.
Her father is a professor of political science at Kyung-Hee University in Seoul, South Korea.
Her mother, Youngsoon La, is a registered nurse at Nassau County Medical Center in East Meadow, L.I.


INSIDE
Europeans Split on Leader
A European Union summit meeting broke up in disarray after Britain held out against its 11 partners on the choice of a new leader.
Page 6.
Battle Over AIDS Testing
An effort to require New York State to disclose results of H.I.V. tests performed on all newborns has become a complex political battle.
Page 23.
Argentina Triumphs
Argentina, a traditional soccer power, held off an emerging one, Nigeria, by 2-1, in the World Cup.
SportsSunday, section 8.


Mutual Funds; The Vanguard Approach to Taxes
FRENZIED competition among mutual fund companies for investors has led to some gimmicky marketing, a trend the Vanguard Group, known for its plain-vanilla approach to investing, has long resisted.
But now, it seems, the company is succumbing.
Taxes is the latest buzzword among funds, and Vanguard is jumping in with a series of funds in July that are intended to reduce shareholders' taxes.


Haitian Dissident Tells Of Rape by Police Agents
Nearly a month after four armed police agents raped her because of her political activities, Rose Margui Lormil's biggest problem is that the scars she carries from the experience are not visible.
Miss Lormil, 24, is a member of Comme Il Faut, or As It Should Be, a grass-roots organization whose loyalists have been hunted by the Haitian military since the army seized power in a coup in September 1991.


Tend Roses and Seedlings
Cut faded roses from their bushes, and watch for aphids.
A spray with the hose is an effective organic method of getting rid of them, as is running your fingers along the buds and stems to squish the soft-bodied creatures.
If you're squeamish, spray them with a Safer's soap solution.
If you see black spots on the rose leaves, spray every four to seven days with a baking soda solution (a tablespoon baking soda to a gallon of water, with a few drops of horticultural oil).
Then, remove diseased leaves from rose bushes and beds.


June 19-25: 0 for 3 in Tokyo; Political Warfare Claims Another Japanese Prime Minister
There was a time when nations all over Asia tried to emulate the stability of Japanese politics.
No more.
Yesterday Tsutomu Hata became the third prime minister to resign in a year, when it became clear his minority government would not survive a no-confidence motion introduced by the Liberal Democrats, who had run the country for 38 years until Mr.
Hata and his allies staged a revolt last summer.
No one knows if the Liberal Democrats' effort will work.
In April, they helped push Moriro Hosokawa, a leader of another party in the coalition, from power amid a financial scandal.
The socialists, the largest party in the coalition, abandoned it, leaving Mr.
Hata with a minority government.


Rockefeller, Javits, Lindsay . . . Millard?


SMOKING TOAD
How infuriating to read, in your article, that attendance at parent-teacher meetings was "about 80 percent white in a school that was 80 percent minority." The bottom line is this: Our long-derided -- but more in vogue today -- middle-class values were what separated chaos from social anarchy all along.
Parental nagging, involvement and caring turn out to be the keys to solving our social ills.
Many of us aging boomers instinctively fell back on those values when our children were born.


Pain, Justice and the Workplace
To the Editor:
In "A Spreading Pain, and Cries for Justice" (June 5), Dr.
Peter Nathan, the Oregon hand specialist cited in your article, is correct in saying that "work itself plays a minuscule role" in causing carpal tunnel syndrome.
I agree that work explains only part of the cause.


Julie A. Roche, Chip Simplicio
Julie Ann Roche, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Roche Jr. of Milton, Mass., was married there yesterday to Philip Werner Simplicio, a son of Marion Simplicio of Pittsford, N.Y., and the late Philip A. Simplicio Jr.
The Rev.
Paul Bolduc performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Elizabeth.
Mrs.
Simplicio, 24, is an account manager in the Boston office of Alexander &amp; Alexander, insurance brokers.
The couple graduated from Bates College.


A HOME FOR ANTHONY
You don't have to be Freud to suspect that there is a link between the mother's rejection of her son, the father's continuous justification of his wife's behavior and Anthony's illness.
In fact, the parents really seem to be the problem.
When, at a dramatic point in Anthony's illness, his father's main concern is to run and clean the rug so it won't upset his wife, one begins to think it is not only Anthony who has a "distorted sense of reality." STEPHEN MONNA Brooklyn


Charles Osgood Isn't Disturbing The 'Sunday Morning' Peace
BEHIND CHARLES OSGOOD'S desk, a bumper sticker is pasted to the wall.
"Charles Kuralt," it says, "Should Be King."
You don't mess with the King.


The Mayor's in the Middle
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani asked to march at the head of today's gay-rights parade past the United Nations but the organizers refused to let him, march officials said yesterday.
Later, mayoral aides said that the entire episode was a misunderstanding and that Mr.
Giuliani did not want to lead the parade in any case.
Nicole Ramirez Murray, a leader of the Stonewall 25 committee, said a mayoral aide, David Klasfeld, asked on Friday afternoon whether Mr.
Giuliani could lead the march.


Laurel Anderson, Vernon Cowell Jr.
Dr.
Laurel Rene Anderson, thedaughter of Theodore Anderson of Long Barn, Calif., and Norma Anderson of Uniondale, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Vernon Lee Cowell Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Cowell Sr. of Reading, Pa.
The Rev.
Maxine Foster-Durham, a Baptist minister, performed the nondemoninational service at Battell Chapel at Yale University in New Haven.
The bride, 32, graduated from Hofstra University and received a medical degree from the State University Health Sciences Center at Syracuse.
She is a fellow in allergy and clinical immunology at Yale.
Her father retired as an optician in Los Alamitos, Calif.
Her mother teaches the third grade at Powell's Lane School in Westbury, L.I.


Rebecca E. Reber, James A. Burness
Rebecca Erma Reber, the president of Rebecca Reber &amp; Company, talent representatives in Santa Monica, Calif., was married yesterday to James Andrew Burness, the president of Burness Consulting Group, communications consultants in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Stephen Treat, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Flathead Lake Lodge in Big Fork, Mont.
Mrs.
Burness graduated from the University of Montana.
She is a daughter of Velma L. Reber of Helena, Mont., and the late Paul W. Reber.
Her father was a real estate broker in Helena.


Boris Aleksandrov, Choral Leader, 88
Boris Aleksandrov, a Soviet leader of choral groups that sang propaganda songs and pre-Soviet oldies, cheered up Red Army units in World War II and counted Stalin as a fan, died on June 16 in Moscow, the British newspaper The Independent reported last week.
He was 88.
Colonel Aleksandrov, who received that rank during World War II, won two Lenin Prizes.
In 1950, while Stalin was reading aloud the list of the latest Stalin Prize winners, he spontaneously added the colonel's name.


On Sunday; Scoring Points And Winning An O. J. Debate
SUSAN from Scarsdale, a first-time caller, sounds as if she's lost in the men's locker room when she gets through to WFAN all-sports talk radio.
"I'm not sure I'm on the right show for the point I want to make," Susan hesitates, aware of the petulance summarized by Charlie from Staten Island, a rabid Knick fan who had called to snarl at the station, "Look, give the O. J. Simpson thing a rest."
But Susan has some major-league stats as a battered wife and is in the right place.
WFAN, normally a whiny cliche pit about stepping up for the big game and closing down the big man, has been airing a lot of O. J. calls. (Herein the manipulative-familiar "O. J." is the style, in line with the rest of the world's mixed flush of concern and entertainment.) Some of these calls are quite refreshing as they push beyond soporific regrets from cellular-phone jocks about the tragedy of a football hero gone wrong.


June 19-25; Court Is Deaf to Singer's Wail
In the end, it was hard to feel sorry for George Michael.
The pop singer lost his bid in a London court last week to be freed from the shackles of a 15-year contract with Sony Music that he said condemned him to "professional slavery."
Some slavery.
Mr.
Michael, who is all of 31, acknowledged that he has made more money than he knows what to do with, and the judge ruled that his contract was similar to those of other superstars.
Record sales will determine how much Mr.
Michael ultimately earns from Sony.
Asked his worth, he scribbled down the amount, allowing only the judge to see it.


The Nation; Our Bodies, but My Hysterectomy
I am browsing in the New Gender Studies section of a bookstore in my hometown of Berkeley, Calif., searching for "hysterectomy" in the index of every book I can find.
I am about to have one, at the hands of a trusted male physician, and while I am persuaded that mine is a necessary operation, you can never be too sure.
Not with this all-too-common procedure that is widely considered to be one of the most overused in the United States.


Getting Even With Dad, Uncle Scar and Bigots
The Lion King  Animated Directed by Roger Allers and Rob Minkoff G 87 minutes


On Tour, Mother-Daughter Writing Act
THEY don't look like they have sore faces from smiling and talking about themselves so much, these two calm women, full of friendly curiosity, mother and daughter writers, just back from a multicity publicity tour to promote their latest novels and calling it "a grueling exercise in solipsism."
Yet here they are in a bright and serene, book-filled Manhattan apartment, gamely geared for another interview -- projecting their best selves to the press while hoping they won't be asked the same old questions -- talking about themselves again.


Fifth Car Added to Parkway Sniper's Toll
New York State Police investigating a sniper attack Friday morning on motorists using the Southern State Parkway said yesterday an additional attack had been verified on that morning.
The police said they have no suspects in the case.


The Marathoners Raced to Beat the Heat
Keith Turner easily won the men's marathon at the Gay Games yesterday, but as temperatures rose with the sun, the women's race became a tight one.
The race started at the crack of dawn as weather conditions -- especially for the month of June in New York -- seemed ideal.
Overcast skies shielded the sun and a heavy mist rolled over Central Park at 6 A.M. as 769 men and women took their marks at Tavern on the Green, the starting point for the 26.2-mile run.


Miss Newcombe, Mr. Shilling
Kirsten Margrethe Newcombe, a daughter of Sissel and David Newcombe of Weston, Mass., was married yesterday to Andrew John Shilling, a son of Margaret and A. Gary Shilling of Short Hills, N.J.
The Rev.
John Lombard officiated at the Trinitarian Congregational Church in Concord, Mass.
The bride was until recently a senior associate in asset finance at Prudential Securities in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is the chief of physical medicine and rehabilitation at the Bedford (Mass.) Veterans Affairs Hospital.


Victoria Lasdon And Donald Rose
Victoria Robin Lasdon, the publisher of YM magazine in New York, was married last evening to Dr.
Donald J. Rose, an orthopedic surgeon in New York.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at the Essex House in New York.
Ms.
Lasdon is keeping her name.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Julian Coleman and Stuart Lasdon, both of New York.
Her father is the president of Caribbean International Inc., an industrial consulting company in New York.


In Knicks' Search for Answers, a Pick-Me-Up on Offense Sure Wouldn't Hurt
It was a great season, but it ended one victory short of a championship.
So as the Knicks begin their off season, the goal is to find whatever will make the difference.
Clearly, help is needed at the offensive end.
Too many times, the Knicks could not make an open shot.
Too many times, they could not create an easy basket with a one-on-one move.
Too many times, their infrequent fast breaks ended with a turnover or a miss, instead of a layup.


Memories! Get 'Em Here!
This is the summer of the souvenir key ring.
At Macy's, the arcade has been turned into a helter-skelter series of souvenir shops.
The Unity '94/Gay Games IV boutique is next to the Summer of '69 shop, which features T-shirts commemorating the 25th anniversaries of Woodstock ($28), the Stonewall uprising ($18), and the Apollo moon landing ($25).
Across the aisle, in the World Cup shop, there are Team Ireland jerseys by Adidas ($60) and nylon U.S.A. windbreakers ($65).


Jessica Fleming, Charles Kibel
Jessica Ann Fleming, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Fleming of Manassas, Va., is to be married today to Charles Kibel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Kibel of New York.
Judge Harold Silverman of Bronx County Civil Court is to perform the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
The bride, 26, is a student at Hunter College.
Her father is a consultant at Trident Information Systems in Fairfax, Va.


Joanne Herrmann, Douglas A. Milch
Joanne Lynn Herrmann, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mark S. Herrmann of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married last evening to Douglas Adam Milch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald B. Milch of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Kenneth Roseman officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Milch, 26, is the vice president of the Mark Automotive Group, an automobile dealership in Yonkers.
She graduated from Washington University and received a law degree from American University.


A Troubled Life Unfolds: A special report.; Simpson: 'Baddest Cat,' a Polished Star, or Both?
On the last day of her life, Nicole Brown Simpson went to a dance recital for her 9-year-old daughter, Sydney, at the junior high school near her Brentwood home.
O.
J.
Simpson also arrived, joining Nicole, her parents and two of her sisters, members of a family that had formerly embraced him but now held him at arm's length.


The Big City; Scalping, Fair and Square
When he urged the public this spring to report ticket scalpers to his office, New York State's Attorney General, G. Oliver Koppell, said he wanted to protect the average fan from being exploited.
His critics said he wanted publicity to get elected in the fall.
Either way, I thought I could help him.
I had evidence on scalpers who were guaranteed to make the evening news if Koppell led them away in handcuffs.
These cases were even worse than the ones in Koppell's press releases about "outrageous and illegal markups" of tickets to concerts, ice shows and basketball playoff games.


Fitting In


Political Notes; Lowey and Lautenberg Lock Horns Over a Bridge
In the perpetual border war between New York and New Jersey, Representative Nita M. Lowey, who represents parts of Westchester County, the Bronx and Queens, has often been in the front lines against her fellow Democrat, Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of New Jersey.
Earlier this year, they faced off over Mr.
Lautenberg's support for the proposal of a New Jersey citizens' group to reroute air traffic from Newark Airport over Long Island to decrease noise in some New Jersey communities. (The proposal is officially still pending but going nowhere fast.)


Mary Elizabeth Joffe, Gregory Garber
Mary Elizabeth Joffe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Joffe of Mantoloking, N.J., is to be married today to Gregory David Garber, a son of Dr.
Gabriel Garber of Yardley, Pa., and the late Frances Garber.
Rabbi Morton Rosenthal is to officiate at the Ryland Inn in Whitehouse, N.J.
Msgr.
Harrold Murray is to take part in the ceremony.
The bride, 26, and the bridegroom, 27, graduated from Skidmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her master's degree in anthropology from the State University of New York at Buffalo, where she is a Ph.D. candidate in anthropology.
Mr.
Garber is studying for a master's degree in social work there.


Books, and a New Way to Learn to Read
RICHARD C. OWEN, a former aquisitions editor at Holt Rinehart &amp; Winston and now a publisher in Somers, said he was compelled to start his own company by a re-occurring vision of himself.
"I kept seeing myself retired, never knowing what might have been if I had started my own enterprise," Mr.
Owen said.
"The specter of not knowing was such a strong motivating factor that I dipped into my own savings, of approximately $10,000 to start a company. I envisioned it as a mini-Holt Rinehart &amp; Winston, publishing college textbooks for teacher education, which are used to prepare prospective teachers for the classroom and certification."


Alfresco Concerts Offer a Variety of Choices
THERE can be problems with the weather, distractions from jetliners, poor amplification and mosquitoes, but music alfresco still has a special magic for most people, and now that long days and balmy evenings have returned, some enticing outdoor opportunities await.
It isn't even necessary to wait for twilight, since the Yonkers Pops has a free concert coming up in Untermyer Park today at 2 P.M.
Led by Albert Torres, the orchestra tenders a "Salute to the Ladies," including such tuneful heroines as "Rio Rita," "Lady of Spain," "My Fair Lady," "Gypsy" and the "Belle of the Ball." If it rains, the proceedings move indoors to the Cola Community Center in the park; otherwise, concertgoers should take chairs or a blanket for lawn seating.
Pop programming outweighs the classical this time around, but come Saturday, the Philharmonia Virtuosi begins its seventh summer of Sunset Serenades on the Lyndhurst lawns in Tarrytown.
Actually, the Fourth of July weekend has spawned a double-header: Stan Rubin's Orchestra sparking a "Big Band Bash" on Saturday as the vocalist David Belt "recalls the elegance and romance of decades past" and "an evening of Cajun music and dancing for the whole family" presented by the VooDudes on Sunday.


The Ottoman Carve-Up
To the Editor:
Re "Carving Up the Balkans" (Op-Ed, June 15), your excerpts from "Peacemaking 1919" by Harold Nicolson: What Britain, France and Italy wanted to carve up that made Nicolson indignant was not the Balkans, but the Ottoman Empire, with the long-sought goal of annihilating the national existence of the Turks.


WOULD YOU BAPTIZE AN EXTRATERRESTRIAL?
The Rev.
Martin McCarthy remarks with wit and precision that angels are extraterrestrial ("Would You Baptize an Extraterrestrial?" by Jack Hitt, May 29).
Angels are indeed extraterrestrials, since they have no material bodies requiring planetary anchorage.
On the other hand, any being with intellect, will and self-awareness is, by definition, human, whatever its outward appearance or solar system of origin.
Captain Kirk is properly Terran, as Spock is Vulcan or Worf is Klingon.
They are all human.
MARIE BROWN LOEHR Plainsboro, N.J.


After They Dragged the Lake
THE SPECTACLE OF THE BODY Stories.
By Noy Holland. 190 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $20.


The Economy Will Work Its Way Out of This
To the Editor:
Re "Leslie Fay's Logic" by Bob Herbert (column, June 19): Mr.
Herbert complains about the "loss" of low-skill jobs in the United States to low-wage countries overseas, especially in Central America and Asia.
However, he is silent on what he thinks the United States should do about the problem, common to all advanced industrial nations.


Traffic Alert
TODAY Stonewall 25 March.
Traffic officials have cautioned motorists not to drive into Manhattan.
From 9 A.M. to 1 P.M., no traffic will be allowed in the formation area between Second Avenue and Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive from 34th to 42d Street.
The exit ramp on 42d Street will also be closed.
The march is to proceed north on First Avenue, west on 57th Street, north on the Avenue of the Americas and up Central Park Drive to The Great Lawn.
Unauthorized marches may periodically tie up parts of Fifth Avenue as well from Washington Square to Central Park.


The View From: Branford; A Caring Hospice for Those Living Out Their Last Days
THE story of hospice is not about life-saving medical advances and triumph over deadly disease.
In fact, the quiet victories that occur every day at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford often go unrecognized by outsiders.
Melinda C. Brockwell, director of nursing at the hospice, recalled one of those private but unforgettable times.
One day last March, she said, a patient with AIDS asked that her bed be moved outdoors to a patio.


Samantha Hewit, David Fruchtman
Samantha Bea Hewit, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Hewit of Radnor, Pa., is to be married there today to David Jay Fruchtman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Fruchtman of Havertown, Pa.
Rabbi Henry Cohen is to officiate at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Hewit, 28, is the director of Creative Artists Network, a nonprofit visual arts organization in Philadelphia.
She graduated cum laude from Boston University.


Sins of the Fathers
THE WAGES OF GUILT Memories of War in Germany and Japan.
By Ian Buruma. 330 pp.
New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $25.


In the Face of Madness
To the Editor:
I recently read Arthur Hertzberg's excellent essay "Swimming Without Drowning: New Approaches to the Ocean of the Talmud" (March 27).


District 20 Picks New Leader
A Brooklyn school district has voted to oust its superintendent and replace him with a man he once forced out as the deputy superintendent.
The final act came Thursday night when the board of Community School District 20, meeting at Public School 105 in Borough Park, voted unanimously to replace Ralph A. Fabrizio with Vincent Grippo, now a principal in the district.


In the Early Days Of Motoring
That indomitable motorist, Alice Ramsey ("Jerseyana," May 8), had, about 20 years later, an equally ardent and courageous successor in Pearl Doremus, wife of the Mayor of Mountain Lakes.
Beginning in the 1920's, according to clippings from The Mountain Lakes News, she was a persistent traveler who for five or more years drove an annual 30,000 miles by herself, making not one but several transcontinental trips without ever having to take the train home.
She did all this driving alone because, as she said, that way there was no argument about when to stop or where to stay.


Hardball, Semipro Style, Is Making a Comeback
JEROME (BUZZY) LEVIN, who has been involved in amateur baseball in Connecticut for more than a half century, can recall a time in the 1940's and 50's when as many as 4,000 people would turn out for Sunday afternoon semiprofessional baseball games at Municipal Field in Middletown between the Middletown Giants and other members of the old Middlesex County League.
It was an era when amateur baseball among adult men thrived, mainly in industrial leagues and in twilight leagues, in Hartford, West Haven and Stamford.
In addition, strong semipro teams like the Savitt Gems in Hartford, the Meriden Insilicos, the West Haven Sailors, the New Britain Cremos, the Waterbury Barons and the Stamford Pioneers drew big crowds to their games, many of them against famous barnstorming teams, including some from the old Negro leagues.


Hata's Gambit: Resignation Is Part of Bid to Rebuild a Reform Bloc
To save the reform movement he helped ignite, Tsutomu Hata had no choice but to resign as Japan's Prime Minister.
His two-month experiment running the world's second-largest economy with a minority Government had failed.
Without the cooperation of the Socialist Party, which in a fit of pique split with Mr.
Hata's Government the day he took power, there was no hope of pressing for his broader agenda: economic deregulation, new sales taxes and a far more active role in security issues like the North Korean nuclear standoff.
His coalition's many divisions boxed him in.
A no-confidence vote, which was an hour from passage at the moment he quit early today, would have only worsened the paralysis, his aides said.
If he had lost the vote, Japan would have been plunged into a 40-day political campaign that would only have extended the chaos that has enveloped the country.
Hoping for Another Chance
So in the end, Mr.
Hata and his close political ally and strategist, Ichiro Ozawa, chose to risk everything, including control of the Government, in return for a chance to once again attempt a realignment of Japan's political forces.


Foam Fell on Alabama
For writers, the possibility of error -- linguistic or factual -- is infinite.
We cannot be paralyzed by this.
Check, recheck and then go ahead and take a chance; if you wait for absolute certainty, you will never commit a word to paper.
This profundity grips me after a polemic I wrote in another space criticizing the critics of a theme park planned by the Walt Disney Company in Manassas, Va.
Standing firm for artistic expression, even by Mickey Mouse, I had taken a pop at several columnists opposed to honky-tonk intrusion into the neighborhood of the battles of Bull Run.
One of those popped was Jonathan Yardley of The Washington Post, a defender of the area's serenity who, I asserted, had written "foamingly" on the subject.


Quick Fix for Workaday Couch Potatoes
SO you're trapped: the Wimbledon tennis matches and the World Cup soccer matches are on television, but you can't watch because you're at work.
Now, courtesy of the Grand Central Partnership, the business-improvement district for the 53 square blocks surrounding Grand Central Terminal, a quick fix is available.
The partnership has set up four 45-inch TV sets.
One of them is in the Grand Central Terminal concourse and the others are on the Avenue of the Americas, one in Grace Plaza, at 43d Street, and two in Bryant Park, between 41st and 42d Streets.
As many as 150 people watch the screens before and after work and at lunchtime, said Daniel A. Biederman, partnership president, adding: "It's a good way to humanize the city."


Set 'Em Up in Crib No. 2, Captain Kangaroo
The boys in the white crib looked comfortable enough, sitting together on the edge of the mattress pad, separated by a huge, dirty pink teddy bear.
One was sucking on a bottle (filled, incidentally, with a vodka tonic), and the other was silently mowing down an ice cream sundae.
The crib was surrounded by other big boys and girls, most of them in their 20's, who were sitting in undersized chairs and drinking cocktails or quietly reading "Danny the Dinosaur" or "Goodnight Moon."


A French Jewelry Cabinet With Drawers Full of Mystery
THE LAVISHLY DECORATED French cabinet that has been installed for the summer at the Coop er-Hewitt Museum in New York has not had an easy life, despite its royal pedigree.
Overlooked for decades and underappreciated as one of the world's first pieces of furniture embellished with large porcelain plaques, it has stood empty for much of its history.
Made as a repository for jewelry, the magnificent six-foot-tall cupboard has enjoyed only one brief moment of fame.
In 1830, shortly after its completion at the Royal Porcelain Factory at Sevres, it was presented by Charles X of France as a state gift to Francis I, King of the Two Sicilies.


Jennifer Apfelbaum and Steven Philips
Jennifer Leigh Apfelbaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Apfelbaum of Harrison, N.Y., was married there yesterday evening to Steven P. Philips, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Philips of Hillsdale, N.J.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated at the bride's parents' home.
Mrs.
Philips, 22, graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of TDI, a national advertising company in New York, at which her mother, Bonnie Apfelbaum, is the director of public affairs.


McGuire Picks Up a New York Honor
The New York City Basketball Hall of Fame has three new members.
Joining the group are AL McGUIRE, the former Knick and St.
John's player who coached Marquette to the 1977 National Collegiate Athletic Association championship; NORMAN DRUCKER, who officiated more than 2,300 games and served as supervisor of officials for the National Basketball Association, and the late Mickey Fisher, who coached Boys High School for 25 years and won three P.S.A.L. titles.


Willie and Joe, 50 Years Later
To the Editor:
Raleigh Trevelyan's review of "D-Day, June 6, 1944," by Stephen E. Ambrose (May 29), evokes memories for all of us who were living 50 years ago.
The drawing on page 1 by Bill Mauldin is especially haunting: Who are those two old guys holding up their M-1 rifles, struggling to keep their heads above water?
They're Willie and Joe, that's who!


Squid With the Crunch but Not the Frying
THE most popular way to eat squid (or calamari, as it is frequently called) is deep-fried to a crisp golden turn with mayonnaise or tomato sauce for dipping.
But for the home cook, that is not the easiest preparation.


Look for Rominger in No. 1 Lane
The newly revised computerized standings of the world's top 800 professional bicycle racers have confirmed this season's curve: Miguel Indurain is no longer No. 1 and Tony Rominger is no longer No. 2.
They switched positions as Indurain fell from atop the list for the first time in two years.
Don't expect wild celebrations or loud gnashing of teeth.
Both men are placid types, stolid as oaks, and both have known for weeks that the change was coming.


On the Road With Chairman Lou
THE dishes have been cleared, and 300 people are sipping coffee and watching a stocky man with a boyish face deliver a monologue from the stage.
He faces the audience for awhile, but then begins pacing, gesturing as he speaks, at turns praising and chiding his listeners.
His speaking style combines the Socratic method with sarcasm, finishing off a description of some truly silly, self-destructive example of corporate behavior with a question, "Isn't that insane?"
At times, he is an impassioned orator.
"What happened to this company was not an act of God, some mysterious biblical plague sent down from on high," he said.
Then, slowing his cadence for emphasis, he observed, "It's simple. People took our business away."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Old Stones, New Design
"A LITTLE higher," the rabbi said, looking up.
"Watch the window," an architect said, looking sideways.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: George R. Zoffinger; Behind the Campaign for the World Cup
THOUGH George R. Zoffinger is still disturbed at the way the United States Postal Service slighted New Jersey by leaving the state's name off the official World Cup souvenir postal card, the anger has subsided somewhat because of the success of the first World Cup game, which was played last weekend at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford.
Mr.
Zoffinger was one of the 74,000 fans who watched Ireland defeat Italy 1 to 0 in the first of seven World Cup games at the stadium.


The Owners Are of One Mind, So They Use the Same Words
Members of the Cincinnati Reds received a letter from their owner last week.
"Love, Marge Schott," she signed it.
Players on the Oakland Athletics' roster received a letter from the chairman of their team.
"Very truly yours, Wally Haas," he signed it.
The owner of the Florida Marlins wrote to his players, too, but opted to be more informal.
"Sincerely, Wayne," he signed his letter, omitting his last name, Huizenga.
To say that those owners and the other 25 wrote to their players would not be literally correct.
They sent their players letters with their signatures, but they didn't write the letters.
That is, they didn't write them unless they all had the same exact thought to write the same exact words.


Health Care Horror Stories
Critics labeled them horror stories, and they were.
On Tuesday night, NBC presented a two-hour news special on health reform that began by focusing on the human disasters caused by a system that denies families the guarantee of adequate health coverage.
Rick Reckoway works hard as an electrician.
When his 12-year-old son was born with respiratory and cardiac problems, he thought he did not have a financial worry because he had bought family coverage.
Mr.
Reckoway discovered that his insurance benefits were capped at $100,000, leaving him $700,000 in debt.
He played by all the right rules, and found himself impoverished.


Boys and Boys Together
GAY NEW YORK Gender, Urban Culture,  and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940.
By George Chauncey.
Illustrated. 478 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $25.


Juliette Kleinman, Robert Hagani
Juliette Dana Kleinman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Laurence Kleinman of New York, was married last evening to Dr.
Robert Marc Hagani, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin K. Hagani of Kings Point, L.I.
Rabbi Deborah Zecher performed the ceremony at the bride's parents' house in South Egremont, Mass.


Getting Even With Dad, Uncle Scar and Bigots
The Slingshot  Jesper Salen Directed by Ake Sandgren R 102 minutes


Visiting Cape Ann
To the Editor: Last year, at the end of April, my husband and I traveled to Cape Ann, Mass.
On the recommendation of friends, we booked a room at the Cape Ann Motor Inn, which was listed in "Embracing Cape Ann's Contrasts" (May 8).
It was a mistake.
As we were going to bed, the couple above us began to fight.
The man threatened to kill the woman.
We called the front desk and the woman on duty visited their room.
After threats to call the police, the brawlers quieted.
The motel clerk stayed past the end of her shift at 11 P.M. and told us that there was a night watchman on the premises.


Relaxed in a Games of Their Own
"I've known world-class athletes, men particularly, who dropped away because of the stress," said Sandy Ledray last week.
She gestured down at the Hunter College gym floor where two teams lunged and spiked in a Gay Games volleyball medal match.
"Imagine how good they feel, how mellow. Competitive but not nasty. No one's calling the women dykes, no one's sticking tampons in the guys' lockers."
Ledray, a 35-year-old businesswoman from Seattle, agreed there could be merit in the criticism by some gays and lesbians that the Games trivialized life and death issues and blunted the thrust of confrontational politics.
On the other hand, in a week of Games going, it was hard to find an athlete or serious spectator who hadn't found it a life-enhancing experience.


Amid Cries of Politicking, a Widely Endorsed Plan Dies
A legislative deadlock that killed a widely watched health care plan here is raising two questions that could determine the fate of health care legislation in Washington as well: How much did election-year partisan politics dominate the process, and how much do the voters really care about health care?
Gov.
Lawton Chiles and other Democratic leaders are saying that Republicans, including some in Washington, leaned on Republican state senators to block the proposed health care plan, which had broad backing.


The Nation; When Moods Affect Safety: Communication in a Cockpit Means a Lot a Few Miles Up
BOSSES can be intimidating.
They may not like to hear bad news, and the people who work for them know it.
Bosses like that may not hear about trouble until it's too late to prevent a blunder.
Melburn A. McBroom was that kind of boss.
So was Marvin Falitz.
How they got along with their co-workers might have gone unnoticed, at least to the outside world, if they had worked in factories or offices.
But each man was an airline pilot, and each was in charge of a plane that crashed.


Ideas &amp; Trends; A Little Economy That Can
Imagine a country with one-thousandth the population of America that delivers all the goods and services of modern life, from designer pizza to open heart surgery.
Not a city-state like Luxembourg, or a castle and casino masquerading as a country, like Monaco.
A real country with its own language, political parties, rock star, world-champion bridge team and Nobel laureate in literature.
Imagine Iceland.
An island near the Arctic Circle, it delights tourists with scenery and fascinates economists with a puzzle.
As Robert Solow of M.I.T. put it: "How can so few people make so much from so little?"


Getting Even With Dad, Uncle Scar and Bigots
Wyatt Earp  Kevin Costner, Dennis Quaid, Gene Hackman Directed by Lawrence Kasdan PG-13 190 minutes


HANAN ASHRAWI
The three-story villa of Hanan Mikhail-Ashrawi -- the former spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation to the Middle East peace talks -- faces a prison.
Built during the British Mandate, the gray cinder-block compound in Ramallah, on the Israeli-occupied West Bank, has housed political prisoners under successive British, Jordanian and Israeli administrations.
Because she finds the jail so horrifying, Ashrawi will not cross the street if she can help it.
"I'd like to think of myself as an antidote to that place," she explains over lunch in her dining room several days after the Cairo peace accords were signed.
"Or at least, I hope I am."


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
A DANCING MATRIX: How Science Confronts Emerging Viruses By Robin Marantz Henig.
Vintage, $12.
AIDS is not the first devastating human plague to be caused by a virus, and this book shows that it will not be the last.
Examining current scientific theory, it explains the tools epidemiologists have developed to fight new diseases.
Last year our reviewer, Harold Varmus, called it a "provocative and intelligent book."  THE SHIPPING NEWS By E. Annie Proulx.
Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $12.
Winner of the Pulitzer Prize and the National Book Award, this novel chronicles the fortunes of Quoyle, a dispirited newspaperman who returns to his childhood home on the Newfoundland coast after his adulterous wife is killed in a car accident.
Living with his two little girls and his eccentric aunt, he makes peace with his past -- and his future -- while covering, among other things, shipping news for the local paper.
The book "displays Ms. Proulx's surreal humor and her zest for the strange foibles of humanity," Howard Norman said here last year.


From Right, a Rain of Anti-Clinton Salvos
For four successive weeks last month, viewers of the Rev.
Jerry Falwell's "Old Time Gospel Hour" on cable television were treated not to the good tidings of Jesus but to excerpts from a videotape in which President Clinton was accused, among other dark deeds, of arranging for the murder of an Arkansas investigator who supposedly had proof of his trysts.
In the televised excerpts, Gary Parks, son of the investigator who was shot to death last fall by unknown assailants, says, "I think Bill Clinton had my father killed to save his political career." He offers no supporting evidence.


June 19-25; A Presidential Pummeling


BEST SELLERS: June 26, 1994
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
3
THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967 bombing in Mississippi.
2
2
17
THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into achieving a fulfilling life.
3
1
THE CROSSING, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) A young American comes of age traveling with a she-wolf into Mexico's mythic sierra.
4
4
136
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
5
3
7
INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.
6
6
98
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.
7
5
9
REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.50.) After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves haunted by a mysterious force.
8
12
2
MISTRESS, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $19.95.) A former schoolteacher's efforts to unmask her aunt's blackmailer in London's high society.
9*
7
11
THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century Manhattan.
10
14
8
THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies, traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf war.
11
13
3
WALKING SHADOW, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser looks into the murder of a member of a theatrical troupe in a Massachusetts town.
12
15
4
TUNNEL VISION, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $21.95.) The private eye V.I.
Warshawski probes a murder and a scandal in an agency for the homeless.
13
1
Q-SQUARED, by Peter David. (Pocket, $22.) All creation is at stake when an old enemy asks for help from "Star Trek"'s Captain Picard.
14
1
POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending current sensibilities.
15
8
5
NIGHT PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $22.95.) Lucas Davenport investigates a case involving a body found in a wildlife preserve.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
THE AGENDA, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) The inner workings of the White House during the first year of the Clinton Administration.
2
1
59
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
2
3
D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) An account of the Allied invasion of Normandy 50 years ago.
4
3
6
STANDING FIRM, by Dan Quayle. (HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) The former Vice President recalls his life, especially during the Bush years.
5
4
27
THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible, folklore and elsewhere.
6
5
16
MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt. (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in Savannah, Ga.
7
6
6
BEYOND PEACE, by Richard Nixon. (Random House, $23.) An agenda of foreign and domestic policies for the United States to pursue in the post-cold war era.
8
8
4
THE HALDEMAN DIARIES, by H.R.
Haldeman. (Putnam, $27.50.) Notes made by the man who was Richard Nixon's chief of staff from 1969 to 1973.
9
11
11
OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a novelist-photographer-musician.
10
7
8
REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.
11*
9
10
SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry. (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a South Carolina businessman.
12
1
ALL MY OCTOBERS, by Mickey Mantle with Mickey Herskowitz. (HarperCollins, $23.) The legendary Yankee recalls the 12 World Series in which he played.
13
12
2
LIFE OF THE PARTY, by Christopher Ogden. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A biography of Pamela Harriman, the United States Ambassador to France.
14
13
24
SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.
15
10
17
HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
9
IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.) Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.
2
2
57
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
9
MAGIC EYE II, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A second collection of designs.
4
4
23
MAGIC EYE, by N.E.
Thing Enterprises. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when scrutinized at length.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest) Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 11, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
CALLED OUT, by A.G.
Mojtabai. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) An abstract, intelligent novel, ostensibly about a jet crash in a small town, that renders the reactions of the witnesses to a random disaster in beautiful, somber prose.
CIGARETTES ARE SUBLIME, by Richard Klein. (Duke University, $21.95.) People smoke them because they are dangerous, and for a lot of other reasons as well, according to this polemical, analytical, lit-critical, theoretical, political ode to deathweed by an up-to-date professor of French.
COLORED PEOPLE: A Memoir, by Henry Louis Gates Jr. (Knopf, $22.) A distinguished American scholar's intricate, captivating account of the rich family and community life of black people in Piedmont, W.Va., on the eve of desegregation.
A JOURNEY THROUGH ECONOMIC TIME: A Firsthand View, by John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Born in 1908, the preternaturally lucid and articulate Mr.
Galbraith has kept his eyes open ever since and seen a great deal he didn't care for.
JUSTICE LEWIS F. POWELL JR., by John C. Jeffries Jr. (Scribners, $30.) An illuminating biography of a pivotal Justice of the Supreme Court whose instinctive conservatism was always tempered by his respect for the rule of law and his willingness to listen hard.
MOSES SUPPOSES, by Ellen Currie. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) A welcome first collection of Ms.
Currie's short stories, new and old; in relationships gone wrong, in everyday objects, she discerns hints of large meanings and glimmers of submerged mysteries.
ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story, by Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky) Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr.
Apple to college and proved, in the long run, to be worth all the trouble he caused.
SHOT IN THE HEART, by Mikal Gilmore. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Fifteen years after Norman Mailer's "Executioner's Song," Gary Gilmore's youngest brother reclaims his own life in this highly personal account of his family.
THE STRUGGLE FOR RUSSIA, by Boris Yeltsin. (Belka Publishing/Times Books/Random House, $25.) Russia's first democratically elected leader shows himself more thoughtful, more observant, more sensitive to nuances of other people's behavior than at first he appeared.
THE WATERWORKS, by E.L.
Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) An intellectual ripping yarn in which a grim, smoke-stained New York City of 1871 is the principal character; the novel's poetic flow of myth gracefully sustains its burden of ideas, of which there are plenty.
A WAY IN THE WORLD, by V.S.
Naipaul. (Knopf, $23.) A brilliant, probing autobiographical meditation on empire and inheritance by a mind at the peak of its powers, made of complementary narratives about characters from the author to Sir Walter Raleigh.


Melissa Duffy, M. A. Garcia-Sciveres
Melissa Duffy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Duffy of Locust, N.J., was married there yesterday to Mauricio Andres Garcia-Sciveres, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alberto Garcia-Tizon of Buenos Aires.
The Rev.
Ronald D'Angelo, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.


Cortines Drops Plan to Move School to Hotel
Ending a controversy clouded with suspicions of racism and marked by strong community opposition, Schools Chancellor Ramon Cortines last Wednesday withdrew a Board of Education resolution to relocate a high school to the St.
George Hotel.
The Science Skills Center, one of the city's experimental New Vision schools, last week completed its first year with 120 ninth graders in the basement of New York Technical College at 186 Jay Street.


Kirsten Healy, Scott Turkington
Kirsten O'Hara Healy, the daughter of Mrs.
Charles M. Dubroff of Cove Neck, L.I., and Gregory V. Healy of Pelham, N.Y., is to be married today to Lieut.
Scott Garo Turkington, a son of Marilyn Turkington of Glen Cove, L.I., and Robert Turkington of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edson J. Wood, a Roman Catholic priest, is to perform the ceremony at the Cadet Chapel of the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y.


FRESH PEPPER
You know the impresarios of American cooking by voice.
Consider, for instance, the baritone timbre of the late James Beard, the booming, daffy alto of Julia Child and the girlish, French-tinged pitter-patter of Madeleine Kamman.
And then there is Paula Wolfert, the 56-year-old Brooklyn-born author, whose voice, at the slightest provocation, rises a full octave and loses whatever modulation it acquired as a student of 18th-century literature and an expatriate living in France and Tangier.


Taking Middle Course, Episcopal Draft on Sex Still Stirs Conflict
Trying to steer a general course on a volatile issue, Episcopal bishops affirm in a draft pastoral teaching that marriage remains the foundation of the church's sexual guidance, but they also describe homosexuality as an orientation of "a significant minority of persons" that "cannot usually be reversed."
In a section called "pastoral guidelines," the document says sexual relationships work best within the context of a committed lifelong union.
"We believe this is as true for homosexual relationships as for heterosexual relationships and that such relationships need and should receive the pastoral care of the church," the document adds, without going into details.


Jay's Slide Continues: Ripken Insures It
Orioles 4, Blue Jays 1
Cal Ripken hit a tie-breaking, two-run homer in the eighth inning at the Skydome yesterday and the Baltimore Orioles sent the Toronto Blue Jays to their seventh straight loss, 4-1.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
2 Former Lawyers Bring Their Pizza to Manhattan
Back in 1985, Larry Flax and Rick Rosenfield, law partners and former Federal prosecutors in Los Angeles, decided to switch careers.
They opened a pizza palace in Beverly Hills called the California Pizza Kitchen.
Now, with 57 restaurants around the country, they are planning to break into the Manhattan market in November.


Angus Walker and Pamela Congdon
Pamela Lemle Congdon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas B. Congdon Jr., of Nantucket, Mass., was married there yesterday to Angus McLendon Walker, the son of Jennifer B. Nelson of Milton, Mass., and Gordon T. Walker of Boston.
The Rev.
Howard T. W. Stowe performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Congdon graduated from the San Francisco Art Institute and received two master's degrees in art education from the Rhode Island School of Design.
The bride, a ceramist, teaches art at the Advent School, an elementary school in Boston, and Oakdale Elementary School in Dedham, Mass.


Some Tips to Brighten the Shady Spots
NURSERY owners may be telling us something.
Results from sales surveys are good indicators of plant popularity.
Two years ago, the top-selling annual was impatiens.
Last year the top-selling perennial was hosta.
These results point to a common denominator: shade.
Both of these best-sellers thrive where a canopy of trees and tall shrubs provides deep to semi-shade.


Squid With the Crunch but Not the Frying
THE most popular way to eat squid (or calamari, as it is frequently called) is deep-fried to a crisp golden turn with mayonnaise or tomato sauce for dipping.
But for the home cook, that is not the easiest preparation.


Maria Freebairn-Smith, Loring Vogel
Maria Freebairn-Smith, a daughter of Martha de Barros and Roderick Freebairn-Smith, both of San Francisco, was married yesterday to Loring Isaac Vogel, a son of Amos and Marcia Vogel of New York.
Norman Fischer, a Zen priest, performed the ceremony at Green Gulch Farm in Muir Beach, Calif.
The bride, 29, teaches art in San Francisco.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is an architect in San Francisco.
Her mother, who is retired, was a hospice coordinator with the Zen Hospice Project in San Francisco.


Leaders Back Free Hungary Plus Stability
People in this part of Europe may yearn for the job security and stability they had under Communism, but the ex-Communists they returned to power in Hungary last month have no illusions that the voters want Communism itself back.
Gyula Horn, a former Communist, is now leader of the Hungarian Socialist Party, which won 209 of the 386 seats in Parliament in elections in May.
He said his aim was to form a government that can deliver on the free-market promises its conservative predecessor made but could not keep in the first flush of Hungarian democracy.


Laurie Reid, Charles Casey
Laurie Frances Reid, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Reid of Eugene, Ore., is to be married today to Charles Frederic Casey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. Casey of Quogue, L.I.
The Rev.
Anne Kelsey, an Episcopal priest, is to perform the ceremony at the Point Reyes Station (Calif.) Community Center.
The bride, 29, teaches French to fourth graders at the Hamlin School in San Francisco.
She and her husband graduated from Reed College.
Her father is an administrator at Lane Community College in Eugene.
Her mother is an occupational therapist at McKenzie Manor, a rehabilitation center there.


Dr. F. Schwartz, 73; Taught Social Work
Dr.
Florence Shishko Schwartz, a retired professor of social work at the Hunter College School of Social Work, died on Wednesday at Greenwich Hospital in Connecticut.
She was 73 and had homes in Greenport, N.Y., and Greenwich.
The cause was complications from cardiac arrest two weeks after heart surgery, said her daughter, Deborah Schwartz Rapaport.


Tours Offer Looks At Indonesia Wildlife
Two companies, Bolder Adventures and International Expeditions, are focusing on Indonesia's exotic wildlife in tours offered this summer and fall.
Bolder Adventures has devised a series of 11- and 15-day study tours at Camp Leakey Orangutan Research Station in Borneo, in cooperation with the Los Angeles-based Orangutan Foundation International.
Participants will work with Dr.
Birute Galdikas, one of the world's foremost experts on orangutans, or with members of her research team.
The program includes training in field study and visits to environmentally sensitive areas.
Participants help with the rehabilitation of formerly captive orangutans and spend several days tracking wild orangutans through the jungle.


Linda Wang and Willy Ke-Wei Liu
Linda Wang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kuang-Shou Wang of Forest Hills, Queens, is to be married today to Willy Ke-Wei Liu, a son of Yung-Li Liu of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Josephine Tzu Liu.
The Rev.
Herbert I. Miller is to officiate at the Diamond Hill United Methodist Church in Cos Cob, Conn.
Mrs.
Liu, 28, is a senior financial analyst at the American Express Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Pace University, from which she also received an M.B.A..
Her father, who is retired, was a consultant and chief mechanical engineer in Tripoli, Libya, for the Taiwanese Defense Department.


Julie A. Gerngross, Richard A. Baker
Julie Ann Gerngross, the daughter of Hans and Frances Gerngross of Fearrington Village, N.C., was married yesterday to Richard Alan Baker, a son of Kenneth and Kay Baker of Nevada City, Calif.
The Rev.
Jim Bridges, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at a home of the bride's parents in Woodstock, N.Y.
Mrs.
Baker, 27, is vice president of H. O. Gerngross &amp; Company, a New York advertising agency.
Her father, now retired, founded the agency, from which her mother retired as a vice president.
The bride and bridegroom graduated from the University of California at Santa Cruz.


Curtain to Fall on Old-Time Cabaret
After more than 15 years as one of the Upper West Side's only supper clubs, Steve McGraw's -- which hatched the long-running shows "Forbidden Broadway" and "Forever Plaid" -- is staging its last three performances on 72d Street today, its owners say.
The decision to close the cabaret dismayed many who live in the neighborhood, who said it would leave yet another shuttered storefront on a stretch of the street between Columbus and Amsterdam Avenues that has seen several businesses shut down recently, including a restaurant and Tiger's Eye, a large housewares store.


SMOKING TOAD
As a student at Proviso West and co-editor-in chief of our school paper, I found your article one-sided.
With such a racially and ethnically diverse student body and faculty, I have gotten to know different cultures firsthand, something you cannot get from a classroom lecture.


Corrections
The Executive Computer column last Sunday, about using the Internet to retrieve electronic filings at the Securities and Exchange Commission, misstated the amount of the National Science Foundation's grant for the retrieval service known as Edgar on the Internet.
It is $666,528, not $680 million.


What Kind of Lawyers Work for the County?
I have been following with interest Nassau County's attempt to recoup $350,000 from a local group that filed an unsuccessful action against the county  [ "Civic Advocates Face New Threats" June 5 ] .
Why, with a large staff of county attorneys who are paid well in excess of $350,000 in salary and benefits was it necessary to retain outside counsel in the first place?
When I posed this question to a representative from the County Attorney's office I was told that defending this lawsuit required expertise outside of the realm of any of the staff attorneys.


F.Y.I.
Animal Post
Q.
On Columbus Avenue and 63d Street (facing the New York State Theater) is a parking-sign post.
Attached to it is what appears to be an animal figure with a jagged back.
It's kind of gray and has lavender splotches.
I pass this weekly, and no one can explain what it is.
Can you?


Word for Word/ Gay Magazines; Under Many Banners: Varied Voices In Gay Life Not Always in Chorus
We're a nation of joiners, which goes a way toward explaining the many lesbians and gay men in New York this weekend.
But the movement that is marking its 25th anniversary, being as fractured and indescribable as any bunch of Americans, has spun off a thousand more specialized interest groups, joined in turn by homosexuals of disparate identities.
Newsstands decked out for the celebration pitch to every erotic niche that's been thought of, and they show that gay people have organized around a lot of nonsexual interests, too -- like Marxism and Catholicism, dentistry and model railroading.
Visitors' guides list Manhattan bars, but you can also find in them the phone number of the Gay/Lesbian Scrabble Club.
And because there's a publication for everyone, gay America's subcultures and sub-subcultures have written their own versions of what they bring to the table this weekend.
A few examples follow.
LAURA MANSNERUS
What a thrill to be writing to you on the eve of the Stonewall/Gay Games celebration in New York City.
With all of those activists, socialites and girljocks on hand, marching may not be the only workout you'll get. -- Heather Findlay, editor, writing in On Our Backs, a bimonthly for lesbians published in San Francisco.
Are you tired of being represented in the news media by Luke Sissyfag, Act Up and Nambla (the National Man-Boy Love Association)?
Yes, Virginia!
It's O.K. to be gay and Republican!
It's O.K. to care about high taxes, crime, excessive government, as well as human and gay rights and aggressive funding for the fight against AIDS.
It's even O.K. to care about values which will preserve and strengthen our gay relationships, homes and spiritual lives. -- Message accompanying membership form in the newsletter of the Log Cabin Club of New York, an affiliate of the national Log Cabin Federation, for gay Republicans.
When the Apostle Paul declared: "In Christ there is neither male nor female, Jew nor Gentile, slave nor free," this was a liberating message that proclaimed equality and justice.
However, the proclamation that we are all "one" can sometimes blur our differences and reinforce the norms of the majority.
Thus, in our church communities, we might reword Paul's declaration by saying, "In Christ, there is male and female, old and young, disabled and temporarily able-bodied, lesbian, gay and heterosexual."
We are seeking new theological "wineskins" that can adequately hold and convey the good news of God's love and justice for our day, as well as recovering the old language and imagery when it is life-giving and can convey to people in our times the heart of the message. -- The Rev.
Melanie Morrison, in Open Hands, published by Protestant organizations welcoming gay men and lesbians.
Like responsible heterosexuals, we have the choice of whether (and, yes, when) to parent.
But unlike heterosexuals, we and our communities still remember the time when to be gay was to preclude parenting.
Because of this, we are less likely to believe that we "have to" parent, that it "makes us truly" men or women or adult.
These and other myths are central to the socialization of most heterosexual women and men.
As a consequence, we are uniquely able to "consider parenthood."
Lesbian and gay parents DO have an advantage: we KNOW that there is more to life than we were first led to believe from our families.
Since we weren't fooled then, perhaps we won't be now.
We need not be fooled by some of the social myths about parenting -- that it's a "woman's instinct," or that it just requires that you be "a good person." -- Valory Mitchell and Diane Wilson, psychotherapists, writing in The Family Next Door, a newsletter for lesbian and gay parents and their friends.
The world is not an easy place for Muslims.
We are viewed with great suspicion, constantly discriminated against, and openly called barbaric warmongers and oppressive tyrants.
Those of us who know better find this incredible.
Most Muslims are gentle, noble, peaceful people, and our societies are tolerant and charitable.
Gay people are very familiar with this same paradox, and as a gay Muslim man I have found that, by and large, the same people who would discriminate against me because of my sexuality would also do so because of my religion.
It is usually my lesbian sisters and gay brothers who are the first to stand by me when others accuse me of belonging to a religion that advocates the subjugation of women or terrorist bombing attacks.
They understand that prejudice and ignorance are universal adversaries, whether the issue is religious freedom or sexual freedom.
Sadly, many leaders within the Muslim community have not made the same connection. -- Shaffiq Essajee, writing in Trikone magazine, for gay and lesbian South Asians.
In a small and esoteric community such as ours, a little prejudice and intolerance can do a lot of damage.
I've met people of color who have dropped out of the scene because their fantasies or partners were unacceptable to the groups they were in.
I've known people who have hidden the fact that they enjoyed cross-dressing, acted "too feminine" or "too masculine" in public, or liked to sleep and play with people of the "wrong" sex or gender, in a community that claims to cherish the sexual outlaw.
This seems even more incongruous and ironic in the year celebrating the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall riots, which were carried out by the very people who are looked down upon now: drag queens, effeminate gay men and diesel dykes, most of whom were people of color. -- Antoinette, editor, BlackLeather, Leather on the Cutting Edge for People of Color and Their Friends.
Until more aviators with H.I.V. and AIDS are visible, we'll miss opportunities to learn and share and support.
And yes, to be supported, too.
Maybe that's the hardest part for a pilot . . . admitting you need (or may need) support -- that you're not in control.
Pilots are taught to be independent, strong, brave, always in control.
How many times have we boasted (or bemoaned) the fact that the PIC bears ultimate responsibility for the flight, no matter who else may be involved in a supportive role?
Losing control is perceived as the ultimate humiliation for a pilot.
But that's exactly what H.I.V. does -- pilots lose control of their careers and their health.
Fortunately, my faith and a great set of friends made it easy for me to learn to let go. -- Ron S., writing in NGPA News, the quarterly of the National Gay Pilots Association.
On June 26, New York City is going to witness a massive gathering of gays, lesbians, bisexuals and transgendered people.
This gathering, Stonewall 25: International March on the United Nations to Affirm the Human Rights of Lesbian and Gay People, marks the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall riots.
There is, however, a lot of controversy surrounding this celebration.
Bisexuals and transgendered people are feeling excluded because they aren't part of the title.
Stonewall organizers have said that the words "transgendered" and "bisexual" cannot be understood or translated on an international level.
Transgendered activists feel that is perhaps the lamest excuse the committee could have come up with.
So we urge you to come to New York City to show your pride in who you are, whoever you consider yourself to be.
The important thing is to be proud.
Remember that! -- BiFocus, a newsletter for Philadelphia's bisexual community


Ann Zeitung, James Lombardi
Ann Flora Zeitung, the daughter of Patricia Zeitung and Dr.
David Zeitung, both of Baltimore, was married yesterday to James Paul Lombardi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Lombardi of Barrington, R.I.
Msgr.
Robert Evans performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in Manning Chapel at Brown University in Providence, R.I.


Honest to Abe
LINCOLN IN AMERICAN MEMORY By Merrill D. Peterson.
Illustrated. 482 pp.
New York: Oxford University Press. $30.


Ms. Schneiderman And Dr. Furst
April Deborah Schneiderman, a daughter of Carol and Ed Schneiderman of Wantagh, L.I., is to be married today to Dr.
Howard Paul Furst, the son of Margo and Michael Furst of Tappan, N.Y.
Rabbi Paul Kushner is to officiate at the Water's Edge Restaurant in Long Island City, Queens.
The bride, 26, graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in special education from the C. W. Post Campus of Long Island University.
She is to become a sixth-grade special education teacher at the Ardsley (N.Y.) Middle School in the fall.


Anya E. Bernstein, Jonathan Bassett
Anya Elisabeth Bernstein, a daughter of Prof.
Thomas P. Bernstein of New York and Ellen H. Bernstein of Guilford, Conn., was married yesterday to Jonathan Anderson Bassett, the son of Nancy Bassett and the Rev.
Joseph Bassett of Chestnut Hill, Mass.
The Rev.
Harry Hoehler, a Unitarian minister, and the Rev.
Herbert Davis, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Eliot Congregational Church in Newton, Mass.
Ms.
Bernstein, 26, will keep her name.
The bride is a summa cum laude graduate of Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a doctoral candidate in political science at Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman of the political science department at Columbia University.
Her mother is a teacher at the Edith B. Jackson Child Care Program at Yale University.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Dorothy Solinger, a professor of political science at the University of California at Irvine.


MANHATTAN MINUTE . . .
PUSH 'EM BACK: Police officers make 20 drug arrests in the campaign to clean up Downtown, the S. R. O. at 105 West 17th Street.
Residents and business owners say the arrests are helping.
Meanwhile, the West 17th Street Block Association papers the neighborhood with fliers warning "Dealers and Druggies" to get out.
The Guardian Angels begin patrols. . . .
RELIEF IN SIGHT?: Look for a new coin-operated public toilet at City Hall Park by mid-July.
The Parks Department will test it before building 30 toilets around the city.
The Transportation Department's long-stymied plan for 200 toilets is still in the bidding process. . . .
HOME AGAIN: Four squatter families, evicted from 508 West 168th Street by the city, win a preliminary injunction allowing them to return to the building. . . .
NO RIV VU: Does I. M. Pei have a sense of humor?
The Javits Center, built of glass and stretching five blocks along the Hudson River, is ideally suited for spectacular views.
So what does the center's president, Fabian G. Palomino, see from his office?
Nothing.
He doesn't have a window.


Editors' Notes
An article on page 36 of The Times Magazine today about pop culture in Japan includes photographs of nude figures illustrating youth subcultures.
The starkness of some of the pictures, in the absence of a compelling news context, conflicts with the desired tone of The Times; they should not have been published.


Max Yasgur's Farm


Backstage Memories
To the Editor:
I was pleased to read in Michael Gorra's review of "Art, Dialogue, and Outrage" (May 15) that he considers Wole Soyinka's play "Death and the King's Horseman" "powerful" and "Mr. Soyinka's finest." I would certainly concur.


A SENSE OF PLACE
THEY are tough.
They are resourceful.
And they are everywhere: one of New Jersey's most abundant natural resources.
Yet they get absolutely no respect.
Talk-show hosts make jokes about them; government authorities favor their elimination.
Worse, they breed wild speculation and outright rumor.
And so, at long last, some hard-hitting truths about the New Jersey mosquito.


SMOKING TOAD
Congratulations for printing Gallagher's article; it is rare to find an article like "Smoking Toad" in so mainstream a publication.
It is not likely the piece will cause great pilgrimages to the Southwest in search of Bufo alvarius.
I think it is important to show the inquisitive hunger people have to understand human consciousness and the lengths to which they will go in pursuit of that knowledge.
JIM QUINN Garrison, N.Y.


June 19-25: Giving Victims a Weapon; States Enact Laws Against Domestic Violence
In focusing the country's attention on the problem of wife battering, the O. J. Simpson case may have provided an unexpected boost in state legislatures around the country for tougher measures against domestic violence.
Last week the New York State Legislature approved a bill that would force police officers to arrest abusive spouses, give victims greater flexibility in bringing criminal charges and require police to be trained in handling domestic disputes.
While the bill is not new, its unanimous adoption was attributed largely to widespread interest in the murder case.


Saints' Mills Will Go Where He Is Wanted
Linebacker SAM MILLS, the Saints' only unrestricted free agent to be tendered a contract offer by the team, would leave New Orleans rather than accept $1.015 million, his agent said.
"Here's a guy who literally got out of the hospital bed to play for them last year," BRETT SENIOR said.
"You'd think that there would be some kind of payback." Mills missed seven games last season when he underwent knee surgery and then developed complications, including a staph infection.


Selden Wells, David Tearse
Cary Selden Wells, the daughter of David H. Wells of Duxbury, Mass., and Mrs.
Ronald M. Horne of Chicago, was married yesterday to David Bradley Tearse, a son of Harold H. Tearse Jr. of Wayzata, Minn., and Bonnie F. Ree of Sun Valley, Idaho.
The Rev.
Michael Marrone performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
John the Evangelist in Duxbury.
Mrs.
Tearse, 31, is known as Selden.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a legal secretary with Crowe, Crowe &amp; Vernaglia, a Boston law firm.


Of Fresh Air Tales and Brotherhood
Alex Berkett was wheezing with laughter.
His best friend of 11 years was telling another slapstick tale from their summers in Connecticut.
"My first memory of the Berketts is crashing my bike into the garage door," said 18-year-old Khenyada Welcome, walking with Alex in midtown Manhattan recently.
"I was hurting for a while."


Smarter, and Fairer, About Drug Crime
Beneath the din of tough-on-crime shouting in the White House and Congress, a quiet strain of sober reason has begun to emerge in the fight against drugs.
Both the House and Senate have voted to ease mandatory minimum sentences for certain low-level drug offenders.
That refreshing step recognizes that while the mules and messengers of drug operations must be punished, it is dumb and unfair to inflict mandatory minimum sentences of 5 and 10 years.
Both chambers would remove mandatory terms for minor drug violators.
The House would apply the more flexible rules retroactively to release between 1,600 and 4,000 inmates needlessly cramming Federal prisons.


Alison Loop, David Piedra
Alison Potter Loop, a senior production associate for the ABC News show "Prime Time Live," was married yesterday to David Anthony Piedra, an associate at Morrison, Cohen, Singer &amp; Weinstein, a New York law firm.
The Rev.
Robert Wenz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Dominic in Shaker Heights, Ohio.
The bride, 30, graduated from New York University.
She is a daughter of Judith Loop of Atlanta and of Dr.
Floyd Loop of Gates Mills, Ohio, and is a stepdaughter of Dr.
Bernadine Healy.
Her father, a thoracic and cardiovascular surgeon, is the chairman of the Cleveland Clinic Foundation.
The bride's stepmother, a cardiologist, was formerly the director of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.


Hillary Durgin, Murphey Harmon
Hillary Kelley Durgin, the daughter of Don Durgin of New York, and the late Tess K. Durgin, was married yesterday to Phelps John Murphey Harmon, a son of Francis G. Harmon 2d and Murphey Harmon, both of Houston.
The Rev.
Mark S. Anschutz performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James Church in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Harmon, a graduate of Princeton University with a master's degree from the Columbia University School of Journalism, is the oil and gas reporter for The Houston Chronicle.


Journal; The Gay Card
"Jane Alexander defends the slopping around of AIDS-infecting blood!" shouted Representative Robert Dornan of California on the House floor on Thursday.
Jane Alexander?
How did the sedate chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts land in this gory mess?
To understand that, you have to appreciate just how ruthlessly demagogues will play the gay card, especially in an election year.
No matter how large the show of force by homosexual men and women in today's Stonewall march in New York, gay-bashing remains a booming political sport for the right -- a sure-fire way to whip up votes, campaign contributions and a national witch hunt in the grim tradition of Salem and Joe McCarthy.


POSTINGS: Riverside South Land Sculpture; A West Side 'Countryside'
The undeveloped plot of land on Manhattan's Upper West Side that is known as Riverside South has become a canvas of sorts for a literal landscape by the environmental artist Stan Herd.
The plotting and planting of the earthwork, "Countryside," began last month, but the one-square-acre project did not become visible until earlier this month; it will continue to evolve over the summer.
Mr.
Herd is using a variety of planted crops, like squash, along with flowers, grasses, clover, groundcover, paving stones, and natural materials, like topsoil, to create an undulating image of trees and clouds.


Q. &amp; A.
Insurance For Sublet Of a Co-op Q. I live in Manhattan and own a co-op apartment in Park Slope that I rent out.
I would like to purchase insurance for the co-op to cover contingencies such as fire, water damage or misuse by the tenant, etc.
Some insurance companies refuse to insure co-op apartments not occupied by the owner; others offer to attach a rider to an apartment dweller's policy which would cover the place in which I live and would limit coverage of the rented-out co-op to the cost of replacing appliances and parquet flooring.
Is there any way to get coverage for the full value of the co-op in case of vandalism or severe damage caused by fire, leaks, etc.? . . .
Joanne Silver, Manhattan.


SMOKING TOAD
"Jesuit astrophysicist" a contradiction?
The Galileo trial notwithstanding, many members of the Society of Jesus have been formidable scientists from the order's start.
Far from being cloistered monks poring over medieval manuscripts, the Jesuits were founded by Ignatius Loyola, in 1534, as a carefully crafted response to the new world order forged by the forces of Renaissance, Reformation and exploration.
In their structure, their education and even their attire, they were designed to be men of action, not contemplatives; more scholarly soldiers than mystics.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Aside from the color in their titles, Greg Dinallo's RED INK (Pocket, $22) and Richard Hoyt's RED CARD (Forge/Tom Doherty, $19.95) have little in common.
"Red Ink" deals with an investigative reporter in the new Russia.
"Red Card" deals with the world's most popular sport -- football, or, as we in the United States call it, soccer.
But they have something else in common too: both are very fine books.


Medical Center Evaluating Silicone Breast Implants
A NEW service for evaluating women with silicone breast implants opened here last week at the Westchester County Medical Center.
Dr.
Jane Petro, a plastic surgeon and associate director of the Medical Center's burn center, will oversee the service, along with Dr.
Susan Klein, a radiologist.
Dr.
Petro estimated that 5,000 women in Westchester -- and 20,000 in the seven-county Hudson Valley region served by the Medical Center -- have had silicone implants.


Simpson Case Shows Batterer's Privileges
To the Editor:
Did O. J. Simpson get special treatment?
Not much.
What your June 18 article on the handling of a 1989 domestic violence charge against the football star does not say is that it is common for such cases to be treated lightly.
It is typical that the police are called to the home on many occasions before finally arresting the batterer.
Prosecutors frequently reduce charges in domestic violence cases to lesser offenses.
And all too often the orders of judges in these cases reflect the sentiment that domestic violence is not a crime to be taken seriously.


Barbara Maltby, Michael Janeway
Barbara S. Maltby, a movie producer, and Michael Janeway, the dean of the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill., were married yesterday.
Judge Charles P. Sifton of Federal District Court in Brooklyn officiated at the bride's home in Lakeville, Conn.
Ms.
Maltby, who is keeping her name, is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Carroll H. Sudler.
She was a producer on such films as "Ordinary People" and "A River Runs Through It." She is a graduate of Smith College.


To the Western Wall
Not many archeological sites are accessible to people in wheelchairs.
But in April, the famous tunnels under the Western Wall in Jerusalem's Old City offically became wheelchair friendly.
Seated in a wheelchair, violinist Yitzhak Perlman inaugurated the special route for the disabled, which consists of lifts, ramps and elevators and cost $304,000 to install.
Wheelchairs can be borrowed from the visitor center in the Jewish Quarter.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
RELIGIONS COMPARED
When the Young Men's Christian Association was founded in England in 1844 it would have been almost unimaginable for a rabbi to address its members or be associated with its operations.
A program at the Rye Y.M.C.A. on Wednesday at 7:30 P.M. is open to the public free of charge and features a discussion of similarities and differences between today's Christians and Jews by Rabbi Robert Rothman, a professor of theology and comparative religions at Manhattanville College and Fordham University.


Study Hints of Reason for Blacks' High Rate of Heart Disease
A study of blood vessel tissue indicates that the veins of blacks are less flexible and expandable than those of whites, a finding that may explain why blacks are more vulnerable to cardiovascular disease, Georgia researchers said yesterday.
Studies of pieces of veins and arteries obtained from patients undergoing heart bypass operations show that for unknown reasons the blood vessels of blacks dilate, or expand, at a different rate than those of whites, said Dr.
Randall L. Tackett of the University of Georgia in Athens.


World Cup Hits Home In Soccer Town, U.S.A.
For generations this former mill town by the Passaic River has seen its young men go off to do battle on fields in foreign lands.
All of them were soccer players.


Sports of The Times; This Team's As American As Kim Chee
A YEAR ago I finally got up the courage to visit the Vietnam wall in Washington, honoring people who had been willing to give more than I would have wanted to give, at least in that time and place.
We found the name of a man who had been a good friend of my wife's in high school, the name of a fellow I knew in college.
And I became aware of the great number of Hispanic names on the wall -- Rodriguez and Perez, Garcia and Hernandez, by the dozens -- who had paid the ultimate respect to this country.


Update; Guilty Pleas in Assault Case Of Employee Hurt in Factory
A case that established the right of state prosecutors to file criminal charges against employers who endanger their workers came to a quiet end in Brooklyn last week, with guilty pleas that were little more than formalities.
Originally charged with assault after a worker suffered brain damage when he was exposed to mercury at a factory in Williamsburg, the owners of the Pymm Thermometer Corporation pleaded guilty on Wednesday in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn to far less serious charges of falsifying business records, a misdemeanor.
The company pleaded guilty to assault.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
A JULIA CHILD FEAST
If veal and pork pate with pistachios in a pastry crust, grilled boneless leg of lamb, grilled medallions of tuna with a puree of black olives and sun-dried tomatoes, roast breast of chicken with 40 cloves of garlic, and lemon meringue tart sound like your kind of picnic, call the Long Wharf Theater for reservations.
A three-day adventure in gastronomy led by Julia Child will begin with the elegant Provence-style picnic on Tuesday.
Be advised that this is no come-as-you-are affair.
Summer whites and gauzy gowns will prevail, as will a ticket price of $175 per person.


Can Police Put Brakes On Racers?
With summer's arrival, the police have stepped up their presence along a five-mile stretch of Francis Lewis Boulevard to combat the perennial problem of drag racing.
But their presence may not be enough.
For years, youths have used the expansive street as a racing strip to test the speed of cars with souped-up engines.
The police and some community officials say the problem has improved since a crackdown began a year ago but some residents say no progress has been made.


Superb Talent in Draft Well Beyond Robinson
The National Basketball Association's longest season in history is not over just yet.
On Wednesday, a maze of general managers and owners will engage in the league's annual ritual of renewal as the N.B.A. holds its rookie draft in Indianapolis.
This year's draft crop is being called one of the best ever.
With 20 underclassmen leaving college early and joining a solid group of seniors, it's also the deepest.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Recalled Jerry DiPoto, pitcher, from Charlotte of the International League.
Placed Steve Farr, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Mexican Says He'll Stay On To Work for a Clean Election
After three days of talks, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari persuaded his Interior Minister today to withdraw his resignation and remain in place to oversee national elections in August.
The decision by the minister, Jorge Carpizo MacGregor, ended a brief crisis that highlighted the continuing partisan struggle over rules for the vote and the fragile credibility of Government assurances that it will be the cleanest in Mexico's modern history.


7 Hurt on West Side After Car Rams Taxi
Seven people were injured yesterday, including a man who lost part of a leg, when a car ran a red light on the Upper West Side, starting a chain-reaction accident that spread onto a busy sidewalk, the police said.
Heading west on West 77th Street about 4:30 P.M., Kenrick Bishop, 44, of 21 Marconi Place in Brooklyn, at the wheel of a 1978 Pontiac, ran a red light at Broadway and broadsided a southbound taxi, said Sgt.
Joseph Gallagher, a police spokesman.


World Economies


Books of The Times; A Financial Thriller With a Message
Black Money  By Michael M. Thomas  309 pages. Crown Publishers. $22.


Accounts
*
International Paper Co., Purchase, N.Y., to Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG, New York, to handle its account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Jennie-O Foods, Willmar, Minn., to BBDO Minneapolis, as the first agency to introduce a line of microwaveable meats.
BBDO already handles the bulk of advertising for Jennie-O's parent, Hormel Foods Corp.
Billings were not disclosed.


Review/Music; A Festival Shakes Off American Connections
The Russian program that opened the Waterloo Festival's orchestral season here this evening seemed clearly intended as a statement, a declaration of independence, perhaps, from the musical Americanism of the festival's departed leaders.
Astonishingly, Gerard Schwarz, who helped found the event in 1976 and served as music director until early this year, was nowhere mentioned in the 32-page program booklet, not even on the full page devoted to "Musical Mission and History," which credits no fewer than a dozen guest soloists.
And Samuel Lipman, who was artistic director from 1985 through last season, has similarly been rendered a nonperson.
Yoav Talmi, who is now artistic adviser and becomes music director next year, is to conduct the last two concerts of the season, which has been shortened to four weeks from six.
The only orchestral Americana scheduled is Barber's popsy "School for Scandal" Overture, to be led next Saturday by Joseph Silverstein.


Bridge
A 10-card fit may be more productive than an 11-card fit, but the reasons are usually fortuitous and unforeseeable.
Consider the diagramed deal from the Knockout Team event at the Bermuda Regional tournament in January: Seven spades is unbeatable for North-South, but seven hearts may fail if played by South.
It was reported by Peter Willcocks, who has represented Bermuda internationally.
East was able to show his powerful minor two-suiter by bidding four no-trump over four hearts, and followed with a Lightner double of six hearts.
He expected to score a spade ruff and the club ace, and the first part of this program succeeded when his partner led a spade.
But that was the end of the defense and North-South collected 1,660.


Give the Players a Break!


Jack Harkness, 75, Who Raised Roses
Jack Harkness, a British grower and breeder of roses and an author, died on June 18.
He was 75 and lived in Southwold, England.
In his long career, Mr.
Harkness introduced roses with names that were sometimes romantic, like "Compassion," "Yesterday" and "Amber Queen," sometimes exotic, like "Tigris" and "Euphrates," and sometimes aristocratic, like "Mountbatten."


The Missing Voice: Clinton
As Congress strives to produce health care proposals by week's end, President Clinton and his Administration are deliberately avoiding detailed negotiations.
Page A12.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Are broadcasters neglecting educational television? The F.C.C. will hold a hearing to seek answers.
IT didn't seem like a particularly tough act to follow.
In 1990, Congress passed the Children's Television Act with the stated objective of increasing educational programming for the young.
The act granted broadcasters wide discretion in meeting this goal.
But in the intervening four years, children's advocates say, broadcasters have failed to make even a minimal good-faith effort to achieve it.


Corrections
Because of a production error, several paragraphs were omitted in some copies yesterday from an article about rightists' attacks on President Clinton and his wife.
The omitted section is reprinted today on page A12.


CHRONICLE
GOV.
EDWIN EDWARDS of Louisiana has already announced he won't run for a fifth term, but he seems to be looking further ahead.
He said that when he died he wanted to be buried under the State Capitol in Baton Rouge, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Edwards said he wanted to be buried near the statue of Huey Long, the only person now buried at the Capitol.
Long was assassinated in 1935.


Bloomberg Is Planning A Sunday Supplement
Finding another path for its financial information services, Bloomberg L.P. will begin publishing a personal-finance magazine this fall that will be distributed with Sunday newspapers in major cities.
Bloomberg Personal is planned as a 24-page glossy magazine divided equally between advertising and personal-finance features.
The magazine will offer advice on investment decisions and will include interviews with financial experts.


Split Reported in Haiti's Army, With Chief Urged to Quit
Although Haiti's army has outwardly responded with nothing but defiance to international sanctions aimed at driving it from power, Haitians familiar with the military's workings say it now may be close to buckling.
In recent days a ban on commercial air traffic has halted all but a handful of flights here, and Washington has frozen most financial transactions involving Haitians and United States banks.
In response, Haitian soldiers have stepped up their urban patrols, built sandbag barricades in downtown streets and acted to sharply restrict the movements of foreign journalists.


Space Station Faces Danger From Flotsam
Dead satellites, shattered rocket stages and thousands of other pieces of man-made space junk speeding around Earth could destroy a planned international space station, and engineers are struggling to reduce the danger.
NASA estimates the chance that debris could smash through the shield of the space station, an orbital outpost for the world's astronauts, at 1 in 5 during its construction and expected 10-year life.
That probability means that if there were five such stations, experts would expect one to be hit.


Protectionism, Alive in Washington
President Clinton preached open trade in April when he signed an international trade agreement in Morocco -- proclaiming it would add $1 trillion to the U.S. economy over the next few years.
But when the Administration withdrew from public scrutiny to translate the Marrakesh accord into U.S. law, it lurched toward protectionism.
At issue are anti-dumping rules, which countries use to retaliate against foreigners who sell goods at prices below their production costs.
The Marrakesh accord puts limits on the rules so that countries will no longer be able to exploit them by finding dumping where none exists.
But the Administration's draft language includes provisions that either change the words of the Marrakesh accord -- which the U.S. signed along with more than 100 other nations -- or twist their meaning in such a way that the U.S. would be able to exclude more imports than the accord intended.


Fuller (H.B.) Co.(FULL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tumen Journal; Wall Around North Korea Has Big Hole in It Here
A convoy of ancient North Korean trucks, some listing precariously under their brimming loads of sacks of Chinese rice, rumbled home recently over the one-lane bridge that spans the Tumen River here.
The bridge and a half-dozen others like it along the 310-mile frontier with North Korea have become a critical lifeline for the Government of that country's President, Kim Il Sung.


Review/Pop; Returning To the Roots Of Zydeco
Louisiana's zydeco music is a meeting ground of styles.
Traditionally, it is where the blues, country-and-western and rhythm-and-blues step into the accordion-soled dancing shoes of Cajun music.
On Saturday afternoon at the Central Park Summerstage, in his first New York performance, the zydeco hotshot Beau Jocque and his band, the Zydeco Hi-Rollers, added new regional influences to the music.
The drummer, Steve (Skeeta) Charlot, attached funk, disco and reggae rhythms to the shuffling beat of Wilfred (Caveman) Pierre's rubboard, or metal washboard.
Mr.
Charlot also contributed stuttering vocals that sounded like hip-hop scratching, and engaged in uplifting call-and-response vocals with Beau Jocque.


Migration Theory Doesn't Help Mastodon
To the Editor:
"Mastodon Findings Raise Question on Human Route" (news article, June 8) reports finding butchered remains of an elephant-like mastodon in northern Florida, suggesting that human migrants to the New World may have colonized the Midwest and Southeast before becoming abundant in the West.
This finding, along with others, suggests that humans did not advance as a simple wave from the land bridge off Alaska.
You suggest that this finding weakens the "blitzkrieg hypothesis" that Pleistocene hunters contributed significantly to the loss of dozens of species of large mammals because this period of hunting and extinction lasted more than 1,000 years.


How Many People Can Fit On the Great Lawn? Right.
Call it the politics of numbers.
Depending on whom one believes, the crowd sweltering in Central Park for yesterday's gay rights rally either equaled the populations of Boston and Seattle combined, or it just about matched the turnout at a big college football game.
The organizers estimated 1.1 million people; the police and parks officials said there were 100,000.


Abroad at Home; 'The Level of Beasts'
"On the night of July 16 the camp commander ordered the door to Room 3 locked for five days.  [ Guards ]  emptied all the prisoners' toilet cans onto the floor. At that time there were approximately 400 men in the room. . . .
"After approximately 48 hours the outside temperature and lack of ventilation had created such an unbearable stench in the room that the prisoners started to riot. . . . Fifteen young men were pulled out of the room and beaten until dead as punishment for the unrest. . . . Within an hour, ordered the remaining men to be taken to the small courtyard and executed."


Dollar Hits New Low Against Japan's Yen
The dollar plunged to a record low against the yen in Tokyo, after the failure of 17 central banks to halt its slide and the resignation of Japan's Prime Minister.
The dollar was quoted as low as 99.50 yen, the lowest since the modern currency trading system began after World War II.


Jazz Concert Held to Raise Scholarship Funds


House Set to Pass Changes In Telecommunication Rules
In a move that would have been unthinkable only two years ago, the House of Representatives is poised to pass on Tuesday the most sweeping changes in telecommunications law since the breakup of the Bell telephone system 10 years ago.
Together, two bills are intended to fundamentally change the ground rules for electronic communications.
The stakes are immense.
And because of breathtaking advances in technologies like fiber optics and digital processing, telephone and cable television companies are investing tens of billions of dollars in advanced new video and voice networks.


Cipsco Inc.(CIP,N) reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
May  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
June  New-Home Sales . . .
May  Wednesday  Gross Domestic Product . . . 1st Qtr.
Thursday  Personal Income . . .
May  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Leading Economic Indicators . . .
May  Construction Spending . . .
May


RESULTS PLUS
Pazienza Ruled Winner Despite Damage  Vinny Pazienza entered the ring with white stripes painted on his face and left it with blood streaming from a cut.
He looked like a loser and that is exactly what Roberto Duran thought of Pazienza on Saturday night in their middleweight bout at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas, Nev.
The three judges, however, made Pazienza (30-8-5) a clear winner at the end of 12 rounds and all three of them raised eyebrows by scoring the fifth round even (10-10) although Duran scored a clean knockdown in that round.
The defeat was Duran's 10th in 103 fights in a career that began in 1967, but the 43-year-old Duran said he would continue to fight. (AP)


Joan Haslip, Writer, Dies at 82; Biographer of Women in History
Joan Haslip, a British author known for her biographies of Marie Antoinette, Empress Elizabeth of Austria and other female blue bloods in history, died on June 19 in Bellosguardo outside Florence.
She was 82 and lived in Bellosguardo.
Summing up her career last week, The Times of London said, "As a writer, she had an eye for the romantic, the dramatic, the picturesque."


Corrections
An article yesterday about the status of health-care legislation in Congress referred imprecisely to the position of Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma, a Democrat on the Finance Committee.
He has said he will not support a health care bill in the committee unless at least some of the Republican members support it.


Police Officer in Playboy; This Time, Official Yawns
A female New York City police officer appears in uniform on the cover, but mostly out of uniform inside the August issue of Playboy magazine.
The Police Department, however, may look the other way.
The officer, Carol J. Shaya, 24, who is a patrol officer in the 45th Precinct in the eastern Bronx, appears in an imitation uniform.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, an article yesterday about Peter E. Stangl's role as chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority had three lines out of place in some editions, scrambling two passages.
The affected passages are reprinted today on page B5.


Raytheon and Grey To End Relationship
The Raytheon Company and Grey Advertising of New York have agreed to end their relationship after three years, effective Sept. 6.
As a result, Raytheon plans to consolidate its account, with billings estimated at $10 million, at one agency.


Preview of Simpson Case to Be Detailed
As prosecution and defense lawyers labored today to prepare for a preliminary hearing on Thursday on the murder charges facing O. J. Simpson, some indications emerged about how both sides view -- and may try -- the case.
The prosecution said it would go beyond presenting just a skeleton of evidence, as is often the case in preliminary hearings.
"The rules permit us just to put on the investigating officers," said Suzanne Childs, the spokeswoman for the District Attorney.
"But we intend to put on other witnesses."
When prosecutors present a parade of witnesses at a preliminary hearing, they are often trying to minimize the risk of having their case thrown out of court for lack of probable cause, even though they may tip their hand as to how much evidence they have.
But sometimes the prosecutors present a little extra evidence in an effort to force the defense to tip its hand a bit as to how the case will unfold.
Defense Says It's Ready
Ms.
Childs would not say why the prosecution adopted its strategy.
But whatever the rationale, Mr.
Simpson's defense team said it would not be fooled either way.
Its investigators were seen at the suspect's home throughout the weekend, at one point taking pictures and making measurements in the driveway.
That activity was another indication that the Simpson case would probably turn in good part on large batches of physical and forensic evidence that both sides have collected, among them extensive samples of blood and tissue.
In fact, F. Lee Bailey, one of the lead defense lawyers, said this afternoon in a telephone interview that he would not be surprised if prosecutors sought to delay the preliminary hearing to be able to complete tests on some of the samples.
In particular, he mentioned DNA tests, which in theory can pinpoint the origin of blood, tissue and hair but which still provoke considerable debate about their value in criminal proceedings.
"Of course," Mr.
Bailey added, "if they delay, they have to let O. J. out on bail because Thursday is the deadline for getting the preliminary hearing under way." High-Profile Case
Mr.
Simpson, whose career in professional football and on television made him a familiar national figure long before he was arrested in the slaying of his former wife, Nicole Brown Simpson, and one of her friends, Ronald L. Goldman, is charged with two counts of first-degree murder and is being held without bail in the Men's Central Jail in downtown Los Angeles.
He pleaded not guilty at his arraignment last Monday.
Should he go to trial and be convicted, he could face life in prison and maybe even the death penalty.
Ms.
Childs said the prosecution intended to go through with the preliminary hearing on Thursday.
"We'll be ready," she said.
So will the defense, Mr.
Bailey said.
"The prosecutors say they have the goods, so let 'em prove it," he said.
"That's our defense. Always has been. You say I've done something criminal -- prove it."
If the preliminary hearing results in Mr.
Simpson being bound over for trial, there will be no effort to defend him on grounds of insanity, as prosecutors -- and even a member of the defense team -- have speculated, Mr.
Bailey added.
He also said no attempt would be made to change the location of a trial, despite an avalanche of pretrial publicity that led a judge to halt a grand jury inquiry last week.
Insanity Plea Is Dismissed
"Speculation about an insanity plea is nonsense because in California the prosecution has to prove its case first before you even get to that question," Mr.
Bailey said.
"It's outrageous that they would talk this way and convict O. J. even before a trial has been held."
As for requesting a new location for a trial -- a change of venue, in legal parlance -- Mr.
Bailey said that would not be a realistic remedy.
"You can't get far enough away to escape the impact of nationwide, and even international, publicity," he said.
"This case is now known about from one coast to the other and then some."
Mr.
Bailey said Mr.
Simpson had a credible alibi as to where he was on the night of June 12, when Ms.
Simpson and Mr.
Goldman were fatally slashed outside Ms.
Simpson's condominium in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles.
"He says he was at home waiting for a limousine to take him to the airport," Mr.
Bailey said.
"So, if he was home, he couldn't have done it, could he?"
Mr.
Bailey also insisted that Mr.
Simpson was not fleeing when he led the police on a lengthy, televised freeway cavalcade that ended with his arrest at his home, also in Brentwood.
A Chase in Slow Motion
"You can't call it a chase when it went as slow as that ride went," Mr.
Bailey argued.
"That doesn't qualify as flight from anything. He said he was going home and he did go home. So, he wasn't running from doing something wrong."
The preliminary hearing will be in Los Angeles Municipal Court before Judge Patti Jo McKay, who conducted Mr.
Simpson's arraignment.
In many instances, preliminary hearings last from a few minutes to a few hours, even when the charges are murder.
But in a high-profile case like the Simpson case, there is always the possibility that the hearing could last days, maybe even weeks.
How long will the Simpson case hearing run?
"As long as it runs," Mr.
Bailey replied.
"We've got a lot of questions to ask. Let's see what they've got."
Most preliminary hearings result in the accused being bound over for trial.
"First, you must establish that a crime has been committed, which is easy enough in this case, what with the pictures of the slashed bodies," said Bradley W. Brunon, a prominent criminal-defense lawyer in Los Angeles.
"Then you saddle suspicion on the accused, tie him or her to the crime -- suspicion at this point, not proof beyond reasonable doubt. Only about 1 in 100 times does the hearing result in the charges being thrown out."
Another well-known Los Angeles defense lawyer, Danny Davis, said the preliminary hearing would also offer the defense an opportunity to "infect" the case with error, even if Mr.
Simpson were sent on to trial.
"What the defense has a chance to do," he explained, "is throw up as many roadblocks as it can and hope that somewhere along the line the judge rules wrong or the prosecution slips up. Then, when the trial actually starts, the defense can come in, point out the mistake and ask that the whole thing be thrown out. You get away with that twice -- and it has been done before -- and O. J. walks."
Some members of the grand jury that was taken off the Simpson case have begun to talk about their experience, though none have been willing to be identified, since grand jury business is meant to be secret.
Over the weekend, one told The Los Angeles Times that though members of the panel had been warned not to watch, listen or read news reports about the Simpson case, some jurors had nevertheless learned about the police tapes on which Mr.
Simpson curses and threatens his wife.
"The only way you could avoid it was not watch TV," the juror was quoted as saying.
"It was a surprise to us when it came on."
Another juror told the newspaper that prosecutors had almost completed presenting their evidence when the order came down for the jury to stop work on the case.
The juror said the panel had been shown pictures of the bodies of Ms.
Simpson and Mr.
Goldman and described them as shocking.
"This crime was such a blood mess," the juror added.
Still another juror said, "This was butchery, absolute butchery."


Equity Issues Scheduled for This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Alza Corp., Palo Alto, Calif., $825 million face amount of liquid yield option notes due in 2014, about $300 million proceeds, Baa-3/BBB-.
Merrill Lynch.


A Tunnel? Holland Named U.S. Historic Landmark.
George Washington didn't sleep there.
John Hancock didn't sign anything there.
Abraham Lincoln didn't debate anyone there.
But the Holland Tunnel has been declared a National Historic Landmark all the same.
It is the 92d such landmark in New York City, Federal records-keepers say, and the 6th tunnel in the nation to be given landmark status.
It joins a short list of crossriver spans that are, historically speaking, more than the site of historic traffic jams: the Brooklyn Bridge, which became a National Historic Landmark in 1964, and the Queensboro Bridge, which was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1978.


ISRAEL PANEL SAYS KILLER AT HEBRON WAS ACTING ALONE
A Government commission investigating the massacre of 29 Muslim worshipers in February at a mosque in Hebron concluded today that an Israeli settler, Dr.
Baruch Goldstein, had acted alone and was the only person to blame for the killings.
Though it did not assign blame to any other individual, the five-member panel criticized Israeli Army and border police procedures, saying they needed to be tightened in Hebron, on the West Bank, especially at the shrine where Dr.
Goldstein went on his deadly rampage.
He was beaten to death by worshipers after they overcame their initial terror.


In Ukraine Election, the Issues Are Poverty and Fear
On a summer's day of startling beauty, even in the Troyeshchina district, where the shabby apartments look twice their age and the concrete seems diseased, Antonina N. Bogoslavska cast her vote today, without much enthusiasm, for Leonid D. Kuchma as Ukraine's next President.
Mrs.
Bogoslavska, a doctor, earns about $9 a month; her husband is a retired soldier whose pension is even less.
"We're really paupers," she said angrily.
"Life has never been easy, but what we're paid now is an insult."


No Headline
We want them to stay for a long time, because if they leave we will be killed. -- FRANCIS SIBOMANA, a Tutsi, of the French troops in Rwanda.  [ A1:5. ]


CHRONICLE
There was never a thought of a midlife career change for BILLY TAYLOR , the jazz pianist and composer.
On Thursday, he will perform at a concert in Carnegie Hall called "Billy Taylor: My First 50 Years in Jazz." "I will pay homage to artists I loved and respected in the past, but basically it will be a look at where I am today as opposed to a look backward," Mr.
Taylor, 72, said the other day.
Most of the concert will be devoted to his own compositions.
"When I started out, my biggest plans were just to be the best piano player I could be," he recalled.
But he has done much more.
An author and teacher, he is artistic director for jazz at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and an arts correspondent on "CBS Sunday Morning."


Comptroller Report Faults Special Education Policy
Although the New York City Board of Education spends nearly one-quarter of its budget on special education programs, it has no way of measuring whether disabled students are getting an education or are developing skills, according to a report released yesterday by City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi.
Auditors from the Comptroller's office sought to determine whether the 130,000 city students who have been labeled as having disabilities and placed in special education classes are making academic progress.
But they concluded, "The board has no comprehensive policy or methodology for measuring the success of the special education program."


German Neo-Communists, Surging, Capture a City Hall
For the first time since unification in 1990, a former East German Communist has been elected Mayor of a German city.
With 51.6 percent of the vote, Horst-Dieter Brahmig was chosen today to be Mayor of the eastern German city of Hoyerswerda, 100 miles southeast of Berlin.
His opponent, Klaus Naumann, a Social Democrat, had been supported by every other party.


Fugitive Reported in Iraq
A suspect in the World Trade Center bombing has been spotted in Baghdad, Newsweek magazine reports in the issue that goes on sale today.
The United States Government has offered a $2 million reward for aid in capturing the suspect, Abdul Rahman Yasin, who was charged last August with helping to mix the chemicals that went into the Trade Center bomb.
Mr.
Yasin, an American citizen, left the United States a week after the bombing, and investigators have long believed that he went to Iraq.
"We've been aware for some time of reports of his presence in Baghdad," said David Johnson, a State Department spokesman.
Mr.
Johnson would not comment on the Government's efforts to bring Mr.
Yasin back to the United States to stand trial.


Helmut Andresen, Finance Official, 85
Helmut Andresen, a retired executive vice president of United States Trust Company of New York and a past chairman of the Trust Division of the New York State Bankers Association, died on Friday at his home in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
He was 85.
Mr.
Andresen, who had been in ill health for two years, died of kidney failure, his daughter Florence Andresen said.


Disney's 'Lion,' King Of the Summer Box Office
For months, the Walt Disney Company, and for that matter most of Hollywood's executives and producers, have predicted that "The Lion King" would reign at the summer box office.
But no one quite predicted that this animated musical would turn into the biggest opening of the year.
The movie, produced by the Disney Company, grossed about $42 million in its first weekend at theaters around the nation and drew 10 million people.


Overshadowed, Yes, But Hardly Outscored
Claudio Caniggia is one of several stars in their prime on the national team of Argentina, but he and the others live in the shadow of the aging Diego Armando Maradona.
On and off the field, Maradona grabs the headlines.
Few paid attention to Caniggia even last month, when he completed a 13-month suspension by FIFA after having tested positive for cocaine use.
Caniggia's ban by the world governing body of soccer ended May 8.
He immediately went to work and has brought his play to the level he achieved in the 1990 World Cup, when he was the most dangerous striker for his country in leading Argentina to the final.


Honors
*
Chrysler Corp.'s Plymouth and Dodge divisions, the new Neon automobile and Chrysler's media services agency, Pentacom, Troy, Mich., took top honors, winning the General Excellence Award, in Mediaweek magazine's 1994 national media Plan of the Year competition.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A wave of mergers and alliances is transforming the nation's trillion-dollar health care system.
Without waiting for the outcome of the Congressional health debate, providers of medical care -- including hospitals, physician groups and nursing homes -- are joining to form bigger and bigger networks.
The goal is to become large enough to offer the comprehensive services and the reasonable prices needed to assure a steady flow of patients from the increasingly demanding groups that buy medical care.  [ Page A1. ]


That's Just the Way the Ball Bounces
Regardless of which team selects him in the National Basketball Association draft, one thing appears certain about Charlie Ward: The Heisman Trophy winner is ready to make his living wearing shorts and sneakers.
"Football is my last choice right now," the point guard and self-described ex-quarterback said here this weekend, after working out for the Orlando Magic.
"I'm a basketball player."


Greeks Get The Cheers But Not The Goals
For a very short while, this could have been Athens.
Greek flags billowed in every nook and cranny of Soldier Field; Greek letters covered banner after banner, and thousands of proud Greek voices joined together to send the words of their national anthem booming out across the choppy surface of Lake Michigan.
Then the match began.


Provision on Death Penalty Is Slowing Anti-Crime Bill
The anti-crime bill that President Clinton and Congress have been touting has snagged on a disagreement about a crucial provision, making compromise difficult and delay until August certain.
The provision, which amounts to five pages in 1,463 pages of anti-crime legislation, is called the racial justice act.
It would allow death-row inmates to cite statistical trends, not just the facts in their own cases, to support the contention that they had been the victims of racial bias in sentencing.


Frigidaire Selects Campbell Mithun
The Frigidaire Company has selected Campbell Mithun Esty of Minneapolis to handle its national advertising account, which had been at SBC Advertising of Westerville, Ohio, for the last five years.
Although billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $10 million.


Errors Inflated New York Success At Affirmative-Action Contracts
Santa Fe Construction, owned by a black man, got two contracts, each worth $6.5 million, to renovate police station houses.
The K-Pam Trucking Corporation, owned by a woman, won a $4.6 million subcontract for work on the construction of New York City's third water tunnel.
Those were among hundreds of examples that enabled Mayor David N. Dinkins, in the middle of his re-election campaign last October, to announce proudly the results of a new effort to award more city contracts to companies owned by women or minorities.


In Japan's Imperial Roadshow, Signs of a More Relaxed Era
For two weeks, from the East Coast to Hawaii's sun-drenched shores, the Japanese Emperor's visit to the United States played with all the sweet-tempered monotony of a summer movie intent upon unrumpled distraction.
No politics, please: By definition, the cross-country journey of Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko was purely ceremonial.
Even a stop at Pearl Harbor was rejected as too controversial.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Saturday about the O. J. Simpson case misstated the judge's action in some editions.
The judge halted a grand jury's inquiry into the case; he did not dismiss the grand jury itself, which will continue to sit in other cases.


United States Falls to Earth but Not Out of the Tournament
Four days earlier, the United States soccer team had left the Rose Bowl wrapped in the flag after a stunning 2-1 victory over Colombia.
Today, the Americans left wrapped only in uncertainty.
A victory or a draw against Romania would have guaranteed the Americans their first advance beyond the first round since the inaugural World Cup in 1930.
What the United States received instead was a 1-0 defeat on a merciless afternoon, when the temperature hit 115 degrees on the stadium floor.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the Clinton Administration's plan to create an international peacekeeping force for Haiti referred incorrectly at one point to the force's proposed makeup.
The 12,000 to 14,000 members would include police officers and civilian contractors as well as troops.


Cameroon Goalkeeper Says He's Had Enough
Goalkeeper Joseph-Antoine Bell quit Cameroon's World Cup team yesterday because of a dispute with team officials.
Bell said the officials had tried to force Coach Henri Michel to start someone else in goal Friday against Brazil in a game that Cameroon lost, 3-0.


Mussina Throttles the Jays And Makes Key Move Over
Orioles 7, Blue Jays 1
Mike Mussina pitched a five-hitter for his 11th victory and Brady Anderson homered twice last night to lift the Baltimore Orioles to a 7-1 victory over Toronto at the Skydome.
It was the Blue Jays' eighth straight loss and the 11th in their last 12 games.


Can Low S.A.T. Scores Lead to High Grades?
To the Editor:
Therefore, assuming average S.A.T. scores have the same predictive power today as they had a generation ago and that academic standards are the same as then, if grade inflation is not endemic in United States higher education, average grades in the 1990's should have fallen.
This is certainly not the case.


South Jersey: Nice Shore, but Definite Attitude
Kathy Larson-Gutowski was chewing her tuna salad the other day and reminiscing about the year she was away.
"I lived there for a year while I was going to school," she said, "but I couldn't wait to get back home." Had she been in brutal towns like Chicago or New York, or distant cities like Paris or Rome?
No, she had lived in Bergen County, in North Jersey.
To many South Jerseyans, it might as well have been Bombay.


A Listing Of Week's Debt Sales
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week is confined to bills, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 4.14 percent and the rate on a six-month bill was 4.58 percent.


Adobe Systems Inc.(ADBE,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 27


F.C.C. Plan Should Cut Cellular Rates
To the Editor:
"F.C.C. Opens Airwaves to Fierce Competition" (Business Day, June 10) fails to describe how dramatically the auction of radio spectrum will change the cellular industry and local telephone business.
Ten years ago, the United States began its historic move toward a more competitive telecommunications industry with the breakup of A.T.&amp; T. Today, the industry is on the edge of a comparable revolution in mobile communications.
The cellular industry price umbrella would collapse under the increased competition of as many as seven new personal communications service providers.


Planning for Tomorrow's Sounds of Silence


AIDS Babies Deserve Testing
All those concerned about babies infected with the virus that causes AIDS can be grateful to Michael Dowling, New York's Commissioner of Social Services.
He, at least, has had the decency and common sense to guarantee that all AIDS-infected babies in the foster-care system will be identified and cared for.
But what about the larger number of AIDS-infected babies who are not in foster care?
Their fate now hinges on the outcome of a legislative battle that pits the health needs of the babies against the privacy rights of the mothers.


First, Save the Schools
New York City's public school system needs to be reinvented from the ground up.
Organized a century ago and never seriously revamped since then, it has become a bureaucratic monster that wastes vast sums that should be spent on instruction.
But what is worse than wasting money is wasting lives.
Five years ago, the State Commissioner of Education reported that 63 of the state's 77 worst schools were in New York City.
This year Chancellor Ramon Cortines identified 40 schools as "educationally bankrupt." Too many of New York's poorest children spend their days in huge buildings designed in an era when the factory method of production was much admired; today, reformers agree that schools need to be on a smaller, human scale, capable of meeting the needs of students from diverse and often adverse backgrounds.


Healthtrust Inc.-The Hospital Co.(HTI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Some Contractors Say Special Help Is No Favor
As a woman born in Puerto Rico, and as a construction contractor in the blighted blocks of the central Bronx, Olga Perez Martinez is a model of the kind of business owner that the city's affirmative-action contracting program was intended to help.
Forming her company, PrimAlto Development and Construction, in 1989, Ms.
Perez Martinez started small and grew slowly.
The company's first job was to renovate a bathroom.
Then came a sprinkler system that it installed at a center for the elderly, then a small renovation for a medical center, budgeted at $300,000.


Review/Dance; Ballet Style, Apparently for Its Own Sake
Leigh Witchel is that rare new choreographer who, although unconnected to a major ballet company, chooses to work within a strict classical ballet style.
The tasteful program of four dances that he presented on Friday night at the Marymount Manhattan Theater was handsomely produced and performed by Dance as Ever, a group of engaging, beautifully trained dancers, some of whom have made their names with leading ballet companies.
His training is in ballet, and he has performed with companies including the Eglevsky, American Festival Ballet and the Lexington Ballet.
But the program failed to answer the question of why Mr.
Witchel has chosen ballet for his medium of expression.
Some, John Selya and Clark Tippet among them, seem to choose to explore ballet as a kind of vital puzzle to be solved.
A few seek to express dramatic themes or their own individuality.
Mr.
Witchel appears to have a love of order and formality that is met by ballet.
It is clear he also has a fondness for scores others might not think to choreograph to.


Key Voice Is Missing On Health
Even though the battle over health care has moved into a critical time of striking deals and compromises, President Clinton and his Administration have deliberately avoided detailed negotiations with Congress, preferring to give only "technical assistance" while affirming the general goal of universal coverage.
That is partly by design and partly by default.


Review/Jazz Festival; Milton Nascimento, Still on a Hilltop
Toward the middle of Milton Nascimento's JVC Jazz Festival concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Friday night, this great Brazilian singer and composer introduced a song he said was inspired by his childhood growing up in the state of Minas Gerais.
Every evening, he said, he would climb to the top of a hill to watch the sunset and the lights going on in the neighboring towns.
The song, like much of Mr.
Nascimento's finest work, conveyed a sensuous appreciation of nature that was as enveloping as a sultry summer evening in the country.
A wash of synthesized strings was laced with several thickets of percussion and pushed by a driving backbeat.
Plunging through this steamy atmosphere, Mr.
Nascimento's protean voice suggested a singer profoundly attuned to the natural world.


Jergens Parts Ways With Its Agency
The Andrew Jergens Company and its agency, Publicis/Bloom of New York, have decided to end their relationship because of what they called "inevitable future conflicts" with another, larger client of Publicis/ Bloom's, Cosmair.
As a result, Jergens said it planned to separate the creative and media portions of its account, with billings estimated at $25 million, but planned no formal review.
"We've been trying to work this out all year long, so it's not a surprise," Robert H. Bloom, chairman and chief executive of Publicis/Bloom, said on Friday.
Publicis acquired Bloom FCA in October and merged both agencies' New York offices to create Publicis/Bloom.
Bloom had handled the Jergens lotions and soaps account for the last two and a half years, while Publicis had handled Cosmair's international account, which includes advertising for Lancome and L'Oreal, for 15 to 20 years.
Mr.
Bloom said the billings ratio of Cosmair to Jergens was "three-to-one."


Jeep Ad Honored At Cannes Festival
A humorous commercial from the United States for Jeep, in which the product is never seen, took top honors, winning the Grand Prix award, at the 41st annual International Advertising Film Festival in Cannes, France, sponsored by the Screenvision Cinema Network of New York.
The winning spot, "Snow Covered," was created by Bozell North of Southfield, Mich., formerly the Southfield office of Campbell Mithun Esty.
The commercial, which was not mentioned in various predictions of the Grand Prix winner, is the first Grand Prix winner for a United States agency since 1986.


New Age Rites at Sacred Place Draw Indian Protests
For centuries, Sioux, Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians have visited Bear Butte to fast and pray, earning the 4,422-foot butte the name Sacred Mountain of the Plains Indians.
But on Tuesday more than 200 Sioux showed up at Bear Butte State Park near here not to pray, but to protest.
They say the butte, which rises out of the rolling plains on the edge of the Black Hills, is being desecrated by New Age practitioners and "plastic medicine men," spiritual leaders who they say distort Indian ceremonies and improperly charge for their services.


Patents
QUANTUM SYSTEMS INC., a tiny private company based in Ramsey, N.J., claims it has patented a way to generate billions of dollars for telephone companies and thereby make the so-called information highway affordable.
Two officers of the company, which is known as Qsi, Mark R. Gregorek and Jeffrey C. Dillow, this month patented a system for replacing telephone ringing sounds and busy signals with 15-second advertisements.


WORLD CUP '94: Sports of The Times; Americans Now Face Time in Front of Tube
THE way I understand it, they must now multiply Pele's birth date times the heat on the floor of the Rose Bowl times the number of yellow warning cards Charles Oakley would receive if he were a soccer player.
That figure will be the percentage of probability of the United States reaching the second round of the World Cup.
And while the computer chips are buzzing away, or whatever it is computer chips do, the American soccer players must now sit in front of a television set for the next four days and root for Germany to beat South Korea, Russia to beat Cameroon and Jupiter to align with Mars.
That is a lot of tube time for our lads.


Review/Jazz Festival; 2 Kinds of Brubeck and 1 of Slide Hampton
Dave Brubeck is a tough musician to figure out.
He can spend 10 minutes reducing a piece to hamburger, then turn around and be amazingly graceful and agile.
One piece can have no conception at all, just four musicians bruising a tune into submission, then he'll play an oddly structured composition that suggests musical intelligence.
Mr.
Brubeck was the headliner at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday night for the JVC Jazz Festival, and if it hadn't been for Slide Hampton's band, the concert would almost not have existed.
Mr.
Hampton is one of jazz's finest living arrangers, and at the rare appearances he makes with his small big band, he has proved to be an exceptional leader as well.
Mr.
Hampton borrows from Dizzy Gillespie, Tadd Dameron and Gil Evans for his basic sound and makes it modern; a piece of his overflows with harmonies and textures and melodies, all brought together without seams.
He has an idea and it permeates his work, making it consistent.


Market Place; If Fokker makes a comeback, is anybody likely to take notice?
FOKKER N.V., the Dutch aircraft builder, thought its future had been assured last year when Deutsche Aerospace, a unit of Daimler-Benz of Germany, agreed to acquire a 51 percent stake in the company as part of a plan that injected $500 million into Fokker.
But 14 months later, Fokker, which makes small commercial jets and turboprop planes for airlines, continues to struggle.
Deutsche Aerospace, which is known as Dasa, seems resigned to injecting more money in Fokker.


Drug Emporium Inc.(DEMP,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


The Church Can Learn From Its Daughters; What the Cardinals Said
To the Editor:
As a longtime advocate of women's rights in my beloved church -- and one using the services of both altar boys and altar girls for the last 20 years -- I was dismayed to read your report from Rome (front page, June 15) that our cardinals had opposed "what they portrayed as a pervasive feminist influence at a forthcoming United Nations population conference." How could the cardinals make such a broad-based attack on the whole spectrum of feminism?
The following day I obtained a text of the statement.
It in no way portrays the cardinals as opposing "a pervasive feminist influence," but is narrowly focused on the family and its rights, and it opposes "the destruction of human life through abortion . . . sexual promiscuity and distorted notions of the family."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Criimi Mae Inc., Rockville, Md., filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell $200 million of securities.


Lawyers


Labatt (John) Ltd.(LBT) reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Bomb Suspect May Be Vital To U.S. Case
The man accused of masterminding a terrorist plot to assassinate political leaders and bomb the United Nations and other New York landmarks is expected to become the main prosecution witness against Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman and a dozen other defendants at a trial next fall, legal experts said yesterday.
Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, a 33-year-old Sudanese who was reported by his lawyers over the weekend to have dismissed them and agreed to cooperate with the Government, would be able to give the jury a sweeping overview and dazzling details of the conspiracy charges, experts familiar with the case said.


Potomac Electric Power Co.(POM,N) reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


A Late Entry In Health Care Fray; Bradley Jumps Into the Debate
Since he first awed Princeton basketball fans by sinking over-the-shoulder shots with his back to the basket 30 years ago, William Warren Bradley has usually had an uncanny sense of where he is.
Where he put himself last week was right in the middle of one of the biggest legislative issues in his 16 years in the United States Senate.
Until then, it was not clear that this game would include the senior Democratic Senator from New Jersey, who suffered a soul-searing near-defeat for his seat in 1990 and sat out the 1992 Presidential race.


Florida Steel Corp. reports earnings for Year to Mar 31


On the Right Track With Russia
Whatever problems President Clinton may face elsewhere in foreign affairs, his Russia policy is yielding significant advances.
Last week Russia joined NATO's Partnership for Peace, intended to foster military cooperation between once-hostile alliances; Mr.
Clinton and President Boris Yeltsin agreed to meet in Washington in September; the U.S. and Russia signed agreements to build a space station together and to have an American consortium develop oil and gas reserves on Russia's Sakhalin Island.
They also made progress on curbing nuclear dangers.


Old Hurdles Complicate Plan for Unified Police
The idea has enticed but eluded mayors for a decade and more: a merger of New York City's three police forces into a single superforce, as large as most nations' armies, the efficiencies saving millions of dollars and improving public safety.
Now Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani has pushed the idea forward again, but many substantial obstacles remain.
The Mayor's aides described as a major step the City Council's passage last week of a technical transfer of money in the city's $31.6 billion budget that would allow the consolidation of the Police Department and the two smaller forces, the housing police and transit police.


Gay Marchers Celebrate History in 2 Parades
Tens of thousands of gay men and lesbians surged through Manhattan yesterday, celebrating a civil-rights movement that took its first steps during a police raid on a gay bar 25 years ago and seemed in the last week to have come of age.
The participants in the commemoration of what is now known as the Stonewall rebellion had their own reasons for being there.
Some came to honor pioneers in the gay movement, to support one another, to protest, to rejoice, to remember the dead or to offer a beacon for the living.


The Church Can Learn From Its Daughters; Environmental Crisis
To the Editor:
Your June 15 article on the opposition of the Roman Catholic cardinals to proposals approved in preparatory meetings for the international conference on population and development fails to give a proper perspective on demographic realities.
World population stands at 5.6 billion.
Some environmental and agricultural scientists contend that our planet has exceeded its carrying capacity.
But the earth's human numbers grow nearly 100 million annually, more than 90 percent occurring in the developing world.
Fifty-five countries are on course to double their population in 25 years or less.


Conservative Daily Tries to Expand National Niche
The Washington Times, the conservative daily that is linked to the Rev.
Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church, has begun a national weekly edition that it hopes will sell 250,000 to 500,000 copies a week.
To supporters, the new national ambitions are evidence of a coming of age for The Washington Times, a 90,000-circulation daily that has annoyed liberals and served as a rallying point for conservatives.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 REPORT SAYS ONE KILLER IN HEBRON  The panel investigating the killings of Palestinians in February in a Hebron mosque issued its report, concluding that the killer had acted alone but criticizing Israeli Army and border police procedures.
A1  UNEASY RWANDA CALM  For the moment the French seem like saviors in Rwanda, but there are seeds of future problems as the French find that what they intend to do and what Rwandans want may be different things.
A1  MUSSOLINI DIARIES A LOOK BACK  Excerpts from diaries believed to be Mussolini's were published, and a scholar said they were probably written by Mussolini but while he was in exile.
A6  Excerpts from diaries believed to have been written by Mussolini.
A6  MEXICAN RESIGNATION WITHDRAWN  The Mexican Interior Minister, who is in charge of planning the presidential election, withdrew his resignation after an outpouring of support from those who said he was needed to make sure the vote is fair.
A2  HAITIAN MILITARY BUCKLING  The sanctions and other pressures on the Haitian military designed to restore the exiled President to power have brought public bluster in response, but reports say that dissent is growing in the military.
A2  PAINFUL CHOICES IN BOSNIA  The story of one Bosnian soldier and his difficult choice to join a breakaway Muslim who has allied himself with the Serbs reflects the painful choices for peace in Bosnia.
A6  UKRAINIANS CAST THEIR VOTES  Ukrainians voted in their Presidential election, and although they are angry about the economy and other conditions, most said that the incumbent would win anyway.
A3 GIRDING FOR A DIVE  Currency traders in Tokyo were bracing for the dollar to test new lows against the Japanese yen this week.
D1  A former Communist won a mayor's post in a German city.
A3  American policy on Africa was criticized at a forum.
A9  The Afghan leader's troops ousted a rival from the capital.
A8  Tumen Journal: China's porous border with North Korea.
A4 National A10-14 AN INDUSTRY REMAKES ITSELF  A wave of mergers and alliances is transforming the nation's health care system.
The goal is to become large enough to offer the services and reasonable prices needed for a steady flow of patients from the groups buying medical care.
A1  DANGER IN SPACE  Dead satellites and thousands of other pieces of space junk could destroy an international space station, and engineers are struggling to reduce the danger.
A1  CLUES OF A CASE  Some hints emerged of how the O. J. Simpson hearing might play out on Thursday: prosecutors indicated they might present several witnesses, while the defense concentrated on forensic evidence.
A10  IMPERIAL MESSAGE  The Emperor and Empress of Japan ended their American tour, which was rich in symbolism for a Japanese audience rethinking the role of the imperial household.
A10  REPUBLICANS AND THE RIGHT  Republican leaders are arguing over how to handle the growing power of the Christian right, and clashing over whether to soften their opposition to legalized abortion.
A12  HEALTH CARE STRATEGY  President Clinton and his Administration have avoided detailed negotiations with Congress on health care, preferring to give only "technical assistance." That is partly by design and partly by default.
A12  CRIME BILL HURDLE  The crime bill in Congress has been snagged over a provision that would give death-row inmates more leeway in arguing that racial bias affected their sentences.
A14  Indians criticized New Age followers at a sacred butte.
A14 Metro Digest B1 A GAY-RIGHTS COMMEMORATION  Tens of thousands of gay men and lesbians surged through Manhattan, celebrating a civil-rights movement that began with the Stonewall rebellion 25 years ago.
A1  PHANTOM MINORITY CONTRACTS  Mayor David N. Dinkins's claims that New York doubled contracts going to companies owned by women or minorities were substantially overstated, an analysis shows.
A1  Business Digest D1  Sports C1-11  Baseball: Griffey emerging as home-run king.
C1  Yankees beat Indians.
C9  Mets lose to Pirates.
C7  Basketball: Ward chooses N.B.A. first.
C11  Columns: Vecsey on World Cup.
C3  Tennis: New faces rising at Wimbledon.
C11  World Cup: U.S. loses to Romania but may still advance.
C1  Colombia goes home.
C2  Greece beaten by Bulgaria.
C4  Obituaries B8  Joan Haslip, British biographer.
Arts/Entertainment C13-18  Christopher Durang's parody.
C13  Strong opening for "The Lion King." C18  Music: The gay links.
C13  Milton Nascimento at Avery Fisher Hall.
C13  Waterloo Festival.
C14  Guided by Voices.
C14  Will Oldham performs.
C14  Louisiana zydeco.
C14 Mel Torme.
C16  Slide Hampton and his band.
C16  Cleo Laine.
C16 Dance: Four works by Leigh Witchel.
C14  Books: "Black Money," monkey business.
C18  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials  AIDS babies deserve testing.
Protectionism in Washington.
On the right track with Russia.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: "The level of beasts."  William Safire: Jimmy Clinton.
Diane Ravitch: First, save the schools.
Robert L. Park: Congress versus science.
Chronicle B6 Bridge C14 Crossword C18


Correction: Cuomo Is Quoted on M.T.A.
Because of a mechanical error, an article yesterday about Peter E. Stangl's role as chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority had three lines out of place in some editions, scrambling two passages.
The first passage, in which the Governor expresses irritation at the M.T.A.'s lack of political restraints, should have read:
"I am not insulated from the public," Mr.
Cuomo said shortly after taking office in 1983.
"They'll get me four years from now. Authorities are insulated."


Office Market in the Suburbs Is Showing Signs of Recovery
The troubled office market in Westchester County is showing the first signs of a rebound, following the lead of the office markets in New York City and Fairfield County in Connecticut.
Westchester's vacancy rate is now 25.4 percent, down from 26.9 percent six months ago and 27.1 percent at midyear 1993, according to a survey by the Rostenberg-Doern Company, a real-estate concern.


Mets Get Swept Away On Too Little Too Late
Why were they hanging around in the ninth inning of a rout at Shea Stadium yesterday, these children wearing nice blue Mets caps?
As part of a promotion, they were allowed to run the bases when the game was over.
Considering that hardly anyone from the Mets is setting an example these days, it was amazing that the children could find their way from first to home.


Christopher Durang, a Parodist, Finds Very Little That Is Sacred
As a playwright and parodist, Christopher Durang takes lethal aim at individuals and institutions from both church and stage.
In his latest comedy, "For Whom the Southern Belle Tolls," which was the highlight of the Ensemble Studio Theater's recent Marathon of one-acts, he spoofs "The Glass Menagerie," offering a hilarious sendup of Tennessee Williams's memory play.
In typical fashion, the tone of the sketch is malicious with a dash of affection.
The lame sister, Laura, becomes Lawrence, a hypochondriac who treasures his precious collection of glass swizzle sticks ("This one I call Mother," he says to his mother, Amanda, and tosses it over his shoulder.) Analyzing his parody, Mr.
Durang said: "In the real play, Amanda is frustrated with Laura at the same time she worries about her. If her angers and frustrations are put on the surface, for some reason that can be funny."


As Christians Pull the G.O.P. to the Right, Its Leaders Argue Over Holding the Center
As they seek to unify their party for the elections this November and in 1996, Republican leaders are arguing over how to handle the growing power of the Christian right.
They are clashing over whether to soften their outright opposition to legalized abortion and debating their stands on health care changes, welfare policy and family values.
Only last week, the Senate minority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas, rose in the Senate to denounce the Democrats as "appealing to religious bigotry" by condemning Christian conservatives' influence over Republicans.
Yet the next day, a Republican colleague, Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania, accused his party of intolerance because it had allowed that faction to gain power.
Last weekend, prominent Republicans sparred over the issue at Iowa's state party convention.


The Man Who Would Be Home-Run King
Ever wonder if it tickled Tchaikovsky just to tickle the ivories?
Or whether Michelangelo ever just dabbed his fingers on the fresco and played instead of painted?
When you're that good, the brilliance must seem like so much child's play.
It certainly does with Ken Griffey Jr., the center fielder of the Seattle Mariners, who has, at the age of 24, become the centerpiece of his sport.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GAY MARCHERS THRONG MANHATTAN
Tens of thousands of gay men and lesbians from all over the world surged through Manhattan, celebrating a civil-rights movement that took its first steps during a police raid on a Greenwich Village gay bar 25 years ago and that seemed to many in the last week to have come of age.


Yanks Left Standing After Indians Put Up a Fight
So this is magnificent Jacobs Field.
So this is where the upstart Indians had cast a seven-week spell over any opponents who strolled into their new home.
Everyone left with losses, so the happiness and hype were immense in Cleveland when the Yankees visited.
What was New York's reaction to the initial hysteria?
So what.
It changed today.
The Yankees discovered precisely why the Indians are a dangerous team.
The spell that had existed over visitors from May 1 until Saturday returned in thrilling fashion today and almost vaulted Cleveland back from an eight-run deficit in the eighth inning.
Instead, the Indians scored seven times off three relievers and had the 41,648 fans howling in the final two innings.
Their frenetic comeback ended in the ninth when Steve Howe retired Alvaro Espinoza on a lineout to left field with a runner on first base, and the Yankees escaped with a 12-11 victory.


From the Gay World's Every Reach, A Sea of Marchers, All With Stories
They marched for any number of reasons.
Barbara and Sal Deldeo of Wilmington, Del., joined the throngs of gay and lesbian people in the Stonewall 25 parade for their son, Thomas Gerald, who died in April after a 10-month battle with AIDS.
Neither had ever marched before, not against the Vietnam War, nor in marches against nuclear weapons, not even on Memorial Day.


McNeil and Shelton Strangers to the Spotlight
Wimbledon, the sort of place that doesn't like surprises, has been full of them this year.
Vulnerability is a funny thing, and tennis has a built-in seeding system to protect its top stars from it, particularly here at Wimbledon, which takes the theory one step further and awards its seedings not only on the basis of rank but as rewards for jobs well done on lawns of the past.


Oracle SystemsCorp.(ORCL,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


CHRONICLE
You never know quite what to expect from President JIMMY CARTER .
Hard on the heels of his trip to North Korea comes news that he is joining the ranks of poets.
Times Books is to announce today that it is publishing "Always a Reckoning," a collection of poetry by Mr.
Carter.
The book, Mr.
Carter's ninth, is due before Christmas and will contain 45 poems, said PETER OSNOS , the publisher of Times Books.
"He shares his private memories of childhood, family and political life," Mr.
Osnos said.
"His subjects also include his feelings about such issues as homelessness. They are emotional without being tremulous."


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc.(FLE,N) reports earnings for Year to Apr 24


Essay; Jimmy Clinton
"It was kind of like a miracle," breathed Jimmy Carter, about his conversion of North Korea's dictator from lion to lamb.
No wonder Kim Il Sung denied entry to special envoys chosen by President Clinton last month.
Senators Sam Nunn and Richard Lugar would have presented a strong American position on his nuclear bomb production.


The Church Can Learn From Its Daughters
To the Editor:
The cardinals of my church have voted to oppose what they perceive as a pervasive feminist influence at a population conference sponsored by the United Nations (front page, June 15).
Led by John Cardinal O'Connor, they defined the battle lines against moves within the United Nations to assure that women would be given more prominent roles in population programs, a direction they described as reflecting the "cultural imperialism" of the United States.
My reverence for the Roman Catholic Church, which has graced my life, compels me to ask these men of God if they at all recognize the irony of their accusing American women of cultural imperialism.
Might I suggest that it has been and remains the cultural imperialism of an all-male church hierarchy that has brought the great majority of American Catholic women to respect the teaching authority of their shared lives at least as much as the imperial authority of the hierarchical church.


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp.(KBH,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Correction: Omission In Article on Clintons
Because of a production error, several paragraphs were omitted in some copies yesterday from an article about rightists' attacks on President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The omitted passage, beginning with the last paragraph of the front-page section, should have read:
Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition called Mr.
Clinton's inauguration a "repudiation of our forefathers' covenant with God." On his "700 Club" cable television program, Mr.
Robertson has promoted conspiracy theories about the death of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the White House deputy counsel and former law partner of Ms.
Clinton who committed suicide last July, asking: "Was there a murder of a White House counsel? It looks more and more like that."


The Church Can Learn From Its Daughters; 'Cultural Imperialism'
To the Editor:
Your June 15 article about the Vatican's stand on the United Nations international conference on population and development calls it a conference on women's rights.
The draft of the document discussed during the New York preparatory session is 82 pages long, and it covers topics on population control policies.
Only 7 pages are dedicated to development.
The agenda being pushed includes a heavy load of population control, allegedly on the assumption that reducing population will reduce poverty.
A scientifically respectable proof of this thesis is yet to be put forth.
One may ask who is pushing this agenda and why.
The effort to impose the values prevailing among United States delegates to the conference is a case of "cultural imperialism" and an attempt at social control of third world countries. (Nor are those values a unanimous consensus among the people of the United States.)


Dividend Meetings


Wieden &amp; Kennedy Gets Microsoft Job
The Microsoft Corporation has named Wieden &amp; Kennedy of Portland, Ore., as the first agency to handle "broad reach" advertising, as the company calls image and branding ads that supplement its product advertising.
Although billings were not disclosed, trade publications have estimated them at $40 million.
Christine Santucci, a spokeswoman for Microsoft in Redmond, Wash., said on Friday that Wieden &amp; Kennedy was awarded the account after a three-month review that had narrowed to include two other finalists: the Leo Burnett Company of Chicago, and Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, which withdrew from the review last month after its parent, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, got the I.B.M. account.


Davis Distributing reports earnings for Year to Mar 26


Critic's Notebook; The Gay Connection in Music and in a Festival
Statistics are not at hand to support the claim, but it seems that gay men and lesbians make a disproportionately large contribution to music.
Why so?
One popular and persistent explanation is that music is the most indefinite, the most ambiguous of all the arts, as Oscar Wilde declared in "The Critic as Artist," and is therefore attractive to those who find themselves out of sync with more conventional, clear-cut modes of expression.
Encouraging an impersonal submersion in the arcana of tradition, music has historically been a refuge for homosexuals who were elsewhere silenced.
This is, of course, a very old-fashioned formulation.
Twenty-five years after the Stonewall rebellion, gay men and lesbians are making a more direct engagement with the musical culture that is very much part of their heritage.
In the program for the Gay Games cultural festival last week, one saw listings for the International Gay and Lesbian Baroque Orchestra, the New York City Gay Men's Chorus, a cantata entitled "Stonewall/Flashpoint." Ambiguity is very much out of fashion; what was once a refuge is now a platform for public affirmation.


A Muslim's Quandary: Peace or Betrayal
This is the story of a Bosnian Muslim soldier, a refugee, a heroic fighter against the Serbs and now, to many of his people, a traitor.
It is also a story of the Bosnian war, its cruelty, its ambiguities and, ultimately, the critical quandary it poses to the Muslims: whether to fight on to avenge the terrible wrongs committed against them by the Serbs, or compromise in the name of peace.


Review/Jazz Festival; Mel Torme's Own Blend Of Voice and Instrument
Since jazz singers are stuck between popular and jazz culture, they have always had to wrestle with the contradictions of their position.
The brilliance of Mel Torme, who opened the JVC Jazz Festival on Friday night at Carnegie Hall, comes from his easy ability to reconcile the popular song and the improvisations of an instrumentalist.
He has all the rhetorical tools to make a performance seem emotional, and he can take a tune apart, virtuosically.
On "Star Dust," near the end of his performance, he slowed his trio down to a glacial tempo, and proceeded to sing the song as if he'd written it himself.
There's a pleasure to be gained in authenticity, and Mr.
Torme made the words seem autobiographical, taking his performance out of the the realm of a show and into the realm of confession, where drama lies and where contact with an audience can be made.
Mr.
Torme can be a stunning singer, and he made an ancient song emotional.


Philip Morris Plans Smoking Campaign
Philip Morris U.S.A. is, as expected, starting an advertising campaign aimed at rebutting the critics of smoking.
Advertisements were scheduled to begin running today in 11 newspapers across the country and continue through Friday.
The ads, carrying the theme, "In any controversy, facts must matter," reprint an article from Forbes Media Critic magazine that aggressively takes issue with a report last year from the Environmental Protection Agency on the dangers of secondhand smoke.


Currency Turmoil Weighing on U.S. and Japan; Fed Officials Get Confusing Signals on Interest Rates
Top Federal Reserve officials found mixed signals in this week's turmoil in the currency markets, which they believe has left their course on interest rates unclear.
When an American-led effort by 16 central banks on Friday failed to prop up the dollar against the German mark and Japanese yen, many analysts wondered if the Fed would be forced to raise interest rates as the only way to stop the slide.


'I Will Not Make War. I Must Not Do It.'
MARCH 10, 1935 An almost springlike Sunday.
Rest and reading.
Caesar of Shakespeare in a French edition.
Not very long but interesting.
The text has some lively spots, but the Caesar of historical reality was different from that of the play.
He was or had to have been a man of extraordinary genius.


Review/Jazz Festival; Technique, Freedom And Drama
Few singers in any genre make more beautiful sounds than Cleo Laine, the English jazz and pop singer, who at 66 remains in full command of an astonishing technical arsenal.
For Ms.
Laine, who appeared at Carnegie Hall on Saturday evening as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, the challenge has always been to find the right balance among calculated technical display, improvisational freedom and dramatic interpretation.
And as the years pass, her blending of these elements becomes ever more confident.
Ms.
Laine, who was joined by a quintet led by her husband and longtime musical partner, John Dankworth, performed a program that ranged from "St. Louis Blues" to modern cabaret songs like Francesca Blumenthal's humorously soul-searching ballad "The Lies of Handsome Men."


Corrections
A brief report in the Music Notes column on Tuesday about the Leopold Stokowski Conducting Competition misidentified the site for the final round, on July 17.
It will be at Avery Fisher Hall, not in Alice Tully Hall.


With Wrist Hurting, Mattingly Takes the Day Off
With the frustrating memories of last September's offensive drought still vivid and the nagging pain in his right wrist growing more piercing, Don Mattingly stuffed his bat and glove in his locker today and asked Manager Buck Showalter for the afternoon off.
It is the first time in his career Mattingly could recall ever requesting to not play.
Mattingly is probably hoping the rest will heal the wrist so the Yankees first baseman and team captain can pull balls more regularly.
So far, his trademark hits have been to left field.
Could the wrist be troubling him?


Currency Turmoil Weighing on U.S. and Japan; Dollar Declines To a Record Low Against the Yen
The dollar plunged to a record low against the yen in Tokyo trading this morning following the failure of 17 central banks to halt the dollar's slide on Friday, and the resignation of Japanese Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata the next day.
Shortly before noon, the dollar was quoted as low as 99.50 yen, below the 99.90 level that had been reached in New York last Tuesday.
This was the lowest level since the modern currency trading system began after World War II.
Later in the day the dollar had recovered a bit, to 99.95 yen.


Home Run Hounds Homing In on Maris's '61 Trail
Too bad Roger Maris didn't live in the life and times of Ken Griffey Jr. and Frank Thomas.
Thirty-three seasons ago, Maris's successful pursuit of Babe Ruth's legendary record of 60 home runs in a season was like a Greek tragedy, so fitful it was for the Yankee power hitter.
But now, Griffey, the Seattle Mariners' center fielder, and Thomas, the Chicago White Sox first baseman, are mounting their own spirited run at Maris's magical 61.
And brother, are they having fun doing it.


Lure and Virginia Rapids Surge to Victory
The turf champion Lure gave one of the unyielding performances of his career yesterday when he rallied in the homestretch and edged Fourstars Allstar by a nose in final strides of the $500,000 Caesars International in Atlantic City.
And along the way, he broke the stalemate in his series against his archrival, Star of Cozzene, who ran third.
Another dashing performance was given at Belmont Park, where Virginia Rapids shot through the deep stretch and nipped Cherokee Run by a head in the $100,000 Tom Fool Stakes.
Nearly two lengths farther back came Boundary, undefeated in five starts, his perfect record gone in the rush to the wire.
It was the 14th stakes victory of the season for Allen Jerkens, who trains Virginia Rapids as well as the big winners of last weekend, Devil His Due and Sky Beauty.


Administration Is Faulted Over Conference on Africa
An Administration-sponsored conference on Africa that opened today immediately became a lighting rod as black members of Congress seized on it to criticize the President's policies toward Rwanda and other African nations and to criticize the conference itself as poorly planned.
After accusations in recent months that the Administration was neglecting Africa, Anthony Lake, the President's national security adviser, who orchestrated the two-day conference,promised in his keynote speech an increase in attention and assistance to Africa.


Review/Pop; Words By a Prolific Songwriter
Music seems to come pouring out of some people: Mozart, the young Rossini, Paul McCartney, Prince and now Robert Pollard, the singer and leader of Guided by Voices, which performed at the Thread Waxing Space on Saturday night.
Since 1986, Guided by Voices has released eight albums and half a dozen singles and EP's, all packed with songs that clock in under three minutes; its new album, "Bee Thousand" (Scat/Matador), includes 20 songs, while its predecessor, "Vampire on Titus" (Scat), included 33.
Surprisingly few are throwaways, so the band had plenty to choose from onstage.
Its set on Saturday night was a cornucopia of surging melodies and jubilant guitars.


Diary Excerpts Said to Be Mussolini's
Excerpts from diaries said to be Mussolini's were published in a London newspaper yesterday, and an American scholar said the documents probably were genuine, but written after the fact in an effort by Mussolini to absolve himself of responsibility for World War II.
The small, boldly inscribed notebooks, dated 1935 to 1939, are a treasure for historians, but they contain anomalies best explained by the theory that they were written during Mussolini's virtual exile at Lake Garda from 1943 to 1945, said Brian R. Sullivan, a senior research professor at the National Defense University in Washington, who has been studying the diaries for several years.


Review/Pop; Will Oldham, Plainly, With Fears
God and horses, loneliness and death obsess Will Oldham, who sang on Friday night at the Thread Waxing Space.
Mr.
Oldham, who records with a small band as the Palace Brothers, performed alone with an acoustic guitar, and it was all he needed to convey the songs' desolate fatalism.
"When you have no one," he sang to begin the set, "no one can hurt you."
Without pretending to be old-fashioned, Mr.
Oldham looks back to the unflinching chronicles in Appalachian and Celtic ballads.
He sang in a quivering high tenor, akin to Neil Young and Loudon Wainwright 3d, and strummed bare-bones guitar chords.
As he played, he stared, deadpan and unblinking, into the audience.
His songs are slow, plain and stoic; some sketch stories, but most ponder private betrayals and fears: "Why is the night so long?"


HEALTH INDUSTRY IS CHANGING ITSELF AHEAD OF REFORM
A wave of mergers and alliances is transforming the nation's trillion-dollar health care system.
Without waiting for the outcome of the Congressional health debate, providers of medical care -- including hospitals, physician groups and nursing homes -- are joining to form bigger and bigger networks.
Some of the combinations are being put together by hospitals, like the $1.08 billion deal in which the country's largest for-profit hospital chain, Columbia/HCA Healthcare, agreed to buy the largest chain of surgery centers, Medical Care America, last month.
Another such combination is New York Hospital's regional alliance with seven other nonprofit hospitals, two nursing homes and four walk-in clinics, all of which send their most complicated cases to the big Upper East Side hospital.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Two more restless creative executives decide to move on.
TWO well-known agency creative executives are resigning unexpectedly in separate decisions that reflect the continuing ferment among the ranks of Madison Avenue's top creative talents.
Larry Kopald, the executive vice president and executive creative director of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Orange County in Santa Ana, Calif., with billings of $250 million from Mazda Motor of America and other clients, said on Friday that he would leave the agency, effective in October.


Giuliani's Office Clarifies Affirmative-Action Goals
The Giuliani administration sought yesterday to clarify how it has altered the program to steer more city contracts to companies owned by women or minorities that was created by former Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Randy Mastro, the chief of staff for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, said the administration had eliminated the long-term goal of awarding 20 percent of all city contracts to women- or minority-owned companies -- a goal that Mr.
Dinkins established two years ago.
Mr.
Giuliani eliminated another major component of the Dinkins program last February, when he dropped a measure allowing such companies to win a contract even if their bids were as much as 10 percent higher than the lowest bid.


Rwandan Enemies Struggle to Define French Role
For the moment, the French paratroops seemed like saviors to the 3,000 Tutsi men, women and children sitting wearily in the tall grass here today.
In their combat fatigues, red berets and sunglasses, and with their assault rifles at the ready, the paratroops alertly scanned the hills for signs of danger as the crowd listened intently to a priest's sermon at Sunday mass.


Clinton Aide in Quest Of Latin Trade Riches
Declaring Latin America the world's fastest growing region for American exports, Secretary of Commerce Ronald H. Brown today started a weeklong tour of South America with executives from 22 United States companies.
In particular, Mr.
Brown. arriving here on the first stop in a tour of Brazil, Argentina and Chile, said that those three countries "represent immense market opportunities for U.S. businesses."


INSIDE
Mussolini, in His Words
Excerpts of diaries believed to be Mussolini's were published in London.
A scholar said he probably wrote them well after the events described, to justify earlier actions.
Page A6.
Bill Bradley Off the Bench
For a while, the Senator from New Jersey seemed to be sitting out the health-care debate.
Then, suddenly and in a surprising way, he stepped into the discussion.
Page B1.
Currency Turmoil and the Fed
Federal Reserve officials, who must decide whether to raise interest rates to stop the dollar's slide, see a far more complex picture.
Page D1.
The Emperor's Silent Signals
Behind the serenity of Emperor Akihito's American tour lie subtle messages about the imperial household and U.S.-Japan relations.
Page A10.
Romania Defeats U.S.
Romania defeated the United States, 1-0, in the World Cup yesterday in Pasadena, Calif.
It was the Americans' first loss and complicated their chances of advancing.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Employment Beats Welfare Every Time
To the Editor:
As the architect of New Jersey's welfare reform law, I strongly disagree with "The Harm in Family Welfare Caps" (editorial, June 9).
Regrettably, your opposition hinges on a dangerously erroneous interpretation of why we should withhold additional benefits for recipients who have more children while on welfare.
Indeed, your whole terminology is skewed.
These welfare reform measures are not so much about capping family size as they are about giving recipients a chance to make choices.
Under our conventional welfare system, welfare mothers are effectively shielded from confronting the difficult questions that other American parents face when considering additional children.
Questions like how will I clothe this child?
How will I feed this child?
How will I educate this child?
Sometimes these parents manage it.
Sometimes they add on jobs or work longer hours.


Parasites Amid the Useful 'Junk'
FOR all the new insights researchers are gathering into the usefulness of the abundant genetic material in the cell that had long been dismissed as molecular junk, they have also learned that at least some portion of human DNA does not serve its host any good, and may on occasion do real harm.
These stretches of DNA, these chattering, redundant genetic sequences, are little more than benign parasites: at some point in the distant past, they infiltrated the human chromosomes -- known in total as the human genome -- and they have been replicating slowly ever since, generation after generation.
In their single-minded selfishness, they are rather like viruses, but unlike viruses they do not have the ability to dress themselves in a protein coat and leave the cell.
The genome is their home, and they want nothing more than to persist for eternity.


A Puzzling Strength Amid Turmoil
As the Japanese yen soared above a crucial benchmark today, the incongruities here seemed even more striking: How could Japan's currency be so strong when its economy is still scraping bottom and its once seamless political order has unraveled for the third time in a year?
For the first time in history, the yen closed in Tokyo worth more than a penny.
All day, the market's movements swirled and intermingled with the political maneuverings set off by Prime Minister Tsutomu Hata's resignation on Saturday.
Rumors of new combinations of parties and personalities, of secret meetings and imminent divisions in the Liberal Democrats and the Socialists, the country's two largest political parties, only drove the markets into greater fury.


SHAKE-UP AT THE WHITE HOUSE: BUDGET DIRECTOR Woman in the News; A Hawk on Budgets -- Alice Mitchell Rivlin
Many young Americans dream of becoming President someday, but Alice M. Rivlin had a different dream: to become director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Much of her life has been pointed in that direction, and today President Clinton named her to that post.
As soon as Bill Clinton was elected President, her many friends started mentioning her as a logical budget director.


Keys Emerge To Mystery Of 'Junk' DNA
IN recent times, the twisted, viscous molecular celebrity called DNA has been described by any number of lofty metaphors.
It is the book of life.
The master molecule.
The blueprint for a human being.
Yet to some researchers who consider the whole molecule, and not just the individual genes arrayed along its chemical coils, a few more homespun comparisons might better apply: DNA as your grandmother's attic, for example, or the best little flea market in town.


Jewel Thief In 7 Robberies Strikes Again In Manhattan
A dapper jewel thief brandishing a silver automatic pistol, who the police say was involved in seven other robberies in Manhattan that netted more than $500,000 in diamond rings and precious bracelets and left three victims wounded, struck again over the weekend, detectives said yesterday.
This time the gunman brazenly seized a 3.7-karat diamond ring worth more than $50,000 from a woman the police said he corralled in the half-filled elevator of an elegant midtown Manhattan hotel.
He also made off with a $2,000 watch that the woman's husband was wearing, as well as a $10,000 bracelet and a second, less valuable ring of hers, the police said.


Stories From A Life
As the Lady in Red in "For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/ When the Rainbow Is Enuf," Trazana Beverley proved such a distinctive presence that she won the 1977 Tony Award for best featured actress.
Although the theater has never provided her with an equivalent triumph, some of her arresting gifts can be seen in "The Spirit Moves," her one-woman show, which the New Federal Theater is presenting at the Henry Street Settlement through July 17.
Ms.
Beverley still possesses a fierce inner conviction that allows her to stare down any and all doubters in the audience.
Her voice, gruffer than ever, is not without its poetic appeal.
And she knows how to season a raging passion with just enough irony to keep it from turning purple.


Ruling Leaves Anxiety Among Parents But Perhaps Little Change for Students
While the Hasidic villagers of Kiryas Joel were left deeply troubled by their legal setback in the ruling yesterday by the United States Supreme Court, the daily lives of the school district's 200 students may not change that much, school officials said.
The district, created primarily for handicapped and learning-disabled Hasidic children, could be administratively absorbed by the adjoining Monroe-Woodbury school district, with its 5,500 children from largely secular backgrounds, yet continue as a largely Hasidic enclave, school officials said.


Tektronix Inc.(TEK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Lyrical and Wistful in Songs, A Pop Court Jester Onstage
It was stand-up comedy night on Sunday at the Brendan Byrne Arena in East Rutherford, N.J., where Phil Collins performed the second of two consecutive shows.
Between songs, Mr.
Collins, speaking in a genteel British accent, entertained a near capacity audience of 15,000 with hilarious three-minute monologues about ex-girlfriends, band members and his negligible sex life.
Vulnerable and self-conscious, the 43-year-old Mr.
Collins, who also sings in the band Genesis, seemed like a jester in the court of pop music, especially when he tried to dance.
But he also has a serious side.
It appears on his recent solo album, the cerebral and wistful "Both Sides" (Atlantic), and in his charity work.
Before performing "Another Day in Paradise," his 1989 Grammy-winning song about homelessness, Mr.
Collins announced that representatives of a shelter for the homeless (Isaiah House in East Orange, N.J.) would be on hand to accept donations.
"There must be some other rich people besides me here tonight," he joked.


G.M. Expected to Name North American Chief
The General Motors Corporation plans to announce on Tuesday the promotion of G. Richard Wagoner Jr., now the chief financial officer and head of worldwide purchasing, to run the company's crucial North American automotive operations, G.M. officials said today.
A corporate reshuffling has been expected at G.M. for weeks.
Board members met today in New York to consider the appointment, as well as other management changes requested by John F. Smith Jr., G.M.'s president and chief executive.


Unifirst Corp.(UNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Gerrity Oil and Gas Inc., Denver, is selling $100 million of senior subordinated notes due in 2004 at 100 to yield 11.75 percent through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co., Dillon, Read &amp; Co. and Paine Webber Inc.
The notes are non-callable for five years.
After the fifth year, the notes are callable at 105.875 percent, or $1,058.75 for each $1,000, of face value of the notes.
The issue is rated B-2 by Moody's Investors Service and B by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.


Let's Not 'Treat' the Problem of Homelessness With Drugs
To the Editor:
Your June 17 article reporting growing support in New York State for involuntary commitment to mental hospitals describes "a bill that would place those released from mental hospitals under court order to take medication and get counseling."


World Cup Just Might Give U.S. Soccer Fever
To the Editor:
In "The World Cup's Universe" (editorial, June 17), you illustrate through several delightful examples the intense passion that nations all over the world have for their soccer teams.
However, there is no conclusive evidence that soccer does not matter in the United States -- a point that you imply and others in the media have made.


Chess
The greatest number of games won outright in the world championship quarterfinals of the Professional Chess Association occurred in the match between Michael Adams of England and Sergei Tiviakov of Russia.
After the regulation eight games were completed at the current standard of 40 moves in two hours, each player had won three and drawn two.
Finally, after four tiebreak games at 30 minutes for each player and two games at 15 minutes each, Adams got the victory with a 3 1/2-to-2 1/2 tally.


Cellstar Corp.(CLST,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Getting Real On Central Europe
President Clinton's visits to Latvia and Poland next week, as well as his participation in the Group of Seven summit meeting in Naples a few days later, signal a more comprehensive and strategically coherent U.S. policy toward the former Soviet bloc.
Generated by a working alliance between the National Security Council and the Defense Department, the policy seeks to sustain realistic cooperation with Russia while also enlarging the scope of European security.
Both the symbolism and the substance of the President's trip are likely to underline these important themes.


Killer of 6 Is Sentenced to Prison
In a court session marked by screams of rage from his victims' relatives, Ramon Concepcion, a Bronx man who pleaded guilty to killing his girlfriend, her three children, her mother and her mother's companion, was sentenced yesterday in New York State Supreme Court to 37 1/2 years in prison.
Mr.
Concepcion, 29, a factory worker, sat expressionless, his head bowed during the one-hour sentencing before Justice Carol Berkman.
But the court session included passionate statements in which the relatives begged the judge to deny him parole and castigated Mr.
Concepcion as an "animal" and a "beast."


Finlay Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 30


Observer; Activism Epidemic!
In May I became aware of the disturbing new ism that is loose in America.
It is activism.
Activism must have been putting its roots down for several years because it was in full bloom when I first noticed it.
In fact, activism and activists -- people who believe in the doctrine of activism -- had become as commonplace in the media as Communism and Communists had been back during the cold war.


Big 3 Look at Natural Gas
The Big Three auto makers plan to announce on Tuesday that they have formed a research partnership to lower the cost of making vehicles powered by natural gas.
By 1998 the partnership aims to halve the cost of making the tanks that store natural gas, a popular alternative fuel because it costs less and burns cleaner than gasoline.


The Constitution's New Public Burden
The Supreme Court has laid a heavy new burden on governments trying to regulate land use in the public interest.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist's opinion for a narrow 5-to-4 majority was a triumph of ideology over community needs to protect fragile environments and scarce resources.
For generations the right to use property as the owner saw fit, especially commercial property, has been subject to a social compact that includes valid zoning and land planning.
But now the Court, driven by an ideology that exalts property ownership to undeserved heights, diminishes the ability of local governments to control development.


Bishop Joseph Durick, 79, Civil Rights Advocate
Bishop Joseph Aloysius Durick, who emerged as a strong voice for civil rights in the segregated South despite opposition from his tradition-bound congregation and other members of the clergy, died on Sunday at his home in Bessemer, Ala.
He was 79.
The cause was cancer, according to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Nashville, which he served as Bishop from 1969 to 1975.


Lebow to Enter Track Hall of Fame
FRED LEBOW, who guided the growth of the New York City Marathon from a low-key race into a major international event, will be inducted into the National Track and Field Hall of Fame next month.
A vote yesterday by USA Track and Field's executive committee and a special waiver granted by the hall's board of directors paved the way for Lebow to bypass the usual nomination, election and induction process.


By Design; For Bad-Hair Days
Summertime can be a succession of bad-hair days, but there are some nifty ways to cope that are decorative as well as camouflaging.
One idea is to use old-fashioned hair clips, like the ones your mother may have used to hold pin curls or to set waves.
They showed up on runways in the fall shows of trendy designers.
The latest versions are silver-plated and gold-plated and are meant to be worn in multiples, perhaps to create a contemporary marcel wave.
Colette Malouf's clips come in two sizes, for short or long hair, and are $20 to $24 at Henri Bendel.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Battered Dollar
Ten years ago, a dollar bought 250 Japanese yen; now, it buys slightly more than 100.
The dollar's slide against the yen has evoked cries of alarm from Wall Street.
But for many Americans who are not engaged in trading currencies or securities, the dollar's woes have not meant very much.
Economic Analysis.  [ Page A1. ]


New Strife in Bosnia?
Diplomats from the United States, Russia and the European Union will meet here on Tuesday to complete what they regard as a final peace plan for Bosnia, but already it is clear that the Bosnian Government and Croatia are preparing for a coordinated war on the Serbs, not an imminent settlement.
The plan, the fruit of several months' work, would grant 51 percent of Bosnia to the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government, in federation with the Bosnian Croats, and 49 percent to the Bosnian Serbs.
Its details are now broadly known and include an attempt to satisfy the Muslims by linking their eastern enclave of Gorazde to Sarajevo and by insuring that they can return to several towns seized by the Serbs, including Visegrad and Zvornik.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CMS ENERGY CORP., Dearborn, Mich., an electricity and natural gas company, said its oil and gas exploration and production unit had paid Sun Company Inc., Philadelphia, a petroleum refinery and oil and gas exploration company, $22.5 million for all the stock of Sun Colombia Co.
IMPERIAL OIL LTD., Toronto, said it would eliminate more than 500 jobs, or 25 percent of the work force, at its exploration and production department in Calgary, Alberta, by the end of 1995.


Invisible People, Made Visible
June has been an enlightening, and enlightened, month in New York City.
Gotham's citizens could hardly turn on their television sets or ride the subways without encountering some aspect of the astoundingly large gay presence that had converged on the city.
Gay Games IV brought 11,000 athletes and tens of thousands of sports fans from 40 countries.
More than 130 cultural events celebrated gay themes.
And on Sunday, tens of thousands of gay men and lesbians marched to commemorate the evening in 1969 when police, harassing patrons of a gay Greenwich Village bar called the Stonewall Inn, met fierce resistance for the first time.


Expos Gain on Braves as Hill Wins 11th
Expos 7, Braves 2
Ken Hill outpitched Greg Maddux and became the National League's first 11-game winner last night as the Montreal Expos beat visiting Atlanta, 7-2, to close within a game and a half of the Braves in the National League East.


Review/Fashion; A 70's Revel for Italian Men's Wear
High on a hill in Florence on Friday night, beneath a blood-red moon and on the grounds of one of the city's grandest villas, Ziggy Stardust returned.
He had alighted from a hovering spaceship emblazoned with "I (heart) Elvis" and was asking directions to Studio 54.
As if those references in Dolce &amp; Gabbana's D &amp; G runway show weren't demanding enough for an Italian men's wear industry audience accustomed to finding controversy in a four-button blazer, the show seized on the formula Karl Lagerfeld has made famous for Chanel: pricey plays on street ideas, lavish use of logos, relentless music and a model who, though male, bore a striking resemblance to Claudia Schiffer.


No Headline
"There's something wrong when a teacher can be convicted in a court of law for selling drugs, and the school system can't dismiss him." -- LAWRENCE E. BECKER, director of the New York City Board of Education's Office of Legal Services.  [ A1:2. ]


Vivra Inc.(V,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Virtual Actor Makes Its Debut
ARTIFICIAL faces have made their theatrical debut, bringing about the age of the virtual actor.
While most computer scientists are developing computer algorithms to control artificial faces automatically, for live theatrical performances it is possible for a person to control the computer face directly, as if operating an electronic puppet.


THE BATTERED DOLLAR: THE IMPACT A Primer on the Dollar; The Currency's Well-Publicized Decline Hasn't Meant Much for Most Americans
Ten years ago, a dollar bought 250 Japanese yen; a month ago, it bought just 105.
Now, it buys about 100.
The dollar's slide against the yen, as well as against the German mark, in recent weeks has evoked cries of alarm from Wall Street and has been read by some as a judgment of American policy -- and policy makers.
"The market is saying your economy is not in good shape," said Georges de Menil, a senior editor of the European-based journal Economic Policy.


Dow Jumps 48.56 as Dollar Stabilizes
Bracing for another sharp decline after a failed central bank intervention in the currency market and political turmoil in Japan, the stock market unexpectedly rallied yesterday as the dollar ended the day nearly unchanged against leading currencies.
After falling nearly 140 points last week, the Dow Jones industrial average, the most closely watched barometer of stock performance in the United States, shot up 48.56 points, to 3,685.50.


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric Co.(OGE,N) reports earnings for 12mos to May 31


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Sid Fernandez, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 19.
Recalled Arthur Rhodes, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.


Quickly Pedaling His Way Into Legend
SOONER or later, Madison beach visitors are sure to spot a white-haired figure in neon spandex dash by on a 14-speed, his empty shirt sleeve flapping against the breeze.
That would be Charlie Handy.
The sun might be playing coy, the waves wimping out.
Charlie on the beach, you can count on.
Every day, he comes out on one of his four bicycles, keeping a steady pace and, to the really keen eye, leaning slightly on his undamaged right side.


Sports of The Times; A Slice Of Sports In Drag
GAY GAMES IV are gone from New York, but they have left an indelible, colorful imprint, and not just pink.
Other hues are red, white and blue.
The weeklong games, which ended Saturday, have suffixed themselves with a self-bloated numeral, like the Olympics and the Super Bowl.
But, like much else with these games, they seemed to do so with a wink, which was frequently missed in the coverage by mainstream news organizations.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a major suspect's decision to cooperate with the prosecution in a terrorist conspiracy trial in New York next fall misstated the role of Earl Gant, a minor figure in the case.
In pleading guilty to a lesser charge recently, Mr.
Gant reached an agreement with the Government that he would not be required to testify against any other defendant; the point was not left in doubt.


Immigration Magnet; The Lower East Side Changes Its Face
The rabbi, a portrait of gentle authority with his long silk overcoat and silvery beard, sits in a study of burled-wood bookshelves filled with large volumes on rabbinical law and gestures backward, indicating that there is not just one telephone in his office, but two.
Ephraim Oshry, an Orthodox rabbi born in Kovno, Lithuania, founder of religious schools in Rome and Montreal, author of the five-volume "Responsa From the Holocaust," a compendium of rabbinical counsel, fields questions about religious law and ethics from his home on the second floor of a co-op building on East Broadway, the epicenter of what was once the Jewish Lower East Side.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.25
4.17
3.08
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.20
4.14
3.05
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.60
4.58
3.15
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.16
7.20
5.77
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.45
7.52
6.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.27
8.33
7.41
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.44
6.40
5.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Declining Dollar
The dollar continued to fall against the German mark yesterday and hovered near a post-World War II low against the Japanese yen.
But a lower dollar poses no crisis and, for now, warrants no dramatic attention.
Indeed, intervention by Washington is likely to be ineffective or damaging.
True, a lower dollar means lower U.S. living standards -- Americans can afford fewer German cameras or Japanese VCR's.
And a lower dollar, by driving up the price of imports, adds to inflation.
However, these impacts are small because imports account for only about 10 percent of the nation's economic activity.
Besides, the dollar will almost surely continue to fall as long as the U.S. racks up huge trade deficits.


S.I. President Named By CUNY Trustees
Trustees of the City University of New York yesterday named an East Carolina University administrator as the president of the College of Staten Island, replacing a president who was ousted following a feud with the university chancellor.
The trustees, acting on the recommendation of Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds, chose Dr.
Marlene Springer, who will take the position on Sept. 1.
Dr.
Springer has been the vice chancellor for academic affairs at East Carolina University, part of the University of North Carolina system.


Hebron Is a Bit Quieter, but Certainly Not Peaceful
At Hebron's shuttered vegetable market today, two Israeli settlers played paddle-ball and Jewish children rode bicycles outside stalls closed on orders of the Israeli Army.
The once bustling marketplace, adjacent to a Jewish enclave, has been off-limits to Palestinians since Feb. 25, when a Jewish settler killed 29 Muslim worshipers at a mosque in the Cave of the Patriarchs shrine.


Empire Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Accounts
*
Xerox Graphics Systems, Stamford, Conn., to Bradford &amp; Maloney Inc., Greenwich, Conn., as the first agency to handle advertising, public relations and marketing for the new Xerox business unit that manufactures and markets digital film.
Billings were not disclosed.


World Cup Just Might Give U.S. Soccer Fever; Fitba' in Glasgow
To the Editor:
Bill Buford's "Hate Behind the Game" (Op-Ed, June 16) transported me to boyhood days in the true home of fitba' (neither football nor soccer is quite the correct term), Glasgow, Scotland.
Of all the rivalries in the city, none surpassed that between the Rangers and the Celtic.
Their matches represented the age-old religious wars of Protestant and Roman Catholic.
The annual New Year's Day battle was the only one forbidden to me by my mother.
Too dangerous by far!


Amoco to Get $440 Million Tax Refund
The Amoco Corporation announced yesterday that it would receive a refund of $440 million from the Internal Revenue Service to settle a long dispute over a tax aimed at limiting windfall profits.
The payment, however, will add only $270 million to the company's second-quarter earnings after Federal income taxes are paid.


Biomet Inc.(BMET,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


New Media Buyer For Andrew Jergens
The Andrew Jergens Company said yesterday that it had selected Media That Works of Cincinnati to handle the media planning and buying for its consumer brands.
Those duties, along with the creative portion of Jergens's account, had been handled by Publicis/Bloom of New York until that agency and Jergens ended their relationship last week because of conflicts with another, larger client of Publicis/Bloom's, Cosmair.
Jergens said it would unbundle the account after leaving Publicis/Bloom, but it did not identify the agencies being considered for the creative portion.
Billings were estimated at $25 million.


Artisoft
Artisoft Inc., a Tucson, Ariz., software developer, saw its stock price rise sharply yesterday after it began shipping French, Italian, German and other versions of its Lantastic network operating system.
Such networks allow computers to share printers and other devices.
Artisoft products are popular with small businesses.


Same Roots Nourish Russia and Ukraine
To the Editor:
In "Ukraine -- Going, Going" (Op-Ed, June 10), Anders Aslund uncritically cites Zbigniew Brzezinski: "Russia can be either an empire or a democracy, but it cannot be both . . . Without Ukraine, Russia ceases to be an empire, but with Ukraine suborned and then subordinated, Russia automatically becomes an empire."


A Mistake and Then a Disaster
A Map of the World  By Jane Hamilton  390 pages. Doubleday. $22.
Like Sue Miller's "Good Mother" and Rosellen Brown's "Before and After," this new novel by Jane Hamilton aspires to combine a melodramatic soap-opera plot with highly tuned literary writing, the pacing of a thriller with the psychological detail of a Bildungsroman.
In the case of "A Map of the World," the results are something of a mixed bag: bizarrely clumsy and contrived scenes combined with highly moving moments of exceptional emotional clarity, and a motley cast of characters, ranging from the stereotyped to the dexterously well drawn.


Coffee Futures Soar 25%, Biggest Daily Rise in 7 Years
Coffee prices surged more than 25 percent yesterday, the largest one-day rise in more than seven years, as a damaging frost struck much of the coffee-growing areas of Brazil.
"We are going to see this market skyrocket," said Judith Ganes, coffee analyst for Merrill Lynch.
"Consumers are likely to feel it at the retail level."


An Effort to Link Simpson To Hair at Site of Murders
After two weeks of talking vaguely about evidence, prosecutors today asked a judge to order O. J. Simpson to provide a hair sample, asserting that a knit cap with "black curly hairs" that were "determined to be of African-American origin" had been found near the body of his slain former wife.
In turn, the defense requested a sweeping court order for immediate access to that cap as well as to blood samples and other evidence, saying it needed at least four days to complete tests to prepare for a preliminary hearing.
That hearing is scheduled to begin on Thursday.


One Era Ends, One Resumes In the Harbor
Some people saw their ship come in yesterday; others saw it go out.
The people who saw their ship come in were drivers.


Panel Decision a New Setback In Search for an AIDS Vaccine
TEN years ago Margaret M. Heckler, who was then Secretary of Health and Human Services, predicted an AIDS vaccine by 1986.
Although the deadline passed, the effort continued.
But this month work on the two experimental vaccines furthest along in development received a serious setback.
A Government-appointed panel of 30 experts rejected plans for full-scale tests.
They said they had little confidence that the vaccines would protect a sufficiently large proportion of recipients.


Treasury Prices Gain As Commodities Drop
Prices of Treasury securities were sharply higher yesterday after rebounding from earlier losses connected to the falling dollar.
The 30-year bond rose 22/32 , to 8524/32 , for a yield of 7.45 percent, down from 7.52 percent on Friday.


Study Criticizes Subsidy For Insurance for Poor
A new study finds serious, unsuspected problems with many proposals for the Federal Government to help low-income people buy private health insurance by subsidizing their premiums.
Such subsidies are a feature of most of the health insurance bills being considered in Congress.
Subsidies have been suggested as a way to make sure that all Americans obtain health insurance, with or without a requirement that employers contribute to the cost of workers' coverage.


Court's Decisions To Come Thursday
The Supreme Court said today that it would announce its next decisions on Thursday, which will be the final day of the 1993-94 term.
Six cases that were argued during the term remain undecided; the Court may announce decisions in all six or reschedule one or more for reargument when the new term begins in October.


Bold New Plan for Imperiled South Pole Station
FOR 37 years the United States has continuously operated a scientific station at the South Pole, which has become a world center for research in astrophysics and astronomy, and for monitoring global environmental changes.
But the station's dilapidated buildings and outmoded, overtaxed equipment may soon begin to hobble polar research.
Officials of the National Science Foundation reported at a meeting last week that research at South Pole Station, one of three year-around stations operated by the United States on the Antarctic continent, might have to be curtailed or even ended if funds cannot be found to restore the aging base.


Q&amp;A
Leonardo's Lengths
Q.  What kinds of units of measurement did Leonardo da Vinci use?


In a Reversal, Cuomo Will Refund Taxes of Federal Retirees
Seeking to end a five-year legal fight that had angered thousands of retirees, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that the state would refund about $60 million to 10,000 retired Federal employees who paid state income taxes that were later deemed unlawful.
The announcement marked a sharp reversal by Mr.
Cuomo, who as recently as February said that while refunding the money might be politically popular, the decision should be made by the courts, not him.
"I can't give money away to make myself popular," Mr.
Cuomo said on WCBS radio at the time.
"I can't take the money of the taxpayers, say, 'Give it to him, he'll like me, I'm running for office.' "


Corrections
The weekly Radio Highlights listing on Sunday covered next week's programs, not this week's.
Corrected listings are appearing each day in the daily paper.


Moynihal to Push Health Care Plan Paid by Employers
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan will ask the Senate Finance Committee on Tuesday to vote for a national health insurance proposal that would ultimately require employers to pay most of the insurance costs for their workers, a Senate aide said tonight.
Mr.
Moynihan, the New York Democrat who heads the committee, expects the issue to come to a vote on Wednesday and is not sure of the outcome, the aide said.
Republicans on the committee maintain that anything requiring employers to pay will be defeated.


HAITIANS TAKING TO SEA IN DROVES, ALARMING THE U.S.
The tide of Haitian boat people surged today to its highest level in more than a year as the Coast Guard picked up more than 1,000 people on the high seas who were seeking to seize the opportunity the Clinton Administration has given them to apply for refugee status.
The flood is swamping the bureaucracy that the Administration set up to accommodate Haitians who hope to be granted such status.


Corrections
A sports caption in some editions on Friday with a picture by Reuters showing the Italian soccer star Roberto Baggio misstated the timing of his removal from the match.
It happened later than the scene shown.


Teachers and Tenure: Rights vs. Discipline
After Jay Dubner, a special education teacher in New York City, was arrested, convicted and sent to prison in 1990 for selling $7,000 worth of cocaine to undercover police, school officials thought it would be easy to dismiss him.
Not so.
While Mr.
Dubner served his sentence in Sullivan Correctional Center in upstate New York, he collected his teacher's pay.
And, after five years and more than $185,000 spent by the Board of Education on disciplinary proceedings, Mr.
Dubner has prevailed.
He still has his job.


Senate Approves Whitman Budget
After a furious last-minute round of political wrangling among the Republican majority, and with Cabinet members looking on anxiously, the Senate today approved the state budget for the 1995 fiscal year.
The Republican-controlled Assembly is expected to vote its approval of the $15.2-billion budget on Wednesday, and Gov.
Christine Todd Whitman, also a Republican, is planning to sign the budget bill on Thursday.


Tektronix Inc.(TEK,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Sensitive Spin on Doubleday Pitch
His team is in a slump, a few of his veterans are vocally unhappy, and with a possible players' strike looming, the Mets already have suffered from a downswing in attendance.
But Nelson Doubleday brushed away most of those concerns last night.


Justices Back Cable Regulation
A deeply divided Supreme Court endorsed a broad framework for Federal regulation of cable television today but stopped just short of upholding the 1992 law that requires cable systems to retransmit the signals of local broadcasters.
Instead, the Justices held in a 5-to-4 decision that the Government had to present more evidence to justify the law's assumption that the retransmission requirement was necessary to preserve the economic viability of broadcast television.
The case now goes back to a special three-judge Federal court, which upheld the law last year.
A Return Is Inevitable
The split nature of the decision enabled both the cable and broadcast industries, locked in bitter economic and political combat, to claim a measure of victory -- assertions that will not finally be resolved until the case makes its inevitable way back for another Supreme Court decision a year or more from now.
But it was clear that the broadcasters, despite being on the losing end of today's decision in a technical sense, had won a great deal.
The one-vote majority accepted the rationale Congress had used in crafting what are known as "must carry" rules, as well as the analysis that the special Federal court applied last year in upholding the retransmission requirement.
In fact, most of Justice Anthony M. Kennedy's 45-page opinion read like an all-out affirmance of the lower court's judgment.
But in the final pages, Justice Kennedy suddenly switched gears and announced that the case had to be sent back for additional factual findings.
That conclusion may have been necessary to hold one of the five members of the majority for an opinion that may have gone through several incarnations since the case was argued more than six months ago.
Rules Remain in Effect
The must-carry rules will remain in effect as the case proceeds.
Justice Kennedy said that the must-carry provisions "are justified by special characteristics of the cable medium: the bottleneck monopoly power exercised by cable operators and the danger this power poses to the viability of broadcast television."
The "bottleneck" image was central both to the approach Congress took in enacting the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and to the majority's analysis today.
Once a home is wired for cable, as are 60 percent of American households with television sets, viewers no longer have the option of watching broadcast television directly without special equipment.
Instead, as a practical matter, viewers are limited to the offerings that the cable system chooses to provide.
Congress found that the cable industry, competing with broadcasters for the same advertising dollars, had an incentive to limit broadcasters' access to their systems.
Congress also found that cable operators' affiliation with programmers provided an extra incentive to limit broadcasters' access.
The 1992 law, which was passed over President George Bush's veto, requires most cable systems -- those with more than 300 subscribers and 12 channels -- to devote a third of their channel capacity to carrying the signals of local commercial broadcast channels.
If the number of local broadcast stations exceeds a third of a cable system's capacity, the system is not obliged to carry them all.
A separate provision also provides guaranteed access for public television stations.
As expected, the cable industry immediately went to court to challenge the provisions on First Amendment grounds, on the theory that the Government could not interfere with cable operators' judgment by requiring the transmission of particular speech.
A fast-track provision in the law sent the challenge to the special panel of three judges here, with a direct appeal to the Supreme Court.
Broad Implications
The case, Turner Broadcasting v.
Federal Communications Commission, No. 93-44, had broad theoretical implications as well as enormous practical and economic importance.
The Supreme Court had never defined a place for cable television along a First Amendment spectrum that gives the most complete constitutional protection to the press and much more limited protection to broadcasters, on the theory that the scarcity of broadcast frequencies makes regulation necessary.
Justice Kennedy said today that because cable had no comparable physical limitations -- and with the advent of new technology, will soon have no practical limits at all -- the rationale for limited First Amendment protection that applies to broadcasters does not apply to cable.
This was only a limited, theoretical victory for the cable industry, however, because Justice Kennedy's opinion relied on another rationale for justifying Government interference with cable programming of the sort the Court has explicitly rejected with respect to the press.
Citing cable's role as "bottleneck or gatekeeper," Justice Kennedy said: "Simply by virtue of its ownership of the essential pathway for cable speech, a cable operator can prevent its subscribers from obtaining access to programming it chooses to exclude."
"The potential for abuse of this private power over a central avenue of communication cannot be overlooked," Justice Kennedy continued, adding: "The First Amendment's command that government not impede the freedom of speech does not disable the Government from taking steps to insure that private interests not restrict, through physical control of a critical pathway of communication, the free flow of information and ideas."
Justice Kennedy's opinion was joined in full by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Harry A. Blackmun and David H. Souter.
Justice John Paul Stevens joined the central part of the analysis, but wrote a separate opinion to say that the must-carry rules should be upheld without the requirement of further proceedings.
Justice Stevens said he was nonetheless joining the Court's judgment in sending the case back to the lower court so that there would be a majority for that disposition.
The dissenters were Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
In a dissenting opinion by Justice O'Connor, they said the must-carry rules were "an impermissible restraint on the cable operators' editorial discretion as well as on the cable programmers' speech."
Much of the constitutional debate between the two sides was over whether the must-carry rules have the effect of regulating speech on the basis of content.
Under the Court's precedent, content-based regulation of speech is the most serious First Amendment violation, requiring the highest level of justification.
"Content neutral" regulations, on the other hand, are justified as long as they serve "an important or substantial governmental interest" and restrict no more speech than necessary.
In concluding that the regulations are content-neutral, Justice Kennedy said that "Congress's overriding objective in enacting must-carry was not to favor programming of a particular subject matter, viewpoint or format, but rather to preserve access to free television programming for the 40 percent of Americans without cable."
Addressing the Government's justifications for the policy, he said, "Assuring that the public has access to a multiplicity of information sources is a governmental purpose of the highest order, for it promotes values central to the First Amendment." Dissenters' Argument
But in the dissenters' view, the Government's choice to favor broadcasters by assuring them access to cable was inherently based on content.
"The interest in insuring access to a multiplicity of diverse and antagonistic sources of information, no matter how praiseworthy, is directly tied to the content of what the speakers will likely say," Justice O'Connor said.
No interest the Government put forward could justify that interference with cable operators' First Amendment interests, she said.
In sending the case back to the lower court, Justice Kennedy said the Government must demonstrate that "Congress has drawn reasonable inferences based on substantial evidence." Specifically, he said, the three-judge panel must compile evidence to test the Government's assertion that without the must-carry rules, cable operators would drop broadcast stations, which would deteriorate or fail as a result.
The lower court had not conducted a full trial before reaching its original decision, instead granting summary judgment to the Government on the basis of briefs that had been filed.
The new proceeding will not necessarily have the character of a formal trial, but many more documents are likely to be filed.


Unifirst Corp.(UNF,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Adding Whipped Cream To Bach's 'Coffee' Cantata  Cathedral of St. John the Divine
Bach's effervescent "Coffee" Cantata (BWV 211) and his sober "Ich Steh mit einem Fuss im Grabe" (BWV 156) are almost as different as Bach cantatas can be.
But they are not quite as different as the performers of the Bach Aria Festival and Institute made them sound on Wednesday evening, in the group's annual excursion to Manhattan from its Long Island base.


Beard to Replace Daly as Nets Coach
The Nets have called a news conference for today to announce the hiring of Butch Beard, the former Knicks and Nets assistant, to replace Chuck Daly as head coach.
Beard, 46, is the head coach at Howard University, but he has a long history with Nets General Manager Willis Reed and, according to league executives, was the general manager's choice for the job.
The executives said Reed's task was to convince the Nets' ownership that Beard was the right person for the job.


MACY REPORTS SOME INCOME IMPROVEMENT IN MAY
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, laboring to emerge from bankruptcy protection early next year, reported yesterday that its losses shrank in May, thanks to tight inventory management that prevented markdowns.
While sales slipped 4.4 percent last month, to $452 million, the retailer managed to eke out operating income of $6.4 million, compared with an operating loss of $7.4 million in the corresponding month last year.
While analysts are generally pleased with Macy's continuing ability to reduce expenses, the company's slipping sales are still a concern.
Adjusted for closed stores and the elimination of much of the company's consumer electronics business, sales in stores open at least one year increased a scant half percent.


CHRONICLE
NORMA McCORVEY, the Jane Roe of the landmark Roe v.
Wade case that legalized abortion, began work yesterday as a paid counselor at a women's clinic.
She doesn't want the name of the Dallas-area clinic disclosed, at least for now, she told The Associated Press, because she fears she will attract anti-abortion protesters.


Energy Secretary Tells a Few More U.S. Nuclear Secrets
Opening the door to American nuclear secrets a little wider, Energy Secretary Hazel R. O'Leary today gave fuller details about the atomic tests and radiation experiments of the cold war era.
An important fact confirmed today was that the United States exploded a nuclear bomb underground in 1962 that was fueled by plutonium of the type that could come from a civilian nuclear reactor.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Two Styles, One Concert, Much Audience Bewilderment  Manhattan Center
An uncomfortable lull occurred midway through the Senegalese singer Youssou N'Dour's concert on Thursday night.
The three percussionists in his band, the Super Etoile, left the stage and a drum machine kicked in.
Vivian Chaudid, a backup singer, approached a microphone next to Mr.
N'Dour and the two sang "Seven Seconds," a disco duet Mr.
N'Dour recently recorded with Neneh Cherry.
The audience, which had been dancing nonstop for an hour, stood still and looked confused as the hollow beat echoed through the small theater.


Johnson Buys Stake in Dream and Lakers
MAGIC JOHNSON realized his long-held dream to own part of a National Basketball Association team, buying a stake in the Los Angeles Lakers, the team announced yesterday.
Johnson will hold the title of vice president and will work in "various management areas where his expertise could be beneficial to the Lakers," the team said in press release.


WNET Considers Closing Manhattan Production Studio
WNET, Channel 13, New York's premier public television station, is considering closing its production studio to save money.
The studio, on West 58th Street in Manhattan, employs about 50 people.
Among the shows produced there are "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" and "The Charlie Rose Show."


Clinton Helps Raise Money for Cuomo Campaign
Two years ago in Madison Square Garden, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo nominated Bill Clinton as the "Comeback Kid" who could take back the White House for the Democrats.
Last night President Clinton returned to New York to return the favor for a threatened Mr.
Cuomo, at a brace of fund-raisers intended to help keep a Democratic Governor in one of the biggest statehouses.
Together, the two events -- a $25,000-a-couple dinner at the St.
Regis and a $1,000-a-head reception at the Sheraton New York -- were to raise $2.5 million for the national and state Democratic Parties, with $1 million of it going to statewide electioneering efforts for Mr.
Cuomo, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and their running mates this fall.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  KURDS' PROSPECTS FADING  At the end of the Persian Gulf war, the prospects for a Kurdish state appeared good, but bitter factional fighting has caused hopes of democracy to fade and has dissipated Western support.
A1


A Shakeup in Women's Singles
Whoever thought Zina Garrison-Jackson and Lori McNeil would save women's tennis?
They don't know it yet, but they have.
They've saved it from two impossible, intolerable, indistinguishable weeks of Steffi and Aranxta and the here-nots.
They saved it from the inevitably stodgy baseline final between Graf and Sanchez-Vicario to the incessant droning of the unofficial women's tennis anthem -- "Where Have All the Flowers Gone?"


INSIDE
Delay Sought in Sex Suit
Lawyers asked a court to put off a sex harassment lawsuit against President Clinton until he leaves office, saying a President cannot be subject to a civil suit.
Page A14.
Cuomo in Shift on Refunds
In a move critics called politically motivated, Governor Cuomo said the state would refund $60 million to retired Federal workers who paid taxes latger deemed unlawful.
Page B1.
On the Run in Rwanda
Thousands of Rwandans forced from their homes by the chaos that has overtaken the country are wandering the countryside in desperate conditions, aid agencies fear.
Page A3.
Q.E.D.?
A year ago a Princeton mathematician said he had proved Fermat's last theorem.
Part of the proof has checked, out but one knotty problem remains.
Science Times, page C1.


A Tournament Record for Being Carded
The number of cautions for physical play will most likely reach a record number in this World Cup, but according to FIFA officials, that's just the way they like it.
FIFA instructed the referees in this World Cup to pay close attention to physical play and punish the offenders.
The result has been 106 yellow cards and 7 red cards, which call for automatic ejections, in the 26 games through Sunday, the halfway point of the tournament.
At this pace, this World Cup will surpass 200 cautions and break the record of 169 issued in the 52 games four years ago in Italy.


CHRONICLE
When EDWARD F. ARRIGONI walked into the Water Club on the East River the other evening, the 150 guests who had come expecting to celebrate his 60th birthday, shouted, "Surprise!"
But the surprise was on them.
Mr.
Arrigoni, chairman of the New York Bus Service and founder of Cop-Shot, a program that awards $10,000 to individuals for information about gunshot attacks on police officers, announced that he and MARY JANE BOUTE had just been married and that the party was, in fact, also a wedding reception.


The White House Turns Again To an Old G.O.P. Image-Maker
In an interview last November, David R. Gergen made clear that he wanted to be regarded as a man of substance, not spin.
"I would never pretend to know as much about foreign affairs as Tony or Christopher," Mr.
Gergen, White House counselor, said of the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, and Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
"But I didn't take the job to do P.R."


CLINTON SHUFFLES HIS AIDES, SELECTING BUDGET DIRECTOR AS WHITE HOUSE STAFF CHIEF
President Clinton today announced the most extensive staff shake-up of his 17 months in office, redrawing the lines of power in the White House as he searched for a way to give an air of strength and professionalism to his Administration.
Mr.
Clinton removed a fellow Arkansan and lifelong friend, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, as White House chief of staff and replaced him with Leon E. Panetta, the President's budget director.
He also installed his counselor, David R. Gergen, to whom he turned in another time of political crisis, in a powerful new position to help refine the Administration's foreign policy.


Daly Disqualified From Hartford Open
JOHN DALY was disqualified from the Greater Hartford Open for signing an incorrect score card after the final round of the tournament, the Professional Golfers' Association said yesterday.
The card for Sunday's final round, which was kept by his playing partner, CLARK DENNIS, read that Daly had a 3 at No. 5, when he actually had a bogey 4, said LESLIE SINADINOS, a PGA spokeswoman.


A Year Later, Snag Persists In Math Proof
ONE year ago, a shy and somewhat secretivemathematician stunned the world by announcing that he had proved Fermat's last theorem, the most famous unsolved problem in mathematics.
Yet a year later, he still has not published his proof.
Was the claim premature?
In short, it is probably too early to say.
A subtle gap has been found in the manuscript of the proof.
Its author, Dr.
Andrew Wiles of Princeton University, is working in seclusion to close the gap.
A tense quietus has settled over the community of mathematicians, a few predicting failure, others expressing confidence based on the fact that Dr.
Wiles's proof is already agreed to have conquered part of another major mathematical peak known as the Taniyama conjecture.


Winn Newman, 70; Fought Salary Bias
Winn Newman, a labor and civil rights lawyer who fought salary discrimination based on sex or race, died on Friday at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 70 and lived in Washington.
The cause was a stroke, said his daughter-in-law Jeanne Vonhof.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Courville Takes Lead in Long Island Jerry Courville Jr. of Shore Haven, winner of the title in 1990 and '91, shot a one-over-par 72 yesterday for the first-round lead in the Metropolitan Golf Association/Met Life Ike Tournament at Bethpage State Park Black Course, Farmingdale, L.I.
A field of 108 competed in the stroke play championship.
The cut was 79, with 40 advancing to today's final 36 holes.
Courville also has won the team title four times, three with his father, who is not playing because of chemotherapy treatment for cancer.
The 35-year-old Courville three-putted two holes on the front nine, where he finished one under at 35.
Jeff Thomas of Plainfield West, the 1993 M.G.A.
Player of the Year, failed to make it with an 80.


Finlay Fine Jewelry Corp. reports earnings for 13wks to Apr 30


Accused Mother Has Multiple Personalities, Family Says
Karisa Santiago, the 21-year-old Yonkers woman accused of killing one of her three children who died mysteriously last year, has what appears to be multiple-personality disorder, family members said today.
Ms.
Santiago, they said, can switch without warning from her normal self to one of three distinct personalities: a child who likes to color, a quiet woman with a blank stare or an aggressive and streetwise "hoodlum."


Agassi's Comeback Can't Catch Martin
Off went his final shot of the match right where he didn't want it go, wide of the sideline.
Off went his shirt into the crowd, just one of the many ritual gestures that have made him the darling of Wimbledon before, during and after his 1992 triumph here.
Up stood those unimpressionable folks in the Royal Box, giving him a standing ovation rather than a stiff upper lip, and then off went Andre Agassi where nobody except Todd Martin wanted him to go, home to Las Vegas.
The pony-tailed man in the snow-white oversized briefs offered a regal wave of his own and then, with his stay here rendered overly brief by Martin's 6-3, 7-5, 6-7 (0-7), 4-6, 6-1 victory today, he sadly took his leave of the Grand Slam that seems to cherish him most, and the only one he has ever won.


Why Oz Is a State of Mind In Gay Life and Drag Shows
Consider this scenario: A teen-ager, growing up in a drab, flat part of the Midwest that is strictly American Gothic, feels out of place and misunderstood and fantasizes about a more colorful, exotic world.
Well, the kid finds that world: a land of magnificent artifice filled with strange, enchanting companions, all united by a pungent feeling of incompleteness.
The kid has many exciting adventures but continues to yearn with a bottomless pang for the idea of something called home.
Yes, that is the plot of "The Wizard of Oz." It is also the life story of countless numbers of gay men and lesbians who fled what Tina Landau, the writer and director, describes in the play "1969" as the "vast map of normalcy" that is much of America.
Many of them found their own Oz on a northeastern island called Manhattan.
And for an important subset of those people, Emerald City took the form of an all-inclusive land of make-believe known as the New York theater.


Review/Fashion; A Collection in Every Port
A decade ago, European fashion manufacturers were mystified by what was called the cruise-resort season in the United States.
Now, they've all caught on.
In the last week, most important designers have shown a cruise collection, to reach the stores in November and December.
Some have even tested new ideas.
Giorgio Armani has changed his style.
His jackets are drawn in closer to the body, with seams under the bust and a snug fit through the midriff.
Besides suits there are dresses, many dresses, with shaped middles and gently flaring skirts.
Some hemlines approach the knees.


Excerpts From Opinions And Dissent on Religion
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Board of Education v.
Grumet, declaring unconstitutional the public school district that New York State established for a community of Satmar Hasidim.
Justice David H. Souter's majority opinion was joined by Justices Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy concurred separately.
Justice Antonin Scalia dissented in an opinion that was also signed by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas.
FROM THE DECISION  By Justice Souter
The Village of Kiryas Joel in Orange County, N.Y., is a religious enclave of Satmar Hasidim, practitioners of a strict form of Judaism.
The village fell within the Monroe-Woodbury Central School District until a special state statute passed in 1989 carved out a separate district following village lines to serve this distinctive population.
The question is whether the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment is binding on the States through the Fourteenth Amendment.
Because this unusual act is tantamount to an allocation of political power on a religious criterion and neither presupposes nor requires governmental impartiality toward religion, we hold that it violates the prohibition against establishment.


SHAKE-UP AT THE WHITE HOUSE: CHIEF OF STAFF -- Man in the News; Once at Odds With White House, Now at Its Helm: Leon Edward Panetta
Leon E. Panetta, the man now charged with making the White House more efficient and focused, learned early in his career about the power a White House chief of staff can wield.
Mr.
Panetta, who began public life as a Republican, was the director of civil rights for the old Department of Health, Education and Welfare in 1969, in the early days of Richard M. Nixon's Presidency.
He sought to deal quickly with more than 600 lingering school desegregation cases but was told bluntly to back off to preserve the White House's "southern strategy," the effort to woo the South from the Democrats.


Robinson to Attend N.B.A. Draft, After All
GLENN ROBINSON, expected to be the first pick in the National Basketball Association draft, won't spoil the show after all.
Robinson's agent, CHARLES TUCKER, said yesterday that the former Purdue star won't boycott tomorrow's draft at the Hoosier Dome in Indianapolis.
"He will attend," Tucker said.
"Fans and the players deserve this. We'll do it for the N.B.A., the fans and the players. But we still have concerns about many issues. We're not going to give up our rights."


Clinton's Lawyer Asks for Delay on Sex Harassment Lawsuit
Lawyers for President Clinton argued today that he should not be subject to a civil suit while in office and, as a result, that a sexual harassment complaint by a former Arkansas clerical worker should be put off until he leaves the White House.
In a motion filed in Federal Court in Little Rock, Ark., Robert S. Bennett, the Washington lawyer hired by Mr.
Clinton, asked the court to delay any action in the suit, brought by Paula C. Jones, until that issue of Presidential immunity is resolved.
In his filing, Mr.
Bennett said he would file a separate motion on the issue by Aug. 5 to give the full details of his arguments.


French in Rwanda Discover Thousands of Hutu Refugees
It is almost impossible to move through the dirt yard surrounding the Notre Dame Church in this hilltop village, where more than 40,000 Hutu are jammed into an impromptu refugee camp.
The crying of children mixes with the sounds of machetes splitting trees in the surrounding hills as men erect more shelters, which are covered with freshly cut greenery.
These members of the Hutu ethnic group, which is the majority in Rwanda, have been on the run from rebel forces of the Tutsi tribe for more than two months, chased from their villages and then from the makeshift camps they set up along the way.
Many have seen family members killed.
Now, more are dying here, from malaria, malnutrition and simple exhaustion.


IN PERFORMANCE: DANCE
First Impressions Presented By the North/South Troupe  Merce Cunningham Studio
The works that North/South Dance presented on Friday night usually got off to a good start, but they never went anywhere interesting.


METRO DIGEST
TROUBLES WITH TEACHER TENURE
After Jay Dubner, a special education teacher in New York City, was sent to prison in 1990 for selling cocaine to undercover police officers, school officials thought it would be easy to dismiss him.
Not so.
While Mr.
Dubner served his sentence, he collected his teacher's pay.
And he still has his job.
The labyrinthine disciplinary processes supporting tenure have become the focus of a debate about balancing the rights of academics against the need to discipline unethical or incompetent teachers or principals.
A1.


The Case of jpmorgan
To the Editor:
"Can E-Mail Cachet = jpmorgan@park.ave?" (front page, June 6) views the status symbol of electronic mail addresses.


Honors
*
Allen Dyon, president of the Allstate Motor Club, Arlington Heights, Ill., was named the 1995 chairman of the Direct Marketing Association.
Robert M. Edmund, president of Edmund Scientific Co., Barrington, N.J., was named the vice chairman and chairman-elect.


Miscellany
*
Cowles Business Media, Stamford, Conn., has agreed to acquire the Wells Group, Minneapolis, a custom publishing and marketing company.
The terms were not disclosed.


Moving Money and Awaiting the Fed
Steve Dickinson and Mike Clark hunched before a bank of computer screens on the currency-trading floor at Midland Bank's global markets division here today, watching for any sign that the Federal Reserve or the European central banks were stepping in to calm the world's financial markets by halting the sharp slide in the dollar over the last week.
The American currency had slumped to another postwar low against the Japanese yen during trading in Tokyo overnight.
European stock markets, nervous about the turmoil, had opened lower.


Agencies and clients look at each other over a divide marked by tensions and misperceptions.
IRRITABLE? Edgy? Got that anxious, uneasy feeling?
Those questions could be part of a pitch for pain relievers or tranquilizers.
But according to the latest results of an annual survey, they also describe the symptoms of the fractious state of agency-client relationships.


Fast? Furious? Chess, ESPN Style
Alexey Vyzmanavin and Pedrag Nikolic, grandmasters in the world of chess, sat facing each other on either side of a tiny table and arm-wrestled with their minds.
Now and then one would deftly move a rook or a pawn, but beyond that, most of the action consisted of back-arching, face-rubbing and, once, Mr.
Nikolic pulled an ear, his own.
Chess, a sport in which commentators interpret a repositioning of a player's feet on the carpet as a change in momentum, may not appear exciting from the outside.
The action is in the mind, where the board becomes a field of combat, where armies attack, flank, defend, retreat, and kill the wounded.


Interpublic Joins Interactive Venture
Time Warner Interactive and the Interpublic Group of Companies said yesterday that they had formed a joint venture to create and produce interactive products like CD-ROM's and interactive television programming.
The terms of the agreement, believed to be the first to link an information and entertainment conglomerate and an agency company, were not disclosed.
"It's an opportunity for us to access both the content capabilities of Time Warner and their interactive production capabilities," said Barry Linsky, senior vice president of planning and business development at Interpublic in New York.


Uneven Punishment
To the Editor:
Re "Justice Powell's New Wisdom" (editorial, June 11):


Profit and Ego in Data Secrecy
If the web of thousands of computer networks around the world can be thought of as an information superhighway, then Jim Bidzos is one of its best-placed toll takers.
Mr.
Bidzos expects to become very rich -- unless the Government has its way.
As president of a Silicon Valley company called RSA Data Security Inc., Mr.
Bidzos, 39, controls the patents for software crucial to scrambling and unscrambling computer messages so they can be sent confidentially.


BE Aerospace Inc.(BEAV,NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Key in Control As Streak Goes To 11 in a Row
Jimmy Key rarely shows any emotion.
He smiles about once a week, he frowns at a similar pace and his voice is rarely raised above normal conversational tones.
He hardly laughs, he hardly smirks and he hardly shouts.
His wife calls him lifeless and he concurs, but does not smile while telling the story.
Maybe he will smile next week.
So when Key waved his left arm tonight after emerging unscathed from a tenuous situation in the sixth inning by inducing Mike Greenwell to hammer into a double play, it was obvious how critical he felt those outs were.
It must have been important if Key displayed his emotions on his left sleeve.
It definitely was as the Red Sox never threatened again and the Yankees rolled to a 5-1 victory at Fenway Park.


Study Criticizes Subsidy For Insurance for Poor
A new study finds serious, unsuspected problems with many proposals for the Federal Government to help low-income people buy private health insurance by subsidizing their premiums.
Such subsidies are a feature of most of the health insurance bills being considered in Congress.
Subsidies have been suggested as a way to make sure that all Americans obtain health insurance, with or without a requirement that employers contribute to the cost of workers' coverage.


Roy Grutman Is Dead at 63; Lawyer for Celebrity Clients
Roy Grutman, a trial lawyer whose theatrical panache and mellifluous voice reflected his training as a child actor and helped him defend clients in courts and on television, died on Sunday of liver cancer.
He was 63 and lived in Manhattan and Greenwich, Conn.
In 39 years of practice Mr.
Grutman, a man who loved quoting Shakespeare, represented Doris Duke, Jackie Collins and Andrew Crispo, the art dealer.
But in a reflection of his adaptability and professional range, his two most famous clients were the publisher of a sexually explicit magazine and a famous television evangelist.


Patterns
Italy Goes Reggae
When one country's movement is co-opted by another, it often loses its teeth.
So expectations were dim when Pitti Immagine Uomo, the Florence trade show, imported graffiti artists and announced its first foray into street fashion with a show called Streetstyle, featuring jeans and club clothes.
Here, for example, was reggae by way of Italy: a T-shirt with the label Major Force, printed with a dreadlocked figure made of rigatoni and emblazoned "Pastaman." Culinary revolution, presumably, will follow.


California Wildfires Burn On


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the publication of diaries attributed to Benito Mussolini misstated the wartime role of the father of the man who made the diaries public.
The father, who concealed the diaries until his death in 1962, served in the guerrilla unit that captured and executed Mussolini, but was not its leader.


Software Puts Meals And More On a Menu
THE city is London, the time is almost 6 P.M., and the immediate question is, what about dinner?
Out comes the Newton Messagepad.
Luckily, the hotel room is bright enough to see the screen.
You tap the stylus on Extras, then on the Timeout London Guide icon.
A menu appears, not of entrees but of options: About This Guide, Accommodations, Eating and Drinking, Entertainment, Exploring, Information and Services, London by Area, Maps, Shopping.
You tap Eating and Drinking.


U.S. Hopes North Korea Can Be Induced to Extend Nuclear Freeze
The Clinton Administration is confident that it will able to verify the freeze on the North Korean nuclear progam in the next round of talks, to begin on July 8.
But the big issue is whether the monitoring can be extended after the negotiations.
To monitor the freeze, two officials of the International Atomic Energy Agency are stationed at the Yongbyon nuclear site.
From there, they conduct inspections to make sure that the 8,000 fuel rods the North Koreans have removed from the Yongbyon reactor and dumped into a cooling pond are kept there and not diverted to produce plutonium, an ingredient in atomic bombs.


Death on the World Cup Express
The Group of Death has reached its final reckoning. Today is the day.
At the World Cup draw in December in Las Vegas, Nev., when the 24 teams were dealt out into six groups for the first round, one group immediately earned the traditional nickname, "Group of Death." Today, fans at Giants Stadium and R.F.K.
Stadium in Washington get to see why.


SHAKE-UP AT THE WHITE HOUSE: NEWS ANALYSIS Job for a Capital Insider; In Calling on Panetta as Staff Chief, Clinton Opts for a Doer Rather Than a Doorkeeper
Marlin Fitzwater, who was the President's spokesman in the Reagan and Bush White Houses, has just finished writing a chapter in his memoirs about the seven chiefs of staff he worked under -- starting and ending with James A. Baker 3d.
One of his conclusions is that Washington insiders have a better chance of succeeding as chief of staff than do outsiders.
"The White House," Mr.
Fitzwater said in an interview today, "operates on a set of rules and principles applicable in no other setting."


Divorced Father Accused Of Killing His 2 Children
A 50-year-old divorced father, apparently distraught that his former wife and two children were moving to Florida, murdered the children Sunday and then drove with the bodies to the police headquarters here and parked, the authorities said today.
The man, Avi Kostner, an unemployed cabdriver under psychiatric care for depression, was arrested in the police parking lot after a friend found him slumped over the steering wheel of his Isuzu Trooper and the bodies of the children hidden under a sleeping bag in a rear seat, John J. Fahy, the Bergen County Prosecutor said.
Mr.
Kostner may have been feigning unconsciousness.


Who Knows The Rules? Embarrassed U.S. Didn't
The American players are not out of the World Cup, but they are out of sorts: with each other, with the coaches, with team officials.
This disarray became increasingly evident today as players complained that they were not properly informed of the rules that govern the issuance of yellow cards, in the wake of the suspension Sunday of midfielder John Harkes.


Ruling Disappoints Cable Executives
Both sides claimed some element of victory in yesterday's Supreme Court decision ordering a lower court to reconsider the law that requires cable television systems to carry all of the broadcast stations in their market areas.
But the immediate effect of the ruling will be nil for perhaps a year or more, and that leaves most of the cable industry, in the words of one executive, "very, very disappointed."


Bolivia Scores, but Will Still Go Home
What began last year at 12,000 feet in La Paz ended on considerably lower ground today for the Bolivians.
The good news for all those who instinctively lean toward the underdog was that Xabier Azkargorta's suspension-depleted team finally got its first goal in a World Cup finals.
The bad news was that Spain got three goals -- two from midfielder Jose Luis Caminero -- along with Group C's second and only other spot in the second round.


High Court Bars School District Created to Benefit Hasidic Jews
The Supreme Court today declared unconstitutional a public school district that New York State created for the benefit of a village of ultra-Orthodox Jews.
As the result of the 6-to-3 decision, the Kiryas Joel Village School District, established by a 1989 law for the benefit of the village's Satmar Hasidic residents, will now go out of existence.
It will probably be absorbed by the Monroe-Woodbury Central School District, from which it seceded.


Fernandez Goes on Disabled List
Left-hander SID FERNANDEZ was placed on the 15-day disabled list by the Baltimore Orioles yesterday because of a strained rib cage that forced him to miss his last start.
The placement is retroactive to June 19.
He was replaced by left-hander ARTHUR RHODES, who was recalled from Class AAA Rochester. (AP)


Jays' Ward to Start Rehabilitation Stint
The Toronto Blue Jays relief ace DUANE WARD is heading to Class A Dunedin for a rehabilitation assignment in the Florida State League.
"Duane's going for rehab in the middle of the week, the 29th," General Manager PAT GILLICK told The Toronto Sun after meeting with the pitcher and Manager CITO GASTON.
"He'll be restricted to the amount of pitches he throws, have a day off, throw again, have a day off, that type of thing."


Mayor Applauds Police On Gay March Strategy
From a helicopter above Manhattan on Sunday, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani watched as the city's Police Department, without an arrest or an injury, managed tens of thousands of people marching toward Central Park -- some of them illegally -- to commemorate the day 25 years ago when that same department had clashed violently with homosexuals at a Greenwich Village bar.
Yesterday, with a few conservatives saying the police had tolerated too much, the Mayor pronounced himself pleased with what he saw -- and supported the police officers for not intervening to stop the illegal part of the celebration, a march up Fifth Avenue.


Franco Squanders An Epic Comeback
It could have been the big breakthrough moment the Mets had been hoping -- no, begging -- to see.
Mired in a slump, criticized by their manager, frustratingly weak at the plate, the Mets staged a marvelous comeback last night at Shea Stadium, a one-inning bonanza that took them from a six-run deficit to a one-run lead over the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Then the "emotional roller coaster," as Jeff Kent described it, fell to earth with a most disquieting thud.


Eli Lilly and Somatogen Seek Blood Substitute
Eli Lilly &amp; Company entered the race to produce a substitute for human blood yesterday by signing a joint development agreement with Somatogen Inc. of Boulder, Colo.
Lilly, of Indianapolis, said it would make an immediate investment of $20 million in Somatogen, which is developing a genetically engineered hemoglobin molecule, with an additional $15 million to be invested as Somatogen attains certain milestones.


Mary Drayton; Playwright, 89
Mary Drayton, a playwright whose work appeared on Broadway, died on Friday at Sarasota Memorial Hospital in Sarasota, Fla., where she lived.
She was 89.
The cause was a blood clot in her lung, said her daughter, Kristin Helmore.


Manor Care Inc.(MNR,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Cable TV Ruling
The Supreme Court, in a 5-4 decision, endorsed a broad framework for Federal regulation of cable TV but stopped short of upholding the law requiring cable systems to retransmit the signals of local broadcasters.
Article, page D1.


Calling All the Leetches: N.H.L. Draft Set to Begin
National Hockey League teams today were still scouting players on the eve of the annual entry draft for 17- and 18-year-olds.
One target, Jeff O'Neill, said he still had several appointments today with club officials who were preparing for the draft.
O'Neill, an 18-year-old center from the Guelph Storm of the Ontario Hockey League who is ranked the second best prospect by N.H.L.'s central scouting department, was prepared for more interviews before the 6 P.M. start of the draft at the Civic Center on Tuesday.


CHRONICLE
In January 1990, in an apartment owned by YOKO ONO in the Dakota, Keith Haring did his first religious artwork, a triptych entitled "The Life of Christ," which he carved into clay and had cast in bronze covered in white gold.
A month later he died, and the huge piece -- 5 feet by 10 feet -- went into storage.
This evening, the altar piece will be dedicated in its new home, the Chapel of St.
Saviour at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, a donation of the Keith Haring Foundation.
The ceremony will include prayers, remarks by Ms.
Ono and a performance of three works from her musical "New York Rock."


Walgreen Co.(WAG,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Quarrels of Kurdish Leaders Sour Dreams of a Homeland
After the Persian Gulf war, with much of the world moved to pity by their plight, the Kurds of northern Iraq seemed poised to realize the ancient Kurdish dream of freedom.
With the Western allies providing aid and military protection from the Iraqi Army, which had crushed a Kurdish uprising, a government was elected, a Parliament was sworn in, and the region began functioning almost as an autonomous state.


The Last Shall Be First And the Fans Love It
Let's try to figure this out: The Mets, after their 9-8 loss to St.
Louis at Shea Stadium last night, are nine games under .500.
The Texas Rangers are seven games under .500.
But the Mets are in last place, and the Rangers are in first place.
The Mets are so far from first they have no chance to reach the post-season playoffs.
The Rangers could reach them by winning a division championship.
Here's something else to try to figure out: The Oakland Athletics, who have won four division championships in the past six years, were so bad in the first two months of this season that they won only 13 of their first 49 games.
But they entered last night's games only four and a half games from first, closer to the top than 13 other teams in the major leagues and in position to contend for another division title.


Corrections
The Pulse chart in the Metro Section yesterday included incorrect figures in some editions for the number of lawyers per 100 people in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut and the United States.
The correct figures are: New York, 0.4 in 1987 and 0.5 in 1993; New Jersey, 0.3 in 1987 and 0.4 in 1993; Connecticut, 0.3 in 1987 and 0.5 in 1993; United States, 0.3 in 1987 and 0.3 in 1993.


A Year Later, Snag Persists In Math Proof
ONE year ago, a shy and somewhat secretivemathematician stunned the world by announcing that he had proved Fermat's last theorem, the most famous unsolved problem in mathematics.
Yet a year later, he still has not published his proof.
Was the claim premature?
In short, it is probably too early to say.
A subtle gap has been found in the manuscript of the proof.
Its author, Dr.
Andrew Wiles of Princeton University, is working in seclusion to close the gap.
A tense quietus has settled over the community of mathematicians, a few predicting failure, others expressing confidence based on the fact that Dr.
Wiles's proof is already agreed to have conquered part of another major mathematical peak known as the Taniyama conjecture.


Just Married: First Baby Due Today
Novell Inc. and the Wordperfect Corporation said yesterday that they had completed their merger and that they would show the first product of the merged companies today at PC Expo in New York.
Novell also said it had completed the acquisition of Quattro Pro, which was Borland International Inc.'s spreadsheet business.
The products to be shown today are all applications suites, what the industry calls collections of software in one package.
Novell's new product will succeed the former Borland Office, a suite that contained the Wordperfect word processor, Quattro Pro and Paradox, Borland's data base management program.
Borland will supply Paradox for the new Wordperfect suites, to be known as Perfect Office.


Jess B. Bessinger Jr.; English Professor, 72
Jess B. Bessinger Jr., a retired professor of English at New York University who was an expert on Beowulf, the longest poem surviving in Old English, died on Thursday in his home in Middletown, R.I.
He was 72.
The cause was a heart attack, said his sister, Elaine Fay.


Sanchez Becomes Part of the Upset Crowd
Zina Garrison-Jackson provided Wimbledon with its daily upset dose this afternoon on Center Court by spinning an elaborate strategic web around second-seeded Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and eliminating the French Open champion, 7-5, 4-6, 6-3.
"It's all in the racquet; if I play a very aggressive net game, all that just comes," said the 13th-seeded Garrison-Jackson, who posted her finest Grand Slam result here in 1990, when she served-and-volleyed herself all the way to the final before falling to Martina Navratilova.


Experimental Rocket Lands After Explosion
An unmanned experimental rocket that takes off and lands on its tail made an emergency landing in a New Mexico desert today after a mysterious explosion shortly after its engines started, Pentagon officials said.
The prototype DC-X flew for 78 seconds before it made an emergency landing at the White Sands Missile Range, about 800 feet from its launching point, according to the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, which developed the vehicle, and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, its manufacturer.


A Year Later, Snag Persists In Math Proof
ONE year ago, a shy and somewhat secretivemathematician stunned the world by announcing that he had proved Fermat's last theorem, the most famous unsolved problem in mathematics.
Yet a year later, he still has not published his proof.
Was the claim premature?
In short, it is probably too early to say.
A subtle gap has been found in the manuscript of the proof.
Its author, Dr.
Andrew Wiles of Princeton University, is working in seclusion to close the gap.
A tense quietus has settled over the community of mathematicians, a few predicting failure, others expressing confidence based on the fact that Dr.
Wiles's proof is already agreed to have conquered part of another major mathematical peak known as the Taniyama conjecture.


Bonn Journal; If It's a Museum, Why Does It Look Like an Attic?
How the generation of political leaders that runs Germany today views the country's history can now be seen, heard and even touched in a museum that was opened here this month by Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who was 15 in 1945.
Just after becoming Chancellor in 1982, when the Federal Republic of Germany consisted only of West Germany, Mr.
Kohl suggested the idea of putting the history on display in a building dedicated to it across the street from his office.


IN PERFORMANCE: RECORDINGS
Offering Wagner In an Ultra-Wagnerian Length
The performance of the "Siegfried Idyll" on this latest reissue in Sony's Glenn Gould Edition (SMK 52650, CD) enters the musical record book on three counts: It is Gould's only studio recording as a conductor, his final studio document (he died three weeks after completing it, in September 1982) and the slowest, strangest "Siegfried Idyll" in history.
Wagner's innocent birthday present for his wife normally lasts 16 or 17 minutes; Gould takes a stupefying 25.
If the famous little band of musicians at the foot of the stairs had been playing at this tempo, Wagner's wife, Cosima, would have woken up and gone back to sleep.


Conseco Bid For Kemper Is Accepted
The directors of the Kemper Corporation voted unanimously Sunday evening to accept a $3.2 billion purchase offer made Thursday by Conseco Inc., a life insurance company based in Carmel, Ind.
The agreement calls for holders of each Kemper share to collect $56 in cash and $11 worth of Conseco common stock.
That offer exceeded an earlier $60-a-share cash offer by the General Electric Company, whose bid caused Kemper to put itself up for sale.
G.E. withdrew its offer after the Conseco bid.


Germany Holds Off South Korea
The first half of this Group C match today went according to form, with the defending World Cup champion German team all but squashing the quick but inexperienced South Korean team, which has never won a cup game.
But suddenly, with 28 minutes left to play, there was Germany clinging to a one-goal lead and hearing whistles and catcalls of protest for stalling tactics from many in the crowd of 63,998 at the steamy Cotton Bowl.


Haiti's Strongman Reported Ready to Retire in October
Haiti's military strongman has said he will step down when his term as commander of the Haitian armed forces expires in October, a high-level military officer said today.
The officer, who spoke on condition that he not be identified, said the commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, had merely reaffirmed a long-held intention to retire and was not acting out of fear that the United States would make good on its threat to use force to oust him.
General Cedras was a leader of the coup that toppled the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, in September 1991.


You Can't Roller-Skate On Electronic Highway
THERE are now an estimated 25 million people on the Internet, 6 million or so on commercial computer networks like Prodigy and Compuserve and perhaps 20 million more on local area networks within businesses.
With all these digital personas whizzing through cyberspace, no wonder the place is getting crowded.
Some days, a visitor's Internet connection slows to a crawl as dozens or hundreds of computer users try to drink data out of the same bitstream.
The more popular repositories of free software now often greet visitors with the equivalent of "no vacancy" signs.
On some days, America Online is off line more than on, and Prodigy is stodgy.


Rudulph Carter, 68, A Former Diplomat
Rudulph Ellis Carter, a former Foreign Service officer and a political adviser in the United States Mission to the United Nations, died last Tuesday in Newport Hospital in Rhode Island.
A summer resident of Newport, he was 68 and lived in Dallas.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Wit at the Round Table: Was It, Er, Um, Square?
Seventy-five years ago this month -- no one knows the precise date -- the feast of wit known as the Algonquin Round Table got under way.
Time has only heightened its allure.
Throughout June, the Algonquin Hotel has been celebrating the patrons whose lunchtime gatherings made the hotel a byword for wit and sophistication.
It has even renamed one of its rooms the Round Table Suite and filled it with Round Table memorabilia.
"Mrs. Parker," a film about Dorothy Parker and Robert Benchley, set in the Round Table milieu, will reach movie screens in the fall.
And in late August, Parker will be canonized with a spiffy Modern Library edition of her poems and stories.


Market Place; A shift at the top and perhaps a change in fortunes for L.A. Gear.
AFTER a three-year turnaround effort, L.A.
Gear is poised to claw its way out of financial ruin, industry executives and analysts say.
The athletic footwear maker that is emerging will differ markedly from the one that made color-accented sneakers a hot fashion trend and saw its stock price soar to $50 three years ago.


Lawyer-Client Issue Rises In Bomb Conspiracy Case
Lawyers representing the men charged with plotting to bomb New York City landmarks demanded yesterday to meet with a judge on how a crucial defendant's reported move toward cooperating with prosecutors could affect defense strategies of others charged in the case.
Such a meeting has been scheduled for today before Judge Michael B. Mukasey in the Federal District Court in lower Manhattan at the request of one of the lawyers.


Japanese Put a Human Face on Computers
A VISITOR to Akikazu Takeuchi's office at the Sony Computer Science Laboratory might be forgiven for feeling spied upon.
On the screen of Dr.
Takeuchi's computer is a seemingly human face that tries to maintain eye contact with the visitor, tracking him as he moves around the room.
The face is created by computer graphics and controlled by software.
It is one of many efforts in Japan, the United States and Europe to create artificial faces for computers to make it easier for people to communicate with the machines.


Britten's Music Festival Revives Under a Three-Headed Regime
At 9:15 this morning, Sheila Colvin and her box-office staff broke out a bottle of Champagne.
Ticket sales through Friday night, two days before the end of this year's Aldeburgh Festival, had met the projected figure, meaning that the budget would be in the black.
The Aldeburgh Festival maintains its offices in that charming seaside town, the site of Benjamin Britten's opera "Peter Grimes," but it now scatters its performances all over East Anglia.
Since 1967 its principal home has been the Snape Maltings Concert Hall here in the even tinier town of Snape, a few miles up the Alde River from Aldeburgh.
In 1969 a fire burned down the hall and it had to be rebuilt.
Both the 1967 opening and the 1970 reopening were presided over by Queen Elizabeth II.


The White House Turns Again To an Old G.O.P. Image-Maker
In an interview last November, David R. Gergen made clear that he wanted to be regarded as a man of substance, not spin.
"I would never pretend to know as much about foreign affairs as Tony or Christopher," Mr.
Gergen, White House counselor, said of the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, and Secretary of State Warren Christopher.
"But I didn't take the job to do P.R."


Meriden Mayor Rejects Grants For AIDS Testing and Support
Arguing that expanded social services attract poor people and cost cities money, the Mayor of this small city in central Connecticut has rejected state and Federal grants to pay for AIDS testing and counseling at the city's Health Department.
It is the second time in a year that Meriden has fought against providing a social service that will cost the city little.
Last year, the Board of Education refused to begin a school breakfast program for poor children despite a state mandate.
The state took legal action and the program was eventually adopted.


Implant Study Too Small for Final Word
To the Editor:
If there really was no link between silicone breast implants and disease (news article, June 16), tens of thousands of women with silicone-related diseases would have to start believing their medical problems were caused by something else.


Chiat/Day to Handle Benetton Campaign
Chiat/Day was awarded a high-profile creative assignment yesterday, and the agency announced executive changes.
Benetton Group S.p.A., the Italian apparel marketer and retailer, said yesterday that it had selected Chiat/ Day's New York office as the first agency to create a product campaign for the United States.
Billings have not been determined.
Chiat/Day, which already handles advertising for Prince tennis racquets, a subsidiary of Benetton, was awarded the assignment without a review.
Media Buying Services International of New York continues to handle media placement.


Ameron Inc.(AMN,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Where Meetings Are Truly Feared
These are scary times for some corporate executives in Japan, and not just because of the depressed economy and the strong yen.
Consider the case of Juntaro Suzuki, a senior managing director for the Fuji Photo Film Company.
Mr.
Suzuki answered the doorbell of his western Tokyo home one evening last February to find a stranger who said he had accidentally driven into Mr.
Suzuki's fence.
A few minutes later, Mr.
Suzuki lay dying in his doorway, stabbed several times with what the police believe was a samurai sword.


Rwandans Protest French Intervention


Small Agency's Fate In Doubt After Split
The principals of Baron &amp; Zaretsky, a small agency in New York, said yesterday that they had separated and were considering the fate of the shop, which has lost several clients recently.
A statement from the agency, in the names of Ken Baron, the president and creative director, and Burton Zaretsky, the executive vice president and operations director, confirmed a report of their split this week in Adweek.
Neither returned telephone calls seeking comment.


Now, Focus the President
Yesterday's staff shake-up at the White House was overdue.
Things have not been working.
Apart from the managerial foul-ups that have plagued this Administration from day one, the White House has not yet conveyed clear messages on foreign policy and even some domestic issues.
With health care approaching the moment of truth on Capitol Hill, and with Mr.
Clinton about to embark on a trip to Europe where his diplomatic credentials are suspect, there was a clear need for change.
But people who have studied this White House know that staff shuffles can go only so far.
Having a well-managed staff requires a President who wants to live in an orderly managerial environment.
By most accounts, Mr.
Clinton still spends a lot of time on personnel, political and policy minutiae that should be handled two or three steps down the ladder.
His preoccupation with details robs the Administration of focus and continuity.


Runoff Seems Likely In Ukrainian Vote; Count Moves Slowly
President Leonid M. Kravchuk and his former Prime Minister, Leonid D. Kuchma, seemed headed today for a runoff vote in Ukraine's presidential elections, which displayed a country deeply split between east and west.
Scattered results in slow counting from from the seven-man race on Sunday showed Mr.
Kravchuk sweeping western Ukraine.


Dollar Falls But Rallies Some at End
The dollar hit another record low against the Japanese yen in Tokyo early today but later bounced back in New York, buoyed by falling commodity prices, a rising bond market and a new sense among some investors that the weak dollar is a bigger problem for Japan than it is for the United States.
Currency traders say there is a growing belief that the dollar has hit bottom for now, trading lower than the economic fundamentals would dictate, and is thus due for at least a temporary bounce upward.


Excerpts From Opinions And Dissent on Religion
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Board of Education v.
Grumet, declaring unconstitutional the public school district that New York State established for a community of Satmar Hasidim.
Justice David H. Souter's majority opinion was joined by Justices Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, and Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy concurred separately.
Justice Antonin Scalia dissented in an opinion that was also signed by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justice Clarence Thomas.
FROM THE DECISION  By Justice Souter
The Village of Kiryas Joel in Orange County, N.Y., is a religious enclave of Satmar Hasidim, practitioners of a strict form of Judaism.
The village fell within the Monroe-Woodbury Central School District until a special state statute passed in 1989 carved out a separate district following village lines to serve this distinctive population.
The question is whether the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment is binding on the States through the Fourteenth Amendment.
Because this unusual act is tantamount to an allocation of political power on a religious criterion and neither presupposes nor requires governmental impartiality toward religion, we hold that it violates the prohibition against establishment.


On My Mind; Americans on the Golan
This is the time for Americans and Israelis to start talking in their own countries about whether American troops should be stationed on the Golan Heights.
That was the opening of this column on Nov. 30, 1993.
Now the Clinton Administration says it expects to send U.S. troops to the heights as part of an international force if Syria and Israel come to a peace agreement.
But still there has been no debate in Congress and none scheduled.


Hinting at More Changes, Panetta Takes the Reins
The capital was witness to a ritual guard-changing today as a freshly minted White House chief of staff visited subordinates, journalists and television hosts to proclaim that he was ready to make the White House work for the President again.
At each stop, Leon E. Panetta, the 16-year House veteran who will move from the budget director's office into what is in theory the second-most powerful job in the White House, sounded an identical theme: that he had been promised "full authority" to do what was necessary to restore discipline to an operation widely seen as inefficient and loosely managed.


Higher Taxes? No Problem. Voters Rescue School.
A white elephant of a building mixing turn-of-the-century French, Flemish and Tudor Revival styles, Fairhaven High School, known locally as the Castle, is not your conventional schoolhouse.
So it was perhaps appropriate that when the school was placed on accreditation probation last June, the town's residents responded in a most unconventional way: they voted to raise property taxes.


Compromise Is Proposed On H.I.V. Test
Derailing a proposal to force doctors to inform parents if their newborns test positive for H.I.V. antibodies, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver has put his substantial clout behind a compromise that would instead require doctors to counsel pregnant women and new mothers to take the tests themselves.
If the bill is approved, New York would become the first state to insist on such counseling.
But by announcing his position on the emotional issue today, Mr.
Silver quickly deflated an alternative bill that would require doctors to give parents the results of H.I.V. tests now being performed anonymously on newborns.


St. Jude Medical in Pacemaker Deal
Jumping into a fast-growing market for electronic heart devices, St.
Jude Medical Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the cardiac device business of Siemens A.G., the German electronics giant, for $500 million.
St.
Jude Medical, based in St.
Paul, dominates the world market for heart valves.
The Siemens Pacesetter unit, in the Sylmar area of Los Angeles, is the second-largest maker of pacemakers, behind Medtronic Inc.
The devices bring lagging heartbeats up to speed.


Food Notes
Tasting Time
The American Institute of Wine and Food's annual summer wine tasting will be held on July 11 at the Marriott Marquis Hotel, 1535 Broadway (45th Street).
For the first time, retailers from New York, Westchester, Long Island and New Jersey will participate.
Nearly 150 wines will be available for tasting, along with food from 30 restaurants and food companies, including Nosmo King in Manhattan, North Street Grill in Great Neck, L.I., and Xaviar's in Piermont, N.Y.
Tickets are $20 for members of the institute, who will be admitted to the event at 5 P.M.
Tickets are $30 for nonmembers, who will be admitted at 6 P.M.
The tasting will last until 8:30 P.M.
Tickets can be reserved by calling (212) 447-0456.
Loaded With Fruit
In most fruit-flavored vinegars like raspberry, apple or cassis, the fruit takes a back seat to the vinegar.
But two new fruit vinegars are made so the fruit dominates.


Agency Issues New Guidelines For Managing Heart Conditions
Millions of people suffering from progressive heart failure can live longer and do more if they comply better with recommended treatments and if their doctors are more aggressive in prescribing cardiac medications, Federal health officials said today.
New guidelines for treating heart failure, issued by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research of the United States Public Health Service, say the condition can be better controlled now than a decade ago.
Heart failure contributes to the death of about 200,000 Americans a year.


Charles Moertel, 66; Studied Treatment And Cost of Cancer
Dr.
Charles Moertel, a cancer researcher at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., died on Monday at his home.
He was 66 and lived in Rochester.
Kay Boeding Thiemann, a spokeswoman for the Mayo Clinic, said only that he had a lengthy illness.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL -- Suspended Dwight Gooden, New York Mets pitcher, for 60 days without pay for violating his drug aftercare program.
American League  MINNESOTA TWINS -- Placed Pat Meares, shortstop, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 22.
Recalled Denny Hocking, shortstop, from Salt Lake City of the Pacific Coast League.


Little Sympathy for Gooden From Green
John Franco felt sympathy.
Bobby Bonilla felt concern.
Bret Saberhagen felt simple disbelief.
When the Mets reacted last night to the news that Dwight Gooden -- an undisputed clubhouse leader -- had been suspended for 60 days for a violation of the league's drug policy, their feelings ranged from deep sadness to a sense of frustration and shock.


Corrections
Excerpts yesterday from the Supreme Court decision outlawing the establishment of a public school district for a community of Hasidic Jews omitted one heading and thus merged two concurring opinions.
The heading, "By Justice O'Connor, Concurring," should have appeared in the middle of the third column, above the passage beginning, "We have time and again held that the government generally may not treat people differently based on the God or gods they worship, or don't worship."
A picture caption with the excerpts misstated the year the New York Legislature created the district.
It was 1989.


William Henry 3d, A Drama Reviewer At Time, Dies at 44
William A. Henry 3d, the drama critic for Time magazine and the author of biographies of Jack Benny and Jackie Gleason, died yesterday in Maidenhead, England.
He was 44 and lived in Plainfield, N.J.
The cause was a heart attack, said Robert Pondiscio, a spokesman for Time.


Thompson Promotes Two Top Executives
The J. Walter Thompson Company has promoted two top executives to the additional new positions of worldwide creative directors.
They are Jim Patterson, 47, the chairman and chief creative officer of Thompson North America in New York, who also serves as executive creative director of Thompson's New York office, and Allen Thomas, 49, the chairman and chief creative officer of Thompson Europe in London.
The appointments were made yesterday by Burt Manning, the chairman and chief executive of Thompson, who was the agency's last worldwide creative director, from 1978 to 1980.


Islanders Acquire Lindros (but It's Not Eric) in Draft
A trade in the midst of the first round at the National Hockey League's entry draft tonight brought to the Islanders Brett Lindros, the not-so-little brother of Eric Lindros of the Philadelphia Flyers.
Brett, though 6 feet 4 inches and 215 pounds, acknowledged he is not ready for the big league.
"I don't as yet have N.H.L. hands," the 18-year-old right wing said during an interview within the Hartford Civic Center, the site of the draft attended by 7,000 fans admitted free of charge.


Beef Up the Open Meetings Law
New York State has a healthy policy requiring that the public's business be conducted in public.
"Every meeting of a public body shall be open to the general public," the Legislature declared in the 1976 Open Meetings Law.
The law provided a drastic remedy for violations: a county council or zoning board might find a secret action nullified by court order.
Experience has taught, however, that this often fails to deter officials from ducking underground.
Few people have the energy to bring lawsuits.
Albany is now considering another antidote to closed-door lawmaking.
Bills endorsed by Gov.
Mario Cuomo and the New York Newspaper Publishers Association, of which this newspaper is a member, seek fines of $100 to $500 for willful circumvention of the law.


Let's Not Revive Family Stereotypes
To the Editor:
I read with interest your June 19 report on the role of American fathers.
Apparently, the Republican-backed National Fatherhood Initiative believes the old notion that the father, as breadwinner of the family, should be exempt from splitting disagreeable domestic tasks like changing diapers.
What this group fails to mention is that in most American households women now share men's traditional role of breadwinning.


METRO DIGEST
BILL WOULD CURB SOME PAY PHONE RATES
New York State legislative leaders announced agreement on a bill that for the first time would limit certain rates on pay telephones owned by small private companies, which often charge high prices and surcharges to unsuspecting customers.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 24
June 17
June 25
1994
1994
1993
Gasoline production, daily
7.7
7.3
7.5
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.4
3.1
Gasoline stocks
217.4
217.9
222.3
Distillate stocks
116.6
116.4
106.8
Crude imports, daily
7.6
8.7
6.6
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.7
1.8
Crude stocks
327.4
324.6
354.8
Crude production, daily
6.5
6.5
6.8
Refinery utilization (%)
96.4
94.8
92.7
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Japan Taking Steps on Deregulation
Japanese who want to drive large motorcycles must pass an excruciatingly difficult test administered by the police.
Those content with a smaller motorcycle can pass an easy test given by a driving school.
The United States has complained that these rules impede sales in Japan of American motorcycles, which tend to be large.
But the large-motorcycle test will be eliminated in two years as part of deregulatory plan announced by the Japanese Government today intended to sweep aside dozens of arcane regulations that have irked trading partners and sometimes domestic consumers, as well.


Fashion Post Is Dropped At Bergdorf
In a move that caused jaws to drop along Seventh Avenue, Bergdorf Goodman, the elegant store that is a destination for connoisseurs of designer fashion, abruptly eliminated the position of fashion director and put Ellin Saltzman out of a job.
Ms.
Saltzman, a perennial and well-liked fixture in the world of high fashion, was instrumental in revitalizing the store, building relationships with new young designers and creating merchandising strategies to help draw younger customers.


Mansell to Drive in French Grand Prix
he former world champion NIGEL MANSELL will return to Formula One for this weekend's French Grand Prix.
The Williams-Renault team announced yesterday in England that Mansell will compete in Sunday's race in what the 1992 world champion said was a guest appearance.
Williams has tried to get Mansell to return from Indy-car racing since Ayrton Senna's death in the San Marino Grand Prix on May 1. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  KOREAS AGREE TO MEET  North and South Korea set a date of July 25 for a summit meeting, which would be their first since the Korean Peninsula was divided in 1945, showing a sharp decrease in tensions between the two countries.
A1  MIGRATIONS TROUBLE CHINA  China's mobile rural population was helpful in building the country, but now the millions of rural workers flooding into the cities are proving to be a destabilizing force there.
A3


Getting Down To Details With P.L.O.
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization took their first, tentative step today toward expanding Palestinian rule throughout the occupied territories.
Both sides insisted that they want to move swiftly.
But Israeli officials preferred a discernibly slower approach, saying they wished to see first how the Palestinians handle themselves in two regions that have been under their control since last month, the Gaza Strip and Jericho, on the West Bank.


Studies Show Small Companies Play Big Role
New York has long been identified with the Fortune 500 corporate giants whose names adorn Manhattan skyscrapers or that are based in suburban office complexes around the metropolitan area.
But two new studies indicate that smaller businesses are playing an increasingly important role in generating jobs for New Yorkers.
Particularly surprising was that the thousands of small industrial companies doing business in New York proved far more successful than big ones in riding out the harsh economic downturn of the last few years.


Fairest Way to Pay for Health Plan Is by Taxes; Don't Forget Disabled
To the Editor:
In "Faulty Diagnosis" (Second Opinions, June 12), Willard Gaylin suggests following the lead of Oregon in publicly debating what types of medical conditions and treatments society should pay for.


Another Good Church-State Lesson
The Supreme Court has reaffirmed, with refreshing clarity, the historic barrier that the First Amendment demands against impermissible state aid to religion.
By a 6-to-3 vote the Court struck down as unconstitutional the creation of a special school district for Satmar Hasidic residents of a town 50 miles northwest of New York City.
The decision was not surprising; the state's aid to the religious sect clearly crossed the church-state lines the Court has drawn for generations.
The sect sends most of its children to private religious schools.
But it had made a poignant plea that its handicapped children be granted special education, supported by public funds, in a separate district safe from the ridicule and hostility that might be generated in other public schools because of the sect's distinctive dress and reclusive living style.


COMPANY BRIEFS
L.
M.
ERICSSON, Stockholm, the telecommunications company, said it had won a $110 million contract to provide a radio system for Taiwan's National Police Administration.
RPM INC., Medina, Ohio, a specialty chemical coatings and do-it-yourself products company, completed its acquisition of Rust-Oleum Corp., Vernon Hills, Ill.


Book Notes
Moral: Never Say Die
If you're an author, it helps to have a high tolerance for rejection.
Consider Daniel Evan Weiss.
His first novel, "The Roaches Have No King," about a group of hip, philosophizing New York cockroaches keenly interested in the love life of the man in whose apartment they live, was turned down by more than two dozen publishers when he began sending it around six years ago.
The experience was even more excruciating because not everyone rejected it out of hand.
Random House actually bought the book, but then went through one of its periodic personnel shakeups, leaving the book abandoned by the wayside.
Editors at several more houses were interested enough to keep it around for months, but were ultimately outvoted by other editors.
Mr.
Weiss was discouraged, to say the least.


F.D.A. Head Says He Is Seeking No Big Change in Cigarette Rules
Though the Food and Drug Administration may eventually declare nicotine a drug, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Dr.
David A. Kessler, says he hopes to avoid any kind of drastic change in the regulation of cigarettes.
Leaders in the tobacco battle, from Dr.
Kessler to industry executives to Congressional proponents and opponents, now say that when rhetoric is set aside there may be common ground for regulation among them.
The aggressive investigation of nicotine and addiction undertaken by the F.D.A. in the past few months, as well as disclosures in Congressional testimony and internal company documents, could result in a compromise.


Milton E. Mermelstein; Lawyer, 86
Milton E. Mermelstein, a Manhattan lawyer for 50 years and a former chairman of Alexander's Department Stores Inc., died on June 21 at his home in Deal, N.J.
He was 86.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


Refugees From a Soybean Plant Explosion


Sports of The Times; Charlton, Irish Pub's Popular Proprietor
GIANTS Stadium had been transformed into the world's largest Irish pub.
The patrons in the World Cup assembly of 76,322 for yesterday's Ireland-Norway kickball game had hung hundreds of homemade green-white-and-orange banners against the top wall and along the railings of the upper deck and the mezzanine.
"Our Wives Think We're in Lough Derg," one announced.


Metropolitan Diary
SUMMER  You know it's summer  When a beach ball  Rolls by itself  Out of the garage,  Jumps up in your lap,  A red-yellow moon,  Holding its breath  For the inevitable volley,  Spike, roll in the sand,  Dip in the ocean,  Kick in the head.
ERNEST SLYMAN
. . .
The scene: Metro North's 125th Street stop heading toward Brewster.
Page 658. "Middlemarch." Door shuts, the train begins to move.
I look up from that enormous tome I have been carrying around for weeks, which daily vacillates between brilliance and albatross, to find a woman in her mid-20's, standing above me.
"Is this the New Haven line?" she inquires hastily.
"Brewster North. Sorry."
The conductor confirms that she is definitely on the wrong train and explains a rather lengthy rerouting process to her.
In short, she has to catch a shuttle bus in White Plains.
Gasp.
Sigh.
Grunt.
She takes the seat opposite mine in a state of distress.
Page 664.
I look up from the novel to see the same woman wiping tears from her face and staring forlornly out the window.
I begin to speculate on her predicament: a foiled lover's tryst, lost love or even a missed connection for a large drop-off of cash.
Six hundred and sixty-four pages of George Eliot will do this to you.
Page 670.
As the train approaches White Plains, the woman in question gathers her belongings.
She wipes the remaining tears from her face and leans toward me to speak.
I anticipate her confiding in me her tale of woe, indiscretion or even bribery, but instead her attention is focused on the book in my lap.
Choking back her tears, she gurgles, "I cannot believe you are going to finish "Middlemarch."
Strictly an albatross day. CAROLINE FINDLAY
. . .
Place: Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Scene: A driveway between two homes, noticed by Richard Schmitter.
Printed in pink chalk on the blacktop is a message by a 7-year-old who has just had an argument with her mother:
"Mommy, I hate you. Love, Ashley."
. . .
Dear Diary:
In 1955, after 25 years as a New York actor, I landed the title role in Hitchcock's "The Trouble With Harry." The trouble, from my point of view, was that Harry was killed off in the first scene.
I saw the handwriting on the wall and decided to turn my gardening hobby into a business.
My late wife, Eva, had been a Macy's executive, and we rented a rundown store in the shadow of the good old Third Avenue el.
The sign outside read, "Philip Truex presents The City Gardener."
Alas, customers were few and far between, so when an immaculately dressed little gent walked in one day, he got a warm reception.
He introduced himself as Mr.
Devine, and produced a color photo of an "Empire Hall Stand," which looked pretty snazzy.
He wondered if I cared to display it, complete with greenery, and share the proceeds on consignment.
I had little hope that it would sell in our neighborhood but figured what the hell.
The production arrived the following day, and it certainly did give the shop a bit of a fillip.
Resplendent in white and gold, backed by a large mirror and topped with a golden eagle flanked by two urns sporting lion heads, it was spectacular, indeed.
Third Avenue strollers paused to gape, but that was all.
One fine day a week or so later, a stunning young woman arrived in a chauffeur-driven limousine and asked to see the hall stand up close.
She hobbled in on crutches, one leg in a cast, handling her problem with grace and humor.
She headed for the piece de resistance.
"It really is elegant; how much is it?"
I quoted the rather hefty price.
"I'll take it," she murmured in a voice like sweet music.
"Can you arrange to have it shipped?"
"Certainly," I stammered.
"To Washington, D.C.," she said, fishing for her checkbook.
"The name is Mr. and Mrs. John F. Kennedy." She smiled wryly as she made out the lovely check.
"You know," she said, "I've decided never to play touch football with those Kennedy boys again."
And so ended my one and only cherished encounter with the lady from Camelot.
PHILIP TRUEX
. . .
The place is the lobby of a Greenwich Village apartment building during last week's Gay Games.
A far-bigger-than-usual crowd waits for the elevator.
Man One: Excuse me, but is yours the apartment with the seven Finns?
Man Two: No. I have the six visiting Swiss.


Visa Lottery's Tortuous and Unneeded
To the Editor:
"Aspiring Immigrants Misled on Chances in Visa Lottery" (front page, June 20) does not address the real issues of the visa lottery that the State Department has been holding all this month.


Navratilova Is Savoring Triumphant Turnaround
From basket case to case in point, Martina Navratilova continued to prove to her loyal coterie, and more importantly to herself, that when the subject is Wimbledon, she belongs at the head of the class.
This afternoon on Center Court, pitted against the same woman who sent her packing tearfully in last year's semifinals, Navratilova commenced a martial comeback against Jana Novotna and won all but one game after relinquishing the opening set.
Navratilova's 5-7, 6-0, 6-1 victory sent her flying into her 17th Wimbledon semifinal at this, her 22d and final singles appearance here at the Grand Slam where she holds a record nine titles.


Heimlich vs. Mouth-to-Mouth in Drownings
WHEN a drowning person is pulled from the water, what is the first thing a rescuer should do?
Ask Dr.
Henry Heimlich, world famous for the maneuver that has saved the lives of countless choking victims, and he will tell you, "Do the Heimlich maneuver." Dr.
Heimlich says it will get out the water inhaled by most drowning victims.
If not, Dr.
Heimlich insists, mouth-to-mouth breathing will do no good because it will be impossible to get air into the alveoli, or air sacs, of the victim's lungs.
But the American Red Cross says otherwise, as do the six medical organizations that set the standards on which the Red Cross bases its advice.
The Red Cross, the American Heart Association and the American Academy of Pediatrics, among others, recommend that rescuers first try mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and use the Heimlich maneuver only if the rescuer "suspects that foreign matter is obstructing the airway or if the victim does not respond appropriately to mouth-to-mouth resuscitation."


Defection Means New Tactics, Lawyers in Bomb Case Say
Defense lawyers representing the men charged with plotting to bomb New York City landmarks charged yesterday that the defection of a key defendant to the prosecution's side could hurt them because of how well the defector knows their strategies.
In a tense emergency session in Federal District Court in Manhattan, one of the lawyers, Roger Stavis, said the defendant, Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, had been at weekly meetings of the lawyers for almost a year and knew the strengths and weaknesses of each of their cases.


A Disgruntled Soldier and the Guatemalan Rebels
The Fighting Man  By Gerald Seymour  400 pages. HarperCollins. $23.
Gerald Seymour, one of the few journalists who have made a successful leap into the field of suspense fiction, uses his considerable skills as a seasoned observer to create credible characters who find themselves in trouble in some of the world's worst trouble spots.
His independent-minded protagonists often bear a dangerous burden: they're romantics at heart, which makes them poor life insurance risks when they become entangled in idealistic lost causes.


Denizens of the Nightclubs Venture Into the Daylight
The first of the JVC Jazz Festival's free outdoor concerts brought five groups and five hours of music to Damrosch Park on Sunday afternoon.
Most of the concert was like a sampler of average nights at mid-level jazz clubs, minus the cover and minimum.
There were quartets led by drummers (Roy Haynes and Rashied Ali), a guitarist (Russell Malone) and a tenor saxophonist (Steve Grossman), along with Larry Goldings's organ trio.
Most of the concert was bread-and-butter jazz, competent but not revelatory, the sound of musicians settled into a style.
At its best, the music wriggled free of expectations, breaking patterns; for the most part, it was technically adept and glib.


The Moynihan Puzzle
After a month of false starts, fitful caucuses, bipartisan groping and unending confusion about what the man supposedly in charge of it all, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, was really up to, the Senate Finance Committee will finally begin to vote on a health care bill this week.
It has been a long time coming.
And the buildup is ending, -- characteristically, not with a bang, nor even a whimper, but with a muddle of questions.


Parents of Slain Children Had Bitter Disputes in Court
The 50-year-old divorced father who is charged with murdering his two children during a weekend visit had fought bitterly in court with their mother over money as well as over custody and visitation.
Family Court records here show that the man, Avi Kostner, a former cab driver under psychiatric care for depression, owed his former wife $8,200 in child support and won a judge's ruling in April canceling the debt.
At that hearing, his ex-wife, Lynn Mison, sought permission to move to Florida with the couple's two children, Geri Beth, 12, and Ryan, 10.


Simpson to Give Hair Sample for Prosecution Analysis
The lawyer for O. J. Simpson told prosecutors today that they could have a sample of his client's hair for scientific analysis.
But throughout the rest of a short hearing in Los Angeles Municipal Court, the lawyer, Robert L. Shapiro, wrangled with prosecutors over virtually every assertion they made.
It was an aggressive tactic that is likely to continue -- and prolong every phase of the case against Mr.
Simpson, who has been charged with murdering his former wife and a male friend of hers.


An Illegal Dump Is the Target of a Bronx Cleanup Campaign


No Headline
"I'm truly sorry it happened. I want to apologize to the club, my teammates and the people of New York City." DWIGHT GOODEN.  [ B9:5. ]


Mistrial Declared in Case Of Suspect in 2 Murders
A mistrial was declared today in the case of Paul Cox, the Larchmont carpenter accused of murdering two Indian immigrants who were living in his childhood home, after one juror continued to hold out against a guilty verdict for a seventh day of deliberations.
"The same juror keeps going around in circles and can never develop a proper legal decision for her position," the final note from the jury forewoman said.
"She continues to disregard testimony, evidence and the law. The jury is on the verge of a breakdown."


Cabletron
Cabletron Systems, which develops software for managing computer networks, has seen its shares leap since announcing on Monday that it would buy back as much as $100 million of its stock.
At current prices, that is more than a million shares out of the company's 28.5 million shares outstanding.
Analysts at Salomon Brothers and Fahnestock &amp; Company maintained their buy recommendations.


Graf to Compete in Pathmark Event
STEFFI GRAF, the world's top-ranked woman, announced yesterday that she would once again play in the Pathmark Classic in Mahwah, N.J., after a three-year absence.
Graf, who was upset by LORI McNEIL in the first round at Wimbledon last week, is a four-time champion of the Pathmark event, a traditional prep of the United States Open that is not sanctioned by the Women's Tennis Association.
She last played at Mahwah in 1990, when she won her third title in a row there.


John Scanlan, 73, A Character Actor
John Scanlan, a character actor who appeared on and Off Broadway, died on Sunday at his home in Closter, N.J.
He was 73.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said his nephew, Cornelius Geary.


Constructive Chaos in Japan
Tsutomu Hata, who resigned last weekend after just nine weeks on the job, is the third Japanese Prime Minister to quit in the past year.
Such instability is frustrating to the Clinton Administration, which has to conduct trade negotiations and coordinate Korea policy with officials who may be out of office before deals are ready to be clinched.
But the rapid turnover also reflects something positive, a broad realignment of Japanese political life away from one-party dominance and toward democratic competition.
That shift should make future governments more responsive to ordinary consumers and less beholden to bureaucracy and special interests.
Over the long run, that ought to ease relations between Tokyo and Washington.


New York Holds Domestic-Violence Hearings
To the Editor:
Domestic violence is of particular concern to women, as woman are its victims at a rate three times that of men, according to the New York City Police Department, and because 70 percent of the men who abuse their female partners also abuse their children.
The Surgeon General estimates that 30 percent of all emergency-room visits by women result from domestic violence.


A Battery Built on Wheel Power
Taking a new approach of storing energy mechanically instead of chemically, the United Technologies Corporation has developed a device that engineers at the company and elsewhere believe can bring electric cars far closer to practicality.
The device, a flywheel battery, makes up for a big shortcoming in the batteries now used in electric cars: it allows the car greater bursts of power, a longer range before recharging, and a longer life for the existing chemical battery, which it would supplement.


Grim View From Brazil Coffee Fields
Wanderley Cintra Ferreira, president of the coffee growers cooperative of Franca, in the interior of Sao Paulo state, flew over the cooperative's blighted coffee fields today, to survey the damage from Brazil's worst cold snap in nearly 20 years.
"It was clear that the damage was very great," Mr. Ferreira reported.


Drug Use: Still a Hushed-Up Secret in Baseball
Drug use.
It's one of baseball's dirtier little secrets, hidden under rugs, until sad little occasions like yesterday, when Dwight Gooden was suspended for violation of the commissioner's drug policy.
Drugs.
The illness and dangers are otherwise not often spoken of in major league baseball.
Rather the subject is caught in a D.M.Z.
That is the no man's land where issues of substance are pinned down, while fights over money make up most of the volleys exchanged between management and players.


Foote, Cone Wins A Gallo Assignment
The E.&amp; J. Gallo Winery said yesterday that it had added the San Francisco office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding to its roster by awarding the agency the creative assignment for some of its varietals, like chardonnays.
The assignment had been handled by Dailey &amp; Associates of Los Angeles, which will continue to work on other table wines, new projects and Bartles &amp; Jaymes wine coolers.
Though billings were not disclosed, Advertising Age estimated them at $30 million.


A DAY WITH: Dr. Susan M. Love; A Surgeon's War on Breast Cancer
THREE mammography films were clipped to the light box on the wall of a sleek conference room at the U.C.L.A.
Breast Center.
The different perspectives of a woman's breast looked like black and white photographs of the earth taken from a satellite.
From each angle, the dark shadow of a tumor hovered like a storm cloud near the center of the gray sphere.
A woman born 50 years ago had, on the day of her birth, a 1 in 20 chance of being diagnosed with breast cancer in her lifetime.
A woman born today has a 1 in 9 chance, partly due to a longer life expectancy.
The U.C.L.A.
Breast Center, part of the U.C.L.A.
Medical Center, is one of about a dozen clinics in the country that both treat and research the disease.
And Dr.
Susan M. Love, the director of the U.C.L.A. program, is a leading crusader in the war against breast cancer.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Alice M. Rivlin, the newly appointed director of the Office of Management and Budget, referred incompletely to her marital status.
While she married Lewis A. Rivlin in 1955, that marriage ended in divorce in 1977; she married Sidney Winter in 1989.


ACCORD IS REACHED IN ALBANY TO CURB PAY-PHONE RATES
New York State legislative leaders announced agreement today on a bill that for the first time would limit certain rates on pay telephones owned by small private companies, which often charge high prices and surcharges to unsuspecting customers.
The privately owned pay phones, commonly found in bars, airports and neighborhood grocery stores, have sprouted up during the decade since the phone industry was deregulated, now accounting for about a quarter of the 166,000 pay phones in the state.
In many low-income areas, residents who cannot afford their own phones have no choice but to pay whatever rates the companies charge at the pay phones.


Sweden Settles for a Tie With Brazil
After one half, it appeared the United States soccer team just might have its very important date with Sweden instead of Brazil.
But that was before Romario, the gifted and volatile forward, struck with his customary swiftness.
Now, the Americans will get the chance to pull off a real miracle on grass.


Off the Menu
Less of Bocuse
Paul Bocuse, the famous French chef, turned heads when he was in New York 10 days ago.
He has lost 52 pounds in the last year.
At the benefit held by the Culinary Institute of America in honor of Craig Claiborne on June 16, he wore a dinner jacket he had bought in 1965.
"He lost all that weight so he could wear his old clothes," quipped his colleague Roger Verge.


No Reports of Violence By Simpson's First Wife
Although violent emotional storms were part of O. J. Simpson's second marriage, that kind of turbulence was not seen in his first marriage, to his high school sweetheart, according to court records and a former lawyer for his first wife.
Mr.
Simpson married Marguerite L. Whitley on June 24, 1967, in San Francisco, their hometown, when he was 19 and she was 18.
They had three children.
A lawyer who represented Mrs.
Simpson when the couple divorced in 1979 said he was not aware of any violence in that marriage.


2 KOREAS SET DATE FOR FIRST MEETING OF THEIR LEADERS
North and South Korea agreed today to a three-day summit meeting starting on July 25 in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital.
It would be the first meeting of the top leaders of the two countries since the Korean Peninsula was divided in 1945.
The North and the South announced agreement in principle last week for a summit meeting between South Korea's first civilian President in more than three decades, Kim Young Sam, and North Korea's 82-year-old dictator, Kim Il Sung.
But the setting of a date today substantially increases the prospect that the meeting will take place.


Five Children Die in Garage Apartment Fire
Five children ranging in age from 6 months to 12 years died yesterday when a smoky predawn fire consumed two apartments over the garage of a funeral home in Riverhead, L.I.
Three adults, including two mothers, survived by hurling themselves through windows to the ground, where a neighbor said he could hear the women screaming: "Our babies. Our babies are inside. You have to save them."


Hospital Chain Sets Guilty Plea
National Medical Enterprises Inc., one of the nation's largest psychiatric hospital chains, said today that it would plead guilty to paying kickbacks and bribes for referrals, even as a former executive admitted to arranging $20 million to $40 million in illegal payments -- and then scheming to get Medicare reimbursement.
The company said it had agreed to pay $362.7 million and admit on Wednesday or Thursday to seven charges, in what would be the largest settlement ever between the Government and a health care provider.


In School; A photocopier salesman does his job too well, and the taxpayers foot the bill.
Photocopier companies have been getting lots of bad publicity lately, both here and abroad.
In England, a scandal has been simmering for four years, and it's not unusual to pick up a British newspaper and see headlines about "COPY CHEATS!" "LEASING SHARKS!" "DODGY DEALERS!" A recent investigation by the British Office of Fair Trading found numerous "excesses and malpractices," warning that "schools, social groups and small firms have often made onerous deals as a result of hard-selling, commission-paid salesmen using contracts with misleading terms."


Treasury Prices Tumble; Variety of Factors Cited
Prices of Treasury securities fell yesterday, buffeted by another retreat in the dollar, a surge in commodity prices, bearish economic news and concern about the next interest-rate rise by the Federal Reserve.
The 30-year bond fell 21/32 to a price of 85 4/32 , to yield 7.51 percent, up from 7.45 percent on Monday.
Traders said most of the weakness was felt in the intermediate and long maturities, with shorter-maturity bills mixed.


Virginia's Candidates for Senate Debate, Making Cases to Tough Audience of Voters
In a lively free-for-all on worldwide television tonight, the four candidates running for the United States Senate from Virginia clashed in their first joint debate over issues like character, crime and foreign policy.
Reopening old feuds and probably creating new ones, Senator Charles S. Robb and the three candidates who want his seat took the opportunity on CNN's "Larry King Live" to make their cases.


To Raise the Performance Of Minorities, a College Increased Its Standards
As educators around the country debate how best to raise the achievement of minority students in mathematics and science, no one has to persuade the engineers at Georgia Institute of Technology that success lies in expecting more from students, not less.
Five years ago, the college's minority-education office scrapped its largely remedial orientation program and began a rigorous five-week summer course for black and Hispanic freshmen.
Within a couple years, the students who took Georgia Tech's summer course were outperforming their peers at the largely white college.
Now, college officials say the program has created a pipeline that will produce a significant number of black engineering Ph.D.'s.


Dollar Again Falls Below 100-Yen Level
The dollar fell to another record low against the Japanese yen in Asian trading today.
The decline came even though the Bank of Japan intervened in the currency market to support the dollar and despite Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bensten's renewed promise of support for a stronger American currency.


Norway Odd Team Out of Race
In the end, when Norwegians and the Irishmen combined to grasp Irish flags on the grass of Giants Stadium, the total of 4 points was not the most important statistic in Norway's first finals appearance in 56 years.
The Norwegians hoped that 4 points would be enough to reach the second round.
But they knew that one goal should not be enough.
And confronted with the frustrating balance of Group E, they were right.


Boy Killed In Baseball Mishap
A 12-year-old boy taking batting practice with his Little League team in Brooklyn was killed yesterday by a baseball fired from a pitching machine, the police said.
Michael Marano, a member of the St.
Athanasius Bantam Outside Team, went into cardiac arrest when the pitch hit him in the chest at about 7:16 P.M., said Detective Robert Mladinich.


Home Sales Climbed a Brisk 4.2% in May
Shrugging off the upturn in interest rates, sales of new single-family houses climbed 4.2 percent in May to the briskest pace of the year, a better-than-expected performance that combined with an upward revision for April sales to suggest that the economy may not be slowing much.
Separately, consumer confidence as plumbed by the Conference Board rebounded to about the highest level in four years, though expectations for the months ahead improved much less than assessments of currently prevailing conditions.


How Kansas City Attacks The Problem of Murder
Tonight it's K.C.P.D.
Blue on ABC, as "Turning Point" turns its cameras on members of the Kansas City Murder Squad going about the workaday routine of tracking down perps.
Squad members, who operate in small teams for monthlong stretches, are seen studying crime scenes (providing the cameras with an opportunity or pretext to focus on bloody corpses), sorting evidence and questioning witnesses and suspects.
The car chases, shootouts and spectacular feats of detection that occupy so much of prime time are blessedly absent.
Revolvers stay holstered.
In Peter Jennings's description, "These are analytical cops paid to think." At moments his narration sounds like a commercial for a police benevolent society.


Blackmun Has Acted On the Death Penalty
To the Editor:
"A Change of Mind That Came Too Late" (Op-Ed, June 23) by John Jeffries Jr. discusses Associate Justice Lewis F. Powell's about-face on the constitutionality of the death penalty.
Mr.
Jeffries notes that Justice Harry Blackmun, a few months before his retirement, also announced his categorical opposition to capital punishment and concludes that for both "the change of mind came too late."


Reed, at Crossroads, Chooses Beard's Pat
Alfred (Butch) Beard is Willis Reed's man.
It is a pretty fair assumption that no one above Reed in the Nets' organization would have thought of Beard to replace Chuck Daly, much less hired him.
You might say that Reed, criticized in recent years for being too much a company front man, is sticking his neck out, hiring an undistinguished college coach at a time when his team, and by extension his career, is at the crossroads.
Reed chose Beard over Paul Silas because he believes there exists inside Beard a spark, and that all Beard has needed is for someone to strike the right coaching match.
A long time ago, when Reed and Beard formed a combustible couple with the Knicks, Reed saw Beard close up.
He never forgot the sight of raw pride burning.


No Mattingly, But 10-0 Run Lifts Spirits
The telephone rang at 10 A.M. in Buck Showalter's hotel room today and the distressing news took roughly 10 seconds for him to digest.
Don Mattingly told the manager that his right wrist was very sore.
Two hours later, Mattingly was on an airplane flying back to New York to be examined by a hand specialist.
Three days from today, the Yankees hope the preliminary diagnosis of tendinitis is the full extent of the damage and that Mattingly will be playing first base again.


A Draft Pick Known Throughout the Land
By now, they have all popped in the tape and hit the play button, their pupils widening with each sequence.
"Court vision," said Sam Schuler, the San Antonio Spurs' personnel director.
"He's got unbelievable court vision."


Personal Health
POOLS are great fun, terrific for cooling down on a hot day and for getting aerobic exercise.
But they are are also a responsibility.
As residential pools have proliferated, so, unfortunately, has the opportunity for tragedy.
While in recent years there has been a decline in drownings among teen-age boys, most of whom succumb in natural bodies of water, there has been no comparable drop in drowning deaths among young children, most of whom succumb in pools -- usually the family's pool.
In 1986, a study by the Consumer Product Safety Commission showed that 630 people drowned in backyard swimming pools, and 330 of them were under the age of 5.
Three-fourths of the children under 5 were from 1 to 3 years old.
A further 20,000 children that year were treated in hospitals after having nearly drowned.


Ratify the Chemical Arms Ban
The Senate will vote next month on a global treaty to ban chemical weapons, which could substantially reduce the chances that U.S. troops will ever face a chemically-armed foe.
Opponents would prefer to keep chemical arms to deter the use of gas by others.
And a recent revelation that Russia may be concealing efforts to develop advanced chemical weapons has fueled doubts about Washington's ability to verify compliance.
The U.S. has not relied on chemical weapons as a deterrent in recent years and it would be imprudent to do so now, given its superiority in conventional arms.
Moreover, the U.S. would be a lot more secure with the treaty's verification provisions than without them.
They provide ways to detect and stop suspicious activities by any state.
The Senate would be wise to establish a global norm against chemical arms and use the treaty to enforce it.


For Becker, Quarterfinal Is a Habit
Boris Becker, poised under pressure, shrugged off a cannonade of baseline ballistics from ninth-seeded Andrei Medvedev today and emerged from a 4-hour-53-minute slugfest, 6-7 (5-7), 7-5, 7-6 (7-3), 6-7 (3-7), 7-5, to claim the eighth and final spot in the men's quarterfinals at Wimbleon.


The Hollywood Sitcom World And the Egos Behind the Scenes
The smog that blankets Los Angeles is commonly thought to be caused by an abundance of automobiles on the freeways.
The playwright Theresa Rebeck advances a different explanation in "The Family of Mann": the dingy brown pollution is made up of the incinerated souls of those who write and produce television series.
As one of her characters, a writer new to Hollywood, views it: "The best of us, the stuff that makes us human, it evaporates. And we're left with sitcoms. . . . Maybe that's what all the smog is. . . . It's us, burning ourselves up. And then hanging there, in the air, like a disease. Like television."


Compromise on H.I.V. Tests
Derailing a plan to force doctors to inform parents if their newborns test positive for H.I.V., the New York State Assembly Speaker announced support for a compromise that would require doctors to counsel pregnant women and new mothers to take the tests.
Page B1.


In Bosnia's Other War, Truce Can't Overcome Distrust
The spindly, olive-skinned children begging truck drivers for money at a front-line checkpoint and the watchful woman in a grimy yellow scarf at the roadside augur well for this city, divided and half demolished in Muslim-Croatian warfare, locals say.
"We know peace has really come because the Gypsies are back," said an 18-year-old Croatian policeman as he drove along a dusty road this morning toward the checkpoint, which is manned by Croatian and Muslim troops as well as Spanish peacekeepers.


Unocal Seeks to Sell Assets To Finance Foreign Projects
The Unocal Corporation said yesterday that it would seek to sell its California oil and gas assets, which date back 103 years, to free money to invest overseas.
The decision by Unocal is one of the latest by mostly domestic oil companies like Chevron and ARCO that are making large investments in countries like Russia and Kazakhstan in an effort to become big international companies.


Baseball Bans Mets' Gooden 2 Months for Drug Violation
Dwight Gooden, the final link to the 1986 World Series champion Mets and the franchise's glory days of the 1980's, was suspended for 60 days without pay by Major League Baseball yesterday for a second violation of the commissioner's drug policy.
According to a highly placed person in Major League Baseball, Gooden failed two random drug tests that were administered as a part of the aftercare program in which he had been enrolled since his first drug-related suspension from baseball, in 1987.
At that time, Gooden underwent treatment at the Smithers Center in New York City for cocaine abuse.


Police Link Gun in Parkway Sniping to Buttafuoco Shop Shooting
Shots fired by a sniper on the Southern State Parkway early Friday came from the same gun used to shoot out the windows of a nearby auto body shop owned by the family of Joey Buttafuoco, the state and Nassau County police said today.
Richard Fiero, Nassau County's chief of detectives, said that ballistics tests conducted by his agency showed that shell casings recovered from a parkway overpass matched those found at the Complete Auto Body shop in Baldwin and were fired from a .22-caliber gun.
He and other officials declined to provide any other details about the firearm, or to discuss the significance of the connection between the shootings.


China Migrants: Economic Engine, Social Burden
With his possessions bundled in plastic and hung from his shoulders, and his trousers rolled up to beat the heat, 30-year-old Ren Jun drifted into Beijing this month, part of a migrant tide of 50 million peasants that is threatening to swamp China's urban landscape.
To the Communist Party leadership, they are the engine of China, an inexhaustible supply of cheap labor, a floating population helping to build the country.
They are one reason that 5,000 factories can be simultaneously under construction in China's coastal provinces.


Fairest Way to Pay for Health Plan Is by Taxes; Cap Insurers' Share
To the Editor:
Your special section on health care reform (Second Opinions, June 12) raises but never answers two vital issues: (1) how to pay for the costs of universal coverage and (2) how to insure sufficient and effective primary care.
Answers:


5 Children Die in Blaze in Riverhead, L.I.


Qaddafi Foe May Be Alive
The wife of a Libyan opposition figure who disappeared in Egypt six months ago says she was told by Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi in a meeting last week in Libya that her husband was alive.


Calm, Collected Katie Beers Testifies in Sex Abuse Case
For months, prosecutors had prepared for this day, first trying to avoid it entirely and then getting their young witness ready with a dress rehearsal in the courtroom and a luncheon with the judge.
Today, 11-year-old Katie Beers, in a pink dress with a white lace collar, took the witness stand for nearly four hours, seated atop a large pillow and holding the hand of her therapist.


U.S. Force Ready to Take Last Aides From Somalia
With fighting among clans increasing in Somalia, the Pentagon has sent an amphibious force of 2,000 marines to the area to evacuate the small American diplomatic contingent in Mogadishu if necessary.
In recent days, the United Nations compound in Mogadishu has been hit by mortar fire, wounding an American contractor.


U.S. Wins Without Playing: It's On to the Second Round
The United States achieved its first goal of the World Cup today, advancing to the second round of play against one of the tournament favorites, Brazil.
The two teams will play next Monday afternoon -- the Fourth of July -- in Palo Alto, Calif.
The Americans' advancement came on a day they were idle.
But it was an otherwise busy afternoon in soccer's biggest event as teams vied for berths in the second round.
Mexico won the glamour group, the so-called "Group of Death" ahead of Ireland and Italy, and a Russian player, Oleg Salenko, set a World Cup single-game record with five goals during a 6-1 rout that eliminated Cameroon.
Two more days remain of first-round matches.


Cuban Tells Of Cinema Troubles
The director of the Havana Film Festival, for years a showcase of Cuban culture and a test of Communist tolerance, has left Cuba and vowed not to return, saying he will seek political asylum in the United States because he fears a new wave of repression against Cuban artists.
In an interview here last week, Jose Horta said that he feared for his safety if he returned before there was "a complete change in the policy of the Cuban Government."


On Wiggles Of War And Bodies Building
Pilobolus Dance Theater has tumbled, wiggled and squirmed its way back to the Joyce Theater.
The gymnastically oriented company opened a five-week season there on Monday night and looked as perky as ever.
And just as it has often done in the past, it raised serious questions about dance composition while it entertained.
The evening got under way with the New York premiere of "Collideo scope," in which all six members of the company wore brightly colored costumes by Lawrence Casey that made them resemble a troupe of Harlequins.
The recorded accompaniment was Heinrich von Biber's "Battalia in D Major," a whimsical Baroque composition in which deliberately discordant harmonies are meant to evoke the sounds of battle.


Beard Quietly Takes Over Nets' Helm
For years, sitting on the sidelines as a player and an assistant coach, he was preparing himself for this moment.
Even when he was appointed head coach at Howard University in 1990, he was aiming for this opportunity.
Today, when he finally received his chance to coach a National Basketball Association team, the main question was: what does Alfred (Butch) Beard Jr. expect to accomplish in his first season as head coach of the Nets?


Arts Cuts Are Sought In Senate
The Senate Appropriations Committee recommended yesterday that the $170.2 million budget of the National Endowment for the Arts be cut by 5 percent in the next fiscal year.
The recommendation came as part of the committee's final drafting of an appropriations bill for the Department of the Interior and related agencies.
In an opening statement to the committee, the chairman, Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, said: "None of this reduction is for state programs. Rather, all of it is directed at those grant programs which have been at the center of recent controversies."


First Bid Deadline Passes For Madison Square Garden
First bids were due yesterday for Madison Square Garden, its sports teams and its cable television sports network.
Allen &amp; Company, the investment bankers handling the sale for the Garden's new owner, Viacom Inc., sent out detailed financial data on the assets to approximately 40 possible bidders.
Despite the fact that the deadline for bids had arrived, several people with knowledge of the auction said that it was highly unlikely that any decision would be reached for several weeks.
Viacom and its investment bankers would first have to evaluate the offers, and possibly go to a second round of bidding.


INSIDE
A Bold Simpson Defense
O.
J.
Simpson agreed to give a sample of hair for analysis, but his lawyers resisted prosecutors in virtually every other regard.
Page A14.
Defense Fund for Clintons
President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, created a legal defense fund that allows contributions of up to $1,000 a year from any individual.
Page A18.
Health-Care Fraud Admitted
A large psyciatric hospital chain said it would plead guilty to bribing doctors for referrals.
Page D1.
U.S.
Gains; Russian Scores 5
The U.S., though idle, reached the second round of the World Cup.
Oleg Salenko of Russia scored a record five goals in a victory over Cameroon.
Page B7.


Proposals Could Erode Fiscal Gains, Giuliani Aides Say
With a $31.6 billion city budget in place, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani faces a new battle in Albany over an attempt by the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association to be removed from the jurisdiction of the city's collective bargaining law, as well as several proposals to supplement pensions for retired public employees.
Public employee unions are pushing hard for the pension increase, which they say is needed to allow retired workers to keep up with inflation.
And the P.B.A. bill is part of that union's continuing effort to win parity in pay with neighboring suburban police forces.
Negating State Aid
But city officials said the set of bills, if passed, could cost the city $300 million or more, eroding the fiscal gains achieved when the state approved $285 million in additional aid to the city.


Mexico Thrives In 'Group Of Death'
Add another surprise to the list of surprises in this 15th World Cup: Mexico, champions of Group E.
Group E was the "Group of Death," a group with no weaklings, a group in which any of the four teams could, on a given day, beat any other.
On any given day, yes -- but over all?


Requests by Charities Overwhelm Restaurants
LIKE a benevolent urban stroller who has been confronted by one too many mendicants, restaurants and related businesses across the country are balking at the overwhelming number of requests they receive from charities for free meals and services.
"It's absolutely out of control," said Jeremiah Tower, the celebrated chef and owner of Stars and Stars Cafe in San Francisco.


School's Out. Will Friendships Fade?


Stocks Lose Ground, With Dow Off 15.86
Old worries piled on the new worry of the declining dollar yesterday as the stock market retreated slightly after a one-day rally.
Traders returned to agonizing about inflation, interest rates and earnings.
Housing data indicate that the American economy, thought to be slowing, may be as vigorous as ever and with it, perhaps, inflation.


In Germany, Communists Resurgent
Since the success at the polls that former East German Communists enjoyed this month, new attention is being focused on party leaders and their agenda.
The party is a mixture of old Communists and young punks with spiked hair, unreconstructed Stalinists and reform-minded democrats, earnest politicians and clandestine activists.
They do not always get along well, but they have managed to present a united front and they show surprising strength at the polls.


Fairest Way to Pay for Health Plan Is by Taxes
To the Editor:
The problems of Congress in trying to provide universal health insurance without requiring employers to pay for coverage come largely from trying to pay for insurance through premiums.
This means that everyone pays the same dollar amount for insurance, regardless of income.


Public &amp; Private; Two World Views
There are, as the title says, two worlds in "My Two Worlds," a children's story about a little girl who calls both New York City and the Dominican Republic home.
And there are two world views involved in the small contretemps swirling around the book, two ways of looking at what books should do, two views of what education and ethnicity mean.
"My Two Worlds" was written by Ginger Gordon, a teacher who wanted a simple chronicle of the straddling of cultures many of her first grade students know from experience.
So she teamed up with Martha Cooper, a documentary photographer, and found Kirsy Rodriguez, an 8-year-old who was preparing to leave the snowy streets of upper Manhattan for a visit to Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic.
The book was well received by critics and students alike.
A special workshop was arranged for teachers in Ms.
Gordon's school district.


Fear Is Still Pervasive In Rwanda Countryside
In a thicket of tall weeds, thorny bramble, dead cornstalks and eucalyptus trees, a few ferns have been laid.
It is where three men have been sleeping and hiding for more than two months, since Hutu militia attacked this village in April, killing scores of Tutsi and forcing others to flee.
These men still live in fear, daring to venture out only at night to scavenge for food, the men said, as a French military helicopter flew over.


D.M.B.&amp; B. Chosen For Lockheed Job
The Lockheed Corporation said yesterday that it had selected the Los Angeles office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles to handle its account, which had been at McCann-Erickson Los Angeles for the last 29 years.
Billings were estimated at $10 million.


Webber to Be Restricted Free Agent
Golden State forward CHRIS WEBBER, the top pick in last year's National Basketball Association draft and the league's rookie of the year, has exercised a contract option that will make him a restricted free agent July 1.
Webber's 15-year, $74.4 million contract contains a clause that allowed him to become a restricted free agent.
After exercising the option, which was announced yesterday, he may field offers from other teams beginning Friday.
Under league rules, the Warriors have 15 days to match any such offer and re-sign the power forward.


Dining as the Nation's Founders Did
When it opened more than 200 years ago, City Tavern was Le Cirque of Philadelphia.
Started by a group of 53 prominent investors, including Lieut.
Gov.
John Penn and several signers of the Declaration of Independence, it was decidedly clubby and, as John Adams wrote, created suppers "as elegant as was ever laid on a table." Some meetings of the Second Continental Congress were held there, as were more raucous gatherings where prodigious quantities of alcohol were consumed.
Now, just in time for the Fourth of July, a refurbished City Tavern is reopening, in an incarnation that celebrates its history and the nation's food legacy.
The restaurant opens to the public on June 30.
On June 29 at noon, Mayor Edward G. Rendell will sit down to lunch with 60 city and business leaders.
Had he been Mayor some 200 years ago, he might have done the same.


Indonesia Moves to Stifle Criticism, Both at Home and Abroad
The Indonesian Government, which bans most public debate among its own people over the disputed territory of East Timor, is pressing its smaller Asian neighbors to keep quiet, too.
Last month the Philippines gave in to threats from Indonesia and barred foreign visitors, including Danielle Mitterrand, the wife of the French President, from attending a conference in Manila on human rights abuses in East Timor, a former Portuguese colony that was invaded and annexed by Indonesia in 1976.


At G.M., the Guard Changes But the Strategy Remains
The General Motors Corporation today announced a raft of retirements and promotions aimed at cementing the turnaround of its core North American automotive operations and stimulating its sales internationally.
While John F. Smith Jr., G.M.'s president and chief executive, stressed that the changes did not signal a shift in direction for the world's largest auto maker, they nevertheless demonstrated a new willingness at G.M. to sacrifice seniority for perceived ability, and to reach outside the company's home-grown ranks of managers.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is selling $50 million of step-up notes due in 1996 through First Tennessee Bank.
The notes carry a 5.5 percent coupon and are priced at 100.
If the notes are not called in six months, the coupon increases to 6.25 percent, then twice a year to 6.75 percent and 7.25 percent.


MacTavish Will Reportedly Coach Oilers
CRAIG MacTAVISH, a late-season addition to the Stanley Cup champion Rangers, will retire as a player to replace GLEN SATHER as head coach of the Edmonton Oilers, according to a published report.
The New York Post said yesterday that MacTavish, acquired from Edmonton on March 31, would rejoin the Oilers soon after July 1. (AP)


Two Western Utilities In Agreement to Merge
Two Western electric and gas utilities, the Washington Water Power Company of Spokane, Wash., and Sierra Pacific Resources of Reno, said today that they had agreed to merge in an effort to remain more competitive in an industry undergoing fundamental change.
The companies would not disclose the value of the deal, but analysts said that based on the current share prices, the combined company would have a market value of about $1.3 billion.


McGirt Beats Pompey
The left hand was back. So was just about everything else.
James (Buddy) McGirt pounded his way to a convincing 10-round unanimous decision over Kevin Pompey in a battle of welterweights tonight at the Meadowlands Convention Center.
McGirt, a native of Brentwood, L.I., reaffirmed his status as the most legitimate contender for the World Boxing Council welterweight crown he lost to Pernell Whitaker in March 1993 and the unofficial designation of pound-for-pound best fighter in the world that Whitaker's name is associated with.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday, about the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's move to shut down five offices of a Hong Kong-based commodities firm, referred incorrectly in some editions to the affiliation of a lawyer involved in the case.
The lawyer, Jennifer Larabee, is with the division of enforcement of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, not the California Department of Corporations.


Fred Nathan; Press Agent, 38
Fred Nathan, a press agent who represented some of the most successful Broadway shows of the 1980's, died on Tuesday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 38 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS, said his press associate, Michael F. Borowski.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day on Friday, about marketing to lesbians and gay men, misstated the size of a mailing that the AT&amp;T Corporation aimed at gay consumers to promote its long-distance telephone services.
It was 70,000 pieces of mail, not more than a million.


Valenzuela Comes In; Daulton Goes Out
Marlins 2, Phillies 1
Fernando Valenzuela pitched well in his return to the major leagues last night, but his debut with Philadelphia became secondary when it was learned after a 2-1 loss to Florida that Darren Daulton, the Phillies catcher, had broken his right clavicle and would be out for six weeks.


When a 12-Year-Old Fan Inherits a Baseball Team
Who was the first black player in major league baseball?
What batter was standing on deck when Bobby Thomson hit his historic 1951 home run that clinched the National League pennant for the New York Giants?
"Little Big League," the ultimate Hollywood movie for baseball trivia buffs, has the answers to these and other questions.
So does the movie's main character, Billy Heywood (Luke Edwards), a 12-year-old Wunderkind and walking encyclopedia of baseball lore.
A serious-minded youth who suggests a pint-size, preadolescent Griffin Dunne, Billy inherits the Minnesota Twins when his grandfather (Jason Robards) dies suddenly.
To the astonishment of the professional baseball world, he immediately appoints himself the manager of the team.
And in typical Hollywood movie fashion, he miraculously leads the Twins out of a prolonged slump to become American League pennant contenders.


Wine Talk
Last fall, the French news magazine L'Express reported that varietal wines -- wines identified by the grape they are made from -- were sweeping the world.
It was an unstoppable trend, L'Express said, and France had better get with it.
In fact, the process in France is well under way.


School Guard Is Charged With Statutory Rape of Student
In a case that raises further questions about the quality of the safety force in New York City public schools, a security guard who was being investigated for dating a teen-ager was arrested late Monday on charges of having sex with a 12-year-old student.
The guard, Pedro Nieves, 29, was charged with statutory rape of the student, a sixth grader at Intermediate School 136 in Harlem.
Mr.
Nieves and the girl engaged in sex as many as 20 times in the last month and a half, usually inside his van, said Lieut.
Thomas Carney of the 32d Detective Squad.
He said the police learned of it after the girl told her mother.


House Easily Approves Communications Bills
The House of Representatives today overwhelmingly approved a sweeping package of legislation to rewrite the nation's telecommunications laws, but heated debates are still expected when the Senate takes up a similar measure next month.
The House approved two major bills and then consolidated them into a single measure to be sent to the Senate.
Taken together, the bills would permit greater competition between local and long-distance telephone companies, as well as between the telephone and cable television industries.


Hero Comes Forward For Italy Once More
Daniele Massaro was not even listed in the Italian team guide last December.
There were 43 names, all the way from Albertini to Zenga, but right there between Marchegiani and Mussi, there was just a tiny white space.
But Massaro saved so many games for his Milan team last season that he forced himself upon the national squad.
Yesterday, he came off the bench at halftime and scored almost immediately.
Mexico would soon tie the game, 1-1, and win the so-called Group of Death and advance to Giants Stadium next Tuesday.
And Italy, by finishing third, had to wait several hours until Cameroon had lost to Russia, 6-1.


Russia's New Rich Give In to Philanthropic Urge
For classical musicians, there is no victory as sweet as the one to be announced Wednesday in the celebrated Tchaikovsky competition -- the contest that in 1958 turned Van Cliburn into an overnight sensation.
Now, however, it is the benefactors who expect to make their reputations from it.
Newly minted Russian businessmen are subsidizing the competition, which was once the hallmark of Communist high culture.
In 1990, when the dying Soviet state was too strapped to pay, the Japanese electronics firm Pioneer came to the rescue.
Four years later, the Russian bank Neftechimbank and Transaero, Russia's first private airline, have joined Pioneer to become sponsors of the 1994 competition.


Clintons Create Fund to Accept Gifts to Pay Their Rising Legal Costs
President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, today created a legal defense fund that will enable them to accept contributions of up to $1,000 a year from any individual who wants to help the couple pay their escalating legal bills.
Presidential aides had said earlier that Mr.
Clinton was likely to set up such a fund, the first by a sitting President.
But until today operational details remained the subject of intense discussion at the White House.


In America; Wives And Batterers
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, speaking about family violence at a breakfast in midtown Manhattan yesterday, made a startling comparison.
The Mayor said some of the stories of women in flight from abusive husbands and boyfriends reminded him of the difficulties faced by individuals who had to be placed in the witness protection program after testifying in organized crime cases.


Executive Changes
BERNARD CHAUS INC., New York, named Wayne S. Miller executive vice president of finance and administration and chief financial officer.
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO., New York, promoted George P. Kooluris, its vice president of corporate development, to senior vice president.


Mobil to Cut 2,300 More Employees
The Mobil Corporation announced yesterday that it would cut 2,300 jobs from its chemical business, or about one-fifth of the division's work force of 11,800.
The company said it would take a charge of $315 million in the second quarter to cover the costs of the job cuts in chemicals and reviews of assets in its other businesses.


Enduring Crises to Graduation Day; New York High School Seniors Turn Tassels and Toss Books
In the years it took to reach her graduation day, Catherine Williams had a baby and named him Duvall.
She peeked at him between classes, cuddled him while doing homework, and now, after long days and bookish summers, is preparing to go off to a community college.
In the years it took Flora Tartakovsky to don her cap and gown, she worked her summers away in a hospital and did medical research worthy of a national prize.
Now, the 18-year-old, born in Ukraine and raised in Queens is preparing to leave for Harvard.


No More 'Anything Goes': Cyberspace Gets Censors
Freedom of expression has always been the rule in the fast-growing global web of public and private computer networks known as cyberspace.
But even as thousands of Americans each week join the several million who use computer networks to share ideas and "chat" with others, the companies that control the networks, and sometimes individual users, are beginning to play the role of censor.
Earlier this month, the America Online network shut several feminist discussion forums, saying it was concerned that the subject matter might be inappropriate for young girls who would see the word "girl" in the forum's headline and "go in there looking for information about their Barbies," a spokeswoman said.


Sabi Sand Journal; Trying to Bridge South Africa's Rich-Poor Chasm
The worlds on either side of the wire fence that surrounds this mammoth private game reserve could not be more different from each other.
Inside the fence is a 140,000-acre wildlife refuge where wealthy tourists, most of them white, luxuriate in opulent surroundings, sip drinks on shaded verandas and gambol about the bush in Land Rovers photographing cheetah, lions, rhinos, elephants and other game.


Gay Games Add Vistas For Couple
CATHERINE Hughes and Jane Morrigan should have got back by now to their Nova Scotia farm after the 24-hour drive from New York.
They probably will already have hung up the bronze medal that Ms.
Hughes won in the 1,500-meter race at the Gay Games, and the one Ms.
Morrigan received for singing with the gay and lesbian chorus during their week in New York.
"It's been a pretty wonderful time," Ms.
Hughes said as she prepared for the long journey to the small dairy farm in Pictou County, where most of the 25 cows are named after the two women's feminist heroines.
"We actually met the real Joan Nestle here," said Ms.
Hughes, referring to the founder of the Lesbian Herstory Archives, for whom they had named one of their heifers.
"That was a first."


CHRONICLE
Need someone to fill in while you're on vacation?
DONNA HANOVER GIULIANI is replacing the disk jockey Dan Daniel on his country music show on WYNY-FM this week, and last week she substituted twice for Joan Hamburg on WOR-AM.
Mrs.
Giuliani, who said yesterday that she likes country music as much as her husband, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, likes opera, rose at 3:30 A.M. to get ready for the WYNY program, despite having had 17 guests at Gracie Mansion on Monday evening.
The show airs from 5:30 to 10 A.M.


Seeking Solace and Support in Meditation Books
Pressed for time and hungry for solace, many Americans are seeking spiritual nurture and serenity in small "meditation books" that are proliferating in the inspiration and self-help sections of the nation's bookstores.
The little paperbacks turn up in secular and religious bookstores alike, featuring short, upbeat reflections meant to be taken a page a day through the year.
Their titles aim at all manner of readers -- men, women, parents, brides, the overworked, the sexually abused, former smokers and many others.


Executive of Bates Quits After Dispute
John Noble, president and executive creative director of Bates U.S.A.
West in Irvine, Calif., said yesterday that he had resigned, noting a dispute about the appointment of a new general manager for the office, which handles the Hyundai Motor America account.
Mr.
Noble, 53, confirmed a brief report of his resignation in the Advertising Age Daily Fax.
He added in a telephone interview that he had chosen to leave because "somebody from New York came in and dumped a lot of garbage in my front yard.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Gibstein Breaks From Pack and Wins  With a 69 in the afternoon round yesterday at the Black Course at Bethpage (L.I.) State Park, Ed Gibstein of the Engineers Club not only captured the Metropolitan Golf Association's Met Life/Ike Championship but also deprived the Courville family of another feather in its cap.
The 35-year-old Gibstein's two-under-par closing round enabled him to break away from the pack and gave him a three-over total of 216 for the three-round event.
That was five strokes better than Jerry Courville Jr. of Shore Haven, who won the tournament twice and whose father won it six times.


Streisand Tickets Prove Mixed Blessing for Charities
Barbra Streisand set aside 4,000 tickets to her Madison Square Garden shows for select nonprofit organizations to sell for $1,000 apiece.
Yet many of those agencies, despite hiring extra staff and working overtime, found themselves unable to sell all the tickets allotted to them.
Of the five charities for which tickets were set aside, only the Gay Men's Health Crisis was able to sell its entire allotment of 1,000 tickets.
Planned Parenthood could not sell 400 of its 1,000 seats; Teach for America returned 200 of 500 to the Streisand Foundation; Lifebeat, a music-industry AIDS prevention organization, turned in 125 of 500, and the Environmental Defense Fund handed back 148 of 1,000.
Nevertheless, each of these organizations benefited from the tickets: Planned Parenthood reported a net of $390,000 after expenses, and the Environmental Defense Fund said it made more than $500,000.


Amid Lawsuit and Rumors, There Is Room for the Draft
Amid trade rumors and a lawsuit filed by the players, the National Basketball Association draft will take place tonight in Indianapolis, setting the stage for an interesting off season.
The Milwaukee Bucks are virtually certain to make Glenn Robinson, a 6-foot-8-inch forward from Purdue, the No. 1 pick, but there could be many interesting developments as the draft unfolds.


Eating Well
WHO can forget the calcium craze of just a few years ago: silhouettes of old women with dowager's hump, caused by osteoporosis, were used to scare everyone into taking more calcium, and manufacturers were fortifying everything from tea to cookies with calcium.
In fact, most people did forget or were distracted by something else.
Since then, nothing has changed.
No one has announced that Americans are suddenly getting enough calcium and have nothing to worry about.


Met Life Is Said to Be Facing U.S. Investigation for Fraud
The United States Attorney in Tampa, Fla., is investigating whether the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, as part of its insurance sales business, violated Federal laws prohibiting fraudulent use of the mail and telephone, according to Florida law enforcement officials.
Met Life's Tampa office improperly sold life insurance across the country as a retirement plan, according to a report published earlier this year by the Florida Insurance Commissioner and the Florida Attorney General.


Washington Opera Names Domingo
The Washington Opera announced yesterday that its new artistic director would be the tenor Placido Domingo, confirming what had already become general knowledge in the musical world.
He is to take over on July 1, 1996.
At the age of 53, Mr.
Domingo is still very much active as a singer, having drawn great acclaim at the Metropolitan Opera in "Otello" last season, but he has recently been devoting more attention to administration and conducting.
He was the music director of the 1992 Seville World's Fair and is an artistic consultant to the Los Angeles Music Center Opera, a position he will continue to hold.


FILM REVIEW: I Love Trouble; Nick Nolte and Julia Roberts As Crime-Fighting Rival Reporters
As a veteran Chicago reporter named Peter Brackett, Nick Nolte glares down at his computer keyboard.
Floating over the letters, covering the keys one by one until the whole alphabet vanishes, is row after row of Julia Roberts's face.
She is Sabrina Peterson, his chief crosstown rival, and during her first few days on the job she has written enough front-page stories to get her picture on the side of the Chicago Globe's delivery trucks.
Of course, Brackett has a head start in the fame department.
He already has his picture on the Chicago Chronicle's trucks, and his face on a Gap ad on a bus shelter.
Don't go to "I Love Trouble" looking for realism.
And don't even bother comparing it to the classic spar-until-they-fall-in-love movies of the 30's and 40's, even if this film begs an audience to make that self-defeating connection.
"I Love Trouble" is breezy summer escapism, and taken on those light-spirited terms it is loaded with charm.
Ms.
Roberts has her best role since "Pretty Woman," a part that plays up her unmistakable Audrey Hepburn allure.
And Mr.
Nolte shows a surprising flair for this kind of blithe comedy.
They may not be the first couple that pops into mind to play gritty, love-resisting reporters, but they make the film an appealing, easy-to-take confection.


Green Charges Waste in Food Purchases for Homeless Shelters
Standing before a shelter for working homeless women, the New York City Public Advocate charged yesterday that the city wastes at least $2 million a year on food purchases for shelters for the homeless, and said buying policies should be changed to enable more companies to compete on contracts to provide the meals.
Public Advocate Mark J. Green said that a preliminary review of contracts by the city's Human Resources Agency and the Department of Homeless Services indicated that $16.8 million worth of contracts were awarded for the current fiscal year without any competition.


2 Senate Leaders Propose Health Plans
Two major Senate players on health care legislation today laid out their own long-awaited legislative proposals but without strong hopes that the Senate Finance Committee would accept their main ideas.
When the committee meets on Wednesday afternoon, its chairman, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, will put his proposal before it.
The New York Democrat's plan would require employers to pay for their workers' insurance if other steps did not produce universal coverage by 1999.
That provision appears to have a committee majority against it.


The Tie Goes to the Irish As Norway Is Eliminated
Ireland and Norway, members of the "Group of Death," each ended the first round with 1-1-1 records and four points.
But Ireland, after a scoreless deadlock with Norway today before a crowd of 76,322 at Giants Stadium, clinched second place in Group E. Norway was eliminated.
With their coach, Jack Charlton, sending instructions to the bench via walkie-talkie from a broadcast booth, the Irish played inspired defense and inventive offense.


Transit Talks Deadlocked On Work-Rule Changes
With a Thursday night deadline looming for a new contract, transit officials and the union representing bus and subway workers are deadlocked over a basic question: How many people does it take to run a subway train?
In daylong talks yesterday, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority was pushing an experiment with one-operator trains on some shuttle lines.
The idea is to test whether trains can be run safely and on time with one person doing the jobs of motorman and conductor, while saving money in the process.


U.S. Seeks New Process Sites For Wave of Fleeing Haitians
Fearing that its centers for processing fleeing Haitians will soon be overwhelmed, the Clinton Administration tried today to find additional interview sites as Coast Guard vessels picked up more than 600 Haitians trying to leave the country.
But in a speech at the National Press Club, the exiled Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, refused to discourage his countrymen from leaving, even in rickety vessels.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology
Freedom of expression has always ruled in cyberspace.
But the companies that control the computer networks, and some individuals, are beginning to play the role of censor.  [ Page A1. ]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Mr. Jenkins adds a twist to a new campaign for Tanqueray gin.
MR. CLEAN, Mr. Salty, Mr. Whipple, Mr. Peanut, Mr. Bubble -- and Mr. Jenkins.
Mr.
Who?
Soon, all Americans -- or at least those who drink alcoholic beverages -- will meet another advertising character for whom an honorific serves as a first name.
Much is riding on the imaginary shoulders of Mr.
Jenkins, a raffish sport who seems as comfortable at a funky downtown club as he is at a tony uptown bistro.


Vice President Reaches Out


Jefferson B. Fordham, 88, Dies; Law Dean at U. of Pennsylvania
Jefferson Barnes Fordham, a former dean of law at the University of Pennsylvania who was a vocal supporter of individual rights and racial equality, died on Friday in University of Utah Medical Center.
He was 88 and lived in Salt Lake City.
Professor Fordham served as dean of the university's law school from 1952 until he reached emeritus status in 1970.
From 1972 until his retirement last year he was a professor of law at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City.


Two Down, Three To Go


Sports of The Times; Doc Better Get It Right This Time
THEY administered the drug test mostly for Dwight Gooden's benefit, rather than the company's benefit.
Even if they were not going to bring him back next year, the New York Mets were not exactly looking to suspend one of the most popular players in their history while they were opening an amusement park for kiddies behind the outfield wall.
They gave the test because of Dwight Gooden's history, his time in a rehabilitation center for drug abuse early in 1987.
They gave the test because addicts are never cured, never recovered.
At best, they are recovering, an ongoing process.


It Wouldn't Be Summer Without Salade Nicoise
PERHAPS the most famous one-dish summer meal is salade nicoise -- the happy combination of tuna, green beans, potatoes and tomatoes in a zesty dressing with anchovies and capers.
Generally the tuna comes from a can, but to make the dish even better, grill a piece of fresh tuna.
If you wish, add some crusty country bread.


Gooden's Father Didn't Spot Trouble
Dan Gooden spent Father's Day weekend with his youngest son, Dwight, who was in Florida for the Mets' series against the Marlins.
He did not notice anything different about Dwight.
He did not see any signs of trouble.
Neither, Dan said, did any other members of the immediate family, including his wife, Ella.
It came as a shock, then, when Dan Gooden was told early yesterday evening that his son had been suspended by the Major League Baseball commissioner's office for a second violation of the league drug policy.
According to a highly placed person in Major League Baseball, Gooden had failed two random drug tests that were administered as part of an aftercare program.
Seemed Frustrated
"I didn't know, I didn't know," Dan Gooden said yesterday, in a telephone conversation from his home in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
"I'm shocked. It's been seven years."


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day yesterday, about a turnaround effort by L.A.
Gear Inc., misstated the surname of a former president of the company in some editions.
He is Mark R. Goldston, not Gladston.


CHRONICLE
DAVE POWERS, the keeper of the Kennedy flame, is stepping down as curator of the John F. Kennedy Library after 30 years in the post, in another sign that Camelot is receding into history.
"I am 82, and I just feel it's time for someone younger to take over," he said yesterday from his office at the library in Boston.


State Department Awaits Gergen With Trepidation
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in a statement last night that he "enthusiastically" welcomed it.
The national security adviser, Anthony Lake, insisted in an interview today that he "supported it right from the moment the President told him about it."
But in the corridors of the State Department, and even parts of the White House, there is anxiety about the appointment on Monday of David R. Gergen as a "special adviser" to both President Clinton and Mr.
Christopher.


When the Street Is a Stage


Corrections
An article yesterday about the Algonquin Round Table misspelled the given name and maiden name of one of those said to have traded barbs with Dorothy Parker.
She was Clare Boothe Luce.


Market Place; Two insurers of mortgages may take rising interest rates in stride.
INVESTORS are so nervous about rising interest rates that they are not thinking clearly about how different financial service companies are affected, according to some analysts.
Take the difference between companies that lend money to home buyers and those that sell insurance policies guaranteeing that such mortgages will be paid.
Mortgage companies are clearly in for a rougher ride than in the days when rates were falling.
Homeowners are less likely to take out new mortgages in search of lower monthly payments, depriving the mortgage sellers of a major source of income.
And rising rates put pressure on mortgage originators to reduce loan spreads, servicing fees or other income sources to keep mortgage expenses from rising so fast that they drive business away.


Cuomo Decides to Extend Domestic-Partner Benefits
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced tonight that he would extend insurance benefits to the domestic partners of gay and lesbian state workers by the start of next year.
He said he was uncertain whether the plan would include the unmarried partners of heterosexual state workers.
New York State is the second state to make such an announcement, though New York City and dozens of other municipalities around the nation already offer benefits to domestic partners.
Two weeks ago, Vermont became the first state to do so when it agreed to extend health and dental insurance to unmarried homosexual and heterosexual partners.


New Dolphin Owner Wants to Keep Shula
The new owner of the Miami Dolphins plans to offer Coach DON SHULA a contract extension.
The owner, H. WAYNE HUIZENGA, completed his purchase of the Dolphins and Joe Robbie Stadium yesterday, then said he would meet with Shula on July 4.
The 64-year-old Shula hasn't said whether he wants to coach beyond this season, when his current contract expires.


Barkley Will Return Despite Back Injury
CHARLES BARKLEY, who frequently hinted at retirement while leading the Phoenix Suns to the National Basketball Association playoffs last season, said yesterday that he would return for another shot at the championship despite a back injury.
Barkley said he was committed to a rigorous course of therapy his doctors say he must undergo to strengthen his back.
Retiring now, Barkley told a news conference at the America West Arena in Phoenix, would be the "lazy" way out.


Jews Revisit Shanghai, Grateful Still That It Sheltered Them
They stood in the pouring rain not long ago, a few dozen Jews from all over the world and their Communist Chinese hosts, to commemorate Shanghai's role as a safe haven for Jewish refugees fleeing the Holocaust.
In the late 1930's, Shanghai was the only destination in the world that did not require an entry visa.
And so the Jews came -- 20,000 or more.
And Shanghai, with an already established Jewish population of about 10,000, took them in.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.19
4.29
3.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.14
4.20
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.54
4.60
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.23
7.16
5.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.51
7.45
6.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.27
7.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.44
5.75
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Executive Changes
CAERE CORP., Los Gatos, Calif., appointed Steven C. Humphreys president.
CIGNA HEALTHCARE OF CALIFORNIA, Glendale, Calif., a unit of Cigna Health Care Inc., named Brendan Baker chief financial officer.


Campaign Finance Board Offers Proposal for Voluntary Debates
After a mayoral campaign last fall that featured the two main candidates refusing to debate each other, calls went out for the independent agency that administers New York City's campaign-financing law to require candidates who accept public money to participate in debates.
But after studying the issue, the Campaign Finance Board yesterday rejected that idea and instead proposed a voluntary program under which candidates for citywide elected offices would be asked early in their campaigns to agree to debate their opponents.


American Medical Holdings Inc.(AMI,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hearing For Simpson Is Set Today
O.
J.
Simpson's lawyers filed a motion late today to suppress any evidence that police officers collected in a search of his Brentwood mansion the day after the killings of his former wife and one of her friends.
"It's illegal," said Robert Kardashian, a lawyer and close friend of Mr.
Simpson who talks to him daily.
"We did it because the search warrant was not proper."


Essay; Kneejerks for July
For those who base their opinions on principled disagreement with everything that appears in this space, here is a set of kneejerks for July to cope with events to come while I am on vacation.
1.
Leon Panacea Presents the New, Organized, Pragmatic, Nonfrenetic, Clinton White House.
Do not be suckered: Although this annual summer shuffle will be heralded as the most fundamental shift in governance since the importation of Superpragmatist David Gergen last summer, the sense of shake-up will last only until Leon attempts to wrest power from the real chief of staff.


Space Station Easily Wins In House After '93 Threat
Only a year after the space station program narrowly escaped being killed by Congress, the House voted overwhelmingly tonight to support the proposed orbiting laboratory.
The lawmakers voted 278 to 155 to provide $2.1 billion for the program in the next fiscal year.
The 123-vote margin tonight was in marked contrast to the station's survival by a single vote in the House last year.


Journal; Another Media Morning After
Once O. J. Simpson was under lock and key, the press found itself in a quandary: How would it keep the most exciting murder case in years alive without looking as if it were pandering to its insatiable, irresponsible, hopelessly vulgar audience?
There were easy, legitimate choices at first: the spouse-abuse angle, the race angle, even the rental car angle. (Why did Hertz keep O. J. as a spokesman after his 1989 arrest, and did that Bronco have unlimited mileage?) But by the weekend after the great freeway chase, the media had finally alighted upon its favorite and most narcissistic angle for extending any story: "Is it all the media's fault?"


TBWA gets a creative director with a penchant for entertainment.
TONY DEGREGORIO, who has directed the creative output at agencies like Lintas New York and Levine, Huntley, Schmidt &amp; Beaver, is joining TBWA Advertising Inc. in the new position of executive vice president and executive creative director of the New York office.
Mr.
DeGregorio, an art director who is intensely aggressive about his work, has eclectic credits.
He is perhaps best known for the energetic Diet Coke television commercials that used elaborate special effects to bring stars like Humphrey Bogart, Louis Armstrong, Cary Grant and Groucho Marx back from the dead.


Boggs Feels Fenway Hot Seat Again
Wade Boggs stared at the batch of reporters near his locker in friendly, friendly Boston today and muttered, "It never ends, does it?"
He was referring to another Boston controversy involving him, the former Red Sox third baseman who has been a Yankee the last two seasons.
After Manager Butch Hobson of the Red Sox was ejected in the seventh inning of Tuesday night's 10-4 Yankee victory for arguing with the plate umpire, Greg Kosc, Hobson shoved Larry Barnett, the third-base umpire, while trying to get closer to Kosc.


A Quality-of-Life Offense? It Could End Up in Arrest.
Giorgio Favia was awakened yesterday morning by his mother's knock on his front door.
"These nice police officers want to talk to you," said his mother, who lives on the first floor of their apartment building in the Bronx.
Minutes later, he was in a patrol car's back seat headed to the police station.
Concerned about appearances, he said, the two officers did not handcuff him until he was out of his mother's sight.


Fleeing Haiti: For the Poor, Choices Are Limited
Three years ago, five armed soldiers came knocking at Jean-Fritz Salame's door, looking for his father.
But Mr.
Salame's father, Louitenante, a low-level official in the political party of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, escaped through a back window.
The next night the soldiers returned looking for the son.
But like his father, Mr.
Salame slipped away.


Nuclear Winter
To the Editor:
In your June 15 obituary of my friend and colleague James B. Pollack, the description of the history of the nuclear winter theory is not quite right.
In our original 1983 paper, we estimated that a global thermonuclear war might lower average temperatures by 15 to 20 degrees Centigrade.
Seven years later, we argued in the journal Science that the uncertainty in our calculations had diminished in the intervening years and estimated a more reliable number to be 10 to 15 degrees Centigrade.


A Typical Draft and Nowhere to Go in Majors
Jason Strudwick, the Islanders' third-round selection, represents most of the 286 prospects who were chosen in the National Hockey League's entry draft.
Strudwick, the 63d player to be picked in the two-day draft, is 18 years old; a Canadian; a player on a major junior team, the Kamloops Blazers of the Western Hockey League, and a skater unlikely to surface in the N.H.L. until 1996 at the earliest.


Eagles to Fly Free of the Endangered List
The Clinton Administration plans to remove the American bald eagle from the list of species facing imminent extinction, and it is crediting the Endangered Species Act with preserving the national emblem.
The decision, to be announced on Thursday, reclassifies the species as threatened, but no longer endangered, in most of its range.
The change reflects the eagle's improved prospects now that there are about 4,000 adult nesting pairs -- five times more than the 791 pairs counted in 1974 -- in the lower 48 states.


CBS Is Reported in Merger Talks With a Home Shopping Channel
Barry Diller, chairman of QVC Network Inc., and Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS, are negotiating a deal in which CBS would merge with QVC in a complex arrangement involving cash and stock, according to several people familiar with the discussions.
The two companies have a combined value of $5.4 billion, based on yesterday's closing stock prices.
The merger being discussed would put Mr.
Diller in charge of CBS as its chief executive, returning him to the business in which he initially built his reputation.
Mr.
Tisch would remain as chairman and head of the executive committee.
Neither Mr.
Tisch nor Mr.
Diller could be reached for comment yesterday.


Where to Find It
WHEN an air-conditioner spouts warm air instead of cold, or cools less effectively than it did the previous summer, it may just be in need of a good professional cleaning.
Indeed, a dirty condenser is the culprit about 85 percent of the time when an air-conditioner doesn't cool properly, said Rich Piaia, service manager for AA Kold Air, a Bronx concern that repairs and sells air-conditioners.


Hillenbrand Industries(HB,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


A New Role for Alex Haley's Farm
ALEX HALEY, the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of "Roots: The Saga of an American Family," is often credited with renewing interest in family ties and history.
The Children's Defense Fund, a national child advocacy organization, hopes to draw on this legacy at Mr.
Haley's old Tennessee farm, which it recently purchased for $1,007,500.
"It's almost as if Alex built it for us," said Lisa Butler McDougal, a spokeswoman for the organization, which plans to begin using the 127-acre farm this summer as a training and conference center as well as a retreat.


Jurors Tell of Friction in Murder Mistrial
They tried logic.
They tried tenderness.
They pleaded with her and shrieked at her.
But for seven days, one headstrong juror barely budged from her conviction that Paul Cox did not intend to murder two Indian immigrants in Larchmont in 1988, even arguing at one point that he may not have committed the crimes at all.
"If we said red was red, she said red was black," one male juror, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said.
"She had a problem, a very serious problem."


Dole Begins Gathering Support For a G.O.P. Health Care Plan
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, today moved to establish a strong conservative Republican position on health care by marshaling broad support in his party for a plan that would widen access to insurance and subsidize the very poor but would not promise to insure all Americans.
All but five of the Senate's 44 Republicans signed up as backers of the bill, giving it more Senate sponsors than any other health measure.
The support quickly established Mr.
Dole as a force on the issue by adding a new element to a debate that so far has been dominated by President Clinton's proposal, a variety of Democratic alternatives that made only limited changes and a moderate package that did not satisfy Republican conservatives.


For the Saudi Players, It's More Than a Game
The glossy fold-ups and the 12-page advertising supplements intended to recast the world's image of Saudi Arabia handed out to fans here for the last week and a half were strewn on the grounds of R.F.K.
Stadium.
There, blowing around with food wrappers and empty soda cans, many of the advertisements were still more visible than the team, making the country's first World Cup appearance.
Until today.


Hillhaven Corp.(HIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Where Some See Toys, Others Find a 'Sublime Experience'
The owner of the Cat Game at the Rye Playland takes an interest in his customers and wants them to remember their fling at winning with definite joy.
He begrudges midway game operators who are driven by unmitigated greed to create remote odds of success.
Glenn Davis, the 43-year-old companionable owner of the Cat Game, in which a dollar gets you three balls to toss at dozens of clown-faced cats, awards his fair share of stuffed lions and Power Rangers.
But he also believes the Cat Game is one of the pleasure games of skill along the midway, even for those who don't take home a prize.


F.C.C. to Reserve Licenses In Affirmative-Action Move
In the biggest affirmative-action program in decades, the Federal Communications Commission decided today to give small businesses, women and minority groups preferences valued at hundreds of millions of dollars in setting up new wireless telephone and data services.
In a 5-to-0 vote, the commission voted to set aside more than 1,000 new radio licenses for small businesses, women and minority groups to operate "personal communication services," a catch-all term that embraces pocket-sized telephones, hand-held computers, advanced pagers and facsimile machines.


Undercover Officer Is Shot by Colleague In Mix-up in a Raid
An undercover detective involved in a drug search in a Bronx pool hall was shot yesterday by another detective on the same team, who apparently did not recognize him and thought he was a suspect trying to flee, the police said.
The detective was not seriously hurt because he was wearing a bulletproof vest, the police said.
But police officials said they were investigating to see what went wrong and how similar incidents might be avoided.


Maradona Fails Drug Test and Could Face Suspension
With Argentina playing like one of the 1994 World Cup's stronger teams and Diego Maradona playing like his old superstar self, the team and the soccer world were shocked today to learn that Maradona had tested positive for a banned drug, ephedrine.
Julio Grondona, the president of the Argentine soccer federation, told reporters after the team's early-evening training session in Dallas that Maradona, the 33-year-old Argentine captain, had tested positive in a random drug test after Argentina's 2-1 victory over Nigeria on Saturday in Foxboro, Mass.


An Organizer Admits Guilt In Smuggling
The highest-ranking smuggler yet arrested in the Golden Venture case pleaded guilty last night and said he had given the order to ground the rusty freighter off the Queens coast with its illegal cargo of nearly 300 illegal Chinese aliens, 10 of whom died when they tried to swim to shore.
The man, Weng Yu Hui, provided the most detailed account yet of the grounding, describing it not as a last-second decision by crewmen on board but as a deliberate attempt, conceived by smugglers like himself on shore, to salvage a scheme that had gone awry.


Martinez Keeps Dodgers Atop N.L. West
Dodgers 6, Giants 2
Ramon Martinez pitched a five-hitter and doubled twice last night to lead the Los Angeles Dodgers to a 6-2 victory over the visiting San Francisco Giants.
The victory increased the Dodgers' lead in the National League West to 4 1/2 games over Colorado and 7 1/2 games over San Francisco.


A New Mythology Grows Up Around Wolves; Defend Hunters?
To the Editor:
"Protecting the Targets of Protest: A Debate Now Shifts to Hunting" (front page, June 11) appears to imply that the right of sport hunters to kill animals for pleasure has as much need for protection as a woman's right to control her own body and reproductive life.


Positive-Thinker Becker Joins Sampras, Martin And Ivanisevic in Semis
Could the ginger-haired individual who munched bananas during change-overs, skipped back onto court after every break, and actually smiled at a little yellow tennis ball before he served it to confirm his 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, 6-3 quarterfinal victory against Sweden's Christian Bergstrom, really be a cheater?
And on his favorite playground, to boot.
Boris Becker, safely if scandalously through to his eighth Wimbledon semifinal, where fourth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic awaits him, begged to differ with so disparaging an assessment.
In fact, the man accused of misusing his third-round bathroom break as a leg-stretching session and of deliberately stalling at match point today to annoy his fourth-round opponent, labeled the charges "utter nonsense."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
A deal in which CBS would merge with QVC is being negotiated between Barry Diller, chairman of QVC Network, and Laurence A. Tisch, chairman of CBS, people familiar with the discussions said.  [ Page A1. ]  CBS was ripe for change after it lost affiliated stations to Fox.
New Analysis.  [ D6. ]  Mr.
Diller's move didn't surprise Hollywood executives, who expect the unexpected from him.  [ D6. ]  Mr.
Tisch has done well in his investment in CBS.  [ D7. ]
Bell Atlantic and Nynex plan to merge their cellular companies into a single business that would operate from Maine to Virginia.
The deal would create a cellular telephone giant second only to the alliance planned by AT&amp;T and McCaw Cellular.  [ A1. ]


IN PERFORMANCE: JAZZ
Longtime Colleagues Converse Instrumentally  Carnegie Hall
To open the second half of "The Musical Life of Dick Hyman" on Monday night at Carnegie Hall, the pianist played a tape of some work he had done outside of jazz.
It ranged from a bird-call training record to a session with Johnny Mathis, and between selections, Mr.
Hyman, looking a bit like an accountant, offered a steady stream of quotes, jokes and musical asides.


Announcer Can't Keep Enthusiasm in Check
"The knight is galloping toward the middle!"
"Pawns are attacking mercilessly!"


Flamboyant Frenchman Hauled Before Judge
As a police operation, it went perfectly.
Undercover agents ensconced in a nearby hotel monitored the suspect's home for three days until, shortly after dawn today, police officers woke him up, bundled him into a car and, in the midst of flashing lights and wailing sirens, hauled him up before a judge.
But when it comes to Bernard Tapie, a flamboyant French businessman and leftist politician, nothing is simple.
The police were acting on court orders, but for many French his detention was just another example of the political establishment's vendetta against the tousle-haired maverick.
As Popular as Ever
This time, the police acted barely 12 hours after the National Assembly lifted Mr.
Tapie's parliamentary immunity so that he could answer charges of business fraud and tax evasion in two cases involving his 240-foot luxury yacht, Phocea.
After appearing before Judge Eva Joly, he was released.


Boy's Death From Pitch By Machine Called Rare
The death of a 12-year-old Brooklyn boy as a result of a ball thrown by a baseball pitching machine appeared to be a highly unusual occurrence, according to Federal safety records, youth athletic officials and physicians.
Michael Marano, a member of the St.
Athanasius Bantam Outside Team in Bensonhurst, went into cardiac arrest when a pitch hit him in the chest Tuesday evening.
He was dead by the time he reached Maimonides Medical Center, where efforts to revive him failed.


Harding Punishment Under Consideration
Finally, the governing body of amateur figure skating in the United States is about to decide what to do about TONYA HARDING.
A special panel appointed by the U.S.
Figure Skating Association gathered yesterday in Colorado Springs to consider disciplinary action against Harding for her role in last winter's attack on her chief rival, NANCY KERRIGAN.


De Niro Has Star Role On the Belmont Track
Yes, he is named for the actor Robert De Niro.
Yes, like his namesake, he has drawn raves for powerful performances.
And yesterday at Belmont Park, the 2-year-old colt De Niro gave another powerful performance as he rocketed from last place to first and won the Tremont Breeders' Cup, the race that has launched careers for juvenile race horses for 102 years.
In his debut one month ago, De Niro shot from sixth place to first and won by nine lengths.
In his second race yesterday, he shot from sixth and last place, made up 14 lengths and won by three and three-quarters lengths over Jump the Shadow.
And if some people believe this makes him the earliest of early favorites for next year's Kentucky Derby, so be it.


Nominee to High Court Visits Capitol


People
*
Alan Karo was named to the new position of executive vice president and director of strategic services at Campbell Mithun Esty, Chicago.
He was previously a senior vice president of marketing and media at Ayer Chicago.


INSIDE
Arafat Sets Trip to Gaza
After a delay that raised eyebrows, the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, abruptly announced he would visit the Gaza Strip this week.
Page A4.
A Health Service Shift
The national Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association will allow member plans to become for-profit companies, reversing a long tradition.
Page D1.
A National Symbol, Saved
At 4,000 nesting pairs, the bald eagle is healthy enough to be removed from the endangered species list, the Administration says.
Page A14.
A Royal Wound Reopened
A television documentary sought to depict a warmer Prince of Wales, but it backfired when Charles was questioned about his marriage.
Page A12.
Plight of the Golden Venture
A smuggler said the decision to ground the freighter carrying illegal aliens was made on shore in an effort to salvage the scheme.
Page B1.


TV's Infatuation With the Mystical
Take the supernatural and paranormal, sprinkle liberally with paranoia, and you have a substantial chunk of what increasingly seems to be television's entertainment agenda for the 1990's.
From drama series to documentaries, the electronic hills are alive with the ominous sound of the inexplicable.
The Fox magazine show "Encounters: The Hidden Truth" solemnly presents three people who insist they have repeatedly been abducted by extraterrestrials.
MTV's "Dead at 21" spins its weekly fictional episodes around a plot that finds the Federal Government putting chips in babies' brains as part of a top-secret plan to improve the human race.
A recent NBC documentary, "Angels: The Mysterious Messengers," featured Patty Duke narrating a two-hour essay on "lives enriched by spirits from another plane."


COMPANY BRIEFS
ENTERPRISE OIL P.L.C., London, said it acquired 9.8 percent of the stock of Lasmo P.L.C., a British oil company, for $:159 million ($246.5 million).
BELL BANCORP INC., Chicago, the holding company for Bell Federal Savings and Loan Association, said it would repurchase as much as 5 percent of its common stock outstanding, or 249,284 shares, in the next six months.


Celebrating the Real Thing in Vietnam


Economic Scene; The U.S. shouldn't be too proud to imitate others' technology.
"PRODUCTIVITY isn't everything," Paul Krugman, an economist at Stanford University, is fond of saying, "but in the long run it is almost everything." And long after the current fuss over the exchange value of the dollar is a distant memory, policy makers will still be worrying about the fundamentals that drive American living standards.
President Clinton apparently got the point, sweeping into office clutching reams of proposals for jump-starting the technological change thought to lead to faster productivity growth.


The Pilobolus Penchant For Play Is on Display
The free-spirited Pilobolus Dance Theater has a penchant for play.
In almost all the company's repertory, one senses the impulse to try something and see how it looks or moves.
Play is at the heart of all creation, but Pilobolus tends to wear it on its sleeve as well.
That was the case, at least, with a premiere and a recent piece presented by the company on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, where Pilobolus performs through July.
Baroque manners and orderly progressions through space are gently disrupted by an in-house imp in the new "Quatrejeux," a quartet choreographed by Robby Barnett and Jonathan Wolken to music by Corelli.
The piece is of both its own and an earlier time.
Two men and two women are dressed in tops and shorts that are midway between tennis whites and what might pass for sexy underwear for the Gap generation.
But Pierrot-style pompons are pinned to the tops of the dancers' white socks, and the piece begins with two people lighting candles on the run.


Hopes Dim Over Trade With Japan
The rise to power of a hybrid coalition of Socialists and conservatives in Japan has dampened hopes in Washington that the yearlong negotiations with Tokyo to open some of its closed markets can be concluded in time for the Group of Seven summit meeting in Italy next week.
Indeed, American officials are now loath to predict when those trade talks might conclude.
American officials now use words like "over time" and "the long run."


New York Hospitals to Fight To Retain Medicaid Patients
New York City's public hospital system is losing some of its Medicaid patients -- patients nobody else used to want -- and will fight back with its first major marketing campaign, the head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday.
The agency, which runs the largest public hospital system in the country, will begin its effort with a $1 million marketing survey to be formally approved by the agency's board today, said Dr.
Bruce Siegel, president of the agency.
Dr.
Siegel said the corporation plans to expand the campaign and might use television advertisements.


Tartabull Powers Yanks to 8th in Row
Even against Roger Clemens, even when their new infield made every ground ball an adventure, even when their bullpen failed miserably, the Yankees continued to dodge danger, continued to get huge hits and continued winning.
Their winning streak reached eight tonight when Danny Tartabull homered off Jeff Russell to boost the Yankees to a 4-3 victory in 10 innings at Fenway Park.
It did not seem scripted this way.
Although the Yankees sent the Red Sox to their 11th straight loss at home, their worst streak since 1926, it seemed as if they would win in nine.
It seemed as if Scott Kamieniecki would be a hero for pitching eight stellar innings and Jim Leyritz would join him for driving in three runs.
But those ideas were nixed after the Red Sox tied the score in the ninth and Tartabull, Luis Polonia and Steve Howe became the new heroes.


Interstate Bakeries Corp.(IBC,N) reports earnings for 12wks to May 28


Buying Air-Conditioners: An Environmental Guide
A SHOPPER went to a discount store, Tops Appliance City, in East Hanover, N.J., earlier this month to look for a window air-conditioner.
He made a tentative selection, a $700 model, and then asked if the machine used Freon, the Du Pont trade name that is commonly used to refer to chlorofluorocarbons, or CFC's, the chemicals blamed for eating a hole in the ozone layer.
Yes, the salesman said, and the machines are notorious for leaking, he added, so buy our service contract, too, for $149.


Helene Curtis Industries(HC,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING  Yale Outlasts Nottingham at Henley  The sparkle was everywhere, in the weather, the wine and the Yale junior varsity eight yesterday as the Henley Royal Regatta got under way with elimination heats in 5 of the 16 cup events at Henley-on-Thames, England.
In a heat of the Thames Challenge Cup, Yale rewarded spectators with a "real bash-out between two lightweight crews," as Andy Carr, the varsity coach, described the race against the Nottingham and Union Rowing Club of England.
Racing into a blustery head wind, Yale broke at a sizzling 50-stroke cadence and gained a 6-foot lead on Nottingham 40 strokes into the race.
Yale was never able to widen its margin on the English crew to more than half a boat length, or 30 feet, though, through the mile-and-five-sixteenths course.
But in the final strokes, Yale moved ahead to a full-boat-length victory.
TRACK AND FIELD  Ottey and Fredericks Win Their Sprints  Merlene Ottey of Jamaica ran the women's 100 meters in a 1994 world-best 11.02 seconds and Frankie Fredericks of Namibia won the men's 200 in a season's best 20.30 seconds at the World Games Grand Prix meet last night in Helsinki.


Something Old Becomes New
WANT to recycle your grandmother's old shawl?
How about that tattered Victorian dress collecting dust in the attic?
Can't part with those leftover pieces of fabric cluttering up the armoire?
Then Martha Mae Jones, below, the owner of the Downstairs Market in Chelsea, may be able to help.


U.S. May Ask North Korea to Give Fuel Rods to a Third Nation
The United States will ask North Korea to surrender some 8,000 plutonium-bearing reactor fuel rods to a third country, like Russia or China, or entomb them indefinitely in a concrete sarcophagus as part of any settlement to the dispute over its nuclear program.
Any country receiving the spent reactor fuel would be expected to reprocess it and store the extracted plutonium under the control of the International Atomic Energy Agency, thus insuring that North Korea does not use it for nuclear weapons.


No Whitewater Charges Seen From First Phase of Inquiry
The independent prosecutor investigating the Whitewater affair plans to announce on Thursday that no criminal charges should be brought against White House or Treasury officials for their discussions about an inquiry into a savings association linked to the Clintons, lawyers and Administration officials involved in the case said today.
They said that the counsel, Robert B. Fiske Jr., believed that most of the details about the discussions of the handling of the earlier inquiry by savings regulators into Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan Association must remain secret because the findings relied extensively on grand jury testimony.


Nets Choose Dare, a Big Man With Little Experience
This past season the Nets had a Hall of Fame coach in Chuck Daly and two All-Stars in Derrick Coleman and Kenny Anderson.
On Tuesday, the Nets, finding a successor for Daly, hired a person with no National Basketball Association experience as a head coach in Butch Beard.
Tonight they drafted a player with only three years of organized basketball experience in the United States.


George Carver Jr. Security Expert and C.I.A. Official Is Dead at 64
George Alexander Carver Jr., a national security expert who had a principal intelligence role in the Vietnam War, died of cardiac arrest on Sunday at North Arundel Hospital in Glen Burnie, Md.
He was 64.
Dr.
Carver, who lived in Great Falls, Va., was stricken on his way home from the Baltimore-Washington Airport, where he had picked up one of his sons, his family said.


2 PHONE CONCERNS SEEKING TO MERGE WIRELESS SERVICES
In an effort to build a nationwide wireless communications company to match those envisioned by companies like AT&amp;T, the Bell Atlantic and Nynex Corporations plan to merge their cellular companies into a single business that will operate from Maine to Virginia.
The move marks the first time since the breakup of AT&amp;T 10 years ago that two of the regional Bell companies have tried to form an alliance on this scale.
If approved by Federal regulators, the merger would create a cellular telephone giant second only in size -- in terms of the number of people covered -- to McCaw Cellular Communications, which AT&amp;T is trying to acquire.


The Police Called It a Family Matter; Fallen Idol
To the Editor:
Watching the O.J.
Simpson tragedy unfold during my recent visit to the United States, I was puzzled by one thing: why was a man with a known history of wife abuse still a role model for Americans?


Holland Tunnel Declared a Landmark


The Police Called It a Family Matter
To the Editor:
Thank you for "Case Might Fit Pattern of Abuse, Experts Say" (news article, June 19), on the killing of Nicole Brown Simpson.
You state that judicial help is often too little.
Help from the police is often the same.
When O. J. Simpson was to be arrested, he said: "What are you doing here? This is a family matter?"


Treasuries Are Mixed, Though Dollar Is Weak
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed yesterday, and despite another weak showing by the dollar, the market exhibited surprising resilience.
Trading was thin ahead of the long Fourth of July weekend, and while the dollar slipped to another low against the Japanese yen, the dollar's performance against European currencies may have provided a stabilizing effect on the bond market.
Commodity prices were also lower, and that also helped bonds by easing investors' concerns about inflation.


Corel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Blue Cross Lets Plans Sell Stock
Reversing a 60-year tradition of nonprofit health service, the national Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association said yesterday that it would allow its member plans to become for-profit companies that could sell stock to the public.
Blue Cross executives said that about a dozen of the 69 Blue Cross plans across the country were seriously considering becoming for-profit companies.
The move would let them raise money from investors in order to compete in the rapidly changing national health care market.


Health Care Obstructionists
Two powerful committees -- Senate Finance and House Ways and Means -- are rushing to pass health-reform bills.
The Finance Committee bill is sound, but so far lacks majority support; conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans are pressuring the chairman, Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, to give up on a key plank, universal coverage.
The Ways and Means bill would achieve universal coverage; but the rest of it is a farce, incorporating ruinous amendments virtually dictated by the American Medical Association.
The political calendar will not permit more dawdling and posturing.
The committees must complete most of their work this week.
Then the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, and the House majority leader, Richard Gephardt, can pound flawed committee bills into workable legislation in time for floor votes before the November elections.


Investors Seek a Haven in Money Market Funds
The turmoil in the world's financial markets is giving Americans the jitters, making them reluctant to continue pouring billions of dollars into stock and bond mutual funds, industry officials said yesterday.
Instead, investors are heading for the safety of money market funds.
Executives at fund companies suggest that investors are merely parking their cash in money market funds until the markets calm down.


Miscellany
*
Miller Brewing Co., Milwaukee, said it had extended its sponsorship agreement with the National Basketball Association through the 1997-98 season and, for the first time, would team up with the N.B.A. on marketing programs outside the United States; the Miller Genuine Draft brand will sponsor games in Japan in November. *
Medicus Intercon International, New York, has acquired Total Learning Concepts, Boston, a pharmaceutical sales training company.


Another War of the Titans, Fought Now With Trumpets
The battle of the bands -- the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra and the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band -- on Tuesday night at Avery Fisher Hall, made one thing clear: New York is lucky to have two strong jazz orchestras, institutionally supported, seemingly permanent and led by two charismatic trumpeters, Wynton Marsalis and Jon Faddis.
Given the extremely high level of musicianship in the two ensembles, their mixture of age and youth and their ability to mix crowd-pleasing showmanship with genuinely thrilling improvisations, optimism is justified.
Now to the action: There was blood left on the stage after this JVC Jazz Festival event, and most of it belonged to the Carnegie Hall Band.


Where Job Hunters Hit the Jackpot
With pay bounding ever higher and jobs so plentiful that the local employment benefits office is often deserted, this Plains-hugging city of 105,000 is the closest thing in America to a place where it's the job seeker who says "Don't call me, I'll call you."
With unemployment in Sioux Falls the lowest in the nation -- 1.9 percent in May, according to the latest figures from the Labor Department, and possibly less, compared with 6 percent nationwide -- Karen White, personnel officer at Hutchinson Technology Inc., has had to get used to interviewing prospects for the company's computer-parts assembly line at 6 A.M., before they go off to work.


Bozell Mexico City Opens Miami Office
Bozell Mexico City, in an unusual twist, has opened an office in Miami.
The new office reverses the usual pattern of a United States agency opening an office in Miami to serve as a field office for Latin American clients.


Mayor and Comptroller Clash Over Choosing Bond Advisers
The administration of Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi clashed yesterday over the selection of financial advisers to help market New York City's bonds, with the Mayor's office seeking to block the inclusion of a firm owned by a black woman from Philadelphia.
The Mayor's office and the Comptroller, who jointly select the advisers as well as lawyers and underwriters for the city's bonds, have disagreed over Mr.
Hevesi's decision to hire two firms to oversee the sale of the city's bonds.
The contracts for financial advisers are expected to total nearly $1 million.


Accounts
*
Peasant Restaurant Group, Atlanta, to the Joey Reiman Agency, Atlanta, to handle advertising for five restaurants including Winfield's and the Public House, previously handled by Fitzgerald &amp; Co., Atlanta.
While Peasant spent $83,000 on advertising in 1993, according to Competitive Media Reporting, the company said it planned to increase spending to $5 million. *
Isla Communications Inc., Cebu, Philippines, to Katsin/Loeb Advertising, San Francisco, as the first agency to handle the new telecommunications company's account in the Philippines.
Katsin/Loeb will work with Well Advertising, Manila.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


U.N. Approves Force to Monitor Yemen Truce
The Security Council tonight approved the possible deployment of a small international force to monitor a lasting cease-fire in Yemen.
The vote was 15-0.
In taking the action, the Council was torn by a desire to stop the civil war in Yemen and yet not commit troops under United Nations command because of the mounting costs of peacekeeping operations.


The 'I Hate Your Stuff, Dear' Blues
CHARLES JOHNSON came face to face with the future last week, and he is not happy about it.
"She's having the bedroom wallpaper scraped off, custom-made wallpaper that's in perfect condition," said Mr.
Johnson, a security-company executive who lives in the Bronx.
The woman behind the pronoun is Tina Wynn, a publicity agent for the music industry and Mr.
Johnson's wife of seven years.
The wallpaper removal is her first salvo in the war between the tastes.


Political Memo; Cuomo Wants Business To See Him as a Friend
They weren't your typical Mario M. Cuomo constituents, these 300 bankers dressed in golfing plaids and Wall Street blues, most of them card-carrying Republicans.
But, then, this wasn't your typical Mario M. Cuomo speech.
The Democratic Governor cited Abraham Lincoln but sounded more like another Republican President, Ronald Reagan, as he spoke to bankers recently at Saratoga Springs, advocating deregulation, privatization and maximizing corporate profits.
"You are the answer to our problems," he said.
"You are the tools we need to meet our challenges."


Injured Hampsten to Miss Tour de France
A knee injury will keep ANDY HAMPSTEN of the United States out of the Tour de France, which starts Saturday.
The Motorola team announced yesterday in Paris that Hampsten fell while training last week and injured a knee.


Inpatient Treatment Unlikely for Gooden
The psychiatrists who handle baseball's drug cases will apparently not recommend that Dwight Gooden undergo further inpatient rehabilitation during his 60-day suspension.
Gene Orza, the Players Association's associate general counsel, said yesterday that he did not want to speak for the doctors, but he said: "My understanding is they will not recommend that he be institutionalized. I believe their recommendation will take the form of a more highly structured and more formalized after-care reporting system, some increased testing and some additional participation in counseling sessions and meetings in the New York area."


In Surprise Move, Arafat Says He Will Visti Gaza and Jericho
Reinforcing his reputation for unpredictability, Yasir Arafat made surprisingly sudden plans today to visit the Gaza Strip and Jericho starting on Saturday, a journey of several days that would be his first to the two areas newly under Palestinian control.
Both his aides and Israeli officials said Mr.
Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, would not go to Jerusalem on this trip.


Nassau Supervisors Fail to Set Up a Legislature
Nassau County officials failed again today to reach agreement on the legislative districts for a new county legislature, making it likely that a Federal judge will follow through on his threat last week to impose a plan of his own.
The Board of Supervisors, the county's present legislative body, met this morning, but after only 15 minutes of discussion it broke off talks.
The board has until next Wednesday to present a plan to Judge Arthur D. Spatt of the Federal District Court in Uniondale, who last year ordered the creation of a new county government to comply with the one-person, one-vote principle.


Bridge
A player with an extremely strong hand may find it hard to believe that his partner is extremely weak.
The most popular way, by no means perfect, is the double negative: after responding two diamonds to a strong artificial two clubs, the weak hand bids three clubs, following a major-suit rebid, or three diamonds, following a three-club rebid.
Unfortunately the modern tendency is to make the initial two-diamond response with a very wide range of hands, so that the second negative is effectively a first negative, leaving the strength still somewhat unclear.


Sports of The Times; Why Sports People Are Just People
IT'S time a warning label was printed on the sleeves of America's sports celebrities: Idolizing this athlete can be hazardous to your psyche.
In recent months, consider that:
O. J. Simpson has been charged with a double murder.


As Tide of Haitian Refugees Rises, U.S. Uses Cuban Base
The Coast Guard began taking hundreds of Haitian refugees to Guantanamo Bay in Cuba today, and picked up hundreds more who had fled their country in boats, as the Administration scrambled to cope with the sudden and unexpected surge.
Despite President Clinton's pleas for Haitians to apply for refugee status in Haiti, the flood of people continued today as the Coast Guard picked up more than 520 refugees after intercepting 755 at sea on Tuesday.
That brings to more than 3,000 the total number of Haitians stopped since Friday -- far higher than the 2,329 Haitians the Coast Guard intercepted in all of 1993.


Law Overturned on Paying Cost of Jailing Stowaways
A Federal appeals court has struck down an Immigration and Naturalization Service policy that required owners of ships and airplanes to pay the cost of detaining stowaways who apply for political asylum until their proceedings are finished.
The Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia ruled on Tuesday that the immigration service had violated Federal guidelines in establishing the policy, which is intended to assure that transportation companies are vigilant against stowaways.


In Cyberspace, and Talking to Strangers
MY neighbors' children, who were born before mine, were loping around the neighborhood when my oldest son, Michael, was still learning to walk.
Thus my husband and I had voices of experience to reassure us when we worried about Michael's falling off a two-inch ledge.
That was then.
This spring, some dozen years later, Michael took his first steps into the brusque, banal but intoxicating world of cyberspace, and I wished for neighbors whose children had been there, who could tell me what was worth worrying about and what wasn't.


We Mustn't Ignore Doctor-Patient Tie
To the Editor:
None of the second opinions on health care reform in your June 12 special supplement mention the pivotal doctor-patient relationship.
Dr.
Kerr L. White, former deputy director for medical affairs of the Rockefeller Foundation, has shown that about half the impact of any medical procedure is the product of that relationship.
Doctors who know their patients need much less time and paper, and fewer tests, than those who do not.
Any restructuring of care should therefore have at its heart the preservation of that relationship.


Sampras Is Real Stuff, But Not to Die-Hards
After unscientific evaluation and a review of circumstantial evidence, it occurs to me that tennis people are never happy, that there may exist in this sport a deeply rooted self-loathing that precludes appreciation for anything other than what it doesn't have at the moment.
Here at dry, partly sunny Wimbledon, a joyous occasion in itself, we are witnessing the continuing emergence of a 22-year-old goliath and, at the same time, the heroic passing of a 37-year-old legend.
Through it all, an aura of disappointment hovers over the tournament like wintry fog over London.


SURPRISE ALLIANCE PICKS A SOCIALIST AS JAPAN'S LEADER
The conservatives who controlled Japan for four decades until their ouster last summer swept back into power tonight, forging an alliance with their oldest ideological enemy by electing the head of the Socialist Party, Tomiichi Murayama, as Prime Minister.
The bizarre partnership between the Liberal Democratic Party and the Socialists stunned the country and prompted immediate fears that whatever halting progress had been made toward deregulating the economy and cleaning up a corruption-ridden political system could be slowed or reversed.


Giuliani Asks the Legislature to Kill Two Bills
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani pleaded with state leaders today to kill a pair of union-sponsored bills that he said would dig new holes in the city budget only days after he and the City Council closed a $2.3 billion budget gap.
During a busy day of lobbying in the Capitol, the Republican Mayor urged the state's legislative leaders and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to resist the election-year pressure mounted by powerful unions of state and city workers, including the police union that gave him critical support in his 1993 election.
Deep Cuts Threatened
He said that the two bills -- one that would increase pension payments to retired city workers and one that would remove the police union from the city's collective bargaining system -- would force him to make deep cuts in the budget passed last week by the City Council.
That budget reduced the work force by 15,000 employees, to 201,000.
But Mr.
Giuliani said the union bills could make him lay off thousands more, and he warned that he would start doing so before Mr.
Cuomo and the legislators face re-election in November.


New Stowaway Rule
In a case based in Newark, a Federal court has struck down a United States immigration policy requiring owners of ships and airplanes to pay the cost of detaining stowaways who apply for political asylum.
Article, page B8.


500 in the Theater Gather at the Altar of Diversity
Does multiculturalism lead to a more populist or to a more parochial art?
What responsibility does the artist have to his constituents?
Does quality have to be sacrificed in the name of diversity?
These were some of the questions raised at a four-day theater conference at Princeton University.
Sponsored by Theater Communications Group, this 10th biennial event brought together more than 500 representatives of nonprofit theaters and other professionals for talks, panel discussions, workshops and performances.
Under scrutiny was the subject of theater as a community and as a gathering of disparate communities.
The conference also gave participants an opportunity to consider pooling their artistic resources to try to amalgamate divergent points of view.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.25
7.25
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.06
4.21
3.92
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.13
4.14
3.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.56
4.54
3.11
10-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.22
7.23
5.77
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.50
7.51
6.67
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.30
8.30
7.38
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.45
6.45
5.76
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


New Chief of Staff Gets Lesson on Who's the Boss
Leon E. Panetta, President Clinton's new chief of staff, has said he has demanding full authority over hiring and firing at the White House as a condition of taking the top job.
But that did not prevent Mr.
Clinton from calling Mr.
Panetta just shy of midnight on Monday to tell him to watch what he said about Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary.


CHRONICLE
BOB KUSTRA, the Republican Lieutenant Governor of Illinois, announced on Tuesday that he would resign on Aug. 1 to be the host of a radio talk show on WLS-AM in Chicago.


Philharmonic's Deficit Persists Despite New Regime's Gains
In the nearly three years since Kurt Masur and Deborah Borda took over the New York Philharmonic, they have been hailed as the team to cure an ailing orchestra.
As music director, Mr.
Masur has thrown open the orchestra's doors for public discussions, open rehearsals and radio broadcasts.
Ms.
Borda, the executive director, has tried to lure untapped audiences by scheduling cheaper, shorter concerts at unusual times and festivals to highlight specific themes in music.
Together, they have mended ties with a fractious, once-demoralized orchestra, winning critical acclaim for restoring its musical excellence.
Despite this string of successes, however, the Philharmonic has yet to shake the fiscal demons that have been haunting it, and other orchestras, in recent years.
A deficit that first surfaced in 1990 will not disappear this year, as predicted.
Rather, after dipping to $500,000, it is expected to surge past the $1 million mark again next year, suggesting that for all the cushions of a healthy endowment and well-placed friends, New York's premier orchestra is not immune to the trials confronting orchestras across America, and must invent new strategies for survival.


CHRONICLE
They came from LOUIS J. LEFKOWITZ'S distant past and from his present to say "Happy 90th Birthday" to the man who served as New York State's Attorney General from 1956 to 1978.
Though Mr.
Lefkowitz does not turn 90 until Sunday, his party was on Tuesday evening, at the Town Club on East 86th Street.
Judge BERNARD NEWMAN of the United States Court of International Trade, who was born in the same Lower East Side building as Mr.
Lefkowitz, recalled his friend's 1928 race for the New York State Assembly.


No Headline
"The moment I find a boat leaving, I will take one. What I want the most is peace and security. I want to be somewhere until things change in my country." -- JEAN-CLAUDE FORESTE, of Haiti.  [ A3:4. ]


More on Health
New York City's public hospitals are starting a marketing campaign to hold on to Medicaid patients.
Page A1.
In a shift, the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association will allow member plans to become for-profit companies.
Business Day, page D1.


Market Place; Offshore drilling now seems potential investment territory.
THE offshore drilling industry, once only for the most stout-hearted investors, is now seen as a promising opportunity by some analysts.
After years of shrinking, merging and shifting strategy, offshore drilling has emerged stronger and more nimble to take advantage of rising oil prices and a a recovery in drilling.


Free Show on Broadway
"Broadway on Broadway," a free outdoor entertainment by stars and featured players from several Broadway shows, is to take place on July 13 at 11:30 A.M. in Times Square.
Artists will entertain on a large stage on Broadway between 43d and 44th Streets, and the show will be simultaneously transmitted on the Sony Jumbotron in Times Square.
Rosemary Harris, Carole King, Bebe Neuwirth, F. Murray Abraham, Victor Garber, Harry Groener, Nathan Lane and Jackie Mason are among the performers scheduled to take part.
The show is sponsored by the League of American Theaters and Producers and the Times Square Business Improvement District.


IN PERFORMANCE: RECORDINGS
Particular Pianism From Awadagin Pratt
Awadagin Pratt has much in common with the violinist Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg: both won the Naumburg Competition; both record for EMI; both have a taste for interpretive quirkiness.


Dart Family Files Lawsuit To Nudge Brazilian Bank
The Dart family of Florida filed a lawsuit yesterday asking a Federal judge to force Brazil's central bank to repay $1.4 billion of bonds the family holds.
In addition to Banco Central do Brasil, the suit names as defendants Banco do Brazil S.A., a commercial bank holding $1.6 billion of similar bonds, and Citibank.


U.S., Allies and Russia Agree on Bosnia Map
The United States, Russia and the European Union have agreed on a map for the territorial division of Bosnia designed to end the 27-month war in the former Yugoslav republic, a spokeswoman for the French Foreign Ministry said today.
The map, the fruit of several months of consultation with the warring factions in Bosnia, is set to be formally approved by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev of Russia and European Union ministers at a meeting in Geneva on July 5.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Named Scott Nickle director of marketing and advertising.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Optioned Chris Turner, catcher, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Called up Andy Allanson, catcher, from Vancouver.


Odomes, New Seahawk, Out After Surgery
NATE ODOMES, signed to an $8.4 million contract by the Seattle Seahawks after leaving the Buffalo Bills as a free agent, underwent knee surgery yesterday.
The Seahawks said Odomes, a two-time Pro Bowl cornerback, will be lost for the 1994 season but they hope to have him back the following season.


Diller's Comeback Stuns But Hardly Surprises
To his friends and even to his enemies, Barry Diller was predictably unpredictable in his attempt to merge his company with CBS and take the helm of the big broadcaster.
Intensely secretive, the 52-year-old entertainment executive has told everyone who knows him that his current job as chairman of QVC Network Inc., the television home shopping company, is simply not big enough.
But after losing a lengthy and well-publicized fight to take over Paramount, most executives assumed that Mr.
Diller would take his time to retrench and make another move toward a large company next year.
Or a year after that.


16 Charged As Members Of Drug Ring
Sixteen people said to be members of the Latin Kings gang were arrested today and charged with conspiring to sell cocaine and heroin in Connecticut's largest cities.
The early morning arrests, centered in Bridgeport and New Haven, included the four highest-ranking Latin Kings in the state, said the United States Attorney for Connecticut, Christopher F. Droney.
They and the others charged under Federal drug conspiracy laws face 20 years or more in prison if convicted.
Described as Self-Help Group
The Latin Kings, with chapters in Connecticut, New York, Illinois and Florida, describe themselves as a Hispanic self-help organization.
But authorities have accused them of drug dealing, and of murders associated with the drug trade and with their internal discipline since the chapters were formed in and then spread through state prisons in the late 1980's.
The arrests yesterday were carried out by Federal, state and local authorities.


From Frustration and Isolation, a Costly Choice
Everybody thought Dwight Gooden was his usual self this season.
At least, it seemed that way.
He smiled in the clubhouse, answered questions cheerfully, seldom complained about anything.
No one -- not even his family -- saw much amiss.
"Doc was Doc," Bret Saberhagen said Tuesday night, after Gooden had been suspended for 60 days without pay by the baseball commissioner's office for violating his drug after-care program.
"He did not seem any different."


Tisch's Endgame at CBS
Last month, after CBS lost a fistful of important affiliated stations to the Fox Broadcasting Company, a senior television industry executive said the move was likely to be "part of the endgame" of Laurence A. Tisch's leadership of the broadcasting giant.
With the revelation that Barry Diller of QVC Network will become the new chief executive of CBS if merger negotiations with Mr.
Tisch are completed, that prediction seems about to be fulfilled.


METRO DIGEST
CITY HOSPITALS WILL BATTLE FOR PATIENTS New York City's public hospital system is losing some of its Medicaid patients -- patients nobody else used to want -- and will fight back with its first major marketing campaign, the head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation said.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  TRANSIT UNION HEAD LIFTS WALKOUT THREAT The president of the union representing subway and bus workers said he would not call a walkout when the union's contract expires, so long as the talks continue moving forward.
B3.


IN PERFORMANCE: CLASSICAL MUSIC
Haydn and Mozart In a Open-Air Setting  Washington Square Park
Tuesday evening in Washington Square Park, several hundred people filled folding chairs and bleachers and lined up outside police barricades to hear a performance by the Washington Square Music Festival's chamber orchestra.
One often sees this sort of eager turnout for outdoor events, particularly when the concert is free.
It's a reminder of how markedly the New York classical audience might grow if major organizations could find a way to spread out their offerings and lower their ticket prices.


Cup Tickets Still Remain
The "Sold Out" signs may not apply to the remaining World Cup matches at Giants Stadium.
A surplus of tickets, the result of returns and nonpayment, will be sold on a game-by-game basis.
A spokesman for Giants Stadium said fans should call the box office at (201) 935-3900.


In Milan, a new male glamour


Garden Q. &amp; A.
The Problem With Dill
Q.
Every year I buy dill plants, and every year they don't survive the move to my garden.
Why? -- Jorge Ramos, Jersey City.


General Mills Inc.(GIL,N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Rare Glimpse Of a Private Sanctum
BY the standards of this not very modest village, Gordon and Nina Bunshaft's house is almost unassuming.
It sits on less than three acres, it is only one story high, it has a scant two bedrooms and two baths and a small, windowless kitchen.
Some of the oceanfront palazzi in these parts probably have servants' wings that are bigger.
Yet this house is also, paradoxically, one of the most opulent ever built here.
It could just as easily be described as a sleek pavilion of glass, travertine marble and concrete on a magnificent site overlooking Georgica Pond, its lawns containing rare specimen trees and major sculptures by Henry Moore, Isamu Noguchi and Joan Miro.


Oppenheimer &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Apr 30


Concord Journal; On Land of Revolution, a New Battle
Since they moved to this town steeped in history and made famous for self-reliance and natural beauty by Emerson and Thoreau, Tom and Edith Sisson have learned to chop their own wood, keep bees, kill chickens and grow and harvest vegetables.
In the winter they ski cross country near the first battlegrounds of the American Revolution.
In the spring they plant potatoes, corn and beans in their backyard, and in the summer they sell them to the townspeople, just as Thoreau did in 1845 when he lived here on Walden Pond in a hut he built himself.
And they live in the same house as Mrs.
Sisson's great-great-great-great-great-great-great grandmother, Rebecca Hubbard, who moved out when she married a leader of the Concord Minutemen, Col.
James Barret.


Islands of Hospitality on the City's Streets
SOME stretch stiffly over sidewalks, blocking rain and snow as New Yorkers dart from car to doorstep.
Others wink over windows, adding archness to the solemn faces of brownstones.
They can be elegant or kitschy, bulbous or lithe, eminently practical or utterly whimsical.
Awnings and canopies, graceful fixtures of the urban landscape, combine form and function in the simplest of designs.
And in a city of imposing architecture, they are familiar, comforting amenities.


Public Advocate's Office Gets Things Done
To the Editor:
The preliminary report on New York City's lifeguard operation by Public Advocate Mark Green is evidence of the need for investigative offices that are independent of the mayor (news articles, June 6 and 11).


Prisons Chief Of 15 Years Will Retire
Thomas A. Coughlin 3d, the blunt-speaking Corrections Commissioner who oversaw the largest prison expansion in the state's history, announced his retirement today.
Mr.
Coughlin, whose tenure stretched over the twin epidemics of crack and AIDS in the prison population, will resign on Aug. 1, 15 years to the day after he was appointed.
A confidant of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and a former state trooper, Mr.
Coughlin (pronounced COG-lin) wrote in his resignation letter that "at age 56, I believe that now is the appropriate time to conclude my service to the state."


TURNOVER IN JAPAN: A Startling Choice; Socialist's Leap to the Top in Japan Endangers Painfully Won Measures
When the Socialist Party leader, Tomiichi Murayama, was asked by reporters a few days ago about rumors that he was a candidate to become the country's next Prime Minister, the plain-spoken 70-year-old politician replied, "Which country are you talking about?"
Tonight, the Japanese people might be asking the same question, as the political and business worlds were thrown into disarray with Mr.
Murayama's election as the first Socialist Prime Minister in 46 years.


Need An Extra Room?
IMAGINE being able to store something as large as a guest room or home office.
That's the idea behind the Mezzanine, a lightweight aluminum floor that provides up to 220 square feet of space.
When it's not in use, it can be raised electronically and stored against the ceiling, taking up only 14 inches.
The Mezzanine, which was created by Alain Letessier, a designer in Paris, is being introduced in the United States by Lama U.S.A.
Inc., said Tony Yerex, a principal in the company.


Bell Atlantic
The House of Representatives passed two bills on Tuesday intended to introduce more competition in the telephone and cable television markets.
One bill would allow companies like the Baby Bells to compete in long-distance service.
Share prices rose for six of the regional Bells, including Bell Atlantic, and that was before word broke of a plan by Bell Atlantic and Nynex to merge their cellular units.


Furniture Of Summer
STRAW hats are made for summer; so is rattan furniture.
A new line from Patina Arts includes a roomy rattan club chair and ottoman, below.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  PARTY REGAINS POWER IN JAPAN  The conservative Liberal Democrats swept back into power in Japan by forging an alliance with the Socialists, their oldest ideological enemy, and electing the head of the Socialist Party, Tomiichi Murayama, as Prime Minister.
A1


Employers in Orlando Create an Envied Model
When Jim Coleman took over as personnel director for the town government in the Orlando suburb of Longwood four years ago, he was alarmed to find that the cost of providing health care coverage for its 155 employees was rising by as much as 25 percent a year.
There was little he could do about it, though.
"We really didn't have any bargaining power" with the insurance companies that offered health care packages, Mr.
Coleman recalled.
"Some providers wouldn't even let us bid. They were not not making any money off cities, so they didn't want our business."


The Tainted Defense Fund
President and Mrs.
Clinton have every right to establish a legal defense fund.
The $1,000 limit is reasonable, and the ban on contributions from political action committees is commendable.
But the decision to allow contributions by lobbyists and people who do business with the Government illustrates again the Clintons' uncanny ability to make a mess of a bad situation.
Is there no one in this White House who understands the erosive impact of the Administration's habit of demanding full credit for half measures?
Everyone in Washington knows who the lobbyists are and what interests they represent.
Laundering their gifts through their personal checking accounts does not remove the taint from such contributions.
They are intended to buy favor with a President who has shown himself all too willing to put his favor up for bids.


Dollar Continues Its Drop Against the Yen
The dollar continued its record-breaking descent against the Japanese yen yesterday.
But the drop, which occurred in light, orderly trading, did little to upset other financial markets.
The selling began in Asia after Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, reiterated something the foreign-exchange market already knew -- that Japan's political turmoil was slowing progress in America's trade talks with Tokyo.


From Welfare to Work And Vice Versa
To the Editor:
Peter Passell's June 16 Economic Scene column on turning welfare recipients into job holders reports the high cost of such programs, but neglects externalities that make a cost-benefit analysis even darker.


Jordan Turns Down All-Star Invitation
MICHAEL JORDAN has turned down an invitation to play in the Southern League All-Star Game.
Despite a batting average hovering around the .200 mark with nary a homer, not to mention eight errors in right field for the Birmingham Barons, Jordan was asked by the Class AA league's commissioner, JIMMY BRAGAN, to play in the game July 11 in Binghamton, N.Y.
Bragan cited a 30 percent jump in the Southern League attendance, caused mostly by the presence of the world's most famous minor league baseball player, in justifying his invitation to Jordan, a nine-time National Basketball Association All-Star.


Stocks Mixed in Light Pre-Holiday Trading
The buck stops where? And does the question matter at all to the stock market?
Perhaps not this week, as traders head into the long Fourth of July weekend.
Moreover, share trades this week, for portfolio performance in the quarter ending today, will not be settled until next week, another incentive for traders to head to the beach.


Johnson's Cholesterol Kits Set
The Johnson &amp; Johnson Company said yesterday that it had begun shipping the first federally approved home-test kit for cholesterol, the artery-clogging component in blood that raises the risk of heart disease.
The kits, already on the shelves at some Pathmark stores in the East and some Safeway grocery stores on the West Coast, are to be available at supermarkets and pharmacies nationwide for $15 to $20 in a few weeks.
Johnson &amp; Johnson said it expected to sell two million units during the next 12 months.


Tutsi Refugees Reported Trapped in Rwanda
Several hundred displaced Tutsi who fled their homes when the massacres in Rwanda began in April were reported to be hiding today, prevented from reaching a refugee camp by Hutu militia.
"This is the first reports we have had of a pocket of displaced Tutsi other than those in refugee camps," said Alison Campbell, of Care International, when told about the Tutsi by reporters who tried to reach them but were turned back by automatic rifle and machine-gun fire.


Michael Petrides, 53, Adviser To Mayor and Schools Leader
Michael J. Petrides, a key member of the majority faction of the New York City Board of Education and an adviser to Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, died early today at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 53.
The cause was cancer, said James P. Molinaro, Staten Island's deputy borough president and a close friend.
After Mr.
Petrides's left lung was removed last fall, he experienced a partial recovery, but he was hospitalized again in early June and never recovered.


On the Rise and Fall of Huey Newton
The Shadow of the Panther  Huey Newton and the Price of Black Power in America  By Hugh Pearson  Illustrated. 422 pages.
Addison-Wesley. $24.
In the acknowledgments of his arresting history of the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense, "The Shadow of the Panther: Huey Newton and the Price of Black Power in America," Hugh Pearson writes that as a boy he, too, was picked on for having what he considered the sissyish nickname Huey.
He was therefore impressed when he later learned that someone else named Huey "could be such a hero to so many people" for his refusal to be intimidated by anyone, black or white.


Clerk Kills Shoplifting Suspect Over a Beer
A clerk at a South Bronx bodega killed an unarmed man yesterday for shoplifting a bottle of beer, the police said.
Antonio Pagan, 20, was shot several times as he tried to slip out of St.
Ann's Grocery, at 221 St.
Ann's Avenue in Mott Haven, about 2:45 A.M., said Detective Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman.
He died at the scene.


Review/Fashion; How Much Glamour Can a Man Take?
Fashion may not seduce everyone, but it has an amazing ability to brainwash its own.
Thus the relentless chant in the women's wear industry about a return to glamour has reached such a pitch that, in their men's wear, designers are taking heed and inspiration from it.
What has emerged this week at the Milan men's wear collections for spring 1995 is not only the sort of glamour inherent in Italian men's fashion -- the dapper dressing of the Riviera resort playboy or the trim businessman like Gianni Agnelli.
The women's industry has been so successful in its call that the new male glamour features some strikingly literal appropriations of traditionally feminine allure.


Cowboys Come to Terms With Stepnoski
The Dallas Cowboys signed the Pro Bowl center MARK STEPNOSKI to a one-year, $1.2 million dollar contract yesterday, giving the club 10 returning offensive starters from last season's Super Bowl champions.


Trooper's Long-Missing Gun Turns Into a 'Smoking Gun'
For seven years, Gerard Evans had been plagued by the riddle of his missing revolver.
While he was working as a New York State trooper in 1987, Mr.
Evans's .357 Magnum mysteriously disappeared from his holster, and another officer's weapon, which had been reported missing, appeared in its place.
Mr.
Evans believed he had been framed, but unable to explain his weapon's disappearance, he resigned rather than face charges of stealing a fellow officer's gun.
Now the riddle is solved.
His gun was used by two New York City killers to escape an Orange County psychiatric hospital on May 27.
And prosecutors have charged Mr.
Evans's former supervisor at the state police, Robert Kamrowski, with smuggling the loaded gun to the two patients -- the same Mr.
Kamrowski who, Mr.
Evans said, forced him to resign over the missing gun.


Gaza Journal; Rocks to Hard Knocks: School Subdues Rebels
Aiman Radi gave up early.
Unable to complete his high-school graduation exam in algebra, he handed it in and left the classroom at the Cairo School for Boys here.
"I turned in a blank page," he said, his face frozen in disbelief.
"We missed 50 school days this year."


Saudi Goal as Dazzling As the Upset Victory
Soccer's fondness for nicknames gave the young Saudi Arabian team this one: "the Brazilians of the desert." Today, the Saudis lived up to that hype, defeating favored Belgium by 1-0 to finish second in Group F and push the Belgians down to a humble third.
The Saudis did it with dazzling footwork, a solo goal whose artistry was worthy of Pele, an acrobatic goalie and the sort of cool composure shown by much more worldly teams.


Senate Votes Bill Widening Pool of Jurors
Seeking to place more members of minority groups and more poor people onto juries, the New York State Legislature today passed a measure that for the first time would allow jurors to be drawn from unemployment and welfare rolls.
Currently, juries are selected using lists of registered drivers, registered voters and state and local taxpayers.
But in many parts of the state, particularly urban areas, lawyers and judges have complained that the juror pool is too small or does not accurately reflect the local community.


A Surprise, A Heisman For Knicks
Amid a week of speculating about how the Knicks would use their first-round draft picks, New York made one popular pick and one surprise selection last night in the National Basketball Association.
The popular pick was Charlie Ward, the versatile point guard from Florida State who also won the Heisman Trophy as the Seminoles' quarterback.
The Knicks used their 26th selection to choose Ward.


IN PERFORMANCE: POP
Personalizing a Plea For Environment and Objects  Radio City Music Hall
Instead of making folk music that tries to embrace the world, the Indigo Girls make music that embraces trees, humans, pencils: objects that aren't too immense for them to put their arms around.
The singing and songwriting duo seems to follow the simple advice laid down in the Book of Ecclesiastes: Work in your garden, be happy, and die knowing "all is vanity and a chasing after wind."


Tisch Return On CBS Deal In Question
Although precise figures were not available last night, it seems safe to say that Laurence A. Tisch, the billionaire who knew nothing about broadcasting when he arrived at CBS's door as a director in 1985, has done well, but not superbly, on his huge gamble.
David Londoner, an analyst for Wertheim Schroder, recalled that Mr.
Tisch, through the Loews Corporation, had paid about $127 a share, or $743 million, to acquire his stake of 5.8 million shares.
Mr.
Tisch and his brother, Preston, together own nearly a third of Loew's.


Cause of Commuter Train Derailment Under Investigation


The Dutch Clinch; Will Face The Irish
Order more refreshments.
It will be the Dutch against the Irish in the World Cup's round of 16.
The two fun-loving countries will meet in the Citrus Bowl next Monday, after the Netherlands clinched first place today in Group F with a 2-1 victory over pesky Morocco before 60,578 at the Citrus Bowl.


I.B.M. TO OFFER VERSION OF SOLARIS ON POWERPC
The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it would offer a version of Sun Microsystems Inc.'s Solaris operating system on its PowerPC-based personal computers.
The I.B.M. machines, to be available next year, are part of an effort by Apple Computer Inc., I.B.M. and Motorola Inc. to break the stranglehold that the Microsoft Corporation and the Intel Corporation have on the personal computer market.
Apple is the only major computer maker now shipping systems based on the PowerPC chip, which runs about as fast as Intel's top-of-the-line Pentium processor and is less expensive.


Transit Union Head Says He Won't Call a Walkout
The president of the union representing subway and bus workers said yesterday that he would not call for a walkout when the union's contract expires at midnight tonight -- so long as the talks continue moving forward.
The statement by Damaso Seda, president of Local 100 of the Transit Workers Union, appeared to lift the threat of an immediate shutdown of the city's subways and bus system tomorrow morning.


Honors
*
Hanna Andersson, Portland, Ore., a catalogue selling cotton clothing for children, took top honors, winning the Catalogue of the Year award, at the ninth annual American Catalogue Awards ceremony sponsored by Catalog Age magazine.


Prince Charles, in TV Documentary, Admits to Infidelity
An effort to paint a more human and appealing portrait of the Prince of Wales appeared to backfire tonight when, in the course of a two-and-a-half-hour television documentary, the heir to the British throne admitted that he had committed adultery.
Three-quarters of the way through the largely sympathetic portrayal, the Prince, sitting a little stiffly on a chintz-covered sofa at his estate at Highgrove in Gloucestershire, is asked point blank if he tried to be "faithful and honorable" when he married Lady Diana Spencer in July 1981.


CHRONICLE
What was the PRINCESS OF WALES doing last night while her estranged husband, PRINCE CHARLES, was on television confessing his marital infidelity during a lengthy interview?
Just about the time the program went on the air on Independent Television News, the Princess was heading into a tent in Kensington Gardens in London.
She was attending a dinner Vanity Fair magazine was giving for the Serpentine Gallery, of which the Princess became a patron last week.


Fredi Washington, 90, Actress; Broke Ground for Black Artists
Fredi Washington, one of the first black actresses to gain recognition for her work on stage and in film, died on Tuesday at St.
Joseph Medical Center in Stamford, Conn., where she lived.
She was 90.
The cause was pneumonia, which developed after a stroke, said her sister, Isabel Powell.


The Pop Life
Woodstock, Anyone?
If you forgot to order tickets to Woodstock '94 when they went on sale across the country last Sunday, don't worry.
Promoters don't expect the festival, which is to be held in Saugerties, N.Y., on Aug. 13 and 14, to sell out for weeks, despite an all-star line-up of Bob Dylan, Aerosmith, Peter Gabriel, Arrested Development and at least 25 other bands.


Hong Kong Legislature Approves Expansion of Democratic Rule
Defying threats from China, Hong Kong's legislature voted by a thin margin early this morning to expand the democratic politics of the colony as it heads toward July 1, 1997, the date on which Beijing assumes control.
"The Legislative Council stands on the brink of one of the most momentous decisions in its history," said Anson Chan, the government's chief secretary, as the debate over Governor Chris Patten's electoral reform proposals began early Wednesday.


Otis Smith, 72, G.M. Executive And Ex-Justice
Otis M. Smith, the first black to serve on the Michigan Supreme Court and the first to be named a corporate officer of the General Motors Corporation, died in his sleep at his home in Detroit yesterday after a four-year bout with prostate cancer.
He was 72.
Mr.
Smith, who retired from General Motors in 1984 as vice president and general counsel, became one of the highest-ranking blacks in corporate America when Thomas Murphy, G.M.'s chairman, appointed him as the auto maker's top lawyer in 1977.
At the time the corporation was under attack on several legal and regulatory fronts, including accusations of tax fraud and lawsuits by consumers angry about the substitution of engines from one car division in models from another G.M. division.


Pragamatism Paves Road to Power
For four decades, until last year, the Socialist Party regarded itself as the conscience of Japan.
After a brief flirtation with power in 1948, it settled into place as the permanent opposition party and seemed to take pride in the fact that it stood by its principles -- ardent pacifism, workers' rights, anti-Americanism -- rather than fighting for power.
As years passed, the Socialists exerted almost no influence over the conservative, increasingly corrupt power structure, and it has suffered its own corruption scandals.
But the party remained the second-largest in Parliament, and its position struck a resonant chord with many Japanese.
Most people regarded the Socialists as unsuited to govern but a useful check against the Liberal Democrats.
A Setback for Anti-Americanism
Never was this moral stance more in evidence than in 1960, when rioting broke out among Japanese who opposed extending the postwar security treaty with the United States.
Many people, particularly university students and women, regarded the treaty as a humiliating vestige of World War II that drew Japan into the cold war and made Japan a vassal.


Temple Rewards Chaney With Extension
JOHN CHANEY has been given a contract extension to continue coaching basketball at Temple at least through the 1999 season.
"This decision, in the context of so many sudden changes in the coaching ranks, is good news for Temple," PETER J. LIACOURAS, the university president, said yesterday in Philadelphia.
Liacouras said he expected Chaney to accomplish three goals: a national championship, continued emphasis on the total development student-athletes and an enthusiastic promotion of a new 10,200-seat arena, the Apollo of Temple, scheduled to open during the 1996-97 season.


3 Ex-Agents Of Met Life Face Action
The Pennsylvania Insurance Department is expected to move today to revoke the insurance licenses of three agents named in a scathing report that it issued earlier this year about sales practices by some agents of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
Leslie Osborn, a spokeswoman for the department, confirmed that the three agents would be served with orders to show cause within 30 days why their licenses should not be revoked and they should not be fined.
The three agents, who resigned from or had been dismissed by Met Life, have been selling insurance for other companies, she said.


The Mob Forgoes Japan's Annual Meetings
In the end, the gangsters lay low.
About 2,000 Japanese companies, under the watchful eyes of the police, held their annual meetings for shareholders today without any violent acts by sokaiya, gangsters who extort money by threatening to disrupt the proceedings.


A New Mythology Grows Up Around Wolves
To the Editor:
The natural history of wolves and our culture's love-hate relationship with them are not as pat as people might have gathered from reading "Yellowstone Will Shelter Wolves Again" (news article, June 17).
It appears that the big bad wolf has bred into a better-adapted but no less mythical species: ecologically correct wolf.


The Bell Rings for Summer Cleaning
While the city's students were officially released this week for the summer recess, there was no break for the custodial staff at Public School 111 at 440 West 53d Street.
The summer school session starts on Tuesday, so Jesus Rodriguez, left, and Fred Collins set out to brighten up a classroom.


Shotgun Wedding in Japan
Only a political party system in its death agony could produce a government like the one Japan's Parliament chose yesterday.
In a desperation pact that could turn into a kind of slow mutual suicide, Tokyo's two largest traditional parties, the Liberal Democrats and the Socialists, joined forces to elect Tomiichi Murayama as Japan's first Socialist Prime Minister since the 1940's.
Mr.
Murayama represents the left wing of a leftist party, but he now must depend on right-wing remnants of Japan's main rightist party, the misleadingly named Liberal Democrats.
It is a prescription for domestic and foreign policy paralysis and a serious blow to Clinton Administration hopes for cooperation on Korea and trade.


The Bucks Go With Robinson As No. 1 Pick
Glenn Robinson wore No. 13 in college, but tonight he was lucky enough to be No. 1.
As expected, the Milwaukee Bucks selected Robinson with the first pick in the National Basketball Association draft at the Hoosier Dome.
Robinson, a 6-foot-8-inch forward, was the college player of the year at Purdue, averaging 30.3 points to lead the nation in scoring.
The Bucks, who finished with a 20-62 record last season, hope he will join Vin Baker on the front line to lead the Bucks back to respectability.


House Panel Backs Health Cost Controls
The House Ways and Means Committee has endorsed legislation that would, for the first time, set annual limits on health spending for the nation as a whole and for each state.
If any state exceeded its limit, the Federal Government would enforce strict price controls on doctors, hospitals, prescription drugs and the rest of the private health care industry in that state.


Wilpon Unwilling to Give Up on Gooden
One day after the Mets were forced to reorganize their lives without Dwight Gooden, two themes emerged.
The Mets are disappointed in the wake of Gooden's admitted violation of his drug after-care program and resulting 60-day suspension.
But there was no indication they would quickly write off the pitcher, as the Dodgers did with Darryl Strawberry.
No definitive statements were made about Gooden's long-term future.
Sixty days will take a big chunk out of a season that was his last chance to secure a new long-term contract.
But the Mets' co-owner, Fred Wilpon, vehemently refused to put Gooden in the category of an outcast.
He refused to draw parallels between Gooden and Vince Coleman, who drew the owner's wrath last year after a firecracker incident in which fans were injured in Los Angeles.


Merrill to Pay $4 Million Over Pocketing of Profits
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, the nation's largest stock brokerage firm, agreed yesterday to pay a group of its brokerage customers $4 million in connection with a company "revenue generating" idea that went awry and was fined $90,000 by the New York Stock Exchange.
Without admitting or denying guilt, Merrill Lynch agreed to the fine, payment of the money and a New York Stock Exchange censure.


Umbrellas Were No Help


Celebrating the American Weed
WHILE many people are taken with roses, Carolyn Ray, who has been designing wallpaper and fabric since 1978, celebrates common American weeds.
Such natural images lined the walls of rustic weekend retreats during the Arts and Crafts movement of the late 19th century, and Ms.
Ray has drawn inspiration from that period for what she calls Modern Bungalow Papers for "cosmopolitan cabins."
"We want to bring nature and the country into urban areas," Ms. Ray said.


Argentine Soccer Star Faces Ban for Drugs
The captain of the Argentine soccer team, Diego Maradona, failed a drug test and could be banned from the remaining stages of the World Cup.
Maradona, who was banned from soccer for 15 months in 1991 for cocaine abuse, tested positive for ephedrine, an anti-asthma stimulant.
Argentina plays its final first-round game tonight, against Bulgaria at the Cotton Bowl in Dallas.
SportsThursday, page B13.


Supervalu Inc.(SVU,N) reports earnings for Qtr to June 18


The Mafia Informer Look
Because fashion has omerta, or a code of silence, of its own, an Italian pin-stripe double-breasted fitted jacket with trousers has always been called a gangster suit, never a Mafia suit.
But Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana rattled the Italian press on Tuesday by announcing that certain looks in their men's wear collection for spring were based on the clothing style of Tomasso Buscetta, a high-ranking Mafia member turned Government informer.
Mr.
Buscetta is now in a witness protection program.
But in recent years when his testimony before the Government was shown on television, his face was obscured while his clothes were visible.


TURNOVER IN JAPAN: A Startling Choice; Socialist's Leap to the Top in Japan Endangers Painfully Won Measures
When the Socialist Party leader, Tomiichi Murayama, was asked by reporters a few days ago about rumors that he was a candidate to become the country's next Prime Minister, the plain-spoken 70-year-old politician replied, "Which country are you talking about?"
Tonight, the Japanese people might be asking the same question, as the political and business worlds were thrown into disarray with Mr.
Murayama's election as the first Socialist Prime Minister in 46 years.


TRYING TO SMOKE WITH Christopher Buckley; More Huffing Than Puffing
IT is 90 degrees outside and he doesn't sweat.
His shirt is crisp, his suit is seersucker, and his socks are pink argyle.
When he walks he bounces.
Discussing his new novel, "Thank You for Smoking," Christopher Buckley declares himself "the Cyndi Lauper of American letters -- I just want to have fun." An afternoon in his company confirms his success.
He is more Tom Collins than Tom Wolfe.
Though Mr.
Buckley lives in Washington, he comes to New York once a week in his capacity as editor of Forbes FYI, a life-style supplement to Forbes magazine.
And this particular week, he and his father, William F. Buckley Jr., are sailing to Bermuda on the family yacht.


Corning Inc.(GLW,N) reports earnings for 12wks to June 19


